UNA Ah IS 1646 : 2015 
i, Reaffirmed 2020 
Indian Standard (Reaffirme ) 


Tat (Aart) wt sia Arar 
at ita afm: faed-aearat 
( ART FRAT) 


Fire Safety of Buildings (General): 
Electrical Installations — Code of 
Practice 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 91.120;13.220.50 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 gae WHC Art, we feeei-110002 
mw MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 8 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1961, revised subsequently in 1982 and 1997. The present revision is based 
on the subsequent developments and modifications in other Indian Standards and National Building Code of 
India, 2005. The other changes relate to the developments in cables, wiring methods and other general aspects. 


The requirements of this Code are to be treated as supplementary to the requirements of the Electricity Act, 2003 
and the Rules/Regulations formed thereunder and in no case as substitutes. In the preparation of this Code, it has 
been presumed that the electrical installation work is carried out by qualified contractors and electricians under 
the supervision of competent engineers as required by the Indian Electricity Rules. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 1646 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


FIRE SAFETY OF BUILDINGS (GENERAL): 
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This Code covers recommendations relating to fire 
safety of electrical installations in buildings. 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards given in Annex A. 


3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Besides conforming to this Code all equipment shall 
comply with relevant Indian Standards (wherever 
available) as regards construction, temperature rise, 
current rating, overloads and performance, etc, where 
an Indian Standard does not exist the various items of 
electrical equipments should be those approved by the 
competent authority. 


3.2 Execution of work unless otherwise exempted 
under the appropriate rule of the Indian Electricity 
Rules, the work of electrical installations shall be 
carried out by an electrical contractor licensed and 
under the direct supervision of a person holding a 
certificate of competency and by persons holding a 
valid permit issued and recognized by any Indian 
Government. 


3.3 All equipment shall be capable of developing and/ 
or consuming the rated power safely and continuously 
(unless specifically meant for intermittent use), without 
undue heating, sparking, noise and vibration. 


3.4 All electrical equipment shall be securely mounted 
on the surface on which they are installed. 


3.5 All electrical equipment, fittings, accessories and 
wiring systems in locations which are exposed to the 
following shall be of types approved for particular 
situations and subject to special conditions as laid down 
in the appropriate clauses of this Code: 


a) Fumes; 


b) Flammable or other gases, vapours or liquids 
having deleterious effect on equipment and 
conductors or creating dangerous situations; 

c) Dust and fibrous accumulations; 

d) Damp or wet locations; and 

e) Excessive temperature 


3.6 Manufacturer’s name, trade-mark or other 
description markings by which the manufacturer may 
be identified shall be placed on all electrical equipment, 
accessories, electrical cables, etc. Other markings like 
voltage current and wattage shall also be provided as 
necessary. Marking shall be of sufficient durability to 
withstand the environmental conditions. 


3.7 The type of wiring installed in a particular 
occupancy shall be as permitted under the relevant 
provisions of this standard. 


3.8 Where aluminum conductors are used in the 
electrical installation, special precautionary measures 
as given in IS 732 shall be followed. Fire resistant/fire 
survival cables should be used in hazardous/critical 
occupancies. 


4 POWER EQUIPMENT 


4.1 The term power equipment shall be deemed to 
include motors, motor-generators, control gears, switch 
gears, rotary convectors, rotary balancers, rotary 
condensers, phase advancers, frequency changers and 
any other rotating electric equipment, rectifiers and 
inverters. 


4.2 All electrical equipment located in situations 
where: 


a) the atmosphere is likely to contain flammable/ 
explosive gases or vapours; and 


b) combustible dust, fluff or similar materials 
like saw mills and other wood working 
occupancies, cotton/jute/wooden/viscose and 
acrylic, nylon 66 fibre mills, flour mill, 
pulverizing works, etc, shall comply with the 
special requirements in respect of hazardous 
location specified in 13. 


4.3 Equipment which depends on natural air for 
cooling shall be so located and installed that air flow 


IS 1646 : 2015 


over the exposed cooling surface shall not be prevented 
by adjacent equipment or walls. For floor mounted 
equipment, clearance between top surface of the 
equipment and the adjacent surface shall be provided 
to dissipate rising hot air. 


4.4 Equipment ventilating openings shall be so 
installed that no obstruction may prevent free air 
circulation through them; nor shall any material be 
dumped or allowed to settle on them so as to clog the 
ventilation openings or interfere in any way with 
normal cooling of such equipment. 


4.5 All equipment of more than 14 kW shall be 
separated from unprotected woodwork by a distance 
of at least 300 mm horizontally and 1 200 mm 
vertically. Equipment of % kW or less, except those of 
totally enclosed type, shall be suitably guarded to avoid 
heat being transmitted to readily combustible material 
in the vicinity. 


4.6 Equipment shall be periodically inspected and 
maintained as per relevant Indian Standards by 
competent staff who shall keep complete records of 
all such activities. 


4.7 The position of equipment shall be selected with 
due consideration of accessibility, maintenance and 
overhaul. 


4.8 Equipment terminals shall be rigidly designed and 
planned according to size and type of machine. 
Industrial motors shall have a robust metal clad terminal 
box of adequate dimensions arranged to receive 
armoured or vulcanized rubber insulated/PVC cables 
in conduits without unnecessary bends in the cables. 
All terminal boxes shall be entirely reptile, rodent and 
insect proof. 


5 SWITCHBOARDS 


5.1 Switchboards shall be erected in easily accessible 
and approved positions where cotton fluff, dust or dirt 
is not present. The switchboard shall be located in dry 
locations. 


5.2 The space around the switchboards shall not be 
used for storing of clothing or other materials, even 
for temporary period. 


5.3 Each outgoing circuit from the switchboard shall 
be separately controlled by a suitable automatic circuit 
breaker or linked switches and cutouts. In case the 
electrical installation draws power from a distribution 
transformer having a capacity of 150 kVA or more, 
the switches shall be provided with HRC fuses at all 
fuse points, irrespective of current rating of the circuit. 
This, however, need not be insisted in case of low 
tension installation. 


5.4 All switches and circuit breakers shall be operated 
from the front of the switchboard. 


5.5 All fuses shall be mounted on the front of the 
switchboard as far as practicable. 


5.6 All screws, bolts and nuts, which secure current 
carrying parts to the board shall be of brass, copper or 
similar rustproof material. 


5.7 All wires and cables shall be provided with soldered 
or approved lugs or crimped joints or any other 
approved means of connection. 


5.8 In situations where the atmosphere is likely to 
contain explosive gases or vapour, switchboards shall 
be of explosion protected type. Fire resistant/fire 
survival cables should be used. Selection of electrical 
equipment shall be as per IS 5571 (see also IS 5572 
for classification of hazardous areas). Alternately 
pressurized air lock enclosures may be provided for 
switch rooms and wherever not possible switch room 
should be themselves pressured. 


5.9 Where the switchboard is erected in a room of a 
building isolated from the source of supply or at a 
distance from it, adequate means of control and 
isolation shall be provided both near the boards and at 
the origin of supply. 


5.10 All switchboards shall be of metal clad totally 
enclosed type or any insulated enclosed pattern which 
should be fixed at close proximity to the point of entry 
of supply. 


5.11 In case of outgoing circuits from the switchboard, 
where the current rating exceeds 63A, connection 
between the busbar chamber and the automatic circuit 
breaker or switch fuse or any other control gear shall 
be made only by solid connections. 


5.12 Timber shall not be used in construction of a 
switchboard. 


5.13 All circuits shall be clearly and indelibly lapelled 
for identification in English and vernacular. 


5.14 Moulded case circuit breakers shall not be 
permitted except inside a metal enclosure. 


5.15 The neutral of each main and branch main circuit 
shall be provided with a removable link placed in an 
easily accessible position, for purpose of testing. The 
neutral shall not be punched at the back of the board. 


6 POWER DISTRIBUTION AND MOTOR 
CONTROL GEAR 


6.1 All equipment shall be of metal clad construction 
throughout, dust tight, suitably proportioned and of 
adequate capacity and shall conform to the relevant 
Indian Standards. 


6.2 Equipment shall be accessible at all times, stacks 
of goods and the like shall not impede access to any 
part of the equipment. 


6.3 Wiring to and from the gear shall be of the 
armoured, mineral insulated or screwed steel conduit 
type and provision shall be made to secure the same 
by approved and efficient mechanical methods. 
Flexible tubing shall not be accepted for general wiring. 
It may, however, be used for connections between the 
terminal boxes of motors and starters, switches and 
motors but the length shall be restricted to a maximum 
of 1 200 mm. 


NOTE — Non-metallic conduits conforming to IS 9537 (Part 3) 
may be used for medium voltage installation, subject to 
following conditions: 


a) The conduits should be supported not more than 800 mm 
distance and should have suitable joints. 


b) Separate earthing conductor shall be run inside the conduit 
for earthing the equipment to which the conductor is connected. 


c) Expansion joints shall be provided where required to 
compensate for thermal expansion and contraction. 


Such non-metallic conduit shall not however be 
allowed in following locations: 


a) In locations less than 2.5 m above walking 
floor level unless protected against 
mechanical damage. 


b) Where ambient temperature is likely to be 
above 50°C at some time or other during year. 

c) In concealed places of combustible 
construction. 


d) Inlocations where the atmosphere is likely to 
contain flammable gases or vapours. 


e) In locations where the surrounding 
atmosphere is likely to affect the non-metallic 
conduits. 


6.4 The ends of all conduits shall be bushed. 
6.5 All unused cable holes shall be effectively closed. 


6.6 All current carrying parts, namely terminals, washers 
and clips shall be of copper, brass or of any other equally 
non-rusting material, properly tinned at joints. 


6.7 All cables shall be provided with soldered lugs or 
other approved means for connection. 


6.8 Where a distribution board or group of distribution 
boards is/are erected in a room of a building isolated 
from the source of supply, adequate means of control 
and isolation shall be provided both near the board 
and at the origin of supply. Similar means of control 
and isolation shall be provided even if the source of 
supply and the distribution board(s) is/are located 
inside the same compartment but separated from each 
other by more than 15 m. 


6.9 Outgoing circuits shall be clearly marked in English 


IS 1646 : 2015 


and vernacular, indicating the department or place or 
item controlled, by each. 


6.10 All circuits shall be arranged symmetrically, as 
far as practicable. 


6.11 Each circuit from a main distribution board shall 
be provided with a circuit breaker, linked switches or 
cut-outs. 


6.12 Looping of conductors and tee joints in power 
wiring shall be provided with a circuit breaker, linked 
switches or cut-outs. 


6.13 Detachable inspection covers shall be provided 
to examine connections. 


6.14 Woodwork shall not be permitted for mounting 
of or construction of frame work of any iron-clad 
switch control or distribution gear. 


6.15 Motors shall not be connected to lighting 
distribution boards. 


6.16 Suitable guard enclosures shall be provided to 
protect exposed current carrying parts of motors and 
insulations of motor leads where installed directly 
under equipment or in other locations where dripping 
or spraying of oil, water or other injurious liquids may 
occur, unless the motor is designed for such conditions. 


6.17 In situations where dust or flying materials may 
collect on or in motors in such quantities as to seriously 
interfere with ventilation or cooling of motors, totally 
enclosed or totally enclosed fan cooled motors that will 
not overheat under prevailing conditions, shall be used. 


7 TRANSFORMER SUBSTATION, EXCLUDING 
BELL AND DRAWING FRAME, 
TRANSFORMER AND TRANSFORMERS OF 
SMALL CAPACITY 


7.1 Every oil-filled apparatus, such as transformer, 
static condenser, switchgear or oil circuit breaker 
having an individual or aggregate oil capacity of 2 000 
litres or more shall be housed in a locked, weather and 
fire resistant building and shall be properly ventilated 
to the outside of the building only. The building housing 
the oil-filled apparatus shall be separated by a distance 
of not less than 6 m from all other buildings. 


NOTES 


1 If the building housing the transformer is within 6 m of the 
surrounding building there shall not be any door or window 
opening in the substation or the surrounding building. 


2 If the building or compartment housing oil-filled apparatus 
is communicating with another building or compartment, the 
substation shall be segregated by separating walls of 355 mm 
thick brick wall or 230 mm thick RCC, carried up to roof level 
with door openings therein protected by single fireproof doors 
of 2 h rating. 


3 Not withstanding the above, if the substations supplies power 
to fire pumps, the same shall be segregated from, the adjoining 


IS 1646 : 2015 


building by 400 mm thick brick wall or 300 mm thick RCC 
wall without any door opening therein where, however, door 
openings are absolutely necessary, the openings shall be 
protected by double fire resisting doors of 2 h rating each. If 
the substation is attached to a storyed structure, in addition to 
segregations, it will also be necessary for the substation to be 
provided with RCC slab roof. 


7.2 Each oil-filled apparatus, such as transformer, bank 
of static condensers, including high tension circuit 
breakers, switch and main distribution boards, having 
an individual or aggregate oil capacity of 2 000 litres, 
shall also be segregated from all other apparatus by 
355 mm thick fire resisting brick wall or 230 mm thick 
RCC. The separating wall shall be carried right up to 
the roof level unless the roof is more than 3 m above 
the highest point of the equipment, in which case the 
wall shall be carried up to a height at least 600 mm 
above the top of the equipment so separated. 


NOTES 


1 This provision need not be applied to furnace and rectifier 
transformers as also to transformer of testing apparatus or other 
equipment of which the transformer is an integral part, whether 
they are oil-filled or not. 


2 The requirements given under this clause, however, do not 
apply to dry type transformers, or transformers having sulphur 
hexafluoride, non-flammable coolants and having primary 
voltage not mote than 33 kV. 


3 If the substation supplies power to fire pumps, separating 
walls as described above will be necessary between the various 
items irrespective of the oil contents. 


7.3 Each building or compartment housing oil filled 
apparatus containing 2 000 litres or more of oil shall 
be provided with oil drains of at least 150 mm in 
diameter and soak pits, the latter being not less than 
2.5 m away from the substation. Floors shall be sloped 
not less than | in 96 towards oil drains. The soak pits 
shall be of sufficient capacity to take the entire oil 
content of the equipment and designed to provide for 
drainage of liquids to a safe location. 


7.4 A minimum clearance of 750 mm shall be provided 
between the transformer or other apparatus and 
enclosing or separating walls. 


7.5 Substations and switchgear rooms shall only be 
used to house the intended equipment. Storage of any 
kind/or any repair work shall not be permitted therein. 


7.6 Suitable apparatus shall be provided in approved 
positions for the control and protection of windings of 
transformers. 


7.7 All transformers shall have suitable isolating 
equipment on both high and low/medium tension side. 


7.8 Cable trenches inside substations shall be filled 
with sand, pebbles or similar non-flammable materials 
or covered with incombustible slabs. If a number of 
cables are taken in a trench, it is desirable that cables 
are taken on racks. 


7.9 All control gears shall be protected against rodents, 
reptiles and insects. 


7.10 It is essential in all transformer houses and in 
places of similar applications that an efficient and 
distinctive indicating device be provided to show 
clearly whether the supply in the main incoming cable 
is ‘On’ or ‘Off? for the safety of fire-fighting personnel 
in the event of an outbreak of fire. 


7.11 Transformers and equipment installed outdoors, 
having an individual or aggregate oil content of 2 000 
litres or more shall be located in a suitably fenced and 
locked enclosure separated on all sides by at least 6 m 
from any building including substation. Separating 
walls are necessary between transformers having an 
individual or aggregate oil content of 2 000 litres. 


NOTES 


1 There should be no door or window opening in the 
surrounding building, if the transformers are within 6 m thereof. 


2 If the transformers are within 6 m of doors and window 
openings of surrounding buildings then they shall be protected 
by single fire proof doors and 6 mm thick wired glass in steel 
frames respectively. 


3 Separating walls shall not be necessary in case of transformers 
having an aggregate oil capacity exceeding 2 000 litres but 
individual oil capacity of less than 5 000 litres if the distance 
between transformers and other apparatus is more than 6 m or 
if the transformers ate protected by an approved high velocity 
water spray system. 


4 Where however oil capacity of individual transformer is larger 
than 5 000 litres separating walls shall be provided unless all 
equipment/building/plant are located at a clear distance of not 
less than the following: 


Oil Capacity of Individual Clear Separating 
Transformer 1 Distance 
m 
5 000 to 20 000 8 
Over 20 000 15 


5 The provisions of 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 and 7.11 are not applicable if 
the transformer is filled with non-combustible insulant liquid. 


8 EARTH CONNECTIONS 


8.1 All earth connections shall strictly comply with 
IS 3043. 


8.2 Inno case shall gas, steam, sprinkler or humidifier 
pipes be used for an earth connection. 


9 WIRING METHODS 


9.1 General Requirements 


9.1.1 Only such wiring methods as are permissible for 
a particular situation or location as laid down under 
this clause, shall be allowed. 


9.1.2 Wherever aluminum conductors are used, the 
special precautionary measures laid down in IS 732 
shall be followed. 


9.1.3 Conductors shall be insulated except where 
enclosed or bare conductors are specifically permitted 
under the rules. 


9.1.4 Conductors exposed to oils, greases, vapours, 
gases, fumes, liquids or other substances having 
deleterious effects upon the conductor or its insulation 
shall be of approved type for the purpose. 


9.1.5 Conductors may be permitted to be connected in 
parallel (electrically joined at two ends to form a single 
conductor only) if such conductors are of same length, 
material and cross-sectional area, have same type of 
insulation and terminated in same manner. 


9.1.6 Where cables, conduits, cable ducts or trunkings 
pass through floors, walls, partitions or ceilings, the 
surrounding holes shall be made good with cement or 
similar incombustible material to the full thickness of 
floor, wall, etc. In addition where conductors are 
installed in channels, ducts, trunkings or shafts passing 
through floors, walls, partitions or ceilings, suitable 
internal fire resisting barriers shall be provided to 
prevent spread of fire from one side to the other. 


9.1.7 Cables of ac circuits installed in steel conduits 
shall always be so bunched that the cables of all phases 
and the neutral (if any) are contained in the same 
conduit. 


9.1.8 Ducts of metal or insulating material and trunking 
shall be securely fixed and where they are liable to 
suffer mechanical damage shall be adequately 
protected. 


9.1.9 Trunkings shall be constructed of metal or non- 
combustible insulating materials. 


9.1.10 Cables, cable ducting or trunking of metallic 
construction and conduits may be buried underground 
provided they meet the following minimum earth cover 
requirement: 


Wiring Method Minimum Depth of Earth 
(1) Cover 
(2) 
Rigid metal 150 mm 
conduits 
Other type of 4.50 mm 
conduits 


Metallic ductings 450 mm (with Crete envelope 


or trunkings of not less than 50 mm around 
the ducting of trunking) 
Directly buried 600 mm 
cables 


9.1.11 No ordinary wiring system of any kind shall be 
permitted inside ducts needed for transporting dust, 
loose materials or flammable vapours. However, fire 


IS 1646 : 2015 


resistant/fire survival cables may be used. 


9.1.12 Electrical services shall not be installed in the 
same conduit or trunking as pipes or tubes or 
nonelectrical services like air, gas, oil, water, etc. 


9.1.13 Only PVC sheathed armoured cables or rigid 
metallic conduits shall be allowed in ducts or plenums 
used for movement of environmental air. 


10 PERMITTED TYPES OF WIRING 
METHODS 


10.1 General 


10.1.1 Wiring shall be on distribution board system 
with main, branch main and final sub-circuit boards 
fixed at convenient positions and shall conform to 
IS 732. It is recommended to use fire resistant/fire 
survival cables for all critical applications 


10.1.2 Conductors which are not arranged for 
connection to the same system and circuit or which 
supply different phases of the same supply, shall be 
kept apart throughout their entire run. This shall 
particularly apply to installations in which there are 
pilot lights in addition to the main lighting and the like. 


10.1.3 Conductors for final sub-circuits shall not be 
enclosed in the same conduit or casing as sub main 
and branch of main conductors. 


10.1.4 Conductors which pass through windows or 
door frames, wood beams walls, ceilings and floors 
shall be protected by porcelain tubes or conduits 
according to the conditions. The tube or conduit shall 
extend at least 13 mm on both sides of the wall and 25 
mm above the floor and below the ceiling. 


10.1.5 All conduit ends shall be bushed. 


10.1.6 Cables which are unarmoured shall be 
mechanically protected up to a height of 1.8 m above 
working floor level or up to the height of switchboard. 


10.1.7 Branch main and distribution boards shall be 
mounted in suitable accessible positions, not higher 
than 2 m above floor level. Adequate working spaces 
and freedom from danger shall be provided. 


10.1.8 Incoming mains shall be used for control of 
circuit in conjunction with suitable circuit breakers. 


10.1.9 The system of wiring and all other details shall 
be suitable to the conditions prevailing. 


10.1.10 Linked tumbler switches shall not be used for 
control of circuits. 


10.1.11 Flexible leads shall hang vertically downwards 
from the ceiling rose without any obstructions, shall 
not be in contact with shafting structural member, pipe 
work, etc, and shall not be coiled or tied up but cut to 
correct length. 


IS 1646 : 2015 


10.1.12 Flexible leads shall be renewed when they show 
signs of deterioration. Joints in flexible conductors of 
pendants shall not be permitted. 


10.1.13 Flexible leads shall not be used where they 
are likely to swing due to ventilation or humidifier 
apparatus or any other cause; fixed rod or conduit 
protection shall be used in such cases. 


10.1.14 Flexible leads and fittings shall not be allowed 
to vibrate. 


10.1.15 Ceiling roses shall be securely fixed and shall 
be complete with caps. 


10.1.16 Straight or slanting wall batten holder shall 
not be fitted at switchboard height or on the 
switchboard. 


10.1.17 Shades or reflectors of light points shall not 
be in contact with structural members, pipe work, etc. 


10.1.18 Temporary wiring shall not be permitted. 


10.1.19 Pendants in close proximity to humidifiers shall 
be provided with approved water-tight fittings. 


10.1.20 Only rod pendants shall be used in industrial 
buildings like textile mills, flour mills, saw mills, etc. 


10.1.21 In ducts and tunnels only bulk head fittings 
with wires in conduits or armoured cables shall be used 
for lighting. 


10.1.22 The base of accessories shall be of vitreous 
materials. 


NOTES 


1 Bakelite ceiling roses may be permitted in industrial buildings 
except in areas where the atmosphere is likely to contain 
explosive gases or vapours. 


2 Bakelite switches may be permitted in industrial buildings 
except in ‘Hazardous Locations’ as defined later in this Code. 


10.1.23 Reflector fittings meant to be suspended by 
chain shall not be suspended by string or any other 
similar material. 


10.1.24 Fittings for lamps in places where considerable 
dust or fluff is present (such as willowing, lap breaking, 
waste opening, mixing, blowing, and raising rooms in 
textile mills, flour mills, saw mills and other wood 
working factories, etc) shall be of dust tight type 
conforming to IS 4013. 


10.1.25 In situations where the atmosphere is likely to 
contain explosive/flammable gases or vapours, fittings 
of flameproof type shall be used unless otherwise 
permitted under clauses relating to ‘Hazardous 
Locations’. It is also recommended to use fire resistant/ 
fire survival Cables for such occupancies. 


10.1.26 The run or course of wiring shall be arranged 
to avoid crossing of belt drives; where such crossing 


is unavoidable mechanical protection shall be provided 
against damage by belt breakages. 


10.1.27 The paper insulated lead covered cables shall 
not be brought right through the sealing box without a 
break. The conductors of paper insulated cables shall 
be terminated in the trifurcating box and tails of India 
Rubber (VIR) Conductors sweated by ferrules to the 
conductors of paper insulated cables shall be brought 
through the trifurcating box. 


10.1.28 All filament lamps shall be so placed or so 
guarded as to prevent ignition of combustible material. 
Any shade or guard used for this purpose shall be 
suitable to withstand the heat of the lamp. 


10.1.29 Wiring of lighting circuits shall be on 
distribution board system and circuit diagrams shall 
be attached to it. 


10.1.30 Conductors shall be run as far as possible along 
the walls and ceilings, so as to be accessible for 
inspection. 


10.1.31 Where two or more points are mounted, with 
a voltage differences exceeding 230 V between them, 
a minimum distance of 2 m between the points shall 
be maintained to avoid possibility of shocks. 


10.1.32 Cord grips shall be provided for pendant lamp 
holders of bayonet contact type, and chain suspended 
reflector fittings shall have the cable entries made bell- 
shaped or bushed to avoid damaging the flexible cables. 


10.1.33 Chain suspended fittings, fans, etc, shall be 
fixed at a distance not exceeding 250 mm away from 
ceiling rose. 


10.1.34 Where long spans occur between beams and 
supports, battens shall be provided for attachment of 
conduits, casing, or other wiring or fittings. The runners 
shall be of well seasoned teak wood, free from shakes, 
splits, etc, and shall not be less than following 
dimensions: 


Span, m Dimensions, mm 
(1) (2) 

1.2 to 1.8 75 x 38 

1.8 to 2.4 75 x 50 

2.4 to 3.4 75 x 63 

3.4 to 4.4 100 x 75 


Alternatively, they may be suspended from a catenaries 
arrangement or be supported on steel sections of 
suitable size. 


10.1.35 The wiring for hot air chambers shall be 
mounted on the walls outside the chamber, as far as 
possible. The light fittings inside the chambers shall 
be of oyster type or shall be waterproof fittings. It is 


also recommended to use fire resistant/fire survival 
cables for such occupancies. 


10.1.36 Where wiring is to be carried along the face of 
rolled steel joists or stanchions, a wooden or non- 
conducting backing, preferably of the full width of 
joists or stanchions shall first be laid on the joist or 
stanchions and secured rigidly thereto. Wooden pieces 
for the support of casing or conduit to steel joists or 
stanchions shall be secured by metal clips with at least 
two screws. 


10.1.37 Scaffolding ropes shall not be tied round 
conduits, casings or other forms of wiring. 


10.1.38 All strands of cables shall be fitted into 
terminals of switches, fuses, etc; strands of cables shall 
not be cut. In damp locations, the strands shall be 
soldered together. 


10.2 The wiring methods specified in 10.3 to 10.7 shall 
only be permitted subject to conditions stipulated 
therewith. 


10.3 Conduits 


10.3.1 Conduits and fittings shall be of solid drawn 
and welded steel of heavy gauge screwed type, 
conforming to IS 14768 (Part 2). 


NOTE — Rigid non-metallic conduits conforming to IS 9537 
(Part 3) may, however, be used for low and medium tension 
installations except in locations mentioned under 9.3.5 and 
subject to the following conditions: 


a) Conduits should be supported not more than 800 mm and 
should have suitable joints; 


b) For earthing, separate earthing conductors shall be run 
inside the conduit from end to end; and 


c) Expansion joints shall be provided, where required, to 
compensate for thermal expansion and contraction. 


10.3.2 Solid drawn welded steel conduit shall be 
permitted under all atmospheric conditions and in all 
occupancies subject to stipulations laid down in 10.3.3 
and 10.3.4. 


10.3.3 In damp situations, such as textile sheds, the 
conduits shall be hot galvanized or zinc impregnated 
or treated with special rust-proof paint. 


10.3.4 In occupancies like chemical factories, bleach 
and dye houses, where strong corrosive vapours are 
present special conduits or conduits with additional 
coatings of bitumen paint or with a glass wool lagging 
provided with a protective covering shall be used. 


10.3.5 Non-metallic conduits shall not be permitted in 
the following locations: 


a) Where wiring height is less than 2.5 m above 
working floor level, unless protected against 
mechanical damage; 


b) Where exposed to ambient temperatures 


IS 1646 : 2015 


likely to be above 55°C at sometime or other 
during the year; 

c) In concealed places of combustible 
construction; 


d) Where the atmosphere is likely to contain 
flammable gases or vapour; 


e) Where conductor operates at voltage above 
650 V, and 


f) In locations where surrounding atmosphere 
is likely to affect the non-metallic conduits 


10.3.6 Flexible conduits shall not be used for general 
wiring. It may be, however used for connections 
between terminal boxes of motors and starters, switches 
and motors but the length shall be restricted to a 
maximum of 1 200 mm. 


10.4 Mineral Insulated and Other Types of Metal 
Sheathed Cables 


10.4.1 Mineral insulated metal sheathed cables and 
other types of metal sheathed cables are permitted 
under all atmospheric conditions and in all occupancies 
except as mentioned hereunder: 


a) Where they would be exposed to destructive 
corrosive conditions. 


b) Where directly buried under ground, without 
suitable protection against mechanical 
damage and corrosive conditions 


c) Metal sheathed cables of other types shall not 
be directly buried under ground, nor shall they 
be used in wet locations unless: 


1) the metallic sheath is impervious to 
moisture, 


2) a lead sheath or waterproof jacket is 
provided under the sheath, and 


3) the insulated conductors under the sheath 
are approved for use in wet locations. 


10.4.2 In case of wet locations like in parts of laundries, 
tanneries, etc, and in locations where walls are 
frequently washed, a minimum clearance of 6 mm shall 
be maintained between mineral insulated cable and the 
wall to which it is affixed. 


10.5 Armoured Cables 


10.5.1 Armoured cables shall be permitted under all 
atmospheric conditions and in all occupancies except 
in commercial garages, storage battery rooms and in 
locations where they would be exposed to corrosive 
fumes or gases. 


10.6 Tough Rubber and Other Non-metallic 
Sheathed Cables 


10.6.1 Tough rubber or plastic sheathed cables shall 
not be permitted in the following locations: 


IS 1646 : 2015 


a) Where considerable dust and/or fly in 
generally present (for example, cotton and 
jute mills and other vegetable, fibre 
processing factories, flour mills, saw mills and 
other wood working factories, plastic and 
rubber goods factories, pulverizing works, 
etc); 

b) Where atmosphere is likely to contain 
flammable/explosive gases or vapours; 

c) Where the hazardous trades or processes are 
carried out (for example, oil mills, paint and 
varnish factories); 


d) Where they would be exposed to mechanical 
damage (godowns, engine rooms, rope and 
motor alleys, etc); and 


e) Where wet processes are carried out. 


10.6.2 These systems shall generally be permitted in 
office; and residential buildings. Appropriate 
authorities may however specially permit their use in 
industrial buildings of types other than those indicated 
in 10.6.1. 


10.7 Cleated Wiring System 


10.7.1 This system shall be permitted for use in 
industrial buildings for low tension circuits only, with 
prior approval of appropriate authority. 


10.7.2 When installed in bleaching or dyeing sections 
of a textile mills, the wiring shall be held by porcelain 
bobbins secured to teak wood battens by brass screws 
and the whole run inverted. 


10.7.3 This system shall not be used for any type of 
building of permanent nature other than of the kind 
mentioned in 10.7.2. 


10.8 Cable Trays or Wire or Bus Ducts 


10.8.1 All cable trays or wire or bus ducts shall be 
constructed from earthed sheet metal, enclosed or open 
troughs with hinged or removable covers housing and 
protecting either electric wires or cables, installed at 
site, or factory mounted bare conductors of aluminium 
or copper and shall be capable of withstanding electro- 
mechanical stresses. 


10.8.2 Such systems shall be permitted under all 
atmospheric conditions and all occupancies except in 
following locations: 


a) Where exposed to severe mechanical damage; 
b) Where exposed to corrosive vapours; 


c) Where the atmosphere is likely to contain 
flammable or explosive vapours; 


d) Where wet processes are carried out; and 
e) Where it is concealed. 


10.8.3 The system shall be securely supported at 
intervals not exceeding 1.5 m. 


10.8.4 Such systems of totally enclosed type shall be 
permitted to be extended vertically through floors 
provided they are adequately protected against 
mechanical damage up to a minimum distance of 2.5 m 
above working floor level. 


10.8.5 Dead ends of all cable troughs or ducts shall be 
closed. 


10.8.6 Extensions and branches of such systems shall 
also be of the same type. 


10.9 Under Floor Cables Trenches (within 
Buildings) 


10.9.1 Such systems may be permitted under all 
atmospheric conditions and in all occupancies except 
where exposed to corrosive vapours and locations 
where flammable/explosive vapours or gases may be 
present, unless the cables or conductors are specially 
approved for such use or the trenches are completely 
filled with sand. 


10.9.2 Conductors or cables inside the trenches shall 
be so mounted on insulated racks or other supports as 
to be at least 75 mm above trench bottoms. 


10.9.3 The top of the trenches shall be covered with 
removable concrete slabs or chequered plates. 


10.9.4 In case of long trenches, it is recommended that 
trenches of more than 1 000 cm? cross-sectional area 
be divided by incombustible barrier walls at intervals 
not exceeding 45 m. Such barrier walls shall be of at 
least 50 mm thickness and of the same height as of the 
cable trench. The cables shall be carried through holes 
in these barrier walls, which shall be made good 
thereafter to prevent passage of fire beyond the barriers 
(see also IS 12459). 


NOTE—This provision need not be applied if the trenches are 
completely filled with sand, pebbles, etc. 


10.9.5 The combined cross-sectional area of all 
conductors or cables shall not exceed 40 percent of 
the internal cross-sectional area of the trench. 


10.9.6 The trench shall be kept free of accumulation 
of water, dust and waste materials. 


10.10 Compartmentation of Cable Tunnels/ 
Galleries 


The requirements for compartmentation of cable 
tunnels/galleries should be as per IS 12459. 


10.11 Flexible Cables and Cords 


10.11.1 Flexible cables and cords shall be permitted 
only as: 


a) Pendants; 

b) Wiring of fixtures; 

c) Connections of portable appliances or lamps; 
d) Lift cables; 

e) Wirings for cranes and hoists; and 


f) Connections to mains-operated electrical 
stickers and motors mounted on parts of a 
stationary machine, which undergo to and fro 
motion during operation. 

10.11.2 Where a lighting fitting is supported by one or 
more flexible cords, the maximum mass to which twin 
flexible cords may be subjected shall be as follows: 


Nominal Cross- Number and Maximum 
sectional Area Diameter of Permissible 
of Twin Flexible Lines Mass 
Cord mm kg 
mm? 
(1) (2) (3) 
0.5 16/0.2 1.7 
0.75 24/0.2 2.6 
1.0 32/0.2 3.5 


10.11.3 Where flexible cables or cords are exposed to 
risks of contact with oil or petrol or where cable which 
will not support combustion is required, use shall be 
made of cables or cords having a PVC or oil resisting 
and fire retardant sheath. 


10.11.4 Flexible cables and cords shall not be used as 
fixed wiring unless contained in earthed metal or any 
other non-combustible and mechanically strong 
enclosure. This requirement need not, however, apply 
to short lengths of sheathed flexible cable or flexible 
cord used as final connections to fixed apparatus or 
for connections of control gear of fluorescent lamps 
or discharge lamps. Non-sheathed flexible cables and 
flexible cords shall not be drawn into conduits or ducts. 


10.11.5 Flexible cables or cords shall also not be run 
through holes in walls, ceiling or floors or through 
doors, windows or other similar openings. Nor shall 
they be permitted to be concealed behind walls, ceilings 
or floors. 


10.12 Bare Conductors 


10.12.1 Bare conductors are permitted for low tension 
side, of drawing frame transformer circuits where the 
potential difference does not exceed 12 V. Bare or 
lightly insulated conductors of extra low voltage 
systems shall have adequate insulation and further 
protection, where necessary, to ensure that they do not 
cause risk of fire. 


Bare conductors are also permitted for cranes and hoists 
subject to special conditions laid down in this code for 
such equipment. 


IS 1646 : 2015 


10.13 Lightning Protection and Overhead Lines 


10.13.1 The lightning protection system for buildings 
shall generally conform to IS 2309. 


10.13.2 All overhead transmission lines, including 
compound lines shall not be run above any process or 
storage blocks or open storage site. 


10.13.3 Lightning arresters shall be provided for lines 
at both ends and at supports where exposed to and liable 
to damage or injury from lightning. The arresters shall 
preferably be of the non-horn type for low and medium 
tension because of likely damage by buds and 
distortion. 


10.14 Wall Plugs and Sockets 


10.14.1 All wall plugs and sockets in industrial 
buildings shall be of metal clad 3 pin pattern separately 
controlled by a switch, adjacent to the wall socket. 


NOTE — This shall not apply in case of wall plug and socket 
with current ratings of 5 A and less. 


10.14.2 Where it is necessary to earth the metal case 
of wall plug and/or portable appliances, the connection 
shall be done with soldered or approved lugs or crimped 
joints or any other approved means of connection. 


11 LIGHTING, FITTINGS AND ACCESSORIES 


11.1 Fluorescent Lamp Fittings 
11.1.1 These fittings may be one of the following types: 


a) General purpose type — For use in office, 
residences and similar locations. 


b) Industrial type — For use in places where 
dust, fly or corrosive vapours may be present 
(see Annex B for specification of fittings). 


c) Flame proof explosion type — For use in 
places where flammable/explosive gases and 
vapours are present. 


NOTES 


1 Where fumes or corrosive vapours or gases evolved due to 
chemical action, may be present, the reflector shall be of 
vitreous enamel or non-combustible plastic and wiring shall 
be in load-sheathed conductors. Rayon Spinning Sections 
should have lead coated metal reflectors or equipment. 


2 The position of fittings shall be carefully selected to avoid 
any mechanical damage by belt drives, shafts, etc, and if 
necessary suitable guards shall be provided. The fittings shall 
be clear of the humidifier jets. 


3 Where flammable/explosive gas or vapours may be present 
the fittings shall be of flame proof type [see IS 5572 (Part 1) 
for classification of hazardous areas ]. 


11.2 Lighting Switchboard 


11.2.1 Main switches and fuses shall be metal clad and 


IS 1646 : 2015 


branch main board shall be metal clad when used on 
medium tension circuits. 


11.2.2 All equipment shall be of robust construction, 
of adequate dimensions and thoroughly dust tight. 


11.2.3 Each circuit from main distribution centre except 
fuse distribution board shall be provided with a circuit 
breaker of linked switches and cut outs. 


11.2.4 Adequate means of control in approved positions 
shall be provided for distribution boards or a group of 
distribution boards which are fed from a switchboard 
or distributing centre and within a reasonable distance 
there from, such as one or more boards erected in a 
room or building isolated from source of supply. 


11.2.5 Each final sub-circuit from a distribution board 
shall be controlled by a single pole switch connected 
to the live, outer or phase conductor. 


11.2.6 Woodwork shall not be used for mounting of or 
construction of the frame work for iron clad switch, 
distribution boards and control gear. 


11.2.7 All equipment shall be numbered in English and 
vernacular for ready identification and to indicate the 
department, place or circuit controlled. 


11.2.8 Circuits shall be arranged in symmetry as far as 
practicable. 


12 SPECIAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT AND 
APPLIANCES 


12.1 Radio and Television Sets and Sound 
Apparatus 


12.1.1 The antenna of radio and television sets shall 
be connected through a double pole change over switch 
so connected that the antenna and the set completely 
earthed when not in use of during, thunderstorms. 


12.1.2 The antenna shall be provided with suitable 
lightning arresters if situated in an area subject to heavy 
thunderstorms. 


12.1.3 All circuits (aerial and all internal wiring) shall 
be so constructed that contact with any other electric 
light and power circuits is impossible. 


12.1.4 The lead-in conductor shall be of copper and 
shall be not less than 2 mm in diameter. 


12.1.5 The lead-in conductor shall enter the building 
through a non-combustible and non-absorptive 
insulating bushing. 


12.2 X-Ray Apparatus 


12.2.1 The installation and precautionary measures 
shall comply strictly with Indian Electricity Rules. 


12.2.2 All such apparatus shall be located either in 
independent detached building or in compartments 


10 


segregated by 355 mm thick brick walls with each 
opening protected by a fire resisting door/shutter. 


12.3 Electrolyser Apparatus 


12.3.1 Motor generator sets and/or separate generators 
and/or rectifiers together with necessary switch and 
control gear shall be separated by blank walls or located 
sufficiently away from the electrolyser. 


12.3.2 Circulating pumps and electrical equipment 
thereof, where mounted in close proximity to the 
electrolyser, shall be specially treated with 
anticorrosive paint at frequent intervals. The electrical 
apparatus shall be of totally enclosed type or of an 
equivalent type. 


12.3.3 Windings and insulation generally shall be 
specially treated to resist the corrosive effects of the 
electrolytic fumes. 


12.4 Electrostatic Charge Eliminators 


12.4.1 Electrostatic charge eliminating devices shall 
be provided for all high speed machines and equipment 
of similar type where static electricity may be 
developed, specially during dry seasons of the year. 


12.5 Cold Storage Buildings 


12.5.1 The lighting inside cold storages shall be in 
heavy gauged screwed steel conduit and water tight 
fittings shall be used throughout. 


12.5.2 Machinery and control gear shall be mounted 
external to cold storages. 


12.6 Electrically Driven Fire Pumps for Hydrant 
and/or Sprinkler Installation 


12.6.1 In industry sufficient spare power shall always 
be available to drive the fire pump set(s) at all times 
throughout the year. 


12.6.2 The power station and/or substation(s) supplying 
power for fire pump circuit shall be so placed that any 
falling masonry and the like from other buildings 
occasioned by a fire or other cause cannot damage the 
station and cut off power to the fire pump circuits. 


NOTE — It is preferable to locate the sub-station(s) at least 6 
m away from all surrounding buildings. 


12.6.3 A direct feeder, without any tappings shall be 
laid from the substation to the pump house to ensure 
that the supply to the pumping set(s) is entirely 
independent of all other electrical equipment in the 
premises, namely, even when power throughout the 
rest of the premises is switched off the supply to the 
fire pumps remains available uninterrupted. Overhead 
feeders to sub-stations supplying power to the fire 
pumps are not per permitted within a horizontal 


distance of: 


a) 15 m of any process building/plant or tanks 
containing flammable liquids; and 
b) 6m ofany other building of tanks containing 


non-flammable liquids or of storage in open. 


In case the feed to such sub-station is by means of 
underground cables, the cables shall not pass under 
any building or permanent structure. 


12.6.4 Where there is more than one sources of power 
for the operation of pumping set(s), the electrical 
circuits shall be so designed as to ensure that when 
necessary the set(s) shall continue to operate without 
manual operation of any emergency witch, when the 
supply is interrupted. 


12.6.5 Indicator lamps shall be fitted in prominent 
position(s) both in the sub-station and pump house, 
which would continuously glow as long as power is 
available to the fire pump(s). A sound alarm shall also 
be provided in the event of power failure to the fire 
pumps. 


12.6.6 The pump set(s) shall be of direct coupled type, 
securely mounted on robust bed-plate(s), if or 
horizontal type and should be free from vibrations at 
all variations of load. 


12.6.7 The motors of fire pumps shall be either of 
totally enclosed or drip-proof type, the latter having 
air-inlets and outlets protected with meshed wire panels 
to exclude rodents, reptiles and insects. 


12.6.8 The motors shall be wound for Class-E 
insulation and the windings shall be vacuum 
impregnated with heat and moisture-resisting varnish 
preferably glass-fibre insulated, to withstand tropical 
conditions. 


12.6.9 Motors wound for high-tension supplies shall 
have a suitable fixed warming resistance to maintain 
the motor windings in a dry condition at all times and 
particularly under monsoon conditions. The resistance 
shall be fed from medium voltage circuits. 


12.6.10 Heating apparatus shall also be provided, when 
necessary, for medium tension motors where they are 
located below ground level, in order to maintain the 
motor winding in a dry condition. Adequate drainage 
shall also be provided in the pump house in such cases. 


12.6.11 The pumping set shall preferably be housed in 
a separate building located at least 6 m away from all 
other buildings and at least 15 m away from units and/ 
or storage tanks of plant handling flammable liquids/ 
gases. 


12.6.12 The motor rating should be adequate to drive 
the pump when operating on 150 percent of rated flow. 


11 


IS 1646 : 2015 


12.6.13 The fire pump circuit shall be protected at its 
origin by an automatic circuit breaker, from which 
either the no volt coil is removed or which is fitted 
with automatic re-setting type of no volt coil, and the 
overload setting shall be so adjusted as to permit the 
motor to carry on overload of 50 percent of its rated 
capacity. 


12.6.14 Cables for motors of fire pumps and their 
switchgear shall be armoured or shall be enclosed in 
heavy gauge screwed steel conduit. Overhead lines 
shall not be permitted within 6 m of window, door or 
other opening in any of the protected building or any 
other building within 15 m of a protected building. 


12.6.15 Equipment shall be painted throughout in red 
or in orange yellow colour. 


12.6.16 Pumping sets shall be worked for at least 15 
min each week and records of the same shall be 
maintained. 


12.6.17 The incoming cable to the fire pump room shall 
terminate in an isolating switch fuse unit incorporating 
HRC fuses and where necessary provided with 
distribution system. 


12.6.18 The starting switchgear for the fire pumps 
should be suitable direct on line starting but other 
alternative arrangements are acceptable with the 
approval of competent authority. 


13 REQUIREMENTS 
OCCUPANCIES 


FOR SPECIAL 


13.1 Hazardous Locations 


For the purpose of this Code a location shall be 
regarded as hazardous where any one or more of the 
following conditions exist: 


a) Where flammable gases or vapours may be 
present in the atmosphere in sufficient 
quantities to produce explosive or flammable 


mixtures; 

b) Where combustible dust is produced or 
handled; and 

c) Where vegetable or viscose, acrylic and nylon 


66 fibres are processed or handled. 


13.1.1 In locations where the atmosphere may contain 
flammable gases or vapours the classification of areas 
and selection of Electrical Equipment permitted to be 
installed therein shall be governed by IS 5572 (Part 1) 
and IS 5571 respectively. These requirements may, 
however, be modified in any particular situation as per 
the provisions of 13.1.3. 


13.1.2 In case of process or operations involving 
combustible liquid(s), the presence of flammable 


IS 1646 : 2015 


vapour in the atmosphere may be deemed probable 
only if the flash point of the liquid(s) is below 32.2°C. 
However, locations where combustible/flammable 
liquids having flash points above 32.2°C but not above 
93.3°C are handled shall be regarded as hazardous if 
such liquid is (a) sprayed or (b) present in the form of 
mist or (c) heat to or above its flash point. 


13.1.3 Wherever possible, the hazardous locations 
where installation of flameproof electrical equipment 
and fittings is required shall be located either in a 
detached building or in a compartment segregated from 
the remainder of the premises at least by a non- 
combustible fire resisting wall of 2 h rating without 
any kind of opening. Areas where, however, this is not 
practicable, shall be demarcated by fencings, railing 
or boundary lines painted on floor and all electrical 
equipment and fitting shall be of flameproof type within 
the hazardous location as also up to a distance from 
the boundaries of the demarcated area indicated 
hereunder: 


a) Where the processes or operations 
necessitating the use of flame-proof 
equipment and fittings are carried out in the 
open. All space within 6 m horizontally in any 
direction from the demarcating fencing/ 
railing or boundary line and 3 m vertically 
above the highest hazard source. 

Where the processes or operation 
necessitating the use of flame-proof 
equipment is carried out in enclosed space of 
equipment, as in the case of paint spray 
booths, baking or drying ovens, enamelling 
or coating equipment, etc. All space within 
6 m horizontally of open face or door opening 
of such equipment and 3 m vertically above 
the roof of such equipment. 


b) 


13.1.4 Except the wiring of rigid metal conduits and 
armored cable wiring, no electrical equipment or 
fittings shall be permitted where it may be subjected 
to hazardous accumulation of readily ignitable deposits 
or residue, as within a spray painting booth or drying 
oven. 


13.1.5 Illumination of spray painting booths or similar 
coating or finishing equipment through glass panels is 
permitted, provided the: 


a) lighting fittings are of fixed type and installed 
behind glass panels; 

b) glass panel(s) is so sealed, that, it effectively 
isolates the lighting equipment from the 
hazardous area; 

c) panels are so located that deposits of 


hazardous residues on them are avoided as 


12 


far as possible; and 


d) glass used for panel is either of the wired or 
specially toughened type. 


13.1.6 Electrical installation in hazardous locations 
involving presence or use of combustible dust or fibre 
(vegetable, animal or synthetic) shall comply with the 
following special provisions: 


a) Wiring methods — The type of wiring 
methods permitted shall be as follows: 
Screwed steel or rigid metal conduits, mineral 
insulated or other sheathed cables, armoured 
cables and enclosed metal covered cable or 
bus ducts. Fire resistant/fire survival cables 
shall be used in hazardous/critical locations. 
Motors — Motors shall be either of totally 
enclosed, or totally enclosed fan-cooled or 
dust tight type. 


b) 


c) Distribution and panel boards — Location 
of distribution and panel boards where 
combustible dust is evolved shall be avoided 
as far as possible. 

d) Switchgears — In areas where combustible 
dust may be present, oil circuit breakers shall 
be preferred. 

e) Lighting fittings — Use of incandescent lamps 
shall be avoided as far as practicable and the 
fluorescent light fitting used shall be of 
industrial type. 

In case of incandescent lamps being used, the 
fitting shall be enclosed in dust tight 


enclosures. 


The leads from ceiling rose to lamp terminals 
shall be enclosed in conduits. 


g) 


13.2 Lifts 


13.2.1 The installation of lifts and care of electrical 
installation shall fully comply with relevant provisions 
of IS 14665 (Part2). 


13.3 Petrol Station 


13.3.1 Electrically operated valves shall be so designed 
that they can also be manually operated. 


13.3.2 The valve or valves shall close automatically 
when the electric supply ceases. 


13.3.3 All fusible links in the circuit supplying the valve 
or valves shall be in series and on the live lead. 


13.3.4 The circuit in which the possible links form a 
path for the current to the fire valve shall be a separate 
final sub-circuit controlled by a switch and by a fuse 
not exceeding 5A capacity both on the line lead. 


13.3.5 Equipment shall be of certified flame proof type 


unless it is separately mounted and is away from any 
possible source of fumes. 


13.4 Cinematographic Projection and Rewinding 
Rooms 


13.4.1 Where general lighting of the auditorium and 
exits can be controlled from within the enclosure, 
separate and independent means of control shall also 
be provided outside the enclosure and well away from 
it. 


13.4.2 All switches, fuses and connections thereof shall 
by totally enclosed and iron-clad and all electric lamps 
and resistances so protected as to avoid their possibility 
of coming into contact with or in close proximity of 
films or other combustible materials. Resistance 
connected with auditorium or stage lighting shall not 
be located in the projection or rewinding rooms. 


13.4.3 The insulating material of all electric cables 
including leads to lamps shall be covered with fire 
resisting material. 


13.4.4 There shall be no unnecessary and loose electric 
cable. The ‘leads’ to the projector lamps shall be taken 
as separate circuits from the source of supply and from 
the supply side of main fuses in general lighting circuit. 
Efficient switches and fuses shall be inserted at the 
point where the supply is taken, and, in addition, an 
efficient double pole switch shall be fitted in the 
cinematograph lamp circuit inside the enclosure. When 
the cinematograph lamp is working the voltage across 
the terminals of the double pole switch inside the 
enclosure shall not exceed 110 V. 


13.4.5 Cables from projector lamps should be taken as 
separate circuits from the source of supply and from 
the supply side of main fuses in general lighting circuit. 
Efficient switches and fuses should be inserted at the 
point where the supply is taken, and in addition, an 
efficient double pole switch should be fitted in the 
cinematograph lamp circuit inside the enclosure when 
the cinematograph lamp is working the voltage across 
the terminals of the double pole switch inside the 
enclosure should exceed 1 10 V. 


13.4.6 Resistances shall be made entirely of 
incombustible material and shall be so constructed and 
maintained that no coil or other part shall at any time 
become unduly heated. All resistances, with the 
exception of a resistance for regulating purposes shall 
be placed outside the enclosure and, if reasonably 
practicable, outside the auditorium. If inside the 
auditorium, they shall be protected by a wire guard or 
other efficient means of preventing accidental contact. 


13.4.7 The operator shall satisfy himself before the 
commencement of each performance that all cables, 
lead connections and resistances are in proper working 


13 


IS 1646 : 2015 


order. The resistance shall be inspected at least once 
during each performance. If any fault is detected, 
current shall be immediately switched off and shall 
remain switched off until the fault has been remedied. 


13.5 Accumulator or Battery Service Stations 


13.5.1 Charging shall be carried out in well ventilated 
situations and no smoking or naked lights shall be 
allowed. 


13.5.2 Accumulators/batteries shall stand directly or 
non-ignitable, non-absorbing, non-conducting 
material, such as glass, porcelain or glazed 
earthenware. These materials shall rest on a bench 
which shall be kept dry and shall be insulated from 
earth, or constructed of wood. It shall be of slat 
formation and treated with anti-sulfuric enamel. 


13.5.3 The accumulators shall be so arranged on the 
bench that a potential difference exceeding 12 V shall 
not exist between adjacent cells. The bunching of 
accumulators or arranging them in circular formation 
shall not be allowed. 


13.5.4 All combustible material within a distance of 
60 cm measured horizontally or within 2 m measured 
vertically, from any accumulator shall be protected by 
asbestos sheets. 


13.5.5 The charging circuit shall be provided with 
double pole switches and fuses, and, where a motor 
generator is employed the motor shall be provided with 
double pole switches and fuses and an automatic 
battery cut-out shall be placed in the generator circuit. 
Any sub-circuit shall be provided with a fuse rated at 
not more than 7 A in each live conductor. 


13.5.6 Charging control panels shall be of durable non- 
ignitable, non-absorbent, non-conducting material and 
together with the rectifiers, transformers and supports 
for resistances of lamps, shall preferably be fixed to 
brick or similar wall. If, however, they are fixed to 
woodwork, such wood work shall be covered with 
hard-ascetic sheets or similar fire-resistive material. 


13.5.7 If accumulators are charged through resistance 
coils or lamps, such resistance coils or lamps shall be 
at least at distance of 60 cm from the nearest 
accumulator. 


13.5.8 All wiring shall be securely mounted and 
protected against mechanical injury and efficient 
terminal or connections shall be provided from which 
the connections to the accumulators can be made. 
Rubber or P.V.C. insulated wiring, if on insulators shall 
not be run in such a position that a fire arising at any 
accumulator could reach it. Alternatively fire resistant/ 
fire survival cables shall be used. All conductors 
connecting supply terminals to the accumulators shall 


IS 1646 : 2015 


have either rubber or tough compound insulation 
without a tape or braid. 


13.5.9 If the supply is taken from mains having one 
conductor earthed, the lamps or other resistances shall 
be connected on non-earthed lead and the accumulators 
connected direct to earthed conductor. Precaution shall 
be adopted to prevent the attendant receiving shocks. 


13.5.10 Celluloid-cased accumulator shall not be kept 
on charge at any time without an attendant. 


13.5.11 Spring-jacks shall be used for final connection 
to the accumulator terminals. 


13.5.12 All insulators shall be kept as dust free as 
practicable. 


13.6 High-Rise Buildings 


13.6.1 All electric distribution cables/wiring shall be 
laid in a separate fire resistant duct. The duct shall be 
sealed at every floor with non-combustible materials 
having the same fire resistance as that of the duct. Low 
and medium voltage wiring running in shafts and in 
false ceiling shall run in separate conduits. 


13.6.2 Separate circuits for water pumps, lifts and 
staircase and corridor lighting and blowers in 
pressurizing system shall be provided directly from 
the main switchgear panel and these circuits shall be 
laid in separate conduits so that fire in one circuit will 
not affect the others. Master switch controlling essential 
service circuits shall be clearly labeled. 


13.6.3 Staircase and corridor lights shall be on separate 
circuits and shall be independently connected so that 
it could be operated by on switch installation on the 
ground floor easily accessible to fire fighting staff at 
any time. 


13.6.4 A standby electric generator shall be installed 
to supply power to staircase and corridor lighting 
circuits, fire lifts, the electrically operated fire pumps, 
pressurizing fans and blowers in case of failure of 
normal electric supply. 


13.6.5 If more than 200 litres of oil are contained in 
any oil immersed electric gear a retaining sill threshold 
shall be provided around, the gear or at the door. 


14 GODOWNS 


14.1 General 


Wiring shall either be in rigid steel conduits or 
armoured cable. Alternately fire resistant/fire survival 
cables may be used. Wall brackets shall be eliminated 
and rod pendants and batten holder fittings shall be 
erected for the lamps which shall be of a type protected 
against mechanical damage. Industrial type fluorescent 


14 


light fittings shall, however, be permitted. The fittings 
for lamps shall be fixed at sufficient height above the 
highest level of bulk or other goods which are stored 
in the godown. The circuit shall be controlled by a 
linked switch and cut-outs which shall be placed 
outside the godown in a convenient portion. 


14.2 Raw Jute Godowns 


14.2.1 The supply of electricity shall be at low voltage 
that is, not exceeding 250 V. 


14.2.2 All wiring shall be encased in screwed steel 
conduits, the horizontal portions of which shall be 
sloped to allow condensed moisture to collect at set 
places where drainage outlets shall be provided. Such 
outlets shall be properly secured, against entry of 
insects, etc. 


14.2.3 The cable used shall not be of less than 3/.029 
size of 250 V grade and shall be of single core, rubber 
or PVC insulated, taped and branded. Alternately fire 
resistant/fire survival cables may be used. 


14.2.4 No joint boxes or cut-outs of cables shall be 
allowed inside the godown. 


14.2.5 The conduit shall be affixed to (not recessed 
into) walls or roofs of godowns by means of saddles 
grouped on walls or roofs, the distance between saddles 
not exceeding 750 mm. All conduits must be laid 
externally on the outside walls or roofs of the godown 
except those lengths which are required to carry the 
cables to light fittings. In the latter case, the conduit 
should be run above the level of highest stacking. 


14.2.6 Only bulkhead light fittings of approved design 
with C.I. frames of robust construction and bulkhead 
glasses protected with thick steel lined guards shall be 
used. 


14.2.7 Each lighting fittings shall be affixed to the wall 
or at not more than 450 mm below the roof of the 
godown. In case of a sprinkle red godown each lighting 
fitting shall either be above the level of the sprinkler 
heads or not less than 300 mm below that level, it being 
understood that in no case shall a light fitting be 
installed low than 750 mm above the maximum 
stacking height. 


14.2.8 All lights in the godown shall be controlled by 
one or more double pole metal-clad switches and fuses 
situated outside the godown in a convenient place and 
effectively protected from weather. 


14.2.9 An indicator light controlled by the switch(es) 
shall be provided on the switch panel to show whether 
the lights inside the godown are on or off when the 
godown is closed and locked. 


14.3 Strong Rooms 


14.3.1 Permanent lighting shall be provided by means 
of concealed wiring or solid drawn conduit wiring with 
the main switch located outside. 


14.4 Nitrocellulose (and Chemicals Having Similar 
Fire Hazard Characteristics) Godowns 


14.4.1 Lamps in nitrocellulose storage rooms shall be 
rigid fixtures of glass enclosed and gasketted type or 
flameproof fluorescent fittings. Lamps shall be 
controlled by a switch having a pole in each unearthed 
conductor. This switch shall be located outside the 
room and provided with a pilot light to indicate whether 
the switch is ‘on’ or ‘off. This switch shall disconnect 
from all sources of supply all unearthed conductors 
terminating in any outlet in the room. 


14.4.2 No socket outlets, electric motors, heaters, 
portable lights or other portable electric equipment 
shall not be located in nitrocellulose storage rooms. 


15 TESTING 


15.1 The electrical installation in a new building or an 
addition to an existing installation shall be tested as 
per IS 732 before it is put to service. The installation 
shall also be checked periodically as decided by the 
appropriate authority. 


15.2 The following tests shall be carried out as required 
by the appropriate authority: 


IS 1646 : 2015 


a) Full load and/or flash tests of rotating 
machinery, transformers, condensers, 
rectifiers, etc. 

b) Insulation resistance tests of rotating 

machines, transformers, condensers, 

regulators, cable circuits, etc, by meggers of 
appropriate voltage. 

c) Lighting circuits shall be tested in following 

manner: 

1) All switches ‘on’ and consuming devices 

in circuit, both poles connected together 

to obtain resistance to earth, 

2) Between poles with lamps and other 

consuming devices removed and 

switches ‘on’; and 

3) With lamps and other consuming devices 

in position but switches ‘off. 


d) 
e) 


Earth continuity tests. 


Power circuits to be tested between phases or 
outer and middle or neutral wires and to earth. 


15.3 The appropriate authority shall have the right to 
vary the foregoing tests or carry out further tests as 
may be considered necessary. 


16 INSPECTION 


16.1 All electrical inspections shall be inspected 
periodically and proper vigilance shall be kept. Any 
faults or defects that are notice shall be attended to 
and the defects rectified immediately. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 

732 : 1989 Code of practice for electrical wiring 
installations (third revision) 

2309 : 1989 Code of practice for the protection 
of buildings and allied structures 
against lightning (second revision) 

3043 : 1987 Code of practice for earthing 

4013 : 1967 Dust-tight electric lighting fittings 

5571 : 2009 Guide for selection and installation of 
electrical equipment in hazardous areas 
(other than mines) (third revision) 

5572 : 2009 Classification of hazardous areas 


(other than mines) having flammable 
gases and vapours for electrical 
installation (third revision) 


15 


IS No. 
9537 
(Part 3) : 1983 


Title 
Conduits for electrical installations: 
Part 3 Rigid plain conduits of 
insulating materials 


12459 :1988 Code of practice for fire-protection 
in cable runs 
14665 Electric traction lifts: (Part 2) Code 


(Part 2) : 2000 of practice for installation, operation 


and maintenance 


14768 Conduit fittings for electrical 
(Part 2) : 2003 installations — Specification : Part 2 
Metal conduit fittings 
SP 7 2005 National Building Code of India 
2005 


IS 1646 : 2015 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 11.1.1) 
FLUORESCENT LAMP FITTINGS 


B-1 GENERAL PURPOSE TYPE FITTINGS 


B-1.1 The general design of reflectors shall be of 
suitable type and material. The material shall be any 
suitable metal or plastic. If plastic of a combustible 
nature is used, it shall not be in contact with any 
electrical conducting part and shall not ignite by the 
radiation from the lamp. 


B-1.2 The auxiliary equipment, that is, choke coil, 
power-factor condenser and stating unit (comprising 
thermal switch, radio-suppresser condenser) shall 
comply with relevant Indian Standards and shall 
preferably be mounted on the lamp fitting itself in a 
dust-tight enclosure, but if any item is mounted 
separately it shall be mounted on parts made of non- 
combustible material. 


B-1.3 The wiring connections between the equipment, 
that is, chokes and condensers, shall be in PVC 
insulated wiring, properly clamped as necessary. 


B-1.4 The suspension shall be made by two conduits 
or rods or robust chains, spaced to share equally the 
weight of the fitting. 


B-1.5 The lamp or tube holders may be of plastic 
material provided these are of efficient and approved 
design, and that each tube is securely held by suitable 
metal spring clips at each end. 


B-1.6 Earthing of the fixture shall be made with an 
unbroken conductor, the suspension chains (where 
employed) shall not be regarded as an approved means 
of earthing. 


B-1.7 Fluorescent fixtures may be suspended from 
conduit wiring junction boxes as a means to prevent 
exposure of conductors from the fitting to the wiring 
in the conduit. The connection inside the junction box 
shall be made to a porcelain junction base. Plain 
porcelain connectors shall not be permitted in the box. 


B-2 INDUSTRIAL TYPE FITTINGS 


B-2.1 Mild steel trough suitably enameled or painted 
or any other robust reflectors shall be used which may, 
if necessary, have upward lighting slots. 


16 


B-2.2 The auxiliary equipment, that is, choke coil, 
power-factor condenser and starting unit (comprising 
thermal switch and radio-suppresser condenser) shall 
conform to relevant Indian Standards and shall be 
mounted on suitable framework in a separate 
detachable dust-proof non-ventilated box, with tight 
fitting covers securely fixed by machine screws and 
bolts to the main trough. 


B-2.3 The wiring connections between the equipment 
housed in the choke and condenser box shall be 
vulcanized rubber insulated flexible cabling or 
approved PVC insulated conductors in heavy gauge, 
welded or solid-drawn steel conduit, or run internally 
and properly clamped. 


B-2.4 Suspension shall be made by two conduits spaced 
to share equally the weight of the fitting. Each conduit 
rod shall be provided with a spring loaded ball-and- 
socket joint ceiling plate at the top, and the other end 
shall be bolted to the trough. 


B-2.5 Lamp or tube holders shall be made of plastic 
provided an efficient and approved design is employed 
and each tube is held with suitable metal spring clips 
at each end. 


B-2.6 Earthing of fixtures shall be made with an 
unbroken conductor. 


B-2.7 Fluorescent fixtures may be suspended from 
conduit wiring junction boxes, as a means to prevent 
exposure of conductors from the fitting to the wiring 
in the conduit. The connection inside the junction box 
shall be made to a porcelain junction base. Plain 
porcelain connectors shall not be permitted in the box. 


B-2.8 The chokes of all fluorescent fittings shall be 
mounted on incombustible material. 


B-2.9 Incoming twin twisted flexible conductor shall 
enter the side of the box through a dust-tight bushed 
hole. 


B-2.10 The lighting tubes and reflectors shall be kept 
clean to obtain maximum efficient light. Cleaning shall 
be carried out by competent personnel. 


IS 1646 : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 
In personal capacity (A-347, Defence Colony New Delhi) 
ARAI, Pune 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata 
Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corp Ltd, Chennai 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 


Council of Architecture, New Delhi 


Defence Research & Development 

Organization, Ministry of Defence New Delhi 

Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Factory Advice 

Service Labour Institute, Mumbai 

Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis, New Delhi 


Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 


Engineering Industrial Technical Section, 
Ministry of Industry, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


GAIL, New Delhi 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 


17 


Representative(s) 
Suri R. C. SHARMA (Chairman) 
Suri S. Raju 
Suri A. K. TANDLE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. P. SINGH 
SHRI SUVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri C. S. KASANA 
Suri P. C. KureEL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Deputy INSPECTOR GENERAL (FIRE) 


Suri SATYA PRAKASH BARNWAL 
SHRI ASHOK Kumar GOEL (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


CoL L. K. SHARMA 
Surt M.B.PARADKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. R. RAMANATHAN 
Lr. CoL A. K. Gurra (Alternate) 


Dr SUDHARSHAN KUMAR 

Suri P. CHATTARJEE (Alternate) 
SHRI A. K. SHARMA 

Smt TRIPTA KHURANA 

Suri S. B. MATHUR 

Suri G. S. Panpey (Alternate) 
SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


Sur1 RAM VERMA 
Suri V. K. Guat (Alternate) 


Suri NARESH KAUL 
Suri R. B. Buutpa (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND KUMAR 
Ms ALPANA SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT CHAKRABORTY 
Suri T. K. KUMAR 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. Mirra 
SHRI SANJEEV ANGRA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 


Suri S. C. Gupta 
Suri B. R. GADEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


IS 1646 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
State Bank of India, Mumbai Suri Vay NALHE 
In personal capacity (P/4 Belgacuta, Kolkata) Suri S. N. KUNDU 
In personal capacity (K-33-A Green Park, New Delhi) Suri S. K. DHERI 
In personal capacity (C-127 Kendriya Vihar, Noida) Suri H. S. KAPARWAN 
In personal capacity (C-127 Kendriya Vihar, Amrita College Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


Road, Kasavanahalli, Bangalore) 


BIS Directorate General Suri D. K. AGRAwAL, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri S. CHATURVEDI 
Scientist ‘F’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


18 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (7810). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


