**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8252-4 (1980) : Environmental Tests for Aircraft 
Equipment, Part IV: Ice Formation [TED 14: Aircraft and 
Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629-1 3-05 : 620'193 : 620'192'42 



IS :8252 ( Part IV) -1980 



m 



O 

Q 



o 
D 



O 

a 

LU 



"e 

o 
o 

13 

(0 



(0 

i_ 
o 

< 

to 

c 
o 



o 
U 

c 



Q. 

o 



(0 



Q. 
CO 



% 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS FOR 
AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT 

PART IV ICE FORMATION 



1. Scope — Specifies methods of test for evaluating the effect of various icing conditions on 
the performance of components or equipment in aircraft. This standard covers the following 
conditions : 

a) The performance of equipment with ice or frost adhering to it; 

b) The effects of refrozen water from molten ice or from condensation; and 

c) The performance of anti-icing or de-icing system of the equipment. 

2. General Test Procedures 

2.1 General— The item to he tested shall, in ail* cases, be in a condition representative of opera- 
tional use. Unrepresentative coatings and contaminants, such as oil, grease and dirt, which could 
affect the adhes'on between the ice and the surfaces of the equipment, shall be removed before 
commencing the test. 

2.1.1 The icing test selected from the following three types of test and specified in the relevant 
equipment specification shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures specified in the 
following dauses. 

2.2 Test Requirements — Vox the purpose of this standard, the appropriate requirements specified 
in IS : 8252 (Part I )-1976 * Environmental tests for aircraft equipment: Part I General ', shall- apply. 

2.3 Initial Measurements — The equipment shall be visually examined and electrically and/or 
mechanically checked, as required by the relevant equipment specification. 

2.4 Operational Checks — The operation of the equipment shall be checked at the most adverse 
phase of the test, which for most applications would be a switch-on or start-up under icing condi- 
tions. Excessive operation of equipment which generates heat shall be avoided since this could 
mitigate the effects of this test. 

2.4.1 For tests demonstrating survival of the equipment only, the equipment shall be operated 
and performance evaluation made when the temperature and humidity have returned to standard 
laboratory conditions. 

3. Test A 

3.1 Application — This test is applicable to equipment in which there is movement of parts, for 
example, electrical contacts contained within a non-sealed enclosure* and where the equipment is 
so located and its duty cycle is such that the temperature of the #^uipment could vary during 
flight and on the ground within Jimits that would produce conditions of both condensation and 
freezing. 

3.1.1 The relevant equipment specification shall specify whether it is permissible during the 
functional tests for more than one attempt to be made to obtain satisfactory operation. 

3.2 Procedure — The test shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of temperature/ 
pressure /humidity sequence test [7.10 of IS : 8252 ( Part II )-1980 Environmental tests for aircraft 
equipment: Part II Temperature, pressure and humidity] may and for convenience, 
form part of that test. 

3.2.1 During the last cycle when the temperature of the equipment has risen to -5±3°C and 
before the chamber pressure is fully restored to the ground level, a functional test shall be con- 
ducted to cheok its satisfactory operation. At the completion of the performance test, the equip- 
ment shall be allowed to return to normal laboratory conditions. 



*A non-sealed enclosure is one into which moist air may penetrate during the test. 



Adopted 28 January 1980 



© May 1980, ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 




IS: 8225 (Part IV) -1980 

3.2.2 if, in the case of vented equipment, tbefe is a possibility of the vent hole(s) being closed 
by the presence of ice, the test procedure shall be amended, so that pressure is restored before the 
ice has melted. 

3.3 Information to be Stated in the Relevant Equipment Specification — When this test is a requirement 
in the relevant equipment specification, the following details shall be stated, as far as they are 
applicable : 

Relevant Clause 

a) Object of test 1 

b) Initial measurements 2.3 

c) Operational checks 2.4 

d) Permissible number of attempts to operate 3.1 

4. Test B 

4.1 Application —This test is applicable to all equipment in which there is movement of parts and 
where such movement could be prevented or impeded by ice forming as the result of progressive 
accumulation of water inside non-sealed enclosures where positive drainage is not provided. 

4.2 Procedure — The equipment shall be conditioned to a temperature of — 20°C until temperature 
stabilization has been achieved. The chamber pressure shall then be reduced to that used in the 
test ( 7.8 ) specified in IS : 8252 ( Part II )-1980, but not lower than an altitude of 15 200 m. 

4.2.1 After a period of not less than 10 min, the temperature of the chamber shall be raised at a 
rate not exceeding 3°C/min and humidified so that the chamber humidity is held at or close to 
saturation. The chamber temperature shall not at any time exceed + 30°C. When the equipment 
temperature has reached a temperature above 0°C and after a period which would allow all frost or 
ice to melt, the pressure shall be increased to that corresponding to ground level at a uniform rate 
in a period of 15 to 30 min. At the completion of the repressurization, the next cycle shall be 
commenced. 

4.2.2 Alternatively, after a period of not less than 10 minutes, the temperature and pressure shall 
be raised to + 30°C by internal heating and by allowing moist air such that the rate of rise in 
temperature does not exceed 3°C/min and humidity is always held close to saturation. When the 
equipment temperature has reached above 0°C and after a period which would allow all frost or ice 
to melt, the pressure shall be restored to ground level at a uniform rate in a period of about 15 to 
30 minutes. At the completion of the restoration of pressure the chamber temperature should 
be 30°C and humidity near saturation that is ab ove 95 percent. 

4.2.3 A total of twenty-five such cycles shall be made consecutively. 

4.2.4 If it becomes necessary to interrupt this sequence, the interruption shall take place whilst 
the equipment is held in the low temperature conditions. 

4.2.5 A functional check or checks shall be made, as required by the relevant equipment speci- 
fication, at the lowest temperature in the cycle. 

4.3 Information to be Stated in the Relevant Equipment Specification — When this test *s a require- 
ment in the relevant equipment specification, the following details shall be stated, as far as they 
are applicable: 

Relevant Clause 

a) Object of test 1 

b) Initial measurements 2.3 

c) Operational checks 2.4 and 4,2 

5. Test C 

5.1 Field of Application — This test is applicable to items mounted externally or in non-temperature- 
controlled bays where there is a real risk of accretion of free water which could subsequently 
freeze onthe cold surfaces of the items. The test is intended to examine the effects of a repre- 
sentative thickness of ice on the performance of the item, or to determine the maximum thickness 
that can be permitted before de-icing action is necessary. 



IS : 8252 (Part IV) -1980 

5.1.1 The relevant equipment specification shall state the thickness and distribution of ice or 
whether a progressive build-up of ice is required. 

5.2 Procedure— The equipment shall be conditioned in a low-temperature chamber until its tempera- 
ture has stabilized at a level, determined by previous experiments, that will permit hard, clear ice to 
form on the item when water is sprayed upon it. The optimum temperature is likely to be between 
— 1 and 10°C depending upon the thermal mass of the item. 

5.2.1 A homogeneous layer of hard clear ice ( not white or air pocketed ) shall be produced on 
the relevant surfaces of the item, to the required thickness and distribution, by hand spraying with 
a fine mist of water the temperature of which is close to freezing. 

5.2.2 When the ice accretion has reached the level specified in the relevant equipment speci- 
fication, spraying shall be stopped and the test temperature restabilized, unless otherwise 
stated, at the relevant test temperature given in low temperature operate test [7.3 of IS : 8252 
(Part li)-1980] before making the performance checks required by the relevant equipment 
specification. 

5.2.3 For tests requiring a progressive increase in the thickness of ice, and when it is important 
that the ice be homogeneous ( not layered ), separate tests shall be made in which the ice is formed 
to the specified thickness in one continuous operation. 

5.3 Information to be Stated in the Relevant Equipment Specification — When this test is a requirement 
in the relevant equipment specification, the following details shall be stated, as far as they are 
applicable; 

Relevant Clause 

a) Object of test 1 

b) Initial measurements 2.3 

c) Operational checks 2.4 

d) Required build up of ice 5.1 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is one of the series of standards relating to the environmental and operating 
conditions for aircraft equipment. The scope and applicability of these standards is outlined in 
IS : 8252 (Part I )-1976. 

This standard is based on ISO/DIS 2653 Environmental test for aircraft equipment — Part 2.3t 
Ice formation, issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 



Sharda Enterprises, New DejW 



