IS 13250 : 1992
IS0 7848 : 1985

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

INDUSTRIAL REAL-TIME FORTRAN - APPLICATION FOR THE CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES

UDC 681'3'06

: 800'92

FORTRAN

@BlS

1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9

INDIA-N
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 11 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

February

1992

IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7846 : 1985

Indian Standard
INDUSTRIAL REAL-TIME FORTRAN - APPLlCATlON FOR THE CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7846 : 1985 `industrial real-time FORTRAN Application for the control of industrial processes', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Programming Languages Sectional Committee ( LTD 34 ) and approval of the Uectronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The text of the IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard However, wh-erever the words `International Standard' appear referring without deviations. to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. CROSS REFERENCES
International Standard Indian Standard Degree of Correspwdence

IS0 1539 Programming languages - FORTRAN

IS0 10680 : 1983 Programming languages - FORTRAN

Identical

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 13250 IS0

: 1992

7846 : 1985

0

Introduction
Standard to allow describes a task model and a set of control of multi-task systems using concerlanguage. Information Standard

NOTE -

Terms printed in italics in the definitions are themselves

defin

This International related routines FORTRAN

ed in this clause. However, in each definition, printed in italic at their first occurrence.

such items are only

as the programming

2.1 write)

access

mode:

The right or permission to access (read or by the processor following a request for

ning the development

of this International and justifications

is given in

a file granted

annex A, and suggestions

for some features These annexes do

such permission.

are given in annex 0. Annex

C deals with the problem of aborStandard. 2.2 basic clock counts: Counts of the basic unit of the

ting tasks and annex 0 with file handling. not form part of this International

system real-time

clock as available for the user's program.

1
This

Scope

and field

of application
establishes computer external control procedure systems.

2.3

computation:

A set of operations

carried out on a set of

data, as available for the user's program. International for use Standard references in industrial

2.4

critical

region:

A part of a sequential

order of opera-

These external procedure ~date information, systems,

references

provide access to time and of programs functions, with executive allow manipula-

tions operating execution.

on shared data such that this part of the pro-

permit interface

gram must have exclusive access to the shared data during the

process input and output

tion of bit strings and provide a method These procedures FORTRAN expected executive to be

for file handling. in a 2.5 DORMANT: One of the definite states of a task. syrtem and is not in
or SUSPENDED.

are intended for use with programs written executable environment both in a solitary and in

in accordance

with IS0 1539.111 These programs are under the control of a real-time

A dormant

task is known to the executive RUNNING,

multiprogramming system.

any of the states PENDING,

2.6 It is the responsibility ceptions or errors, of the executive
such as division

event:

A

significant

discrete

occurrence
of some

or

incident

system to deal with exby zero or referencing

which is intended ned manner.

to affect the execution

task in a plan-

SORT( - 1 .O), so that such errors do not cause serious effects, for example unwanted tasks. 2.7 This International Standard is applicable to systems which require multi-tasking features. all FORTRAN eventmark: Internal variable of the executive system, used to indicate that an event has occurred. are or uncontrolled abortion, or affect other An event itself occurs instantaneously and setsan eventmarkll.

if the user's system contains parallel tasks, the eventmarks
NOTE - No extensions or variations from this international Standard should be implemented except for features explicitly declared in this International Standard to be processor dependent.

shared data elements

for the tasks. 1)

2.8 2 Definitions
of this International Standard. the following

execution: The collection of actions performed by a computer processor carrying out instructions in a sequential manner.

For the purpose definitions apply.

2.9 executable program: A program including all of its functions and subroutines in a form suitable for execution.

1)

See also 5.3.1.

3

IS 13250

:

1992

IS0 7846:1985

2.10 executive routine; executive system: The part of the processor which supports the procedures described in this International Standard. 2.11 file: A collection of related records treated as a unit.

2.23 processor dependent: Describes an action of the cessor that is not specified in this International Standard.

pro-

2.24 repetitive execution: Occurs when a task is repeatedly initiated, whether at fixed intervals or by repetitive events.

For the purpose of this International Standard, the records are considered to be of fixed length. Record storage and access are independent of the internal format of records. 2.12 initiation: The action taken by the executive system to start the execution of a task at its first executable statement. 2.13 multiprocessinglj: A mode of operation that provides for parallel processing by two or more processors of a multiprocessor. 2.14 multiprogrammingll: A mode of operation that provides for the interleaved execution of two or more computer programs by a single processor.

2.25

system,

resourcemark: Internal variable of the executive used to indicate that a resource is exclusively reserved for a task. 2)

2.26

RUNNING:

One of the definite states of a task.

A running task is executing in its virtual processor.

2.27 semaphore: A variable of the executive system, used for the exchange of synchronizing information betieen interacting parallel tasks. All semaphore operations fin this International Standard imply critical region protection, provided by the executive system.

2.15 multitasking

1): A multiple operation that provides for the concurrent performance or interleaved execution of two or more tasks. One of the definite (formal) states of

2.28

sequential

order of operations:

An order of opera-

tions the results of whiich are as if the operations are performed

2.16 NON-EXISTENT: a task.

strictly one after another.

2.29 A non-existent task is unknown to the executive 2.17
system.

SUSPENDED:

One of the definite states of a task.

object task; designated task; referenced task: The task that is wanted or expected to be started, halted, stopped, or otherwise affected as a consequenceof a system subroutine call.

A suspended task has temporarily halted the execution of its virtual processor, and is waiting for a specified condition to continue the execution of its virtual processor.

2.30

task: A computation

which can be scheduled.

.

2.18 operation: A deterministic rule for the generation of a finite set of data from another finite set of data. 2.19 overrun: Occurs when the condition for initiation of a

The operations of this computation are performed in a strict
sequential order of operatibns.

(See also 2.17 and 2.28.)

task becomes true while the task is still running because of a previous initiation.

2.31 2.20 parallel tasks; concurrent tasks: whose operations may overlap in time. 2.21 PENDING: A set of tasks a) b) One of the definite states of a task.

time: absolute time: Complete time and date specification. relative time: A time increment or difference.

A pending task has been associated with an event or time condition such that when the condition occurs, the task will be transferred to state RUNNING and initiated. 2.22 -processor: The combination of a data processing system and the mechanism by which programs are transformed for use on that data processing system.

virtual processor: An environment in which a task can 2.32 run from the time it is initiated until it terminates without consideration of availability of resources, managed by the processor and not by the user`s program. A particular implementation serves to map a set of virtual processors onto a set of real processor(s). This mapping is processor dependent.

1) Definitiontaken from IS0 2382/10.121 2) See also 5.3.2.

4

IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7846 : 1985

Section

one

:

Multiprogramming

and real-time

features

3

Introduction
describes real-time several procedure operation. are generally references available and, i.e. and relating to multiprogramming considered indivisible,

4.2

Obtain clock counts"
of a reference to this subroutine allows the user proclock,

This section in particular, tion,

for the user's program, the operations

Execution expressed

For all calls given in this set

gram to obtain the current value of the system real-time in basic clock counts.

their operation

will behave as if they are not interrupted. The form of the call is

4

Date

and time

information
environment, the user must system. variables of the executive

CALL where j

CLDCK(j,kl,kZ)

For programming have access below. Unambiguous time including defining time DATIM the Gregorian The calls are CALL DATIMLtl)

in a real-time

to the time

These time variables are obtained

by system calls as described

designates

an integer

variable

or integer

array element value as

into which the current value of the clock will be placed as a time specification requires unique designation of complete date and an acknowledged calendar, zero. Execution of reference to subroutine information. The date refers to calendar. positive integer. j is counted up to a maximum given by k2, then set to zero and counted again; kl

provides this complete

is the number of basic clock counts per second.

It is an shall be

integer value returned by the system. This argument an integer variable or an integer array element; k2 is the maximum value

j can attain. It is an integer value
shall be an integer

for obtaining

current

date and time,

CALL CLOCK(j,kl,k2)

for obtaining

the basic clock counts.

returned by the system. This argument variable or an integer array element.

4.1

Obtain date and time

The modulus size of j is given by argument k2 (modulus = k2 + 1). In practice, this will usually be equal to the modulus of the hardware counter realizing the clock.

The form of the call is CALL where tl DATIM(t1) designates an integer array, into whose first 8

5

General

aspects

of tasking

elements will be placed the absolute time, as expressed by the executive system's real-time clock at the time when the call is executed. These elements are as follows

:

5.1

States and transitions
a task is in one and only one state. system, Actions ex-

first element:

Counts of the basic clock Milliseconds (0 to 999)

At any time,

second element: third element: fourth element: fifth element: sixth element:

ecuted by the executive

other tasks, or the designated from one state to another. instantly, i.e. they are con

Seconds Minutes

(0 to 59) LO to 58)

task itself, may cause transition These transitions are performed sidered ideally to take no time. This mathematical diagram",

Hours LO to 23) Day (1 to 31) Month Year (1 to 12) model of a task may be visualized by a "state in which the states are drawn as as circles, while transitions such as that shown in the figure,

seventh element: eighth element:

are nodes, illustrated

pointed arrows from one node to another. 131

1)

See also annex B

5

IS 13250 : 1992
-IS0 7848 : 1985

A multitasking system consists of several parallel tasks and can be considered as modelled by a number of disjointed but similar diagrams. It is feasible to apply a three-dimensional picture, with the similar diagrams sandwiched on top of each other and oriented so that the identical states of the individual diagrams cover each other. State transitions are generally caused by subroutine calls, occurrence of events, or expiration of time limits. The name, form, and interpretation of the subroutine calls are standardized and described below.

In this international Standard, a task is described by a mathematical model illustrated by the state diagram shown in the figure. This model adheres to the following basic principles: a) transitions are non-ambiguous, i.e. for a given stimulus in a given state, the task can transit to only one possible new state; b) cl transitions are performed instantly, i.e. in zero time; a task exists in one state only at a time:

d) the state model describes the behaviour of tasks as seen by the application programmer.

DORMANT

Figure -

State model and transition

diagram

6

IS 13250 IS0 7846

: 1992 : 1985

The following diagram -

symbolism

is used for transitions

in the state

5.3.1 In the

Eventmarks management external of concurrent or internal tasks, it is necessary events to

:
Capital letters in box

: Effect on a task imposed
task.

by

associate be either

certain tasks with certain events. events. such as a contact

These events may are of

another

task, i.e. a subroutine on the designated box

call in one task has the in-

External

dicated effect -

some physical nature, nection between the scope of CALL

closure, but the conis beyond event An internal

Capital letters without

: Effect imposed by the task
under which the executive

an external event and its eventmark Standard.

of this International

itself while in the state RUNNING. Small letters

arises from specific program POST). are selected

action (see 6.9.1 for a description

: Conditions
the indicated

system performs With reference

state transitions. Eventmarks by reference to a numeric selector in Eventno attempt is made to is related for the to be by the procomThe association calls CALL SUSPND of events to tasks is done by the subroutine (see 6.4), CALL HOLD CON (see 6.5.8), CALL (see 6.8.1). of an internal with this task to SKED the range 1 (one) to n, where n is processor dependent. marks have two states

to principle system

d) above, actions

describe

executive

transparent

to the applica-

tion programmer.

Consequently,

the state RUNNING processor

to-the task's virtual processor (see 2.32). state of a task whether executive adapted puters. system a physical assigned to it or the execution

It is immaterial happens hampered

ON
OFF

is temporarily availability Thus,

due to limited

of physical

cessors and the task's low priority. to multiprocessors

the model is as well

as it is to single processor

(see 6.71, and CALL

An eventmark

is turned to ON by the occurrence

or external event.

If one or more tasks are associated system will cause each associated An eventmark execution.

5.2

Multiple

activation

calls 1)
conflicting transition calls

event, the executive begin or continue direct program changed events.

is turned to OFF by system as it services Eventmarks can be defined in this Inter-

Different operation,

tasks may issue apparently

control or by the executive with the eventmark. references

for the same object task. This will be the case during normal as well as under error conditions, task. with the principle of a task being in Transition will apply one state state calls are its own since the state of call is made an object task is unknown by another at the time a transition

the tasks associated national Standard

only by the procedure

and by the executive system that services the

In accordance transitions received scheduling Depending or rejected. withan

Eventmarks gram action,

may also be set to the OFF state by a specific prothe CALL CLEAR (see 6.9.4 (see 6.9.21, and 6.9.51. and they may be Additionally, the

only at a time (see 5.1). by the executive strategy

a distinction system,

is made between

and calls for such transitions. which in handling such calls.

masked and unmasked value of an eventmark TESTEM (see 6.9.3).

may be tested

by the logical function

on available resources, system, An argument normally

such as internal tablespace, call will be accepted after the reference, the reference has

etc., of the executive appropriate

a transition

5.3.2

Resourcemarks
for various resources is

will be returned or rejected.

value indicating

whether

A simple means to resolve contention provided by-the resourcemark concept,

been accepted

which permits one and

only one task to use a resource at a time. Resourcemarks in the range three concepts for synResourcemarks LOCKED UNLOCKED are selected by reference 1 (one) to n, where have two states to a numeric selector dependent.

5.3

Synchronization
Standard

concepts
provides

n is processor

This International chronization tention, as follows: eventmarks;

between

tasks and the resolution

of resource con-

-

resourcemarks; semaphores. and semaphores whereas are mainly used for synchronizaare mainly used for

This International

Standard

does not define what can be conIt is the responsibility of the user to If the user wants to the reference be in the will

sidered to be a resource.

associate a resource with a resourcemark. Eventmarks reserve a resource exclusively a resourcemark CALL state and semaphores are local variables of the executive system and they may not be accessed other than by the mechanisms described in this International Standard. Eventmarks, resourcemarks, change resource LOCK to UNLOCKED state exclusively (see 6.70.1). at this for tion purposes, the resolution the resourcemarks for the resource Should

for the running task, he chooses and performs the This thiz resourcemark the

of resource contention.

moment,

resourcemark reservation

LOCKED,

reserving

corresponding is later to EXIT (see

this task.

released by the task, by execution 6.121 or UNLOCK (see 6.10.2).

of a reference

1)

See also annex B.

IS 13250

: 1992

IS0 7846 : 1985

Should the

a task

attempt

to

LOCK where

a resourcemark it remains

which until

is the

6
6.1

Procedure

references of procedure references lJ

already locked, the executive state SUSPENDED, becomes resourcemark

system will transfer this task into

Terms and summary

unlocked

by some other task. This clause contains a summary of the subroutine calls and function references described in subsequent clauses. The following designations for parameters apply to several of the calls. If the exact meaning of these perameter designations deviates from that described ally in the detailed description below, it will be marked specificwill be will be of the cell. If the meaning is ex-

If

several

tasks

are

waiting

for

a

resourcemark

to

be

UNLOCKED, ecutive

only one will be selected for execution (For details, see 6.10.2.)

by the ex-

system.

This is a main dif-

ference from the eventmark concept, where all tasks waiting for an eventmark are transferred to state RUNNING if the eventmark is set to ON.

actly as defined here, the description of the parameter omitted in the description of the call and a reference by reference to the made to this subclause. i specifies the task to be affected ment shall be an integer array. The contents used as input parameter (see 6.10.3).

A resourcemark logical function

can also be set to LOCKED TLOCK

(object task). The arguby CREATE. i is

5.3.3

Semaphores

of i may be partly generated in all other calls.

Semaphores

represent

a synchronization

concept

useful

for

cases where a more advanced mechanism than those available by resourcemarks and eventmarks is desired. Semaphores are selected by reference to a numeric selector in the range 1 (one) to n, where n is processor dependent. Unlike eventmarks and resourcemarks, a semaphore has an integer value, s . The value s of a semaphore must be initialized and may later be set by the reference CALL PRESEM (see 6.11.1).

t,tl,t2 designate integer arrays, whose first 8 elements contain a specification of absolute or relative time. Negative values of elements are not permitted. follows : first element: Basic clock counts Milliseconds These elements are as

second element: third element: fourth element:

Seconds Minutes Hours Day(s) Month(s) Year(s)

If the task needs greater reference WAITS, than CALL

to wait

until the value value, (see 6.11.2).

of a semaphore

is fifth element: sixth element:

or equal WAITS

to a specific

the task uses the of CALL

By execution

the executive

system tests if the specified decrement value

j
to

seventh element: eighth element:

is greater than s. In this case, the calling task is transferred state SUSPENDED, s is incremented where it remains until the semaphore

by another task to a value greater than or equal

If, for absolute times, value 0 is used for one of the three date date", elements, "current this shall be interpreted or "current year" as "current by the exmonth",

to j. If j is not greater than s and the calling task continues

, the value s is decremented
its execution.

by j

ecutive system. By execution of CALL SIGNAL (see 6.11.3). the executive system increments by j the value s of the specified semaphore. This incrementation greater may bring a task, waiting for this if s m is set on return to the calling program, ot the request as fo\\ows : to indicate the disposition semaphore, becomes multiple from state SUSPcNDED to state RUNNING, The interpretation of a relative time specification containing months or years different from zero is processor dependent.

than or equal to j of the suspended for this semaphore

task. If

tasks are waiting

and are can-

didates for running, after the incrementation of s by j. the order in which these tasks transit to state RUNNING is processor dependent. By setting s to certain values and choosing j, a variety of advanced for resource contention In addition semaphore (see 6.11.4). to the synchronization are possible. described above, the value of a different values for

0 or less: undefined 1: request accepted 2 or greater: request rejected (error condition)

concepts and solutions

This argument element. rejection.

shall be an integer variable or integer array may define specific values greater between certain reasons for

The processor

than or equal to 2 to distinguish

calls

may be read using the integer

function

IRDSEM

The list of function subsequent

and subroutine

cells, described

in detail in

subclauses,

is given in table 1.

~.
1)

~~-

See also annex B.

IS 13250:1992 IS0 7846 :1985

Table 1
Full description in subclause 6.2 6.3
:ALL CREATE(i,m) :ALL KILL(i,m) Ipposite of CREATE) : mode selector eventmark reference absolute or relative time for first initiation time period for cyclic initiations reference to eventmark for overrun

Call
I

Parameters
: identification of created task and associated program

6.4

:ALL SKED(i,s,el,tl,t2,e2,m) general scheduling)

: I :
1 2: 2:

6.5.1

:ALL STRT(i,m) start immediately) :ALL 5GTRTAFli.tl.m) start after time delay) :ALL STRTAT(i,tl,m) time) 1

6.5.2

: :

time delay before initiation

6.5.3

1

absolutetime

for initiation

start at absolute

6.5.5

CALL CYCL(i,t2.m) [cyclic, with immediate first initiation)

2:

length of time interval

6.5.6

CALL CYCLAFli,tl,t2,m) (cyclic, with delayed First initiation) CALL CYCLAT(i,tl,t2,m) (cyclic, with absolute time specification of first initiation) CALL CON(i,e,m) (establish event connection) CALL DSKED(i,s,e,m) (eliminate scheduling) CALL DCON(i,e,m) (eliminate event connection) CALL CANCEL(i,m) (eliminate time scheduling) CALL SUSPND(s,e,t,n,m) (suspend continuation of calling task for time period or until event)

:l : 2:

time delay before first initiation length of time interval

6.5.7

t1 : t2:

absolute

time for first initiation

length of time interval

6.5.8

a:

eventmark

reference

6.6

s: e: e:

mode selector eventmark reference eventmark reference

6.6.1

6.6.2

6.7

s: e: t: n: e:

mode selector reference to eventmark

for end of delay

time delay indicator for cause of end of delay reference to eventmark for end of delay

6.8.1

CALL H0LDte.m) (suspend until event

occurs) t: time delay

6.8.2

CALL DELAY(t,m) (suspend for a relative time) CALL POST(e,m) (setting of an eventmark) CALL CLEAR(e,m) (resetting of an eventmark) TESTEM(e,m) (resting the state of an eventmark)

6.9.1

e:

eventmark

reference

6.9.2

e

eventmark

reference

6.9.3

eventmark e: function value

reference

:

condition

of the eventmark

63.4

CALL MKEM(e,m) (setting the mask of an eventmark) CALL UNMKEM(e,m) (clearing the mask of an eventmark) CALL LOCK(r,m) (locking of a resourcemark) CALL UNLOCK(r,m) (unlocking ~of a resourcemark)

e

: :

eventmark

reference

6.9.6

e

eventmark

reference

6.10.1

r:

resourcemark

reference

6.10.2

r

:

resourcemark

reference

9

IS 13250 IS0 7846

: 1992 : 1985

Table
Full description in subclause 6.10.3

1 (concluded)

Call TLOCK(r,ml (testing and locking of a resourcemark)

Parameters r : resourcemark reference function value : condition of the resourcemark

6.11.1

CALL PRESEM(r,s,m) (initialization of semaphore) CALL WAITS(r.j.m) (wait on semaphore)

r s

semaphore

reference

:

initial value of semaphore

6.11.2

r : J: r : j:

semaphore decrement semaphore increment

reference

6.11.3

CALL SIGNAL(r,j,m) (release semaphore) IRDSEM(r,ml (read semaphore CALL EXIT (termination

reference

6.11.4

value)

r semaphore function value

:

reference value of semaphore

vanable

6.12

of execution)

6.2

Creation

of a new

task

6.3.

Eliminating

a task from

the real-time

system')
task NON-

A new task is introduced subroutine CREATE. with some specified

to the real-time system by reference to task will be associated a resource like other considered

A reference to subroutine from the real-time EXISTENT. PENDING, designated mination

KILL will eliminate by transferring

a designated it to state

The designated program,

system,

resources, necessary for the task to perform. The associated program is normally assumed to exist in an executable form. Formally, red from reference and in terms of the state model, the task is transferNON-EXISTENT to DORMANT as the effect of the (see the figure and 5. I!. is assumed Standard which to exist outside the scope of this

If the designated task is in state DORMANT or the effect shall be carried out immediately. If the task is in state RUNNING shall affect only future or SUSPENDED, executions. the ter the any Thus, without

designated task will continue intervention by this call. The form of the call is

its present execution

A mechanism international i.e. the parent,

to create and initiate at least a first task, in its turn may create other tasks. where

CALL

KILL(i,m) in 6.1

i and m are as described

The form of the call is

6.4
CALL where i specifies an integer array which contains all the informaCREATE(i,ml

Scheduling

a task
to the subroutine SKED, or Its shall schedule the initiation of a the condition for subsequent task is in state DO% task shall transit PENDING, the transfer

Execution of a reference derivates as listed in 6.5, designated transition MANT task, to RUNNING. PENDING.

establishing

If the designated

when the call is made, the designated If it is already its conditions in state shall augment according

tion necessary to specify the task and its associated program. The latter includes, among other items, its designation, where the program can be found (such as description of file), residency while existent (primary memory resident or swappable), etc. The array may also contain processor priority. the task's

to state reference

for subsequent

to RUNNING the designated conditions NING

to the arguments

of the call, such that when any of the otherwise an and

task will transit to RUNNING

still valid becomes true. The transition to state RUNoccurs. The augmentation of running condi

requires the task being in state PENDING,

This array will in general also contain output information, i.e. references distinguishing this task from other tasks created from an identical sets, etc. may be used by other procedure i, see program code, reference to individual dqa Such

overrun condition any violation

tions is subject to any resource limitation of such limitation

of the processor,

will result in an error return. the condition that caused this a running to DOR

When a task transits to RUNNING, of parameter

information

transition is removed from the possible complex of combined conditions, such that the other conditions remain. When task subsequently exits, by transition from RUNNING

references 6.1.

in clause 6. For a description

All details of this array are processor m is as described in 6.1

dependent.

MANT, possible scheduling conditions, remaining from previous scheduling calls, shall cause immediate transition to state PENDING. (Note, however, the definition of the term "overrun" and the provision for Its Indication, as explained below.)

1)

See also annex B.

10

IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7946: 1985

Each normally accepted reference to the subroutine SKED causes the following effect. After expiration of a specified time delay or at a desired absolute time or upon the occurrence of a specified event, the object task is transferred to state RUNNING and begins at the first executable statement of the program. The actual time resolution obtainable in a specific industrial computer system is subject to the resolution of that system's real-time clock. If the object task is initiated by an event occurrence, the executive system will set the eventmark OFF, as part of the initiation. If more than one task is waiting for a specified eventmark to change to the condition ON, when the change occurs all these tasks will transit into state RUNNING. The form of this procedure reference is CALL SKEDfi,s,el ,tl ,t2,eZ,m) where i and m are as described in 6.1.

If s = 20: start immediately plus cyclic by t2 If s = 21: start at tl plus cyclic by t2 If s = 22: start after tl plus cyclic by t2 If s = 23: start at el plus cyclic bv t2 If s = 24: start at t-l or el plus cyclic by t2 If s = 25: start after tl or at el plus cyclic by t2 The values of the argument s between 30 and 35 define the first execution of the task which is subsequently executed whenever the eventmark specified by el becomes ON. If s = 30: start immediately plus repeated by el If s = 31: start at tl plus repeated by el If s = 32: start after tl plus repeated by el If s = 33: start at el plus repeated by el If s = 34: start at tl or el plus repeated by el If s = 35: start after tl or at el plus repeated by el

6.5

Starting a task by simplified calls

s is an integer expression, specifying three categories of task scheduling (see below), as follows: the values of the argument s between 10 and 15 cause the task to be initiated once; the values of the argument s between 20 and 25 cause the task to be initiated periodically by time; the values of the argument s between 30 and 35 cause the task to be initiated whenever a specified eventmark becomes ON. el specifies the eventmark for scheduling; it is an integer expression. tl designates an integer array containing the absolute, or relative, time for the scheduling. (The term relative time for scheduling means the time delay from the time the reference is executed until the intended running.) (See 6.1.) t2 is an integer array to designate the time period for cyclic runs. (See 6.1.) e2 is an eventmark for overrun. It will be turned ON if overrun occurs. The action performed with the object task is processor dependent. The values of the argument s between 10 and 15 define the first and only execution of the task. If s = 10: start immediately If s = 11: start at absolute time tl If s = 12: start after time tl Ifs = 13: start at event el (once) Ifs = 14: start at absolute time tl or event el (once) If s = 15: start after time tl or at event el (once) The values of the argument s between 20 and 25 define the first execution of the task which is subsequently executed repetitively at the time period t2. -

The following calls for scheduling represent subsets of the features of CALL SKED. They are established for ease of programming only. CALL STRT(i,m) CALL STRTAFfi,tl,m) CALL STRTATfi,tl,m) CALL CYCLfi,Q.m) CALL CYCLAFfi.tl,Q.m) CALL CYCLAT(i,tl,Q,m) CALL CON(i,el,m) start immediately start after time tl start at time tl start immediately bv t2 start after time tl plus cyclic plus cyclic

bv Q
start at time tl plus cyclic by t2 start at event el plus repeated by el

6.5.1 Starting a task immediately
Execution of a reference to subroutine STRT establishes a condition for immediate transfer of the designated task to RUNNING via PENDING. Execution begins at the task's first executable statement. If in state DORMANT when the reference is made, the task will transit to state PENDING and continue immediately to stata RUNNING. The form of the call is CALL STRT(i,m) where i and m are as described in 6.1. 6.5.2 Starting a task after a specified time delay

Execution of a reference to subroutine STRTAF establishes a time delay as the condition for transfer of the designated task to RUNNING via PENDING. After expiration of a specified time delay after the time when the reference is executed, the designated task is expected to transfer to state RUNNING and will do so if its state at that time is PENDING. If in state DORMANT when the reference is

11

IS 13250

: 1992

IS0 7846 : 1985

made, NING,

the task will transit to state PENDING. the task will begin at its first executable

In state RUNstatement.

If the execution is not finished before the time for the next execution, an overrun situation exists and the action taken with the repeated task is processor dependent. under the specified conditions shall continue unterminated or DCON by a call of subroutine CANCEL (see 6.6.1). are similarly valid for the CALL SKED has

The form of the call is Rescheduling CALL where The statements i and m tl after are as described an integer the object in 6.1. array, task specifying is to start the time delay its execution 6.5.5 6.5.3 Starting a task at a specified to subroutine absolute STRTAl time establishes an Initial start immediately with parameter situation above s - 20 to 25 and 30 to 35; SKED, however, STRTAF(i,tl,m) tit actively (see 6.6.2)

a special parameter designates which

e2, set to ON in the case of the overrun

(see 6.1)

The form of the call is CALL where CYCLfi,t.Z,m)

Execution absolute

of a reference

time as the condition via PENDING. absolute time,

for transfer

of the designated

tdsk to RUNNING At the specified

the object task is expected

to

i and m

are as described

in 6.1; the nominal

transfer to state RUNNING and will do so, if its state at that time is PENDING. If in state DORMANT when the reference is made, NING, the task will transit to state PENDING. the task will begin at its first executable immediately if the specified to STRTAT In state RUNstatement. absolute The is time

t2 designates an integer array, specifying length of the time interval (see 6.1).

task is started

6.5.6

Initial

start

after

a specified

time

delay

already passed when the reference The form of the call is

is executed. The form of the call is CALL

:

CYCLAF(i,tl,t2,m)

CALL

STRTATti,tl,m) where i and m are as described in 6.1; a time delay for

i and m tl time

are as described an integer the object

in 6.1. array, task specifying is to start the absolute its execution

tl

designates

an integer array, specifying

designates at which

the initial activation, made (see 6.1);

as measured from the time the call was

(see 6.1).

t2 designates an integer array, specifying length of the time interval (see 6.1). a task in repeated execution 6.5.7 Initial start at specified absolute time and CON for repeated features

the

nominal

6.5.4

Starting

The calls for CYCL, execution

CYCLAF.

CYCLAT, common

have the following

:
if its

The form of the call is CALL where i and m tl are as described an integer in 6 1; array, specifying is exactly STRTAT the absolute equivalent (see 6.1); the nominal to CYCLATfi,tl.t2,m)

The designated present Further,

task will be transferred or when establishes

to state PENDING it becomes

state is DORMANT the reference

DORMANT. to RUNN-

the condition

for subsequent

transfer of the designated ING for a first execution `executions.

task from state PENDING

and additionally

causes future repeated

desrgnates

time at which the designated A reference to subroutine CYCL, CYCLAF, CYCLAT, or CON has the same immediate effect as a reference for single execu tion: additionally, after its termination (for example by EXIT), as the object task will be transferred immediately from state DORexecution, RUNNING parameter initially.

task is supposed to enter state

This argument

tl of call for subroutine

MANT to state PENDING for the next repeated indicated in the figure by "repetitions". The actual running may be delayed

t2 designates an integer array, specrfying length of the time interval (see 6.1 j.

6.5.8 unintentionally while in state RUNNING, because of running of other programs. Such

Connection

of a task

to an event CON establishes a

Execution

of a reference

to subroutine

delays will not be accumulated

for tasks with cyckc repetitions

specified event as the condition

for transition

from state PEN

12

IS 13250: 1992 ISO 7846 :1985

DING

to RUNNING.

First, the task will transit DORMANT. Then,

to state PENif the related

6.6.1 Elimination of event connections
Execution connection it eliminates SKED SUSPENDED, of a reference between further to subroutine DCON shall cancel any

DING if the state is DORMANT or when the state becomes

when the reference is executed, an object task and a specified event. Thus, effects from a previous call to subroutine task is in state shall affect RUNNING or only future execu-

eventmark is or becomes ON, the designated task will transit from state PENDING to RUNNING and will begin with its first executable the reference statement. task to DSKED The association remains or DCON until between actively the event and cancelled by a designated

or CON.

If the object the cancelling

(see 6.6 and 6.6.1).

tions. Thus, the object task will conclude without any intervention by this call. If the object task is in state PENDING,

its present execution,

The form of the call is the cancelling will cause reCALL where The form of the call is i and m e are as described in 6.1. it is an integer expression. CALL where i and m Execution of a reference to subroutine DSKED or its derivates, DCON and CANCEL, shall cancel specified scheduling conditions for an object task. Thus, it eliminates previous calls to subroutine SKED subroutines. If the object cancelling task is in state RUNNING its present execution, or SUSPENDED, without the Execution of a reference to subroutine CANCEL shall cancei the future initiations of an object task due to time scheduling by previous calls of SKED or its simplified versions. The executive system shall ensure that no further move to the state PENDING shall take place due to previous cyclic scheduling. the cancelling will cause conditions reIf the object task is in any active state (RUNNING or further effects from derived 6.6.2 or its simplified e are as described in 6.1. an integer expression (see 6.6). DCONfi,e,m) specifies the eventmark; CONfi,e,m) a transition main. to state DORMANT if no scheduling conditions

6.6

Elimination

of previous scheduling

specifies the eventmark;

Elimination of time connections

shall affect only future executions.

Thus, the object any interven-

task will conclude tion by this call.

If the object task is in state PENDING, a transition main. The form of the call is to state DORMANT

if no scheduling

SUSPENDED), without

the elimination

shall affect

only future

execu-

tions. Thus, the object task will conclude any intervention by this call.

its present execution

If the object task is in state PENDING, CALL where The form of the call is i and m s are as described expression in 6.1. CALL is an integer selecting one of the following where 1: eliminate all time-based scheduling e; including remain and i-and m are as described in 6.1. conditions: If s = CANCEL(i.m) DSKED(i,s.e,m) a transition main. to state DORMANT

the cancelling

will cause re-

if no scheduling

conditions

scheduling If s = 2: repetition unaltered; If s = 3:

by events as specified eliminate by time. all time-based Possible event

by argument scheduling connections

6.7

Delaying

continuation

of a task
SUSPND shall pro(i.e. transits

Execution

of a reference

to the subroutine for a specified

vide a means whereby to state SUSPENDED)

a running task is suspended

length of time or until a with the statement SUSPND.

specified event has occurred. eliminate event-based scheduling, including e. state RUNN,lNG immediately event-based repetition, as specified by argument Possible time connections remain unaltered. following

The task shall then transit back to

and shall resume execution the call of subroutine

If more than one task is suspended

and waiting for a specified ON, when the change

e

is an eventmark(

integer expression, whose connection

which

specifies

the as

eventmark

to change

to the condition

is to be eliminated,

occurs all tasks will transit to state RUNNING. The time delay is defined as the nominal duration from the time

follows

:
eventmark connections for the when the call was made until the program resumes execution in its virtual processor, by being transferred to state RUNNING. The actual NING specific eventmark, as instants for the entering are subject and leaving states to the resolution system. RUNof the and SUSPENDED

- 1: all If e = designated task: If e = 0: If e > 0:

no event cancelling; reference to one

system's real-time actions performed

clock and to the interrogating by the executive

and activating

specified

by the value of e.

13

IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7846 : 1985

The form of the call is CALL where s is an integer expression selecting the condition shall end, as follows: time t; on which SUSPND(s,e,t,n,m)

The form of the call is CALL where t designates an integer array, specifying (see 6.1). in 6.1. the relative time DELAY(t,m)

the suspension

for the suspension m is as described

If s = 1 : at absolute If s = 2: after time t; Ifs = 3:atevente;

6.9
time t or event e;

Eventmark

operations to the ON condition
shall set a

If s = 4: at absolute

If s = 5: after time t or at event e. e specifies the eventmark for ending suspension; it is an

6.9.1

Setting an eventmark

Execution of a reference to subroutine POST
designated eventmark to the ON condition. was already ON, there shall be no action.

integer expression. t designates an integer array, specifying (see 6.1). the absolute, or

If the eventmark may cause a task to state

Because of an earlier

transition

call in some task, the ON condition from state PENDING

relative time; for the suspension n is a return parameter

to be transferred RUNNING.

or SUSPENDED

to indicate the cause of the end of

the delay in case of s = 4 or s = 5

:

The form of the call is CALL where POST(e,m)

If n = 1: end of delay by event e; If n = 2: end of delay by time t. m is as described in 6.1.

e 6.8

specifies the eventmark; is as described in 6.1.

it is an integer expression.

Suspending

until

event

or time

m

The following calls for suspension represent subsets of the features of CALL SUSPND. They are established for the ease of programming CALL only. suspend until the event e has occurred CALL DELAY(t,m) suspend for a time delay as specified by t

6.9.2

Clearing

an eventmark
to subroutine OFF. CLEAR shall cause the was

Execution designated

of a reference eventmark

HOLD(e,m)

to become

If the eventmark

already OFF, there shall be no action. The form of the cell is CALL CLEAR(e,m)

6.8.1

Delay until event has occurred
where

Execution of a reference to subroutine HOLD shall suspend the calling task until a specified event has occurred. The task shall then transit to state RUNNING the statement immediately HOLD. and thus resume execution following the with call of subroutine

e
m

specifies the eventmark; is as described in 6.1.

it is an integer expression.

9.9.3 The form of the call is CALL where e specifies the eventmark integer expression. m is as described in 6.1. for ending suspension; it is an HOLD(e,m)

Tostlng an eventmark
of a reference

condition
TESTEM shall return a

Execution

to function

logical value TRUE if the specified eventmark was ON and a logical value FALSE if the eventmark was OFF. If the eventmark is unknown be returned, dition. to the processor, a logical FALSE value will and the error parameter will indicate an error con-

The form of this function 6.8.2

reference

is

Delay for a specified relative time

TESTEM(e.m) where e m specifies the eventmark; is as described in 6.1. it is an integer expression.

Execution of a reference to subroutine DELAY shall transit the
calling task to state SUSPENDED tion with the statement for a specified following duration. the The of task shall then transit back to state RUNNING, immediately subroutine DELAY. resuming execucall

14

IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7849 : 1985

6.9.4

Masking

an eventmark

Execution of a reference to subroutine MKEM does not change the state of the designated eventmark but causes it to be masked. The masking-effect is that the eventmark may freely change its state without any effect on tasks that might be PENDING or SUSPENDEO waiting for this eventmark to be set.
The form of the call is CALL where e specifies the eventmark whose corresponding event is to MKEM(e,m)

b) if the resourcemark is locked and there are no tasks suspended as a result of a previously unsuccessful attempt to lock the associated resource, the resourcemark shall be unlocked; cj if the resourcemark is locked and there are one or more tasks suspended as a result of previous attempts to lock the
associated resourcemark, one and only one task shall transit resourcemark remains to state RUNNING. RUNNING The associated dependent.

locked. The criteria used to select the task to transit to state are processor

The form of the call is CALL where r specifies the resourcemark; is as described in 6.1. it is an integer expression.

UNLOCK(r,m)

be masked; m

it is an integer expression. in 6.1.

is as described

6.9.5

Unmasking

an eventmark

m

Execution of a reference to the subroutine UNMKEM shall allow actions associated with the specified eventmark to be executed. If the eventmark is in the ON condition, then all actions
associated The form-of CALL with the specified the call is eventmark will be executed.

6.10.3 Testing and setting a resourcemark condition
Execution of the function The function is unlocked; TLOCK

to the locked

shall first test the specified if the the value F~ALSE,

resourcemark. resourcemark however,

shall return the value TRUE it shall return

UNMKEM(e,m)

if the resourcemark is locked. After this test, the resourcemark will be locked.
whose corresponding event is to The form of this function TLOCK(r,m) where reference is

e

specifies the eventmark

be unmasked; m

it is an integer expression. in 6.1.

is as described

6.10 6.10.1

Resourcemark

operations to the locked condition

r m

specifies

the resourcemark;

it is an integer expression.

Setting a resourcemark

isasdeScrjbedin6.1 as compared to CALL LOCK or

Execution of a reference to the subroutine LOCK shall cause the specified resourcemark to be locked. If the specified resourcemark was locked already, of the task. the executive system shall suspend the execution The form of the call is CALL where r m specifies the resourcemark; is as described in 6.1. it is an integer expression. LOCK(r,m)

The reason for the use of TLOCK to continue with CALL execution LOCK.

is to allow a task to either reserve a resource if it is unlocked,

if it is locked. This would not be possible

6.11

Semaphore

operations')
have the form of local variables of the an The to is

All semaphore executive

variables

system,

and the only means of access is through

argument, r, which refers to one particular semaphore. value of a particular semaphore variable thus referred termed s in the following. of subroutines j SIGNAL and WAITS

The effects

are, respecvalue by

6.10.2

Setting a resourcemark

to the unlocked condition
UNLOCK shall cause

tively, the increasing and decreasing an amount ment of the calls. For WAITS, suspended

of the semaphore

, a positive integer conveyed as the second arguthe decrease will only take place the calling task is takes place, and continuavalue.

Execution

of a reference to the subroutine actions

one of the following a) tion;

:
is unlocked, there shall be no ac-

if the result is not less than zero; otherwise before the decrementing tion will not occur

if the resourcemark

until after s > j, i.e. the decrementation will yield a non-negative

linked to the continuation

1)

See also annex 6.

15

IS 13250 IS0 7846

: 1992 : 1985

The

subroutine

calls for the synchronizing

mechanisms

are

6.11.3

Release

of semaphore to the subroutine SIGNAL shall increof the

describedin

more detail below. Execution of a reference and referred The subroutine ment an integer semaphore sion below, PRESEM has two warnings PRESEM Normally, where j is an argument (see below). magnitude, releasing caused by transfer to for this m will inA change to a positive value of sufficient this operation, state RUNNING event to occur. Other tasks, suspended in their after execution of CALL SIGNAL WAITS may provide a possible reference. variable, designated shall be granted s in the expres-

6.11.1

initialization

of semaphore to the subroutine

to by one of the arguments

Execution purposes. semaphore, a

of a reference permitting that is

exclusive access to

Firstly, it declares the intention operation the

of use of a particular is issued referring to Secondly,

this semaphore ing modification s=s+j

during its operation of its value :

and will execute the follow-

the system to give diagnostic not value program. initialized. for

at run time if another semaphore semaphore the establishes PRESEM ecution initial

semaphore.

is referenced of a real-time

only in the initialization if no semaphore

phase of the ex-

The error parameter

dicate an error condition dicated designation. The form of the call is CALL where r s PRESEM(r.s.mJ

exists with the in-

for a task waiting in state SUSPENDED

relating to the same semaphore condition minated. specifies a semaphore; is the initial value it is an integer expression. to the semaphore. for a particular system call Until the and this is an re-evaluated

r, shall have their suspension call is tertasks This to at a above. for suspended

the present

This will provide an opportunity is subject to all common

to be released and resume operation, continuation exclusive operation

as described restrictions

given

pertaining

CALL PRESEM undefined, semaphore and

is executed another

semaphore, referring to

on a same semaphore.

Thus, the effect will of the semaphore of WAITS as long as a The order in

the internal variable is assigned value s, the internal value is shall give an error return. This parameter

be that only one of the suspended time. This examination for the examined equal which value again, as a consequence

tasks will be examined

may involve reduction

of releasing operation continues task.

integer expression. A negative semaphore negative value is permissible. a negative SIGNAL This is the only way The effect greater before a inthe

task. This examination of some

possibility remains that the semaphore to the j-value suspended value. of a tasks are checked

value is greater than or otherwise is processor

suspended

may attain

initial value is that a correspondingly of CALL is required

dependent. The form of the call is CALL SIGNALfr,j,mJ

crease by virtue

releasing action can take place. m is as described in 6.1

6.11.2

Wait

on semaphore to subroutine WAITS will involve a by the

where r j value s will be reduced by will this is as described in 6.11 .l. specifying the amount by which

Execution referenced

of ~a reference semaphore.

possible suspension

of the calling

task, as controlled

is an integer expression,

By the end of the call, the semaphore the amount j value.

the semaphore variable is to be incremented, if applicable. The value of j shall be positive (one or greater), and j = 1 corresponds used. m is as described in 6.1. to the simple semaphore most commonly

. The reduction and subsequent continuation
the calling task is suspended until

only take place when this can be done giving s a non-negative Otherwise, decrementation can take place.

The form of the call is CALL WAITS(r,j,mJ where r j is as described in 6.11 .l. specifying the amount by which and j = 1 commonly

6.11.4

Reading

a semaphore

value by execution of a

A semaphore reference function system. shared

value

may be interrogated IRDSEM.

to the integer function

The purpose of this operation, in a

is not that it be used as a synchronization Thus, a reference information is the reference resource to function about from IRDSEM

but only to provide a means to supervise synchronization ple, provide (honoured), another how far a buffer saturation. When exclusive to IRDSEM

can, for examor another accepted access to by is made,

is an integer expression,

the semaphore corresponds used. m to

variable is to be decremented, the simple semaphore

if applicable.

The value of j shall be positive (one or greaterr, most

will be granted the reference

the semaphore.

If the semaphore

is already being accessed

system call when

is as described

in 6.1.

the reference will be subject to the same deferred response and contention mechanisms as the other semaphore operations. On

i6

60

IS 13250 : 1992
7846 : 1985

return, the function designator will have a value equal to the internal semaphore value when the reference was accepted. The form of the reference is IRDSEM(r,m) where r m is as described in6.11 .l. is as described in 6.1.

Eventmarks and semaphores shall not be affected. ~Resourcemarkspreviously locked by this task shall be unlocked (see 5.3.2). and files released. The form of this call is CALL EXIT ,?

6.12

Normal termination

of execution

1)

Execution of a reference to subroutine EXIT shall terminate the execution of a task and return the task to state DORMANT.

The common FORTRAN operations STOP and END provide alternative means to terminate execution of a task. However, the effect onconnected units, such as files, is as described in IS0 1!39fll; the effect on other resources described in this International Standard is processor dependent.

11 See also annex B.

17

IS 13250

: 1992

IS0 7846 : 1985

Section

two:

Binary

pattern

and ~bit -processing

7
The

Introduction
:
function references for operations described in this section provide Function value

0101
0011 0001

mechanisms

on bit patterns

as well as individual 8.1.3 Boolean complement is

bits of the internal representation The operations presuppose that

of integer variables. integer numbers are conshift

sidered as if they are unsigned operation With (see 8.2.2)

integers,

The arithmetic

The form of this function NOT(j)

is an exception. referencing individual bits, a bit bit, is the

resp?ct

to arguments

numbering

rule in which bit number 0, the rightmost bit is assumed.

The

value

of the function value, j, according j 01 value 1 0

is the logical

complement

of the

least significant

parameter

to the following

truth table:

Function

8

Binary

pattern

processing
8.1.4 Exclusive OR is

8.1

Boolean

operations
The form of this function provided are IEOR(j,k)

Boolean operations OR, AND,

EOR and NOT. The value of the function is computed from the values of the truth table: are implemented as integer functions. bythe The parameters j and k according 0101 : Function value 0011 0110 to the following

These operations

implicit type for CR, AND k, are integer expressions. After execution The

and EOR is indicated

use of I

as the first letter of the function

name. Their parameters,

j and

of the functions, operations are

the parameters on

remain

un-

changed. (equally following responding

performed

corresponding giving the corin the

8.2

Shift

operations
provided are logical, arithmetic and cirfunc-

numbered)

bits of the two operands,

bit value of the result. The values indicated truth tables represent and of the function value.

The shift operations cular. tions. The functions

the individual and correspond-

The shift operations

are implemented

as integer

ing bits of the arguments

have two parameters, as follows:

j and n, considered

as integer expressions, 8.1.1 Inclusive OR is j n

specifies the value (binan/ pattern) specifies the shift count: n > 0 indicates indicates indicates value a left shift, no shift, a right shift. of the shift count

to be shifted;

The form of this function IOR(j,k) The value of the function parameters

n = 0 n < 0 is computed from the values of the truth table: If the absolute number QlOl : 0011 value 0111 The parameter undefined. j and k according to the following

is greater

than

the

of bits in a numeric

storage

unit,

then the result is

Function

values are not changed

by the shift operations.

82.1 8.1.2 Boolean AND

Logical

shift is

The form of this function The form of this function 1ANDtj.k) All bits representing The value of the function parameters is computed from the values of the truth table: j and k according to the following is ISHL(j,n)

the parameter

j are shifted

n places. end.

Bits

shifted out from the left end or the right end, as the case may be, are lost. Zeros are shifted in from the opposite

18

IS 13250 : 1992
IS0 7846 : 1985

8.2.2 Arithmetic shift The form of this function is ISHAfj,n) Argument j and the function value are considered as signed integers. All bits representing the parameter j are shifted n places. In the case of a right shift (n < 01, zeros are shifted into the left end if j is positive, and ones are shifted in if j is negative. The bits shifted out of the right end are lost. In case of a left shift (n > 01, zeros are shifted into the right end while the bits shifted out of the left end are lost, In a left shift an arithmetic overflow may occur. 8.2.3 Circular shift The form of this function is ISHC(j,n) All bits representing the parameter j are shifted circularly n places, i.e., the bits shifted out of one end are shifted into the opposite end. No bits are lost. NOTE - The number of bits representing j is processordependent.

The parameter values are not changed by these functions.

9.1

Bit testing

The form of this function is BTEST(j,k) This function is of type LOGICAL. The kth bit of parameter j is tested. If it is 1, the value of the function is TRUE ; if it is 0, the value of the function is FALSE.

9.2

Set -bit

The form of this integer function is IBSETlj,k) The value of the function is equal to the value of parameter j with the kth bit set to 1.

9.3

Clear bit

The form of this integer function is IBCLRfj,k)

-9

Bit processing
The value of the function is equal to the value of parameter j with the krh bit set to 0.

Individual bits of an integer can be tested with the functions for bit processing. The functions have two parameters j and k, which are integer expressions, as follows: j k specifies the binan/ pattern; specifies the selected bit, numbered as in clause 7.

9.4

Change bit

The form of this integer function is IBCHNG(j,k)

If k is negative or greater than the number of bits that are used to represent an integer value, the result of the function is undefined.

The value of the function is equal to the value of parameter j with the kth bit complemented.

1Q

IS 13250 IS0

: 1992

7846 : 1985

Section

three:

Process

input/output

10

Introduction
FORTRAN must be able to adAs the major-

i

specifies the number

of values to be transferred:

it is an

integer expression; The user of industrial real-time dress specific process devices for his application.

1 specifies the name of an integer array or array element
that contains I/O The ports, orderly necessary information and data of for description conversion information of the i.e. address information. is processor

ity of input/output (I/O) systems are computer dependent, this can only be standardized in a universal way by standardized calls to driver routines which are especially written for each I/O system. Computer independent I/O systems are either standardized, GPIB, or standards etc.). are under consideration (CAMAC, MEDIA, Standardized I/O calls designed for these here but are outStandard.

representation

dependent; k specifies the name of an integer array or array element the input or output values; indicator. Its value characterizes the

that contains m is a

systems are equally valid to the calls presented side the scope of this International

status

"success" m < 0:

of a call, as follows undefined, all data have been transferred, error conditions. shall be an integer variable or an integer array

11 Scope of the process structure of I/O routines
The process peripheral terminal devices,

I/O and general

m =

1:

m > 2: the process, or its This argument element.

is the link between processing

and the central

unit of the comof the pro-

puter. Data describing the space and time behaviour cess are received by a processing can be transferred interface. The variety of tasks to the central processing required of peripheral

unit and prepared so that they unit through an I/O by the process has For input, a distinction is made between hardware implemented sequential the first sequential and random input. In the first case, for input, the input parameter j contains the address of analog input; further addresses case, will be generated of adthe form is In the second the full sequence

12

Input/output

of analog

values

resulted in a large number

devices from different

manufacturers. However, in the course of many years of hardware development, largely compatible and generally accepted lines of development characterized I/O l/O have become established. They may be by the following statements. addresses. The

automatically. always random, Generally,

dresses must be given in the array j. For output, ports are distinguished port designations by their individual used i.e. all addresses (addresses) in the procedure the format of j is system dependent.

are given in array j. See annex 8,

references will probably, in most systems, be identical to the individual hardware addresses, but this is not mandatory. This relation is considered a processor dependent feature beyond the scope of this International IS0 1539 specifies that Standard. must be completed

clause B.10. The relationship between the range of an input or output port and its corresponding element in k is processor dependent. Some suggested design guidelines may be found in annex B, clause B.10.

one statement

before processing process I/O dicated

of the next statement

begins. The standard mode is in-

described

herein adheres to this rule. The calling and this operating 12.1

task will wait for completion

Sequential

analog data input
to the subroutine AISQW reads a se-

by the last letter W (waiting) designations

of all subroutine

names. Execution of a reference quence of analog input ports of sequential addresses.

The following

for parameters

apply to several of parameter it will be of the

the references. If the exact meaning of these designations deviates from that described below, marked specifically If the meaning parameter and a reference The procedures in the detailed description tn the description is exactly as defined

The form of the call is CALL AISQW(i, where j, k, m)

of the reference. of the reference

here, the description

will be omitted

will be made to this clause.

I specifies the number of analog Input ports to be reac.
for process

l/Onormally have four (in a specral
will be designated Such an I/O

The parameter j

is an integer expresslon; of either hardware or software informa

case, five) parameters

which In the following

in thegeneral form with i, j. k. m (and n If needed). call has the general form CALL procioti, where indicates procio described: one CTf thF: subroutlnes j, k. m)

is a description

tion for the acquisition and for rhe conversion of the first and the following analog ports. It IS the name of an Integer array or nf an elemen?. k See annex B, clause B.lO; It I:,

1s an array for recording the converted analog values

the name of an inteyer array or of an elemeni. subsequently clause 6 ICI V IS as described in clause 11

See ;lnnex H,

20

IS 13250
IS0 7846

: 1992 : 1985

12.2

Analog

data

input

in random

sequence
of analog input ports

13.2

Digital

output
Output Momentary) is permanently held value

The subroutine AIRDW in a specified order. The form of the call is CALL where AIRDW(i,j,k,m)

reads a sequence

For the output, pulse output (Digital distinguished from digital output witha (Digital Output 13.2.1 Digital Latching). pulse output

Execution ports to be read. The

of a reference

to the subroutine

DOMW

performs bit and by

pulsed output to a collection i specifies the number of input parameter is an integer expression; those bits selected element parameter

of I/O ports. A pulse will occur on on bits selected

by a binary 1 of the corresponding is indicated

of an array k. No pulse appears n.

j

is a description of either hardware or software information for the acquisition and for the conversion of each analog value. It is the name of an integer array. See annex B, clause B.10; k is an array for recording See annex B, clause B.lO; m is as described the converted analog values.

binary 0. The pulse duration

in a suitable form by

The pulse will begin either when the DOMW pulse, for example polarity, voltage, ware used. The form of the call is

is executed

or at of the

the next clock tick. This, as well as the representation

etc., depends on the hard-

in clause 11.

12.3

Analog

data

output

CALL where

DOMWfi,j,k,n,rn)

The subroutine AOW outputs a sequence of analog values to a collection of analog output ports in a specified order. The form of the call is CALL where i specifies the number of analog parameter is an integer expression; output ports. The AOW(i,j,k,m)

I specifies the number of digital values output; it is an integer expression; j k contains hardware information for transfer of each digital It value. This parameter is the name of an integer array; the digital values to be output. value wil!

is an array representing

is the name of an integer array. The first outputted be taken from the first array element index is 1); n is the number

(i.e. the element whose on the

j contains information for the data conversion and transfer. It is the name of an integer array. See annex B, clause B.10; k is an array from which the analog values are output. It is the name of an integer array. See annex B, clause B.10; m is as described in clause 11.

of time units of a clock depending

hardware duration, argument m 13.2.2

used. If the processor does not allow selection of this argument is ignored but must be present. This shall be an integer expression; in clause 11. output (DOLWI, in addition to the output sub-

is as described Latched

digital

13

Input/output

of digital

values

For latched be changed

digital output in the output.

field, a mask field is also required to indicate which bits are to For this type of input/output, it is assumed that, while the effective information may be represented at times by a single bit, it will, nevertheless, be necessary to transfer digital values (considered as entities using whole numeric storage units or words) into or out of an integer array (for example 16 bits for each numeric storage unit). The parameter k is therefore divided into kl and k2. The form of the call is CALL where DOLW(i,j,kl,k2,m)

13.1
The

Digital

input

i j

specifies the number of digital words; contains hardware information

it is an integer ex-

form of the call is CALL DIW(i,j,k,m)

pression; for every digital value that is output. This parameter is the name of an integer array;

where i specifies the number teger expression; of digital values input; it is an in-

kl is an array representing the digital values to be output. The parameter is the name of an integer array; k2 designates an array whose values define digital outputs A bit set in the k2 to the in the corwhich can be changed by the subroutine. state defined responding elements argument element; m is as described in clause 11. by the corresponding integer array element

j contains hardware and in some case software information for conversion and transfer. It is the name of an integer array. A possible reset specificatron can also be contained in j; k is an array in which the digital values will be stored. It is the name of an integer array; m is as described in clause 11.

array indicates that the digital output will be changed bit position in kl.

The order of the

in kl and k2 will correspond

to the order in j. This

shall be an integer array name, or an integer array

21

-IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7846 : 1985

Section

four:

File handling

14

Introduction
references
problems

described in this section proof files, and also provide contention

a file can have security

attributes

associated

with the

file for the purpose The external procedure
means for resolving

of ensuring

file privacy; with a task, this association for reasons of privacy;

vide means for controlling multitasking/multiprocessing ment, it is expected cedure references

the access

-

when

a file is associated

of file access

in a

can be restricted -

by the processor

environment. therefore,

In such an environto access proacthe external the

a file can be associated of contention

with a set of related concurrent among the concurrent

that concurrent defined herein

tasks will attempt provide

tasks and this association resolution tasks; -

can be restricted to assure orderly problems

the same file at the same time; necessary for the processor

information of access

to resolve such simultaneous

cess in an orderly manner.

The method for resolution

a file can be internal or external

to a task; media; storage; may

control is left to the processor. The procedure references in this section are intended to pro-

a file can reside on fixed or removable a file can reside on main storage restrictions

-

or backing

vide the methods by which the task can inform the processor of the manner in which it intends to use the file, but the references are not intended be associated to require specific problems when properties or attributes to with the referenced files. They provide rhe means used in conjunction with

for reasons of privacy

or contention

apply to a file or a component data items.

of a file such as records and

to avoid contention sound program tional Standard arise.

design bur the implementation of this Internais no assurance that such problems will not

16
In

File system
industrial
with This

environment
computer
resources Standard

real-time
shared

systems,
such does

concurrent
not address

.ask
ocall the

15

Background

information
systems and can have various at-

operation currence.

as files is a common

International

Files exist in most computing

areas of file management that most commonly systems.

but is concerned in industrial

with the problems real-time computer

tributes -

and features,

such as data, programs, or catalogue infor-

arise

a file can contain

mation; there can be a variety of ways for file access such as sedirect, and stream; by a task, by a system

Table

2 shows those

features

covered

by this International however, the excluded of a are

Standard features concurrent

and those that are excluded; task to a file. Such

quential, -

may affect the result of a request for association restrictions on association

a file can be created or deleted or at system generation time;

processor dependent tional Standard.

and are outside the scope of this Interna-

utility,

Table
Included Files whose contents are considered to be data

2 -

Features

and attributes

of files
Excluded

Files whose contents ing concurrent task media that

are not considered

to be data by the access-

Files which exist on fixed media only or on removable are not removed Files that reside in main storage Files that are external Creation and deletion or in backing storage task task

Files that exist on removable

media which are removed task utility or at system

Files that are internal to a concurrent Creation generation and deletion

to a concurrent

of files by a system

of files by a concurrent

Methods

of file access of a-file

The association of a file to a concurrent task for both systemcreated and for concurrent task-created files
Restrictions on file access as applied to the file of a file to a concurrent task irrespective or stream) of the

Restrictions on file access as applied to a component
Attributes of a file for the purpose of ensuring

file privacy

The association method

of access ffor example

direct, sequential,

22

IS 13250 IS0 7846

: 1992
: 1985

17 17.1

Procedures
Introduction

to control

file access

The form CALL where

of the call is DFILW(j,m)

The procedure references defined in this interruptible, that is the processor will only procedure the features reference described at a time. are executed

section execute

are nonone such that

j

specifies a) b)

the file.

The argument or or

is either

This requirement in an orderly

ensures manner.

an integer an integer a procedure a character

expresslon, array name, name, or

The argument m, shown below, shall be set equal to or greater than two (2) in value when the request is not accepted by the executive que values specific system. reason Individual implementation range may specify to designate unithe of m within for which the allowabie the request

c) d)

expression. which of the above four forms,

was rejected.

The processor are acceptable:

shall define

17.2

Creation
of but

of files
to the subroutine file. CFILW shall by

is set m disposition a named Files established to restrict

on

return

to

the

calling

task

to

tndlcate

fht,

of the request.

The value shall be 1 or gribarer deleted

Execution establish, CFILW

a reference not open,

1 ~~ File successfully 2 or greater This argument array element ~

do not have any privacy

attribute

a concur-

File not deleted vanable name or irltecl~~r

rent task from accessing the files. The contents of a newly created file are not defined by this International Standard. The form CALL where of the call is

shall be an Integer name.

17.4
CFILW(j,nl,nZ,m)

Opening
of

files
to the subroutine OPENW shall

Execution

a reference

associate the unit specified by the task with the named fllc, and shall define the desired access mode of that task to rhe ftle specifies a) h) cl d) the file. The argument expression, array name, or or CALL an integer a procedure a character or where name, OPENW(i,j,k,m) is elthcr The form an integer of the call IS

j

expression. which of the above four forms

I specifies
integer

the unit

by which

the file,

named

by the argo shall bt- ,+i

ment j, is referenced The processor shall define expression; the file

in the task.

This argument

are acceptable; specifies the number of character storage units per nl record in this file. This argument shall be an integer expression; n2 specifies the maximum number of records in this file.

1 speclfles
al b) cl d) indicate the

The argument or or

is either

an integer an integer a procedure a character

expresston, array name, name, or

This argument m is set on

shall be an integer return to the

expresslon; task to

expression. which of the above foilr i01n1,.

calling

The processor are acceptable; k specifies

shall define

disposition

of the request.

The value created

shall he 1 or greater.

1 ~~~ File successfully 2 or greater This argument array element

the access of the task's

mode

destred

by the task The followlnq

It /<I

3

declaration Ftle not created shall be an integer name variable name or tnteqer ment are defined.

Intended

us{? of the file

This dr(,ii val~lr~~,

shall be an Integer

expression

17.3

Deletion

of files
2 Protected read -... Read access to other IS requesred by rtrt, calling task anrl allowrcl Read `write task tasks, tasks, a<.cess is requestc:cl any Me ;I(

Execution of a reference to the subroutine DFILW shail remove a file from the file system. Any file created by the mechanism described in 17.2 can he deleted by the execution of a reference to DFILW, hut deletion will not he effected if the file is c:urrrntly open to any task.

3 Locked hy the calling cess by other

or write

Thr calling

task excludes

23

IS 13250
IS0 7846

: 1992
: 1985

m

is set on return

to the

calling

task

to indicate

the

17.6

Modify

access

mode
to the subroutine MODAPW shall

disposition 1 -

of the request.

The value shall be 1 or greater: Execution of a reference to the calling task to the calling task name or integer change opened file. If t,le calling task does not have access mode to the file, the re quest fails. the calling task's access mode of a file previously by the calling task without closing and reopening the

File successfully -

opened

2 or greater This argument array element The following

File not opened

shall be an integer variable name. apply:

limitations

If the request for change task, the disposition of a

cannot

be granted,

the previous ac-

cess mode remains in force. If the file is currently open to another possible request for a particular access mode will be as follows Unlocked -

:

The form of the call is CALL where I specifies the unit. This argument shall be an integer exMODAPWfi,k,m)

Fails if another task currently has the file open in the Locked or Protected modes: otherwise succeeds.

Protected

read -

Fails if another task currently has the file open in the Locked or Unlocked modes.

pression; k specifies the new access mode desired. This argument shall be an integer expression The following values are defined

Locked Any attempt

-

Fails. to open a file will be successful Standard, the attributes only if the file ex-

:
Unlocked Read/write or write-access is requested

ists. If the file was created by a mechanism this International creation task. may restrict the granting

outside the scope of given to the file at its mode to the

1

by the calling task; other tasks are also allowed the same access, 2 Protected read ~ Read access is requested to other tasks, or write-access is requested by the

of an access

calling task and allowed

17.5

Closing

files

3

Locked

-

Read/write

by the calling task. The calling task excludes any file ac Execution of a reference to the subroutine CLOSEW shall end the task association of the specified logical unit with a named file. The form of the call is 1 CALL where i specifies the unit. The argument shall be an integer exCLOSEWh,m) Access mode requested is granted to the task cess by other tasks; m is set on return to the calling task to indicate the disposition of the request. The value shall be 1 or greater:

2 or greater in force This argument array element The following

Access mode before the request remains

shall be an integer variable name. apply:

name or integer

pression; m is set on return to the calling task to indicate the

limitations

disposition 1 -

of the request.

The value shall be 1 or greater: closed to the calling task

If the file is currently change

open to another

task, the request for a

File successfully -

of mode will fail. outside the scope of this given to the file at its

2 or greater This argument array element

Non-performance name or integer

If the file was created by a mechanism International Standard, the attributes the granting creation task. may restrict

shall be an integer variable

of an access mode to the

name.

24

IS 13250 : 1992
IS0 7846 : 1985

Annex Historical

A

background

(This annex does not form part of the standard.)

A.1

Introduction
language was originally developed by IBM in 1955. Since that time, FORTRAN has become the most widely used high for scientific applications, and large powerful user libraries are available in FORTRAN. internationally in IS0 1539 ltl

The FORTRAN level language FORTRAN

has been standardized

A.2

Special

requirements
of FORTRAN for scientific applications operations, two ways: calculations and for reading and writing of data by standard peripherals. bit-string soon led to its use for industrial real-time manipulation systems. These

The wide use and the proved excellence These applications operations a) can only be accomplished

require special operations,

i.e. real-time

and facilities for process I/O.

in one of the following

FORTRAN

remains the basic language for arithmetic are realized by elements language

The special operations b) the complete

outside the syntax of FORTRAN; the syntax of ~FORTRAN or FORTRAN-functions. programming facilities for the special system used; thus this language was of this kind (see, for ex(see, for example, including the special operations. This means that

real-time

remains within

these operations The first approach operations. ample, created these extensions

have to be FORTRAN-subroutines leads to typical real-time such extensions,

languages which offer the user simple but powerful the designers try to apply all the features as a later development, features

In developing

of the real-time

operating

become dependent references 171).

on the actual system. This was especially true for the early developments It offers very advanced for real-time

bibliographic

[41, [51and [61). PROCOL,

avoids this disadvantage; programming

in France for a series of French computers. reference

bibliographic All languages

with extensions

outside the syntax of FORTRAN

need special compilers

for their translation. is gained the advantage that a first and their to

In choosing approach compilation associated this approach,

b), where the language

remains within the syntactical leads to somewhat

frame of FORTRAN,

and check of the user program can be done on any computer using subroutines and functions, parameters. Yet this may be considered

for which a FORTRAN

compiler exists. On the other hand, are well accustomed

clumsy handling of the added CALLS and FUNCTIONS as the many users of FORTRAN

as a minor inconvenience

this kind of programming. Industrial real-time FORTRAN real-time has also to be compared with three other families of real-time languages

industrial languages Ada [sl.

BASIC; designed for real-time applications, such as PEARL, RTL/2, etc;

specifically

The industrial real-time can be implemented The languages

BASIC

languages

are very easy to learn and to apply. They are well suited for simple and small problems. systems. features real-time to the user. These languages system)

They

relatively

easily in large as well as in small computer type deliver very powerful Their implementation Although

of the specific real-time

programming (compiler-and

are therefore

well suited to large and complex

problems.

is relatively expensive. languages, its size and com-

Since 1980, Ada has been a possible alternative.

Ada is more general than the specific real-time

plexity puts it in the same category as far as implementation is concerned. Ada is considered to be very advanced with respect to synchronization (rendezvous); on the other hand, the possibilities for time-based scheduling appear less developed. The industrial real-time and the specific quently, operations FORTRAN language languages real-time implemented'by approach a) above are often similar to the specific real-time languages. by approach b) are in many respects between to these two language facilities. BASIC Conse-

On the other hand, the industrial real-time a language according

FORTRAN

languages

implemented

type. Thus, this language

offers the user an alternative

to approach

b) has to be relative simple; this means that the number and complexity

of the additional

have to remain restricted

because of the ease of learning and programming.

25

IS 13250 IS0

: 1992

7846 : 1985

A.3

Source

of this

International

Standard
real-time languages, the "Workshop on Standardization of Industrial Corn-

In order to prevent the development

of many incompatible

puter Languages" was founded in 1970 at Purdue University. After a union with another organization in 1973, the workshop was named "International Purdue Workshop on Industrial Computer Systems". The "FORTRAN Committee" of the Purdue Workshop was very active and successful from the beginning. special operations comprehensive being kept within the syntactical Society of America (ISA) standard in a timely manner, For various and good reasons, this committee frame of the FORTRAN language. Recognizing decided to develop a series of standards. ISA formed Technical which was approved Committee and published chose approach b) above with all that it could not develop a single A program of work was proposdeveloped in a S61 .l

the committee and accepted. FORTRAN

ed to the Instrument

SP61. The committee

relatively short time a first proposal for real-time (1972) 191.The standard contains the following statement

by the ISA as ISA Standard

groups and numbers STOP for controlling

of special operations

:
activated "programs" 1).

3 CALLS and the FORTRAN 6 CALLS for process I/O. 5 INTEGER FUNCTIONS standard

the state of concurrently

for bit-string

manipulation

applied on an INTEGER

used as a bit-string. groups and

A second supplementary numbers

ISA 5X1.2 (1973) 1101 was published one year later. This standard contains the following

of special operations: 7 CALLS for handling 1 LOGICAL FUNCTION random unformatted files. bit in an INTEGER. bit in an INTEGER and, by worldwide use, great importance (the proposal for file handling exCommittee" of the Purdue

-

for testing an individual

2 CALLS for setting and clearing of an individual have gained great acknowledgement and the publication

These ISA standards cepted). Workshop

The early development

of these standards

by the American

"FORTRAN

and the ISA has been an important the ISA standards

step for industrial further except

process control. as ANS/ISA standards. Thus, ANS/ISA S61.2

In the meantime,

were developed

and were finally approved the file handling;

S61.11111 contains all sections of the old standards

the file handling

is the subject

of ANS/ISA

(1979) 1121.As a significant difference from earlier standards, ANS/ISA S61.1 (1976) does not allow subroutine calls without wait on the completion of the procedure. The change was made to maintain'compatibility with the external procedure reference operation of the host language, FORTRAN 111. references which have gained wide acceptance, are needed, the American "FORTRAN has developed this standard Committee" a complete can be considered as a "basic of has

As ISA S61.1 contains some procedure industrial real time FORTRAN" worked parallel tasks. 1) Since more extensive intensively on a supplementary as a draft standard 75" comprises

of the Purdue Workshop. mechanisms

It contains only 3 CALLS and the statement the management

STOP for the management of the Purdue Workshop

proposal concerning

of parallel tasks, organized

as ISA S61.3 1131.Parallel to

this work, the working group "Prozess-FORTRAN" 75", published

of the German VDI/VDE

proposal "Prozess-FORTRAN

of the VDI/VDErt41. 11 CALLS for the management FUNCTIONS for arithmetic of parallel tasks and thus offers a restricted but powerful and circular shift and a CALL for a bit change. tool for is

"Prozess-FORTRAN programming different. practically In ANS/ISA handling

real-time operations.

The binary pattern and bit processing is similar to ANS/ISA

S61 .l (1976); merely the description

There are additional identical to ISA. S61.1 (1976).

INTEGER

The process I/O is

only the standardization S61.2 (1978).

of the analog I/O is performed

in the direction

of a restrictive

standard.

The file

is different

from ANS/ISA

In 1976, the Purdue working dustrial real-time

Europe21 Technical

Committee

1 on industrial

real-time

FORTRAN

was founded

bv members a complete

of the VDI/VDE proposal for in

group "Prozess-FORTRAN" FORTRAN.

and other specialists in Europe. The committee

decided to formulate

Up to the end of 1977, the cooperation between the American and European committees was rather loose, with only one joint meeting per year at the International Purdue Workshop meeting. Thus, the American and European commtttees worked rather In dependently of each ISO/TC97/SCS/WGl, American objective, other, with the result that the proposals produced were quite different in several respects. Therefore, the Purdue Europe Workshop, ECMA TC8, and the International Purdue Workshop all requested the completely, identical. In order to reach tht!:

and European committees to develop proposals that were largely, or preferably cooperatron had to be intensified considerably.

1)

In this lnternattonal Standard, the term "task" is usd

n-dead

of the term "program" used in bibliographic references 191. 1101. 11'1I and 1171

See 2.30.

2)

Now EWICS

26

IS 13250

: 1992

IS0 7846 : 1985

From the middle of 1976 onward, most meetings of each organization were attended by at least one member of each of the other two organizations concerned. Through this level of intense international cooperation significant technical progress was made. This resulted in rapid~development of this joint standard. Concurrently, to complete its program of work, ISASP developed a draft standard S61.3tt41 that is fully compatible with this International Standard. To further the common goal of a single international-standard for the application of FORTRAN to the control of industrial processes, the ISA took several actions: a) It recommended to ANSI that ANS/ISA taken. b) It recommended to ANSI that ANS/ISA S61 .I 1111 be withdrawn as an item of work for ISOITC97/SC5/WGl. S61.21121not be proposed as an item of work for WGl . This action was

cl

It decided that the draft standard S61.3tt31, if approved, would not be forwarded to ANSI for processing as a nationatstandard.

This International Standard will need to be adapted from time to time to allow the progress of FORTRAN and also the progress of realtime operating systems. Thus supplements must be expected.

27

IS 13250

: 1992

IS0 7846 : 1985

Annex Further descriptions

6 to individual clauses

pertaining

(This annex does not form part of the standard.)

B.l

Definitions

and naming

rules
from such literature as bibliographic referencesll51. 1161, and

Some qf the definitions

given in clause 2 are inspired by or borrowed correspond largely to those commonly

other sources. The definitions

used in the International

Purdue Workshop

and are identical or

nearly identical to definitions of ANS/ISA S61.21121 and proposed standard ISA S61.3.1131 Definitions of the states refer to the figure of section one and its description in clause 5 and may be clearer if the figure and its description are consulted. The names of the calls in this International a) b) The names should be descriptive They should be different Standard have been chosen according of their use. S61.1, S61.2 and S61.3, if such a call is not completely idento a few basic rules, as follows:

giving an indication

from calls in any of the ISA standards In the latter case, an identical otherwise

tical to a call in the other standards. c)

name is desirable,

and only then.

The names should not be too common, programs.

they might easily coincide with names naturally selected by users for certain

application

Rule b) has the desired effect that an implementor existing user programs will not become obsolete

may choose to keep calls already implemented just because of the new implementation.

according

to an older starldard,

and

B.2

Use of CALL

CLOCK

(see 4.2)

The call CALL CLOCK is useful, first of all for applications requiring a somewhat lower level of programming. All three parameters are output arguments, j (the first in line) supplying the instantaneous value of the system clock. This value directly represents the contents of the counting register of the clock. supply system constants portability necessary and sufficient to achieve system independence in the use of rhrs call. to

The next two arguments

allow the user to preserve

and system independence

for his programs.

The first of these arguments, kl, supplies the basic clock frequency, whereas the last argument Informs about the module ot the clock, i.e. it reveals the number of bits of the clock register. The modulo IS equal to the value of k2 + 1, One clock tick after the value of

j is equal to k2, j will be reset to zero and start counting upwards again.

B.3

Choice

of task

model

(see clause 5) a call to the executive system (by calls of SKED, This
IS

Commonly, to PENDING
i.e.

in many implementations, to cause state transitions to the activation

STRTAF,

STATAT,

etc.

t for state transition
to be effected, and

causes listing in a table, appropriately are either time dependent (STRTAF,

called "pending-table". STRTAT) executive

a queue of transition (CON).

calls waiting

intended

some time later, All enrries in this table involve some conditions or event-dependent system implementors time. Often,

for future activations,

these conditions two

Entnes with time conditions will general to split this queue tnto

ly be sorted according

will find it convenient

: a time queue and an event qUelJe. With an ordered time queue, the executive system's task of monitoring when time IS due for any task will be simple : it has only to check the first element, since this always represents the next task to be activated. The other part
of the "pending-table" contains entries made by reference to the suhroutlnc CON. All these elements refer to events as their condo tions. The executive system will check this queue when external interrupts are received, as well as at some other Instances, in order to be able to react to possible programmed events, for example eventmarks set to ON by reference to subroutlne POST, may exist to direct the supervIsIon of suspended tasks: In fact, often these two sets of tables will be c:ombined. Similar tables

Transition calls such as those mentloned wrll cause entry in rhe "pending-table" up to the point where the maximum table space is ex hausted. When this occurs, the transltton call will be rejected with the error parameter (termed m in clause 6) Indicating this fact by being set to a value greater than one.

28

IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7848 : 1985

The obvious benefit of a system like this will be that a call for a state transition will be independent pens to be in at the time the call is made. Therefore, "minimum" system without such buffering will behave like the system described comes, however, number

of what state the objecttask

hap-

there will be no conflict with the state, and error returns are less likely to occur. A when the pending-table is full. Since this may hapafter any activation program, the error parameter

pen for any table of finite size, the programming
call. The benefit of a system with pending-table the substantial time savings obtained of buffered

of the tasks must allow for this by checking of error returns.

not so much from simplification

of the application

as from

from the reduced

A further advantage For example, operation

calls is that multiple activations

are possible, yielding an OR-function

of activations

of a certain task.

an operator

action to schedule

a certain task to start its operation

in 5 min does not conflict

with a previous call for

at 10 h 00 next day. of the CYCL, CYCLAF, CYCLAT, and CON calls, i.e. the calls causing possibility (by CALL EXIT or STOP), the pending-table is of run-conditions from the

This rule will also give a simple and logical operation of multiple subsequent checked. table entries. difference, activations (RUNS). Whenever If listed, the task will be transferred If the activating

a task attains state DORMANT, to state PENDING, calls CYCL,

immediately

guided by an OR-function

call was one of the recurrence or STRTAT the immediate

etc., or CON, the table condition

will remain. The same will calls CYCL, etc., and

be the case if multiple calls of STRTAF in principle, between CON. The effect of the recurrence the task after a CALL The details concerning with appropriate A different

were made, leaving the future activation

times in the table. Thus, there will be no

effects of multiple calls of STRTAF, to PENDING. CYCLAT,

etc., and the recurrence

calls will only be that the condition past DORMANT

in the table entry will be adjusted recursively at the instant when

EXIT is transferred

specific calls such as STARTAT, values.

etc. also pertain to references

to the comprehensive

CALL SKED,

argument

issue is the problem

caused by tasks whose execution as scheduled are termed "overrun"

is excessively

delayed,

so that the time or other RUNNING

condi-

tions for their next execution, The problem is, however, record of connections-back there is no obvious vides one possibility, SKED, overrun in case of overrun. condition, handled by the executive

by call of SKED or its derived simplified does not exist when the scheduling within the user's program.

versions,

is already satisfied before EXIT of the

previous run is called. Such conditions

and should normally be regarded as errors and give some error reaction. call is made, and most systems do not keep any to FORTRAN. Thus, in general, Standard prosuch error reactions should be The International conditions. This eventmark By using the CALL will be turned ON would hardly conform Most appropriately, Standard. react on overrun of overrun.

that the error condition to the scheduling system,

task; at least, such operations

receiver of such error reactions however,

and, as such, it is outside the scope of this International by which the user may make his own mechanism task may be connected conditions e2, for indication

rather than the simplified calls, this call has a return argument, Thus, a special user-supplied thereby monitoring overrun

to this eventmark

by CALL CON and thus initiated upon the

in other tasks.

B.4

Use of error

parameter

(see 6.1) between certain reasons for rejection. information. For example, it could be ad-

The processor may define specific values for m > 2 to distinguish vantageous, after a rejected reference to subroutine WAITS, range of values of m: m

to obtain further

This could be supplied by the following

is set on return to the calling task, to indicate the disposition 0 or less: 1: 2: 3: 4 or greater: undefined request accepted, request rejected, request rejected, request rejected, synchronization obtained

of the request as follows:

because of non-existing

semaphore range

because j is outside allowed because of unspecified error.

This argument

shall be an integer variable or integer array element.

6.5

Creation

of a new task

(see 6.2) Standard implies independent tasking, a reference to subroutine CREATE should to

Since the tasking model used in this International not form a dependent relationship between 6.12 should not cause a state transition It is not the intent of this International dependent tasking relationships. of another Standard,

the creating task and the created task; that is, the termination

of one task according

task, in spite of the fact that the one task may have created the other task. however, to preclude alternative subroutines, similar to CREATE, which do form

34

IS 13250 : 1992 IS0 7846 : 1985

B.6

Use of CALL

KILL (see 6.3)

The processor may impose certain restrictions regarding which calling tasks may be permitted to kill other tasks. For example, a reference to subroutine KILL may be effective only if the designated task has been created by the same calling task, i.e. there exists a parent-child relationship.

8.7

Use of semaphores
represent

(see 6.11) mechanisms, and this IS probably mechanism also the one most widely accepted, included in this International Stan-

Semaphores dard. Semaphores

one of the most basic synchronization for the selection

This consideration

has been dominant

as the main synchronization

are traditionally operations the

manipulated contained

by Dijkstra's

terms, single letter identifiers should be avoided, and semaphore value 1. Thus, Semaphore), Argument semaphore. semaphore manipulating

P and V primitives. 1 171 Although these primitives are widely known by these since they can too easily be confused with user-defined terms. Also, the semaphores than the common simple type, using the since increment designations is not confined WAITS (WAIT to on calls are described here

here are more advanced subroutine

and SIGNAL,

corresponding

to P and V respectively. that r = 2 specifies one semaphore as a constant, This is necessary to avoid deadlock, under control of the operating and It and r = 3 specifies another, completely differenr,

r specifies a semaphore. In a user's program,

This means

r will usually be specified WAITS

Exclusive access rights of a task referencing since this suspension does not conflict with the basic atomic

are released when the task is suspended. of the synchronization before. mechanism mentioned

is a normal and intended

operation

system,

reouirement

8.8

Termination

of execution

(see 6.12)

It is recommended to terminate execution of a task by call of subroutine EXIT, which performs a defined release of the resources, eventmarks, semaphores, and resourcemarks. This is not the case for the common FORTRAN operations STOP and END, whose ef~ feet on these resources is processor dependent.

B.9

Binary

pattern

operations
programs -

(see clauses 7 and 8) of process technology is much less characterized programs by the processing of INTEGER,

The,arithmetic

in most application

REAL,

or QQUELE PRECISION quantities or single bits, which often represent rules of IS0

as, for example,

in engineering-scientific

than by the processing of binary patterns Standard complres wrth the however, on

some form of status values or packed data. Since this International new data types for the elements: process binary patterns integer values are represented

1539, it is not possible to introduce procedure references references, described

binary pattern and brt. If one proceeds,

the premise that, in most modern dtgrtal computers, of standardized In the procedure effectively

by their binary values, then one can, with the aid

as well as single bits. in binary form. The represen this representation shift operation. For machine

in section two, it is assumed that integer numbers are represented however, would as two's complement Standard, representanon

tation of negative values is processor dependent; for negative numbers is assumed example, Value bit : 0 1 -1 70 10 the followrng internal Binary representation pattern

is most common,

in general in this International

and applies especially to the arithmettc

be obtained

with a word length of 16 bits on a two's complement

15 14 13 12 11 10 09 06 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 00 ,... . 0000000000000000 0000000000000001 1111111111111111 0000000000001010 1111111111110110 from right to left does not prohibit implementations of the binary pattern operations AS intrinsic fltnctions

The bits are thus numbered Thus International Standard

30

IS 13250 IS0

: 1992

7846 : 1985

B.10

Analog

input

operations

(see clauses 11 and 121

The parameters j and k for analog I/O have the following meanings: The parameter j consists of a measurement specification and a measurement point address. The measurement specification may, for example, contain the measurement range of the analog input unit. The measurement point address specifies the address of the analog l/O points; this also comprises a channel address, if required. Generally, the format of j is system dependent. For block transfers of sequential analog inputs, only.one element of j is required. This may be determined by one or two integers. For block transfers of random analog inputs or outputs, the measurement point address at least changes from point to point. Therefore, a description field for j with several elements is required. The relationship between the measurement range of an input port and its corresponding element in k is processor dependent. The following scaling rules have the advantage that the engineering units y can be computed from the converted values x with the same formula y = Jx) for all computers with the same integer representation without any knowledge of the special coding of the ADC used. The analog value zero is represented by the numerical value zero.

A unipolar positive analog signal is represented by a positive numerical value such that 100 % of the measurement range is represented by half of (the maximum value + 1) of integer variables. This allows a measurement overrange of approximately 99 % Thus, in the case of 18bit storage unit for integer variables, 100 % of the measurement range would correspond to 2**14 = 16 364 and the representation accuracy would be 2""f - 15) or about 0,003 % of the measurement range. Bipolar, as well as negative unipolar, analog signals are represented similarly to unipolar positive signals, such that negative analog values are represented by negative numerical values in the usual format of the processor.

31

-IS 13250

: 1992

JSO 7846 : 1985

Annex Abortion

C

of tasks

(This annex does not form part of the standard.)

An "aborting" mechanism dangerous some other operator

mechanism

is sometimes

needed in an industrial real-time system. There are, however, terminating and its memon/,

several valid arguments

against Such a

the inclusion of a mechanism state. Abortion, unusual dialog.

capable of forcefully or forceful termination The abortion

another task which may be in an arbitrary state at that moment. files, and other resources in a messy, indefinite, task, often running

will involve the risk of leaving the computer situation. is effected

and possibly in

of an object task, may be necessary because of malfunction by a call, issued in some supervising

in a process section, or interactively

This annex outlines a safe method, how to program an equivalent

by which the application

programmer

is not given a general aborting manner.

tool, but a prescription

on

mechanism

that can be used safely and in an ordered

A task will often have sections where abortion would be improper, done without Assume "IABORT" statements problems. The application is defined programmer programmer

or fatal. Equally, there are sections where a possible abort could be

is the obvious person most able to identify these sections. for a certain task. For reference, let us denote this eventmark In all tasks, and similar

an eventmark

to be used to guide an "abort"

in the following.

This eventmark

may be set ON by a supervising task, possibly following and can be allowed,

an operator

request.

where the application

decides that abort may be necessary

he includes the following

at the "safe spots" of the program: IF 0-ESTEM(IABORT,M)) GO TO 9000

90

. .. .
CONTINUE HERE MAY TION THE TION. CALL END A supervising EXIT

C C C C C

BE INCLUDED NECESSARY BEFORE

ANY

PROGRAM TO

PORBY BE EX-

DEEMED JUST

OR CONVENIENT FORCED

APPLICATION

PROGRAMMER, THE

ECUTED

TERMINA-

task may now abort the object task by calling:

. . ... . ...
CALL CALL DSKEDf i, 1, - 1, Ml1 GO TO 8010 GO TO BOO0 IF (Ml.NE.1) IF (Ml.NE.1)

POST(IABORT,Ml)

.. .. . ...
The effect is that the aborted task itself may perform etc. Remark that DSKED be initiated between and POST should be called in that order. Otherwise, call of POST and DSKED. it generally does not generate the operating system any harmful operations. It may remain there forever, to deallocate such the ima slight possibility exists that a new execution of task i will a "graceful" termination, taking care of opened files, dangerous process states,

If the-task to be aborted is in state SUSPENDED, though, that are needed by the rest of the system. include a CALL DSKED

waiting for a condition that will never occur, because of some malfunction. Usually, so this is not covered any further

In this case, this task may occupy some resources with some mechanism

is provided

resources, mediately.

here. For the purpose of taking care of the case that the object task is PENDING, as above in the controliing task, whereby the object task transits back to DORMANT

aborting statements

32

IS 13250

: 1992

1SO 7846 : 1985

Annex

D

File handling
(This annex does not form part of the standard.)

This International Standard is based on the programming language FORTRAN as specified in IS0 1539. In section four, file handling, the access to file is assumed to be performed by the standard FORTRAN input/output statements.

33

IS 13250

: 1992

IS0 7846 : 1985

Bibliography
Ill IS0 1539, Programming languages FORTRAN. Section 10: Operating techniques State and facilities. Model and State Transitions. 1977. 2nd edition.

121
131

IS0 2382110, PETTERSEN, 0: Minutes

Data processing Management

Vocabulary

of Parallel Activities Meeting

in Real-Time

FORTRAN.

of the Purdue

Europe Spring

1977 at ISPRA

CCR Euratom, IEEE Transactions

Vol. II. IRIA,

Rocquencourt,

141 151 161 171 (81 I91

HOHMEYER, R. E. INDAC DDP-516

: CDC 1700 FORTRAN
Corporation,

for Process Control. 1969. Manual.

on IECl, Vol. 15, No. 2, Dec. 1968

8. Digital Equipment OLERT,

ProgrammerS

Reference

Honeywell

Inc.,

Dot.

No. 1300 72069 A, EM-602, IFAC Congress, of Defense, Functions

1969.

BONNARD, P. Reference

: PROCOL

: A Programming

System Adapted Language. FORTRAN

to Process Control. States

Paris, 1972. July 1980. and Process Input-Output. In-

Manual

for the Ada Programmmg Industrial of America, (draft): Computer 1972. Computer System

United

Department for Executive

ISA S61 .l (1972). strument Society (1973)

Procedures

1101

ISA

S61.2

Industrial

System

FORTRAN Society

Procedures of America,

for Handling 1973.

Random

Unformatted

Files, Bit

Manipulation, I1 11 ANSIISA

and Date and Time Information. (1976). Industrial Computer Society

Instrument System

S61.1

FORTRAN 1976.

Procedures

for Executive

Functions,

Process Input-Output,

and Bit Manipulation. 1121 ANSIISA Instrument 1131

Instrument

of America,

S61.2 (1978). IndustrialComputer Society of America, (draft). 1978. Industrial

System FORTRAN

Procedures

for File Accessand

the Controlof

File Contention.

ISA S61.3 (Aug.19781 related

Computer

System

FORTRAN

Procedures

for the Management

of Independent

Inter-

Tasks. Instrument 3556,

Society

of America, 75, eine Gesellschaft

1978. Erweiterung von FORTRAN ffir Prozessrechner-Anwendungen. Dtisseldorf, 1978. VDI/VDE-

1141

VDIIVDE Richtlinie

Prozess-FORTRAN VDI/VDE -

(Entwurf).,

fiir Mess- und Regelungstechnik, Prentice-Hall, 1973 1974. Languages"

(151 1161 1171

BRINCH HANSEY, P: Operating SHAW, A.C.

System

Principles.

: The Logical Design of Operating Systems. Prentice-Hall,
Sequential Processes. In "Programming

DIJKSTRA, E.W. : Cooperating Press, New York, 1968.

(V. Genuys,

ed. ), pp 43 -

112. American

34

