INATT Wah IS 10262 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Concrete Mix Proportioning — 
Guidelines 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30 


© BIS 2019 


ada AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© AM FA, 9 ae VHC APM, As feeet-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2019 Price Group 12 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


This standard provides guidelines for proportioning concrete mixes as per the requirements using the concrete 
making materials including other supplementary materials identified for this purpose. 


This standard was first published in 1982 and subsequently revised in 2009. In the first revision, the title of the 
standard was modified as ‘Concrete mix proportioning — Guidelines’ from ‘Recommended guidelines for concrete 
mix design’. The major changes in the first revision had been, restricting the applicability of the standard to 
ordinary and standard grades of concrete, aligning the standard to IS 456 : 2000 ‘Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision)’; review and modification of the requirements for selection of water cement 
ratio, water content and estimation of coarse aggregate content and fine aggregate content; inclusion of an additional 
illustrative example of concrete mix design, etc. 


In this second revision, the following major modifications have been made: 


a) The standard has been divided into five sections, as follows: 
1) Section 1 General 
2) Section 2 Ordinary and standard grades of concrete 
3) Section 3 High strength grades of concrete 
4) Section 4 Self compacting concrete 
5) Section 5 Mass concrete 

b) Mix proportioning procedure for high strength concrete for M 65 or above (up to target strength of 
M 100) has been included. 

c) The initial data to be provided for mix proportioning has been made more encompassing, covering the 
provisions of revised IS 383 : 2016 ‘Coarse and fine aggregates for concrete (third revision)’, use of 
admixtures, etc. 

d) The target mean strength for mix proportioning formula has been refined to include a new factor based 
on the grade of concrete. This has been done to ensure a minimum margin between the characteristic 
compressive strength and the target mean compressive strength. 

e) The calculations for standard deviation have been detailed. 

f) A graph of water-cement ratio versus 28 days strength of concrete has been introduced for different 
grades and types of cement, as an alternate method for assuming the initial water-cement ratio. 

g) Illustrative annexes for concrete mix proportioning for PPC, OPC with fly ash, OPC with ggbs, high 
strength concrete, self compacting concrete and mass concrete have been provided. 

h) Guidelines on using/selecting water reducing admixtures have been introduced as an informatory annex 
(see Annex G). 

j) The consideration of air content in design of normal (non-air entrained) concrete mix proportion, has 
been reintroduced. 


This standard requires compliance to the provisions of IS 456:2000 particularly to ensure that minimum stipulations 
for durability are met with, such as minimum OPC content, maximum free water-content ratio and minimum grade 
of concrete. However, in certain projects, some deviations in the concrete mix proportioning may be required; all 
such deviations are to meet certain stricter criteria than those given in IS 456:2000. 


Concrete has become an indispensable construction material. In the present scenario, concrete has bypassed the 
stage of mere four component system, that is, cement, water, coarse aggregate and fine aggregate. It can be a 
combination of far more number of ingredients, for example, a judicious combination of ingredients from as many 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Indian Standard 
CONCRETE MIX PROPORTIONING — GUIDELINES 


(Second Revision ) 


SECTION 1 GENERAL 
1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides the guidelines for 
proportioning concrete mixes as per the requirements 
using the concrete making materials including other 
supplementary materials identified for this purpose. The 
proportioning is carried out to achieve specified 
characteristics at specified age, workability of fresh 
concrete and durability requirements. 


1.2 This standard is applicable for ordinary, standard 
and high strength concrete grades. The standard also 
covers provisions for the mix proportioning of self 
compacting concrete and mass concrete. 


1.3 All requirements of IS 456 in so far as they apply, 
shall be deemed to form part of this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
269 : 2015 Specification for ordinary 
Portland cement (sixth revision) 
383 : 2016 Specification for coarse and fine 
aggregates for concrete (second 
revision) 
456 : 2000 Code of practice for plain and 


reinforced concrete (fourth 
revision) 
Fresh concrete — Methods of 
sampling, testing and analysis: 
Part6 Tests on fresh self 
compacting concrete (first 
revision) (under publication) 
Specification for Portland- 
pozzolana cement 

(Part 1) : 2015 Fly ash based (third revision) 

(Part 2) : 2015 Calcined clay based (third revision) 
2386 (Part 3) : 1963 Methods of test for aggregates for 
concrete: Part 3 Specific gravity, 
voids, absorption and bulking 
Specification for pulverized fuel 


1199 (Part 6) : 2018 


1489 


3812 (Part 1) : 2013 


IS No. Title 

ash: Part 1 For use as pozzolana 
in cement, cement mortar and 
concrete (third revision) 

9103 : 1999 Specification for admixtures for 
concrete (first revision) 

15388 : 2003 Specification for silica fume 

16714 : 2018 Ground granulated blast furnace 


slag for use in cement, mortar and 
concrete — Specification 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Water-Cement Ratio (w/c) — The ratio is 
calculated by dividing the mass of the mixing water by 
the mass of the cement. It refers to the ratio 
corresponding to the saturated surface dry condition 
of aggregates. 


3.2 Water-Cementitious Materials Ratio (w/cm) — 
The ratio (w/cm) is calculated by dividing the mass 
of the mixing water by the combined mass of the 
cement and fly ash or other cementitious materials or 
a combination thereof. It refers to the ratio 
corresponding to the saturated surface dry condition 
of aggregates. 


4 DATA FOR MIX PROPORTIONING 


4.1The following data are required for mix 
proportioning of a particular grade of concrete: 


a) Grade designation; 

b) Type of cement, and grade of cement (if 
applicable); 

c) Maximum nominal size of aggregate; 

d) Minimum cement/cementitious materials 
content and maximum water-cement/ 
cementitious materials ratio to be adopted; 

or 
Exposure conditions as per Table 3 and 
Table 5 of IS 456; 


e) Workability required at the time of placement; 
f) Transportation time; 
g) Method of placing; 


h) Degree of site control (good/fair) or value of 
established standard deviation, if any; 


j) Type of coarse aggregate (angular/sub angular/ 


IS 10262 : 2019 


gravel with some crushed particles/rounded 
gravel/manufactured coarse aggregate); 


k) Type of fine aggregate (natural sand/ crushed 
stone or gravel sand/manufactured sand/ 
mixed sand); 

m) Maximum cement content; 


n) Whether a chemical admixture shall or shall 
not be used and the type of chemical admixture 
and the extent of use; 


p) Whether a mineral admixture shall or shall not 
be used and the type of mineral admixture and 
the extent of use; and 

q) Any other specific requirement like early age 
strength requirements. 


NOTE — Suitable reduction in water cement or water 
cementitious material ratio shall be done after the mix 
has been finalized based on trial mixes, to achieve the 
specific requirement of high early strength, if any. The 
reduced ratio shall be fixed based on trials for the 
required early strength. These trials shall be carried out 
after recalculating all the mix proportions. 


4.2 Target Strength for Mix Proportioning 


In order that not more than the specified proportion of 
test results are likely to fall below the characteristic 
strength, the concrete mix has to be proportioned for 
higher target mean compressive strength f’, The 
margin over characteristic strength is given by the 
following relation: 


Fea = Jat 1.65 S 


or 
Safet K 

whichever is higher. 

where 


J’ 4. = target mean compressive strength at 28 days, 
in N/mm’; 
fẹ = characteristic compressive strength at 28 
days, in N/mm’; 
= standard deviation, in N/mm? (see 4.2.1); and 


S 
X = factor based on the grade of concrete, as per 
Table 1. 


4.2.1 Standard Deviation 


The standard deviation for each grade of concrete shall 
be calculated separately. 


4.2.1.1 Standard deviation based on test strength of 
samples 


a) Number of test results of samples — The total 
number of test strength of samples required 
to constitute an acceptable record for 
calculation of standard deviation shall be not 
less than 30. 


b) In case of significant changes in concrete — 
When significant changes are made in the 


production of concrete batches (for example 
changes in the source of materials, mix 
proportioning, equipment or technical control), 
the standard deviation value shall be separately 
calculated for such batches of concrete. 


c) Standard deviation to be brought 
up-to-date — The calculation of the standard 
deviation shall be brought up-to-date 
periodically and after every change of mix 
proportioning. The standard deviation shall be 
checked every month subject to minimum 30 
test results to ensure that it is less than the value 
considered in mix design. If higher, necessary 
modification shall be done in the mix. 


4.2.1.2 Calculation of standard deviation 


Calculate the standard deviation, S, of the strength test 
results as follows. 


4.2.1.2.1 For a single group of consecutive test results: 


S= 
where 
S = standard deviation of the group; 
n = number of test results considered; 


X = average ofn test results considered; and 
X, = individual test result. 


4.2.1.2.2 For two groups (mixes) of consecutive test 
results of same grade: 


S -je -1)s? +A Mt -1) s3 


(nm +n, —2) 
where 

S = standard deviation for the two groups 
combined; 

S,, 5, =standard deviation for group 1 and 2, 
respectively, calculated as per 4.2.1.2.1; 
and 

n,n, =number of test results in group 1 and 2, 


respectively, where both n, and n, shall not 
be less than 10, and n,+ n, shall not be 
less than 30. 


4.2.1.3 Assumed Standard deviation 


Where sufficient test results for a particular grade of 
concrete are not available, the value of standard deviation 
given in Table 2 may be assumed for the proportioning 
of mix in the first instance. As soon as the results of 
samples are available, actual calculated standard 
deviation shall be used and the mix may be proportioned 
suitably. However, when adequate past records for a 
similar grade exist and it is justified to adopt a value of 


standard deviation different from that shown in Table 1, 
it shall be permissible to use that value. 


Table 1 Value of X 
(Clause 4.2) 
SI Grade of Concrete 
No. 
a) (2) (3) 
i) M10 
M15 


Value of X 


5.0 


ii) M20 


5.5 
M25 


iii) M30 
M35 
M40 
M45 6.5 
M50 
M55 
M60 


iv) M65 and above 8.0 


Table 2 Assumed Standard Deviation 
(Clause 4.2.1.3) 


SI Grade of Concrete Assumed Standard 
No. Deviation 
N/mm? 


a) 2) (3) 


3.5 


i) | 
4.0 


iii) M30 


M45 5.0 


iv) 


6.0 


NOTES 

1 The above values correspond to good degree of site control 
having proper storage of cement; weigh batching of all materials; 
controlled addition of water; regular checking of all materials; 
aggregate grading and moisture content; and regular checking of 
workability and strength. Where there are deviations from the 
above, the site control shall be designated as fair and the values 
given in the above table shall be increased by 1 N/mm’. 

2 For grades M65 and above, the standard deviation may also be 
established by actual trials based on assumed proportions, before 
finalizing the mix. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


SECTION 2 ORDINARY AND STANDARD 
GRADES OF CONCRETE 


5 SELECTION OF MIX PROPORTIONS 


5.1 Selection of Water-Cement Ratio 


Different cements, supplementary cementitious 
materials and aggregates of different maximum size, 
grading, surface texture, shape and other characteristics 
may produce concrete of different compressive strength 
for the same free water-cement ratio. Therefore, the 
relationship between strength and free water-cement 
ratio should preferably be established for the materials 
actually to be used. In the absence of such data, the 
preliminary free water-cement ratio (by mass) (w/c) 
corresponding to the compressive strength at 28 days 
may be selected from the relationship shown in Fig. 1, 
for the expected 28 days strength of cement. The final 
w/c is arrived at, based on the results of all the trials 
and any change in strength of cement shall get adjusted 
in the trials. In case, the actual strength of cement is 
known, the curve corresponding to the actual strength 
of cement may be used. 


5.1.1 The water-cement ratio selected according to 5.1 
shall be checked against the limiting water-cement ratio 
for the requirements of durability and the lower of the 
two values adopted. 


NOTE — In case of water cement ratios on the upper limits of 
durability clause, it is required that the water content contributed 
by the admixtures, also be considered in the calculations and 
the final water cement ratio shall be fixed accordingly. 


5.1.2 Where supplementary cementitious materials are 
used, that is, mineral admixtures, the water cementitious 
materials ratio (w/cm) shall be calculated, in accordance 
with Table 5 of IS 456 and this w/cm shall be in 
accordance with Table 3 and Table 5 of IS 456 or as 
specified. 


5.2 Estimation of Air Content 


Approximate amount of entrapped air to be expected 
in normal (non-air-entrained) concrete is given in 
Table 3. 


Table 3 Approximate Air Content 


(Clause 5.2) 

SI Nominal Maximum Size Entrapped Air, as 

No. of Aggregate Percentage 
mm of Volume of Concrete 

(E9) (2) G) 

i) 10 1.5 

ii) 20 1.0 
iii) 40 0.8 


5.2.1 The actual values of air content can also be 
adopted during mix proportioning, if the site data (at 
least 5 results) for similar mix is available. 


IS 10262 : 


80 


70 


60 


50 


20 


10 


28 DAY COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF CONCRETE, N/mm? 


RE 


0 
0.25 0:3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 
FREE WATER CEMENT RATIO 
Curve 1 : for expected 28 days compressive strength of 33 and < 43 N/mm’. 


Curve 2 : for expected 28 days compressive strength of 43 and < 53 N/mm’. 
Curve 3 : for expected 28 days compressive strength of 53 N/mm? and above. 


NOTES 


1 In the absence of data on actual 28 days compressive strength of cement, the curves 1, 2 and 3 may be used for OPC 33, OPC 43 and 


OPC 53, respectively. 


2 While using PPC/PSC, the appropriate curve as per the actual strength may be utilized. In the absence of the actual 28 days compressive 


strength data, curve 2 may be utilized. 


Fic 1. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FREE WATER CEMENT RATIO AND 28 Days COMPRESSIVE STRENGTHS OF CONCRETE 
FOR CEMENTS OF VARIOUS EXPECTED 28 Days COMPRESSIVE STRENGTHS 


5.3 Selection of Water Content and Admixture 
Content 


The water content of concrete is influenced by a number 
of factors, such as aggregate size, aggregate shape, 
aggregate texture, workability, water-cement ratio, 
cement and other supplementary cementitious materials 
type and content, chemical admixture and environmental 
conditions. An increase in aggregates size, a reduction 
in water-cement ratio and slump, and use of rounded 


aggregate and water reducing admixture will reduce the 
water demand. On the other hand increased temperature, 
cement content, slump, water-cement ratio, aggregate 
angularity and a decrease in the proportion of the coarse 
aggregate to fine aggregate will increase water demand. 


The quantity of mixing water per unit volume of concrete 
may be determined from Table 4. The water content in 
Table 4 is for angular coarse aggregate and for 50 mm 
slump. The water estimate in Table 4 can be reduced by 


approximately 10 kg for sub-angular aggregates, 15 kg 
for gravel with some crushed particles and 20 kg for 
rounded gravel to produce same workability. For the 
desired workability (other than 50 mm slump), the required 
water content may be increased or decreased by about 3 
percent for each increase or decrease of 25 mm slump or 
may be established by trial. This illustrates the need for 
trial batch testing of the given materials as each aggregate 
source is different and can influence concrete properties. 
The water so calculated can be reduced by use of chemical 
admixture conforming to IS 9103. Water reducing 
admixture or super plasticizing admixtures usually 
decrease water content by 5 to 10 percent and 20 to 30 
percent and above respectively at appropriate dosages. 


The requirement of water content and/or chemical 
admixture content may increase with the addition of 
high dosages of mineral admixture. The guidelines on 
selecting appropriate water reducing admixture and its 
dosages are given in Annex G. 


Table 4 Water Content per Cubic Metre of 
Concrete For Nominal Maximum Size of 
Aggregate 


(Clause 5.3) 


SI Nominal Maximum Size of Water Content” 


No. Aggregate kg 
mm 

qd) (2) G) 

i) 10 208 

ii) 20 186 

iii) 40 165 


DWater content corresponding to saturated surface dry aggregate. 


NOTES 

1 These quantities of mixing water are for use in computing 
cement/cementitious materials content for trial batches. 

2 On account of long distances over which concrete needs to be 
carried from batching plant/RMC plant, the concrete mix is 
generally designed for a higher slump initially than the slump 
required at the time of placing. The initial slump value shall 
depend on the distance of transport and loss of slump with time. 


5.4 Calculation of Cement/Cementitious Materials 
Content 


5.4.1 The cement and supplementary cementitious 
materials content per unit volume of concrete may be 
calculated from the free water-cement ratio (see 5.1) 
and the quantity of water per unit volume of concrete. 


In certain situations, while using part replacement of 
cement by fly ash, ground granulated blast furnace slag 
(GGBS), silica fume, and other mineral admixtures, 
increase in cementitious materials content may be 
warranted, particularly if fly ash is 20 percent or more. 
The decision on increase in cementitious materials 
content and its percentage may be based on experience 
and trials; or the cementitious materials content so 
calculated may be increased by 10 percent for 
preliminary trial. The water-cementitious materials ratio 
shall be recalculated, based on the increased 


IS 10262 : 2019 


cementitious materials content, as per Table 5 of 
IS 456. 


The cementitious materials content so calculated shall 
be checked against the minimum content for the 
requirements of durability as per IS 456 or as specified 
and greater of the two values may be adopted. The 
maximum cement content shall be in accordance with 
IS 456 or as specified. 


5.4.2 The percentage of fly ash/GGBS to be used has 
to be decided based on the project requirement and the 
quality of these materials. 


5.5 Estimation of Coarse Aggregate Proportion 


5.5.1 Aggregates of essentially the same nominal 
maximum size, type and grading will produce concrete 
of satisfactory workability when a given volume of 
coarse aggregate per unit volume of total aggregate is 
used. Approximate values for this aggregate volume 
are given in Table 5 for a water-cement/water- 
cementitious materials ratio of 0.5, which may be 
suitably adjusted for other ratios, the proportion of 
volume of coarse aggregates to that of total aggregates 
is increased at the rate of 0.01 for every decrease in 
water-cement/cementitious materials ratio by 0.05 and 
decreased at the rate of 0.01 for every increase in water- 
cement ratio by 0.05. 


It can be seen that for equal workability, the volume of 
coarse aggregate in a unit volume of concrete is 
dependent only on its nominal maximum size and 
grading zone of fine aggregate. Differences in the 
amount of mortar required for workability with different 
aggregates, due to differences in particle shape and 
grading, can be adjusted by changing coarse to fine 
aggregate ratio. Generally higher fine aggregate content 
is required for crushed angular coarse aggregates due 
to increased surface area. 


5.5.2 For more workable concrete mixes which is 
sometimes required when placement is by pump or 
when the concrete is required to be worked around 
congested reinforcing steel, it may be desirable to 
reduce the estimated coarse aggregate content 
determined using Table 5 up to 10 percent. However, 
caution shall be exercised to assure that the resulting 
slump, water-cement/cementitious materials ratio and 
strength properties of concrete are consistent with the 
recommendations of IS 456 and meet project 
specification requirements as applicable. 


5.6 Combination of Different Coarse Aggregate 
Fractions 


The coarse aggregate used shall conform to IS 383. 
Coarse aggregates of different sizes may be combined 
in suitable proportions so as to result in an overall 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Table 5 Volume of Coarse Aggregate per Unit Volume of Total Aggregate for Different Zones of Fine 
Aggregate for Water-Cement/Water-Cementitious Materials Ratio of 0.50 
(Clause 5.5) 


SI Nominal Maximum Size 


Volume of Coarse Aggregate per Unit Volume of Total Aggregate for Different Zones of Fine 


No. of Aggregate Aggregate 
mm N 
Zone IV Zone III Zone II Zone I 

(e9) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) 10 0.54 0.52 0.50 0.48 

ii) 20 0.66 0.64 0.62 0.60 
iii) 40 0.73 0.72 0.71 0.69 

NOTES 


1 Volumes are based on aggregates in saturated surface dry condition. 


2 These volumes are for crushed (angular) aggregate and suitable adjustments may be made for other shape of aggregate. 

3 Suitable adjustments may also be made for fine aggregate from other than natural sources, normally, crushed sand or mixed sand may 
need lesser fine aggregate content. In that case, the coarse aggregate volume shall be suitably increased. 

4 It is recommended that fine aggregate conforming to Grading Zone IV, as per IS 383 shall not be used in reinforced concrete unless tests 


have been made to ascertain the suitability of proposed mix proportions. 


grading conforming to Table 7 of IS 383 for particular 
nominal maximum size of aggregate. 


5.7 Estimation of Fine and Coarse Aggregate 
Contents 


With the completion of procedure given in 5.4, all the 
ingredients have been estimated except the coarse and 
fine aggregate content. These quantities are determined 
by finding out the absolute volume of cementitious 
materials, water and the chemical admixture; by 
dividing their mass by their respective specific gravity, 
multiplying by 1/1 000 and subtracting the result of 
their summation from unit volume (excluding the 
volume of entrapped air). The values so obtained are 
divided into coarse and fine aggregate fractions by 
volume in accordance with coarse aggregate proportion 
already determined in 5.5. The coarse and fine 
aggregate contents are then determined by multiplying 
their volume with their respective specific gravities and 
multiplying by 1 000. 


5.8 Trial Mixes 


The calculated mix proportions shall be checked by 
means of trial batches. 


Workability of the trial mix No. 1 shall be measured. 
The mix shall be carefully observed for freedom from 
segregation and bleeding and its finishing properties. 
If the measured workability of Trial Mix No. 1 is 
different from the stipulated value, the water and/or 
admixture content shall be adjusted suitably. With this 
adjustment, the mix proportion shall be recalculated 
keeping the free water-cement/water-cementitious 
materials ratio at the pre-selected value, which will 
comprise Trial Mix No. 2. In additional two more Trial 
Mixes No. 3 and 4 shall be made with the water content 
same as Trial mix No. 2 and varying the free water- 
cement/cementitious materials ratio by about + 10 


percent of the pre-selected value, while satisfying the 
workability requirements as well. 


Mix No. 2 to 4 normally provides sufficient 
information, including the relationship between 
compressive strength and water-cement ratio, from 
which the mix proportions can be finalized, such that 
the strength and durability requirements are also 
satisfied. Additional field trials are recommended 
particularly for workability requirements. The concrete 
for field trials shall be produced by methods of actual 
concrete production. 


5.8.1 Reporting 
The mix design report shall include the following: 


a) Period of testing (starting and ending date); 

b) Details of work/type of structure, if provided; 

c) All the data provided for the mix design as 
per 4.1, and deviations from IS 456, if any; 

d) Relevant test data of different materials for 
the purpose of mix proportioning; 

e) Details of materials such as brand of cement, 
manufacturing date (week/year) percentage of 
pozzolana/slag, etc, as per manufacturers 
certificate; source of coarse and fine 
aggregates (if provided), etc; 

f) Details of the trials conducted; and 

g) Recommended mix proportions. 


5.9 Illustrative Examples 


An illustrative example of concrete mix proportioning 
is given in Annex A. Another illustrative example of 
mix proportioning of concrete using fly ash and using 
slag is given in Annex B and Annex C, respectively. 
These examples are merely illustrative to explain the 
procedure and the actual mix proportioning shall be 
based on trial batches with the given materials. 


SECTION 3 HIGH STRENGTH GRADES OF 
CONCRETE 


6 HIGH STRENGTH CONCRETE (GRADE M 65 
AND ABOVE) 


High strength concrete is the concrete that has 
characteristic compressive strength of 65 N/mm? or 
more. This section provides the guidance for selecting 
mix proportion for M65 or above. 


Usually, for high strength concrete mixes specially 
selected cementitious materials and chemical 
admixtures, that is, super plasticizers are used, and 
achieving a low water—cementitious materials ratio (w/ 
cm) is considered essential. 


The procedure for proportioning high strength concrete 
is similar to that required for ordinary/standard strength 
concrete. The procedure consists of series of steps that, 
when completed, provide a mixture meeting 
workability, strength and durability requirements based 
on the combined properties of the individually selected 
and proportioned ingredients. 


6.1 Materials 


Materials shall be selected, proportioned and controlled 
carefully to achieve effective production of high 
strength concrete. To achieve high strength concrete 
optimum proportions shall be selected, considering the 
cement and other cementitious materials properties, 
aggregate quality, aggregate gradation, paste volume, 
admixture type and dosage and mixing. 


6.1.1 Cementitious Materials 


Proper selection of type of cement is very important 
step for the production of high strength concrete. Fly 
ash, silica fume, ground granulated blast furnace slag 
(GGBS) or metakaoline are widely used as cementitious 
and pozzolanic ingredients in high strength concrete. 


6.1.2 Coarse Aggregate 


In the proportioning of high strength concrete, the 
aggregates require special consideration and they 
greatly influence the strength and other properties of 
concrete. Therefore, the coarse aggregate shall be 
strong, sufficiently sound, free of fissures or weak 
planes, clean and free of surface coating and shall meet 
the requirement of IS 383. Generally crushed stone 
aggregates with impact/crushing value not greater than 
22 percent and combined flakiness and elongation index 
not more than 30 percent have been found suitable for 
high strength concrete. 


6.1.3 Fine Aggregate 


The fine aggregate shall meet the requirements of 


IS 10262 : 2019 


IS 383. Generally, for high strength, a fine aggregate 
of coarser size is preferred (Zone I or Zone II), due to 
availability of high fines content from the cementitious 
materials. 


6.1.4 Chemical Admixtures 


High strength concrete mixes usually have a low water- 
cementitious materials ratio (w/cm). These low w/cm 
ratios are generally only attainable with high-range 
water-reducing admixtures (HRWRA). PCE type (Poly 
carboxylate ether based) super plasticisers which reduce 
water content by 30 percent or above at appropriate 
dosages, maybe used. 


6.2 Concrete Mix Proportioning 

6.2.1 Target Strength for Mix Proportioning 
See 4.2. 

6.2.2 Selection of Maximum Size of Aggregate 


Based on the strength requirement, the maximum size 
of aggregates is generally restricted to 20 mm; however, 
for grades M80 and above, aggregates of maximum 
size 10.0 mm to 12.5 mm may be preferable. 


6.2.3 Estimation of Air Content 


Approximate amount of entrapped air to be expected in 
normal (non-air-entrained) concrete is given in Table 6. 


Table 6 Approximate Air Content 
(Clause 6.2.3) 


SI Nominal Maximum Size Entrapped Air, as 
No. of Aggregate Percentage 
mm of Volume of Concrete 
qd) qd) qd) 
i) 10.0 1.0 
ii) 12.5 0.8 
iii) 20.0 0.5 


6.2.3.1 The actual values of air content can also be 
adopted during mix proportioning if, the site data (at 
least 5 results) for similar mix is available. 


6.2.4 Selection of Water Content and Admixture Content 


The quantity of water required to produce a given 
workability is influenced by many factors, including 
the maximum size, particle shape and grading of the 
aggregate. The demand of water content is also 
influenced by the quantity of cement, pozzolanic 
material and the type of chemical admixture used. PCE 
type (Polycarboxylate ether based) super plasticisers 
which reduce water content by 30 percent or above at 
appropriate dosages, maybe used. 


However, trial batching is the most effective way to 
determine the best proportions for the ingredients to 
be used. Table 7 gives estimates of water content for 


IS 10262 : 2019 


high strength concrete without chemical admixtures. 
The given water content is for 50 mm slump. For the 
desired workability (other than 50 mm slump), the 
required water content may be increased or decreased 
by about 3 percent for each increase or decrease 
of 25 mm slump or may be established by trial. These 
quantities of mixing water are maximum for well- 
shaped, clean, angular and well graded coarse 
aggregate. Since the particle shape and surface texture 
of fine aggregate can significantly influence the mixing 
water demand, the water requirement may be different 
from the values given in Table 7 and shall be established 
by trials. The water so calculated shall be reduced by 
use of high range water reducing admixtures 
conforming to IS 9103. 


The requirement of water content and/or chemical 
admixture content may increase with the addition of 
high dosages of mineral admixture. The guidelines on 
selecting appropriate water reducing admixture and its 
dosages are given in Annex G. 
NOTE — In case of water-cement ratios on the upper limits of 
durability clause it is required that the water content contributed 
by the admixtures shall also be considered in the calculations 
and the final water-cement ratio shall be fixed accordingly. 
6.2.5 Selection of Water-Cementitious Materials Ratio 
(w/cm) 


The recommended values for w/cm for high strength 
concrete made with silica fume and HRWRA as a 
function of maximum size aggregates to achieve 
different target compressive strength at 28 days, is given 
in Table 8. In case, other cementitious materials such 
as fly ash, ggbs are also used, the cementitious material 
content shall be suitably increased and the water- 
cementitious material ratio shall be recalculated based 
on the total cementitious material used. 


6.2.6 Calculation of Cementitious Material Content 


The cement and supplementary cementitious material 
content per unit volume of concrete may be calculated 
from the quantity of water (see 6.2.4) and the free water- 


cementitious materials ratio (see 6.2.5) per unit volume 
of concrete. However, this must satisfy the specification 
of maximum or minimum limit on the amount of 
cementitious material as per IS 456. 


If cement content (not including any mineral 
admixtures) more than the maximum cement content 
as given in IS 456 is to be used, it shall be ensured that 
the special consideration has been given in design to 
the increased risk of cracking due to drying shrinkage, 
or to early thermal cracking and to the increased risk 
of damage due to alkali silica reaction. 


The recommended dosages of different mineral 
admixtures materials for high strength mixes are given 
in Table 9. 


6.2.7 Estimation of Coarse Aggregate Proportion 


The optimum content of the coarse aggregate depends 
on its strength and maximum nominal size of coarse 
aggregate. For proportioning of ordinary and standard 
grades of concrete, the optimum volume of coarse 
aggregate is given as a function of the maximum size 
of coarse aggregate and grading zone of fine aggregate. 
However, high strength grades of concrete are not 
dependent on the fine aggregate to provide fines for 
lubrication and consolidation of the fresh concrete as 
the mixes have high content of cementitious material. 
The recommended coarse aggregate volume per unit 
volume of total aggregate for different zones of fine 
aggregate is given in Table 10. 


For more workable concrete mixes which is sometimes 
required when placement is by pump or when the 
concrete is required to be worked around congested 
reinforcing steel, it may be desirable to reduce the 
estimated coarse aggregate content determined using 
Tablel0 up to 5 percent. However, caution shall be 
exercised to assure that the resulting slump, water- 
cement ratio and strength properties of concrete are 
consistent with the recommendations of IS 456 and 
meet project specification requirements as applicable 


Table 7 Water Content per Cubic Metre of Concrete for Nominal Maximum Sizes of Aggregate 


(Clause 6.2.4) 

SI Nominal Maximum Size of Aggregate Maximum Water Content (see Note 1) 
No. mm kg/m? 
(E9) (2) (3) 

i) 10.0 200 

ii) 12.5 195 
iii) 20.0 186 

NOTES 


1 Water content corresponding to saturated surface dry aggregate. 


2 These quantities of mixing water are for use in computing cement/cementitious material content for trial batches. 

3 On account of long distances over which concrete needs to be carried from batching plant/RMC plant, the concrete mix is generally 
designed for a higher slump initially than the slump required at the time of placing. The initial slump value shall depend on the distance of 
transport and loss of slump with time. Accordingly the adjustment for water content/admixture dosage shall be made for the higher initial 


slump value. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Table 8 Recommended w/cm for High Strength Concrete made with HRWRA 
(Clause 6.2.5) 


SI Target Compressive Strength at 28 Days 
No. N/mm? 
E9 (2) 
i) 70 
ii) 75 
iii) 80 
iv) 85 
v) 90 
vi) 100 


Water—Cementitious Materials Ratio 


Nominal Maximum Size of Aggregate 


10.0 mm 12.5 mm 20.0 mm 
(3) (4) (5) 
0.36 0.35 0.33 
0.34 0.33 0.31 
0.32 0.31 0.29 
0.30 0.29 0.27 
0.28 0.27 0.26 
0.26 0.25 0.24 


NOTE — The recommended w/cm are for 28 days cement strength 53 MPa and above; for cement of other strength values, suitable 


adjustments may be made by reducing the w/cm. 


6.2.8 Estimation of Fine and Coarse Aggregate Contents 


With the completion of procedure given in 6.2.4, 6.2.5 
and 6.2.6, all the ingredients would have been estimated 
except the coarse and fine aggregate content. These 
quantities are determined by finding out the absolute 
volume of cementitious material, water and the 
chemical admixture; by dividing their mass by their 
respective specific gravity, multiplying by 1/1 000 and 
subtracting the result of their summation from unit 
volume excluding the volume of entrapped air. The 
values so obtained are divided into coarse and fine 
aggregate fractions by volume in accordance with 
coarse aggregate proportion already determined 
in 6.2.7. The coarse and fine aggregate contents are 
then determined by multiplying their volume with their 
respective specific gravities and multiplying by 1 000. 


6.2.9 Trial Mixes 


The calculated mix proportions shall be checked by 
means of trial batches. 


Workability of the trial mix No. 1 shall be measured. 
The mix shall be carefully observed for freedom from 
segregation and bleeding and its finishing properties. 
If the measured workability of Trial Mix No. 1 is 
different from the stipulated value, the water and/or 
admixture content shall be adjusted suitably. With this 
adjustment, the mix proportion shall be recalculated 
keeping the free water-cement ratio at the pre-selected 
value, which will comprise Trial Mix No. 2. In 


additional two more Trial Mixes No. 3 and 4 shall be 
made with the water content same as Trial mix No. 2 
and varying the free water-cement/cementitious 
materials ratio by +10 percent of the preselected value, 
while satisfying the workability requirements as well. 


Mix No. 2 to 4 normally provides sufficient information, 
including the relationship between compressive strength 
and water-cementitious materials ratio, from which the 
mix proportions can be finalized. Additional field trials 
are recommended particularly for workability 
requirements. The concrete for field trials shall be 
produced by methods of actual concrete production. 


6.2.10 Reporting 
The mix design report shall include the following: 


a) Period of testing (starting and ending date); 

b) Details of work/type of structure, if provided; 

c) All the data provided for the mix design as 
per 4.1, and deviations from IS 456, if any; 

d) Relevant test data of different materials for 
the purpose of mix proportioning; 

e) Details of materials such as brand of cement, 
manufacturing date (week/year) percentage of 
pozzolana/slag, etc, as per manufacturers 
certificate; source of coarse and fine 
aggregates (if provided), etc; 

f) Details of the trials conducted; and 

g) Recommended mix proportions. 


Table 9 Recommended Dosages of Mineral Admixtures Materials for High Strength Mixes 
(Clause 6.2.6) 


Sl Mineral Admixtures 
No. 
(1) (2) 

i) Flyash 


ii) Ground granulated blast furnace slag 
iii) Metakaoline 
iv) Silica fume 


Recommended Dosages, Percentage by Mass of 
Total Cementitious Materials 


G) 
15-30 
25 - 50 
5-15 
5-10 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Table 10 Volume of Coarse Aggregate per Unit Volume of Total Aggregate for Different Zones of Fine 
Aggregate for Water-Cement/Water-Cementitious Material Ratio of 0.30 
(Clause 6.2.7) 


SI Nominal Maximum Size of 
No. Aggregate 
mm 
Zone II 

a) (2) (3) 

i) 10.0 0.56 
ii) 12.5 0.58 
iii) 20.0 0.68 

NOTES 


1 Volumes are based on aggregates in saturated surface dry condition. 
2 These volumes are for crushed (angular) coarse aggregate and suitable adjustments may be made for other shape of aggregate. 

3 Suitable adjustments may also be made for fine aggregate from other than natural sources, normally, crushed sand or mixed sand having 
higher fine content (passing 150 micron sieve), which may need lesser fine aggregate content. In that case, the coarse aggregate volume 


may be suitably increased. 


6.3 Illustrative Examples 


An illustrative example of concrete mix proportioning 
for high strength concrete is given in Annex D. These 
examples are merely illustrative to explain the 
procedure and the actual mix proportioning shall be 
based on trial batches with the given materials. 


SECTION 4 SELF COMPACTING CONCRETE 


7 GENERAL 


Self compacting concrete (SCC) is highly flowable, 
non-segregating concrete that fills uniformly and 
completely every corner of formwork by its own weight 
and encapsulate reinforcement without any vibration, 
whilst maintaining homogeneity. 


7.1 Application Area 


Self compacting concrete (SCC) may be used in precast 
concrete applications or for concrete placed on site. SCC 
is used to cast sections with highly congested 
reinforcement and in areas that present restricted access 
to placement and consolidation, including the construction 
of tunnel lining sections and the casting of hybrid concrete- 
filled steel tubular columns. It may be manufactured in a 
site batching plant or in a ready-mixed concrete plant and 
delivered to site by truck mixer. It may be placed either 
by pumping or pouring into horizontal or vertical forms. 


7.2 Features of Fresh Self Compacting Concrete 
A concrete mix can only be classified as self- 
compacting concrete, if the requirements for all below 
mentioned characteristics are fulfilled: 

a) Filling ability (Flowability), 

b) Passing ability, 

c) Segregation resistance, and 

d) Viscosity 
The above tests shall be carried out as per 
IS 1199 (Part 6). 


10 


Volume of Coarse Aggregate per Unit Volume of Total Aggregate for Different Zones 


of Fine Aggregate 
Zone II Zone I 
(4) (5) 
0.54 0.52 
0.56 0.54 
0.66 0.64 


7.2.1 Filling Ability (flowability) 


This is the ability of fresh concrete to flow into and fill 
all spaces within the formwork, under its own weight. 
Slump-flow test is performed to test the flowability. 
Slump-flow value describes the flowablity of a fresh 
mix in unconfined condition. Visual observation during 
the test can provide additional information on the 
segregation resistance and uniformity. 


The following are typical slump-flow classes for a range 
of applications: 


a) SF1 (slump flow 550 mm - 650 mm). This 
class of SCC is appropriate for: 

1) Unreinforced or lightly reinforced concrete 
structures that are cast from the top with 
free displacement from the delivery point 
(for example, housing slabs). 

2) Casting by a pump injection system (for 
example, tunnel linings). 

3) Sections that are small enough to prevent 
long horizontal flow (for example, piles 


and some deep foundations). 


b) SF2 (slump flow 660 mm - 750 mm) is suitable 
for normal applications (for example, walls, 
columns). 

c) SF3 (slump flow 760 mm— 850 mm) is used 


for vertical applications in heavily reinforced 
structures, structures with complex shapes, or 
for filling under formwork. SF3 will often give 
better surface finish than SF2 for normal 
vertical applications but segregation resistance 
is more difficult to control. 


7.2.2 Passing Ability (Free from Blocking at 
Reinforcement) 


Passing ability describes the capacity of the fresh mix to 
flow through confined spaces and narrow openings such as 
areas of congested reinforcement without segregation. If 


there is little or no reinforcement, there may be no need to 
specify passing ability as a requirement. L-box test is 
performed to check the passing ability. The minimum ratio 
of the depth of the concrete in the horizontal section relative 
to the depth of concrete vertical section is considered to 
be 0.8. If the SCC flows as freely as water, it will be 
completely horizontal, and the ratio will be equal to 1.0. 


7.2.3 Segregation Resistance (Stability) 


This is the ability of fresh concrete to remain 
homogeneous in composition while in its fresh state. 
Segregation resistance (sieve) test is performed to check 
this property of fresh concrete. 


After sampling, the fresh concrete is allowed to stand 
for 15 min and any separation of bleed water is noted. 
The top part of the sample is then poured into a sieve 
with 4.75 mm square apertures. After 2 min, the weight 
of material which has passed through the sieve is 
recorded. The segregation ratio (SR) is then calculated 
as the proportion of the sample passing through the sieve. 


There are two classes of segregation resistance, namely 
SR1 and SR2. SR1 is generally applicable for thin slabs 
and for vertical applications with a flow distance of less 
than 5 m and a confinement gap greater than 80 mm. 
SR2 is preferred in vertical applications if the flow 
distance is more than 5 m with a confinement gap greater 
than 80 mm in order to take care of segregation during 
flow. For SR1 class segregation resistance shall be 15 to 
20 percent and for SR2 it shall be less than 15 percent. 
SR2 may also be used for tall vertical applications with 
a confinement gap of less than 80 mm if the flow distance 
is less than 5 m, but if the flow is more than 5 m, a target 
SR value of less than 10 percent is recommended. 
Segregation resistance becomes an important parameter 
with higher slump-flow classes and/or the lower viscosity 
classes, or if placing conditions promotes segregation. 
If none of these apply, it is usually not necessary to 
specify a segregation resistance class. 


7.2.4 Viscosity 


Viscosity can be assessed by the V-funnel flow time as 
per IS 1199 (Part 6). Concrete with a low viscosity will 
have a very quick initial flow and then stop. Concrete 
with a high viscosity may continue to creep forward 
over an extended time. 


A V-shaped funnel is filled with fresh concrete and the 
time taken for the concrete to flow out of the funnel is 
measured and recorded as the V-funnel flow time. The 
viscosity is divided into two classes, that is, V1 and 
V2. V1 has good filling ability even with congested 
reinforcement. It is capable of self-leveling and 
generally has the best surface finish. V2 class viscosity 
is more likely to exhibit thixotropic effects, which may 
be helpful in limiting the formwork pressure or 
improving segregation resistance. But it may cause 


11 


IS 10262 : 2019 


negative effects on surface finish and sensitivity to 
stoppages or delays between successive lifts. 


For V1 class, the time taken to pass the concrete from 
V-funnel shall be < 8 s and for V2 class the time taken 
to pass the concrete from V-funnel shall be between 8 s 
and 25 s. 


8 MIX PROPORTIONING 


8.1 Mix Proportioning Principles 


a) Lower coarse aggregate content, 

b) Increased paste content, 

c) Low water/powder ratio (see Note), 

d) Increased superplasticiser, and 

e) Sometimes a viscosity modifying admixture. 


NOTE — Powder refers to materials of particle size smaller 
than 0.125 mm. It includes this size fraction from cement, 
mineral admixtures and aggregate. Water/powder ratio shall be 
0.85 to 1.10 by volume. 


8.2 Mix Proportioning Approach 


Laboratory trials shall be used to verify properties of 
the initial mix composition with respect to the specified 
characteristics and classes. If necessary, adjustments 
to the mix composition shall then be made. Once all 
requirements are fulfilled, the mix shall be tested at 
full scale in the concrete plant and if necessary, at site 
to verify both the fresh and hardened properties. 


The mix design is generally based on the approach 
outlined below: 


a) Determine the target average compressive 
strength. 

b) Select the air content based on the specified 
nominal maximum size of aggregate and 
concrete grade. 

c) Select water-cement/cementitious materials 
ratio. 

d) Select the proportions for initial mix. 

e) Select water content and cement/fly ash(or other 
supplementary cementitious material) content. 

f) Select admixture content. 

g) Select powder content and fine aggregate 
content. 

h) Select coarse aggregate content. 

j) Calculate volume of powder content and 
determine water powder ratio by volume, and 
make adjustments, if required. 

k) Work out the mix proportions for trial 1. 

m) Produce the fresh SCC in the laboratory mixer, 
perform the required tests as per 7.2, and make 
adjustments. 

n) Test the properties of the SCC in the hardened 
state. 

p) Produce trial mixes in the plant mixer. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


8.3 Typical Ranges of Mix Constituents 


a) Sufficient amount of fines (< 0.125 mm) 
preferably in the range of 400 kg/m? to 
600 kg/m’, inclusive of suitable quantities of 
fine aggregate and mineral admixtures like fly 
ash in suitable proportions, may be used for 
flowability while ensuring compliance with 
engineering properties particularly shrinkage. 
Fine aggregate content, typically, 48 to 60 
percent by mass of the total aggregate, 
balances the volume of the other constituents. 
Water content between 150 to 210 kg/m’. 
Use of high range water reducing admixture 
like polycarboxylate ether based high range 
water reducing admixture (water reduction 
> 30 percent) and sometimes also using a 
viscosity modifying admixture (VMA) in 
appropriate dosages. 


b) 
c) 


In the event that satisfactory performance is not 
obtained, consideration shall be given to a fundamental 
redesign of the mix. Depending on the apparent 
problem, the following courses of action might be 
appropriate: 


1) Adjust the water/powder ratio and test the flow 
and other properties of the paste. 
2) 


3) 


Try different types of additions (if available). 
Adjust the proportions of the fine aggregate 
and the dosage of superplasticiser. 

4) Consider using a viscosity modifying agent 
to reduce sensitivity of the mix. 

5) Adjust the proportion or grading of the coarse 
aggregate. 

8.3.1 Reporting 


The mix design report shall include the following: 


a) Period of testing (starting and ending date); 

b) Details of work/type of structure, if provided; 

c) All the data provided for the mix design as 
per 4.1, and deviations from IS 456, if any; 

d) Relevant test data of different materials for 
the purpose of mix proportioning; 

e) Details of materials such as brand of cement, 
manufacturing date (week/year) percentage of 
pozzolana/slag, etc, as per manufacturers 
certificate; source of coarse and fine 
aggregates (if provided), etc; 

f) Details of the trials conducted; and 

g) Recommended mix proportions. 


8.4 Illustrative Example 


An illustrative example of concrete mix proportioning 


12 


for self compacting concrete is given in Annex E. This 
example is merely illustrative and explains the 
procedure to be adopted for self compacting concrete. 
The actual mix proportioning shall be based on various 
trials with the given materials 


SECTION 5 MASS CONCRETE 
9 GENERAL 


Mass concreting is used for structures like dams and 
other massive structures. For such large structures, 
measures need to be taken to cope with the generation 
of heat from hydration of cement and attendant volume 
change to minimize cracking. 


The primary objective of proportioning for mass 
concrete is to establish economical mixes of proper 
strength, durability and permeability with the best 
combination of available materials that will provide 
adequate workability, easy placeability and least 
temperature rise after placement. 


In mass concrete structures, generally lower grade of 
concrete (say M 15 or M 20) and higher sizes of coarse 
aggregates [maximum nominal size of aggregate (msa) 
40 mm, msa 80 mm and msa 150 mm] are used. In 
certain cases, like thick raft foundation, retaining wall, 
etc, mass concreting may be of higher grade of concrete. 


When a mineral admixture is included in the concrete 
as a part of the cementitious material, the mix 
proportioning remains the same. Attention shall be 
given to the following: 


a) The water requirement may change, 
b) Early age strength may become critical, and 
c) For maximum economy, the age at which 


design strength is attained should be greater. 
9.1 Data for Mix Proportioning 


In addition to the data requirements mentioned in 4.1, 
the following additional data are required for mix 
proportioning for mass concrete: 


a) Expected maximum placing temperature. 

b) Air content range in case of air entrained 
concrete. 

c) Test ages for strength. 


9.2 Target Strength for Mix Proportioning 


The target strength calculated as per 4.2 shall be 
increased by 20 percent for 80 mm msa, and by 25 
percent for 150 mm msa. This is to account for higher 
strength achieved after wet sieving the concrete through 
40 mm sieve for making 150 mm cubes for strength 
testing. This increase in target strength due to wet 
sieving effect is only for cube test results and not to be 
considered for selection of water cement ratio. 


In case, any other relationship is established at site, the 
same may also be adopted in place of 20 and 25 percent. 


9.3 Estimation of Air Content 


Approximate amount of entrapped air to be expected 
in normal (non-air-entrained) concrete is given in 
Table 11. 


Table 11 Approximate Air Content 
(Clause 9.3) 


SI Nominal Maximum Entrapped Air, as Percentage 
No. Size of Aggregate of Volume of Concrete 
mm 
qd) (2) 6) 
i) 40 0.8 
ii) 80 0.3 
iii) 150 0.2 


9.3.1 The actual values of air content can also be 
adopted during mix proportioning if, the site data (at 
least 5 results) for similar mix is available. 


9.4 Selection of Water Content and Admixture 
Content 


The water content of concrete is influenced by a number 
of factors, such as aggregate size, aggregate shape, 
aggregate texture, workability, water-cement ratio, 
cement and other supplementary cementitious materials 
(type and content), chemical admixture and 
environmental conditions. An increase in aggregates 
size, a reduction in water-cement ratio and slumps, and 
use ofrounded aggregate and water reducing admixture 
will reduce the water demand. On the other hand 
increased temperature, cement content, slump, water- 
cement ratio, aggregate angularity and a decrease in 
the proportion of the coarse aggregate to fine aggregate 
will increase water demand. 


The quantity of mixing water per unit volume of 
concrete may be determined from Table 12. The water 
content in Table 12 is for angular coarse aggregate and 
for 50 mm slump. The water estimate in Table 12 can 
be reduced by approximately 20 kg for rounded gravel 
of 40 mm msa, 15 kg for rounded gravel of 80 mm msa 
and 10 kg for 150 mm msa, to produce same 
workability. For the desired workability (other than 50 
mm slump), the required water content may be 
increased or decreased by about 3 percent for each 
increase or decrease of 25 mm slump or may be 
established by trial. This illustrates the need for trial 
batch testing of the given materials as each aggregate 
source is different and can influence concrete 
properties. The water so calculated can be reduced by 
use of chemical admixture conforming to IS 9103. 
Water reducing admixture or plasticizing admixtures 
have been found effective in mass concrete mixes, and 
usually decrease water content by 5 to 10 percent at 
appropriate dosages. 


13 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Air entrainment in mass concrete (for 150 mm msa 
and 80 mm msa) is considered useful for various 
reasons. Air entrainment in mass concrete permits a 
marked improvement in durability (particularly under 
freezing and thawing conditions), improvement in 
plasticity and workability and reduction in segregation 
and bleeding. The effect of air entrainment on the 
strength of mass concrete shall be considered in the 
design of mass concrete itself; that is, the reduction 
in strength, shall be compensated in the mix trials. 
Generally, 3 to 4 percent air content is recommended 
for 150 mm msa and 3.5 to 4.5 percent air content is 
recommended for 80 mm msa. The air content when 
determined on mixtures passing through 40 mm sieve 
shall be higher by 1.5 to 2 percent than the values 
indicated above. 


Table 12 Water Content per Cubic Metre of 
Concrete for Nominal Maximum Size of Aggregate 


(Clause 9.4) 
SI Nominal Maximum Size of Water Content” 
No. Aggregate kg 
mm 

0) (2) (3) 

i) 40 165 

ii) 80 145 

iii) 150 125 


DWater content corresponding to saturated surface dry aggregate. 


NOTES 

1 The recommended values of water content for different msa of 
aggregates are for non-air-entrained concrete. The values will be 
decreased by 8 kg in case of air-entrained concrete. 

2 These quantities of mixing water are for use in computing 
cement/cementitious materials content for trial batches. 

3 On account of long distances over which concrete needs to be 
carried from batching plant/RMC plant, the concrete mix is 
generally designed for a higher slump initially than the slump 
required at the time of placing. The initial slump value shall 
depend on the distance of transport and loss of slump with time. 


9.5 Selection of Water Cement Ratio. 


The water cement ratio shall be selected as per Fig. 1 
for the target strength calculated as per 9.2 without 
considering the increase of strength by 20-25 percent 
due to wet sieving effect. 


9.6 Calculation of Cement/Cementitious Materials 
Content 


9.6.1 The cement and supplementary cementitious 
materials content per unit volume of concrete may be 
calculated from the free water-cement ratio (see 9.5) 
and the quantity of water per unit volume of concrete. 


In certain situations, while using part replacement of 
cement by fly ash, ground granulated blast furnace slag 
(GGBS), silica fume, etc, increase in cementitious 
materials content may be warranted, particularly if fly 
ash is 20 percent or more and GGBS is 30 percent or 
more. The decision on increase in cementitious 


IS 10262 : 2019 


materials content and its percentage may be based on 
experience and trials; or the cementitious materials 
content so calculated may be increased by 10 percent 
for preliminary trial. The water cementitious materials 
ratio may be recalculated based on the increased 
cementitious materials content. 


The cementitious materials content so calculated shall 
be checked against the minimum content for the 
requirements of durability as per IS 456 or as specified 
and greater of the two values adopted. The maximum 
cement content shall be in accordance with IS 456 or 
as specified. 


9.6.2 The percentage of fly ash/GGBS to be used has 
to be decided based on the project requirement and the 
quality of these materials. 


9.7 Estimation of Coarse Aggregate Proportion 


Aggregates of essentially the same nominal maximum 
size, type and grading will produce concrete of 
satisfactory workability when a given volume of coarse 
aggregate per unit volume of total aggregate is used. 
Approximate values for this aggregate volume are given 
in Table 13 for a water-cement/water-cementitious 
materials ratio of 0.5, which may be suitably adjusted 
for other water-cement ratios, the proportion of volume 
of coarse aggregates to that of total aggregates is 
increased at the rate of 0.01 for every decrease in water- 
cement ratio by 0.05 and decreased at the rate of 0.01 
for every increase in water-cement ratio by 0.05. 


It can be seen that for equal workability, the volume of 
coarse aggregate in a unit volume of concrete is 
dependent only on its nominal maximum size and 
grading zone of fine aggregate. Differences in the 
amount of mortar required for workability with different 
aggregates, due to differences in particle shape and 
grading, can be adjusted by changing coarse to fine 
aggregate ratio. Generally higher fine aggregate content 


is required for crushed angular coarse aggregates due 
to increased surface area. 


9.8 Estimation of Fine and Coarse Aggregate 
Contents 


With the completion of procedure given in 9.6, all the 
ingredients have been estimated except the coarse and 
fine aggregate content. These quantities are determined 
by finding out the absolute volume of cementitious 
materials, water and the chemical admixture; by 
dividing their mass by their respective specific gravity, 
multiplying by 1/1 000 and subtracting the result of 
their summation from unit volume. The values so 
obtained are divided into coarse and fine aggregate 
fractions by volume in accordance with coarse 
aggregate proportion already determined in 9.7. The 
coarse and fine aggregate contents are then determined 
by multiplying their volume with their respective 
specific gravities and multiplying by 1 000. 


9.9 Combination of Different Coarse Aggregate 
Fractions 


The coarse aggregate used shall conform to IS 383. 
Coarse aggregates of different sizes, as given in Table 7 
and Table 8 of IS 383 may be combined in suitable 
proportions so as to result in an overall grading 
conforming to Table 7 of IS 383 for 40 mm nominal 
maximum size of aggregate, and Table 14 for 80 mm 
and 150 mm nominal maximum size of aggregates. 


9.10 Placement and Workability 


Experience has demonstrated that large aggregate 
mixtures, 150 mm msa and 80 mm msa require a 
minimum mortar content for suitable placing and 
workability properties. Table 15 gives the total absolute 
volume of mortar (Cement, pozzolana, water, 
admixture, air, and fine aggregate), which is suggested 
for use in mixtures containing large aggregate sizes. 


Table 13 Volume of Coarse Aggregate per Unit Volume of Total Aggregate for Different Zones of Fine 
Aggregate for Water-Cement/Water-Cementitious Materials Ratio of 0.50 
(Clause 9.7) 


SI Nominal Maximum Size Volume of Coarse Aggregate per Unit Volume of Total Aggregate for Different Zones of 
No. of Aggregate Fine Aggregate 
mm I E A, 
Zone IV Zone II Zone II Zone I 
9 (2) G) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 40 0.73 0.72 0.71 0.69 
ii) 80 0.75 0.74 0.73 0.72 
iii) 150 0.80 0.79 0.78 0.77 
NOTES 


1 Volumes are based on aggregates in saturated surface dry condition. 


2 These volumes are for crushed (angular) aggregate and suitable adjustments may be made for other shape of aggregate. 
3 Suitable adjustments may also be made for fine aggregate from other than natural sources, normally, crushed sand or mixed sand may 
need lesser fine aggregate content. In that case, the coarse aggregate volume should be suitably increased. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Table 14 Grading Requirements for Coarse Aggregate for Mass Concrete 
(Clause 9.9) 


SI IS Sieve Designation 
No. mm 
a) (2) 
i) 150 
ii) 80 
iii) 40 
iv) 20 
v) 10 
vi) 4.75 


Percentage Passing for Graded Aggregate of Nominal Size 


150 mm 80 mm 
(3) (4) 
100 100 

55 - 65 100 

29 - 40 53 -62 

14 -22 26 - 34 

6 -10 10 - 15 
0 -5 0 -5 


NOTE — In mass concreting, rounded aggregate is also used, and the fine aggregate requirement is on the lower side as compared to 
crushed aggregate. Therefore, it is recommended that, for rounded aggregates, the percentage passing shall be towards the higher limit of 
the range specified for various sieve sizes and for crushed aggregates, the percentage passing, shall be towards the lower limit of the range 
specified for various sieve sizes. This recommendation is valid for grading requirements for 150 mm msa, and 80 mm msa, as mentioned 
above, and for 40 mm msa as per Table 7 of IS 383. 


These values shall be compared with those determined 
during the mix proportioning procedure and appropriate 
adjustments made by either increasing or decreasing 
the fine aggregate, and cementitous material contents, 
for improved placeability and workability, 


Table 15 Approximate Mortar Content for 
Various Nominal Maximum Sizes of Aggregates 
(Clause 9.9) 


SI Nominal Maximum Shape of Volume of 
No. Size of Aggregate Aggregate Mortar Content 
mm m? 
qd) (2) G) (4) 
i) 150 Crushed 0.39 + 0.01 
ii) 150 Rounded 0.37+0.01 
iii) 80 Crushed 0.44 + 0.01 
iv) 80 Rounded 0.43 + 0.01 


9.11 Trial Mixes 


The calculated mix proportions shall be checked by 
means of trial batches. 


Workability of the trial mix No. 1 shall be measured. 
The mix shall be carefully observed for freedom from 
segregation and bleeding and its finishing properties. 
If the measured workability of Trial Mix No. 1 is 
different from the stipulated value, the water and/or 
admixture content shall be adjusted suitably. With this 
adjustment, the mix proportion shall be recalculated 
keeping the free water-cement ratio at the pre-selected 
value, which will comprise Trial Mix No. 2. In addition, 
two more Trial Mixes No. 3 and 4 shall be made with 
the water content same as Trial mix No. 2 and varying 
the free water-cement/cementitious materials ratio by 
about +10 percent of the preselected value, while 
satisfying the workability requirements as well. 


15 


Mix No. 2 to 4 normally provides sufficient 
information, including the relationship between 
compressive strength and water-cement ratio, from 
which the mix proportions can be finalized, such that 
the strength and durability requirements are also 
satisfied. Additional field trials are recommended 
particularly for workability requirements. The concrete 
for field trials shall be produced by methods of actual 
concrete production. 


9.12 Reporting 


The mix design report shall include the following: 


a) Period of testing (starting and ending date); 

b) Details of work/type of structure, if provided; 

c) All the data provided for the mix design as 
per 4.1 and 9.1, and deviations from IS 456, 
if any; 

d) Relevant test data of different materials for 
the purpose of mix proportioning; 

e) Details of materials such as brand of cement, 
manufacturing date (week/year) percentage of 
pozzolana/slag, etc, as per manufacturers 
certificate; source of coarse and fine 
aggregates (if provided), etc; 

f) Details of the trials conducted; and 

g) Recommended mix proportions. 


9.13 Illustrative Example 


An illustrative example of concrete mix proportioning 
for mass concreting is given in Annex F. This example 
is merely illustrative and explains the procedure to be 
adopted for mass concreting. The actual mix 
proportioning shall be based on various trials with the 
given materials. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.9) 
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE ON CONCRETE MIX PROPORTIONING 


A-0 An example illustrating the mix proportioning for a concrete of M40 grade is given in A-1 to A-12. 


A-1 STIPULATIONS FOR PROPORTIONING 


a) Grade designation 
b) Type of cement 
c) Maximum nominal size of aggregate 
d) Minimum cement content and 
maximum water-cement ratio to be adopted and/or 
Exposure conditions as per Table 3 
and Table 5 of IS 456 
e) Workability 
f) Method of concrete placing 
g) Degree of site control 
h) Type of aggregate 
j) Maximum cement content not including fly ash 
k) Chemical admixture type 


A-2 TEST DATA FOR MATERIALS 


a) Cement used 
b) Specific gravity of cement 
c) Chemical admixture 
d) Specific gravity of 
1) Coarse aggregate [at saturated surface dry 
(SSD) Condtion] 
2) Fine aggregate [at saturated surface dry 
(SSD) Condtion] 
3) Chemical admixture 
e) Water absorption 
1) Coarse aggregate 
2) Fine aggregate 


f) Moisture content of aggregate [As per IS 2386 (Part 


1) Coarse aggregate 

2) Fine aggregate 
g) Sieve analysis: 

1) Coarse aggregate 


3)] 


M40 
PPC conforming to IS 1489 (Part 1) 
20 mm 


Severe (for reinforced concrete) 


75 mm (slump) 

Chute (Non pumpable) 
Good 

Crushed angular aggregate 
450 kg/m? 
Superplasticizer - normal 


PPC conforming to IS 1489 (Part 1) 
2.88 

Superplasticizer conforming to IS 9103 
2.74 

2.65 


1.145 


0.5 percent 
1.0 percent 


Nil 
Nil 


IS Sieve Sizes Analysis of Coarse Aggregate Percentage of Different Fractions Remarks 
mm Fraction 
I II II Conforming 
(20-10 mm) (10-4.75mm) 60percent 40 percent 100 percent 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
20 100 100 60 40 100 
10 0 71.20 0 28.5 28.5 Conforming 
4.75 9.40 3.7 3.7 to Table 7 of 
2.36 0 eg 


2) Fine aggregate 


16 


Conforming to grading Zone II of Table 9 of 


IS 383 


A-3 TARGET STRENGTH FOR MIX 
PROPORTIONING 


St x=fatl.65 S 


or 
L'a ae 
whichever is higher. 
where 
J’ẹx = target average compressive strength at 
28 days, 
fx = characteristic compressive strength at 
28 days, 
S = standard deviation, and 
X = factor based on grade of concrete. 


From Table 2, standard deviation, S = 5 N/mm”. 
From Table 1, X= 6.5. 


Therefore, target strength using both equations, that is, 


a) J'a =fyt1.65 S 
= 40+1.65 x 5 = 48.25 N/mm? 
b) fra = fx + 6.5 
= 40+ 6.5 = 46.5 N/mm? 
The higher value is to be adopted. Therefore, target 
strength will be 48.25 N/mm? as 48.25 N/mm? > 46.5 
N/mm’. 


A-4 APPROXIMATE AIR CONTENT 


From Table 3, the approximate amount of entrapped 
air to be expected in normal (non-air-entrained) 
concrete is 1.0 percent for 20 mm nominal maximum 
size of aggregate. 


A-5 SELECTION OF WATER-CEMENT RATIO 


From Fig. 1, the free water-cement ratio required for 
the target strength of 48.25 N/mm? is 0.36 for OPC 43 
grade curve. (For PPC, the strength corresponding to 
OPC 43 grade curve is assumed for the trial). This is 
lower than the maximum value of 0.45 prescribed for 
‘severe’ exposure for reinforced concrete as per Table 5 
of IS 456. 


0.36< 0.45, hence O.K. 


A-6 SELECTION OF WATER CONTENT 


From Table 4, water content = 186 kg (for 50 mm 
slump) for 20 mm aggregate. 


Estimated water content for 75 mm slump 
3x186 


100 
= 191.58 kg 
As superplasticizer is used, the water content may be 


IS 10262 : 2019 


reduced. Based on trial data, the water content reduction 
of 23 percent is considered while using superplasticizer 
at the rate 1.0 percent by weight of cement. 


Hence the water content 


191.58 x 0.77 
147.52 kg~ 148 kg 


A-7 CALCULATION OF CEMENT CONTENT 


Water-cement ratio = 0.36 


148 
Cement content = —~~=411.11 kg/m’ ~412 kg/m 


0.36 
From Table 5 of IS 456, minimum cement content for 
‘severe’ exposure condition = 320 kg/m? 


412 kg/m*> 320 kg/m?, hence, O.K. 


A-8 PROPORTION OF VOLUME OF COARSE 
AGGREGATE AND FINE AGGREGETE 
CONTENT 


From Table 5, the proportionate volume of coarse 
aggregate corresponding to 20 mm size aggregate and fine 
aggregate (Zone II) for water-cement ratio of 0.50 = 0.62. 


In the present case water-cement ratio is 0.36. 
Therefore, volume of coarse aggregate is required to 
be increased to decrease the fine aggregate content. As 
the water-cement ratio is lower by 0.14, the proportion 
of volume of coarse, aggregate is increased by 0.028 
(at the rate of + 0.01 for every + 0.05 change in water- 
cement ratio). Therefore, corrected proportion of 
volume of coarse aggregate for the water-cement ratio 
of 0.36 = 0.62 + 0.028 = 0.648. 


Volume of fine aggregate content = 1 — 0.648 = 0.352 


A-9 MIX CALCULATIONS 


The mix calculations per unit volume of concrete shall 
be as follows: 


a) 
b) 


Total volume = 1 m? 

Volume of entrapped air in wet concrete = 

0.01 m? 

c) Volume of cement 
Mass of cement 1 

7 Specific gravity of cement ‘ 1000 
2.88 1000 

= 0.143 m° 
d) Volume of water 


Mass of water 1 


= x 
Specific gravity of water 1000 
148 1 


—x 


1 1000 
= 0.148 m° 


IS 10262 : 2019 


e) Volume of chemical admixture 
(superplasticizer) (@ 1.0 percent 


by mass of cementitious material) 


Mass of chemical admixture 1 


7 Specific gravity of admixture 1 000 


an l 
1.145 1000 
= 0.003 6 m° 
Volume of all in aggregate = [(a-b)-(c+d+e)] 
= [(1-0.01) — (0.143 + 0.148 + 0.0 036)] 
= 0.695 m? 
h) Mass of coarse aggregate 


g) 


= g x Volume of coarse aggregate x Specific 
gravity of coarse aggregate x 1 000 

= 0.695 x 0.648 x 2.74 x 1 000 

= 1 233.98 kg = 1 234 kg 

j) Mass of fine aggregate 

=g x volume of fine aggregate x Specific 
gravity of fine aggregate x 1 000 

= 0.695 x 0.352 x 2.65 x 1 000 

= 648.29 kg = 648 kg 


A-10 MIX PROPORTIONS FOR TRIAL 
NUMBER 1 


Cement = 412 kg/m? 
Water = 148 kg/m? 
Fine aggregate (SSD) = 648 kg/m? 
Coarse aggregate (SSD) = 1 234 kg/m? 
Chemical admixture = 4.12 kg/m’, 
Free water-cement ratio = 0.36 


NOTE — Aggregates shall be used in saturated surface dry 
condition. If otherwise, when computing the requirement of 
mixing water, allowance shall be made for the free (surface) 
moisture contributed by the fine and coarse aggregates. On the 
other hand, if the aggregates are dry, the amount of mixing 
water shall be increased by an amount equal to the moisture 
likely to be absorbed by the aggregates. Necessary adjustments 
are also required to be made in mass of aggregates. The surface 
water and percentage water absorption of aggregates shall be 
determined according to IS 2386. 


A-11 ADJUSTMENT ON WATER, FINE 
AGGREGATE AND COARSE AGGREGATE (IF 
THE COARSE AND FINE AGGREGATE IS IN 
DRY CONDITION) 


a) Fine Aggregate (Dry) 


Mass of fine aggregate in SSD condition 
Water absorption 
1 + i lio 


648 
1+ "ig 
= 641.58 kg/m? = 642 kg/m? 


18 


b) Coarse Aggregate (Dry) 


_ Mass of coarse aggregate in SSD condition 
1 +4 Water absorption / 


100 


1 234 
T 


1 227.86 kg/m? = 1 228 kg/m? 


The extra water to be added for absorption by coarse 
and fine aggregate, 
1) For coarse aggregate 


= Mass of coarse aggregate in SSD condition — 
mass of coarse aggregate in dry condition 


= 1234-1 228 = 6 kg 
2) For fine aggregate 


= Mass of fine aggregate in SSD condition — 
mass of fine aggregate in dry condition 


= 648 — 642 = 6 kg 
The estimated requirement for added water, therefore, 
becomes 


= 148 + 6 + 6 = 160 kg/m? 


A-12 MIX PROPORTIONS AFTER ADUSTMENT 


FOR DRY AGGREGATES 
Cement = 412 kg/m’ 
Water (to be added) = 160 kg/m? 
Fine aggregate (Dry) = 642 kg/m? 
Coarse aggregate (Dry) = 1 228 kg/m? 
Chemical admixture = 4.12 kg/m? 
Free water-cement ratio = 0.36 


A-13 The total mass of coarse aggregate shall be 
divided into two fractions of 20 - 10 mm and 10 - 4.75 
mm, in a suitable ratio, to satisfy the overall grading 
requirements for 20 mm max size aggregate as per 
Table 7 of IS 383. In this example, the ratio works out 
to be 60:40 as shown under A-2 (g). 


A-14 The slump shall be measured and the water 
content and dosage of admixture shall be adjusted for 
achieving the required slump based on trial, if 
required. The mix proportions shall be reworked for 
the actual water content and checked for durability 
requirements. 


A-15 Two more trials having variation of + 10 percent 
of water-cement ratio in A-10 shall be carried out and 
a graph between three water-cement ratios and their 
corresponding strengths shall be plotted to work out 
the mix proportions for the given target strength for 
field trials. However, durability requirement shall be 
met. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.9) 


IS 10262 : 2019 


ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE OF MIX PROPORTIONING OF CONCRETE 
(USING FLY ASH AS PART REPLACEMENT OF OPC) 


B-0 An example illustrating the mix proportioning for a concrete of M40 grade using fly ash is given in B-1 


to B-15. 


B-1 STIPULATIONS FOR PROPORTIONING 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 


Grade designation 

Type of cement 

Type of mineral admixture 

Maximum nominal size of aggregate 
Minimum cement content and maximum 
water-cement ratio to be adopted 

and/or 


M40 

OPC 43 grade conforming to IS 269 
Fly ash conforming to IS 3812 (Part1) 
20 mm 


Severe(for reinforced concrete) 


Exposure conditions as per Table 3 and Table 5 of IS 456 


Workability 

Method of concrete placing 

Degree of supervision 

Type of aggregate 

Maximum cement content (OPC content) 
Chemical admixture type 


B-2 TEST DATA FOR MATERIALS 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 


g) 


h) 


j) 


Cement used 

Specific gravity of cement 

Fly ash 

Specific gravity of fly ash 

Chemical admixture 

Specific gravity of 
1) Coarse aggregate (at SSD condition) 
2) Fine aggregate (at SSD condition) 
3) Chemical admixture 

Water absorption 
1) Coarse aggregate 
2) Fine aggregate 


120 mm (slump) 

Pumping 

Good 

Crushed angular aggregate 
As per IS 456 
Superplasticizer- normal 


OPC 43 grade conforming to IS 269 
3.15 

Conforming to IS 3812 (Part 1) 

22 

Superplasticizer conforming to IS 9103 


2.74 
2.65 
1.145 


0.5 percent 
1.0 percent 


The coarse and fine aggregates are wet and their total moisture content is 2 percent and 5 percent 
respectively. Therefore, the free moisture content in coarse and fine aggregate shall be as shown in (j) 


below 
Free (surface) moisture 
1) Coarse aggregate 


2) Fine aggregate 


19 


Free moisture = Total moisture content — 
Water absorption 


= 2.0—0.5 = 1.5 percent 


Free moisture = Total moisture content — 
Water absorption 


= 5.0— 1.0 = 4.0 percent 


IS 10262 : 2019 


k) Sieve analysis 
1) Coarse aggregate 


IS Sieve Sizes Analysis of Coarse Aggregate Percentage of Different Fractions Remarks 
mm Fraction 
——————— a 
I II I II 100 
(20-10 mm) (10-4.75mm) 60percent 40 percent percent 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
20 100 100 60 40 100 Conforming 
10 Nil 71.20 Nil 28.5 28.5 to Table 7 of 
4.75 Nil 9.40 Nil 3.7 3.7 ee? 
2.36 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2) Fine aggregate Conforming to grading Zone II of Table 9 of 
IS 383 
B-3 TARGET STRENGTH FOR MIX B-6 SELECTION OF WATER CONTENT 
PROPORTIONING From Table 4, water content = 186 kg (for 50 mm 
f’ x= fat 1.65 § slump) for 20 mm aggregate. 
; or Estimated water content for 120 mm slump (increasing 
Lafa tX at the rate of 3 percent for every 25 mm slump) 
whichever is higher. 8.4 
where = 186 +—— x186 
ft’, = target average compressive strength at 100 
£ =201.62 kg 
28 days, 
fy = characteristic compressive strength at As superplasticizer is used, the water content may be 
i 28 days reduced. 
S = standard deviation, and Based on trial data, the water content reduction of 
X = factor based on grade of concrete. 23 percent is considered while using superplasticizer 


From Table 2, standard deviation, S = 5 N/mm/?. 
From Table 1, X= 6.5 
Therefore, target strength using both equations, that is, 


a) fg =fyt1.65 S 
= 40+ 1.65 x 5 = 48.25 N/mm? 
b) fa = See + 6.5 
= 40 + 6.5 = 46.5 N/mm? 
The higher value is to be adopted. Therefore, target 
strength will be 48.25 N/mm? as 48.25 N/mm? > 
46.5 N/mm”. 


B-4 APPROXIMATE AIR CONTENT 


From Table 3, the approximate amount of entrapped 
air to be expected in normal (non-air-entrained) 
concrete is 1.0 percent for 20 mm nominal maximum 
size of aggregate. 


B-5 SELECTION OF WATER-CEMENT RATIO 


From Fig. 1, the free water-cement ratio required for 
the target strength of 48.25 N/mm? is 0.36 for OPC 43 
grade curve. This is lower than the maximum value of 
0.45 prescribed for ‘severe’ exposure for reinforced 
concrete as per Table 5 of IS 456. 


0.36 < 0.45, hence O.K. 


20 


at the rate 1.0 percent by weight of cement. 


Hence the arrived water content = 201.62 x 0.77 = 
155.25 kg = 155 kg. 


B-7 CALCULATION OF CEMENT CONTENT 


Water-cement ratio = 0.36 
C t tent = ne 
ement conten = 036 


430.55 kg/m? x 431 kg/m? 


To proportion a mix containing fly ash the following 
steps are suggested: 


a) Decide the percentage fly ash to be used based 

on project requirement and quality of fly ash. 
b) Incertain situations, increase in cementitious 
material content may be warranted. The 
decision on increase in cementitious material 
content and its percentage may be based on 
experience and trials. 


NOTE — This illustrative example is with increase of 10 percent 
cementitious material content. 


Cementitious material content 
= 431 x 1.10 = 474.1 kg/m? = 
474 kg/m? 


Water content = 155 kg/m? 


So, water-cementitious ratio 
155 _ 
= 4747 0.327 
Fly ash @ 30 percent of total cementitious material 
content = 474 x 30 percent = 142.2 = 


142 kg/m? 
Cement (OPC) = 474 — 142 = 332 kg/m? 


From Table 5 of IS 456, minimum cementitious content 
for ‘severe’ exposure condition 


= 320 kg/m 
474 kg/m? > 320 kg/m’, hence O.K. 


B-8 PROPORTION OF VOLUME OF COARSE 
AGGREGATE AND FINE AGGRAGETE 
CONTENT 


From Table 5, volume of coarse aggregate corresponding 
to 20 mm size aggregate and fine aggregate (Zone II) 
for water-cement ratio of 0.50 = 0.62. 


In the present case water-cementitious ratio is 0.327. 
Therefore, volume of coarse aggregate is required to 
be increased to decrease the fine aggregate content. As 
the water-cement ratio is lower by 0.173, the proportion 
of volume of coarse aggregate is increased by 0.034 6 
(at the rate of + 0.01 for every + 0.05 change in water- 
cement ratio). Therefore, corrected proportion of 
volume of coarse aggregate for the water-cementitious 
ratio of 0.327 = 0.62 + 0.034 6 = 0.654 6. 


For pumpable concrete these values may be reduced 
by up to 10 percent. (see 5.5.2). Here, 10 percent 
reduction is considered. 


Therefore, volume of coarse aggregate = 0.654 6 x 
0.9 = 0.589 1, say 0.59 m°. 


Volume of fine aggregate content = 1 — 0.59 = 0.41 m? 
B-9 MIX CALCULATIONS 


The mix calculations per unit volume of concrete shall 
be as follows: 


a) Total volume =] m 
b) Volume of entrapped air 
in wet concrete = 0.01 m? 
c) Volume of cement 
Mass of cement 1 


~ Specific gravity of cement 1 000 


Bai 
= 3.15 1000 


0.105 m? 


21 


IS 10262 : 2019 


d) Volume of fly ash 


Mass of fly ash 3 1 
~ Specific gravity of fly ash 1 000 


1421 
= 2.2 1000 
0.064 5 m°? 


Volume of water 


e) 


Mass of water 1 


= x 
~ Specific gravity of water 1 000 


0.155 m? 
Volume of chemical admixture 


(superplasticizer) (@ 1.0 percent 
by mass of cementitious material) 


Mass of chemical admixture 7 1 
E Specific gravity of admixture 1 000 


4.74 1 


——— X —— 


= 1.145 1000 
0.004 m? 


Volume ofall in aggregate 
= [(a-b)(ct+dtetf)}] 
= (1-0.01)-(0.105 + 0.064 5 + 0.155+0.004) 
= 0.661 5 m° 
Mass of coarse aggregate 


g) 


h) 

= g x volume of coarse aggregate x Specific 
gravity of coarse aggregate x 1 000 

= 0.661 5 x 0.59 x 2.74 x 1 000 
= 1 069.38 kg ~ 1 069 kg 

j) Mass of fine aggregate 

=g x Volume of fine aggregate x Specific 

gravity of fine aggregate x 1 000 
= 0.661 5 x 0.41 x 2.65 x 1 000 


= 718.71 ~ 719 kg 
B-10 MIX PROPORTIONS FOR TRIAL 


NUMBER 1 
Cement = 332 kg/m? 
Fly ash = 142 kg/m? 
Water (Net mixing) = 155 kg/m? 
Fine aggregate (SSD) = 719 kg/m? 
Coarse aggregate (SSD) = 1 069 kg/m? 
Chemical admixture = 4.74 kg/m? 
Free water-cementitious materials ratio 
= 0.327 


IS 10262 : 2019 


NOTE — Aggregates shall be used in saturated surface dry 
condition. If otherwise, when computing the requirement of 
mixing water, allowance shall be made for the free (surface) 
moisture contributed by the fine and coarse aggregates. On the 
other hand, if the aggregates are dry, the amount of mixing 
water shall be increased by an amount equal to the moisture 
likely to be absorbed by the aggregates. Necessary adjustments 
are also required to be made in mass of aggregates. The surface 
water and percent water absorption of aggregates shall be 
determined according to IS 2386 (Part 3). 


B-11 ADJUSTMENT ON WATER, FINE 
AGGREGATE AND COARSE AGGREGATE (IF 
THE COARSE AND FINE AGGREGATE IS IN 
WET CONDITION) 


a) Fine aggregate (Wet) 
Mass of wet fine aggregate 


= mass of fine aggregate in SSD condition x 
7 Free (surface) moisture 


í 100 ) 


= 719 x (1+4/100) 
= 747.76 kg/m? ~ 748 kg/m? 
Coarse aggregate (Wet) 


b) 
Mass of wet coarse aggregate 


= mass of coarse aggregate in SSD condition 
as Free (surface) moisture 


j ( 100 


= 1 069 x (14+1.5/100) 

= 1 085.03 kg/m? 1 085kg/m* 
The coarse and fine aggregates, being wet, contribute 
water to the mix to the extent of free moisture over 
SSD condition. The quantity of this water is required 
to be subtracted from the calculated water content. 


1) Water content contributed by wet coarse 
aggregate 
= Mass of wet coarse aggregate — mass of SSD 
condition coarse aggregate 
= 1 085-1 069 = 16 kg 


22 


2) Water content contributed by wet fine 
aggregate 
= Mass of wet fine aggregate — mass of SSD 
condition fine aggregate 
= 748 — 719 = 29 kg 
The requirement for added water becomes : 


= 155- 16-29 
= 110 kg/m? 
B-12 MIX PROPORTIONS AFTER ADUSTMENT 
FOR WET AGGREGATES 
Cement = 332 kg/m? 
Fly ash = 142 kg/m’ 
Water (to be added) = 110 kg/m? 
Fine aggregate (Wet) = 748 kg/m? 
Coarse aggregate (Wet) = 1 085 kg/m? 
Chemical admixture = 4.74 kg/m? 
Free water-cementitious materials ratio 
= 0.327 


B-13 The total mass of coarse aggregate shall be 
divided into two fractions of 20 — 10 mm and 10 — 
4.75 mm, in a suitable ratio, to satisfy the overall 
grading requirements for 20 mm max size aggregate as 
per Table 7 of IS 383. In this example, the ratio works 
out to be 60:40 as shown under B-2 (k). 


B-14 The slump shall be measured and the water content 
and dosage of admixture shall be adjusted for achieving 
the required slump based on trial, if required. The mix 
proportions shall be reworked for the actual water 
content and checked for durability requirements. 


B-15 Two more trials having variation of + 10 percent 
of water-cementitious materials ratio in B-10 shall be 
carried out and a graph between these water- 
cementitious materials ratios and their corresponding 
strengths shall be plotted to work out the mix 
proportions for the given target strength for field trials. 
However, durability requirement shall be met. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.9) 


IS 10262 : 2019 


ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE OF MIX PROPORTIONING OF CONCRETE 
(USING GGBS AS PART REPLACEMENT OF OPC) 


C-0 An example illustrating the mix proportioning for a concrete of M40 grade using GGBS is given in C-1 
to C-11. 


C-1 STIPULATIONS FOR PROPORTIONING 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 


Grade designation 

Type of cement 

Type of mineral admixture 

Maximum nominal size of aggregate 
Minimum cement content and maximum 
water-cement ratio to be adopted and/or 
Exposure condition as per Table 3 and Table 5 
of IS 456 

Workability 

Method of concrete placing 

Degree of supervision 

Type of aggregate 

Maximum cement (OPC content) 
Chemical admixture type 


C-2 TEST DATA FOR MATERIALS 


M40 

OPC 43 grade conforming to IS 269 
GGBS conforming to IS 16714 
20mm 


Severe (for reinforced concrete) 
120 mm (slump) 

Pumping 

Good 

Crushed stone angular aggregate 
As per IS 456 

Super plasticizer- normal 


a) Cement used OPC 43 grade conforming to IS 269 
b) Specific gravity of cement 3.15 
c) GGBS Conforming to IS 16714 
d) Specific gravity of GGBS 3 
e) Chemical admixture Super plasticizer conforming to IS 9103 
f) Specific gravity (at SSD condition) of 
1) Coarse aggregate 2.74 (based on saturated surface dry condition) 
2) Fine aggregate 2.65 (based on saturated surface dry condition) 
3) Chemical Admixture 1.145 
g) Water absorption 
1) Coarse aggregate 0.5 percent 
2) Fine aggregate 1.0 percent 
h) Moisture content of aggregate [As per 
IS 2386(Part 3)] 
1) Coarse aggregate Nil 
2) Fine aggregate Nil 
j) Sieve analysis 
1) Coarse aggregate: 
IS Sieve Sizes Analysis of Coarse Aggregate Percentage of Different Fractions Remarks 
mm Fraction 
I II I II 100 
(20-10 mm) (10-4.75mm) 60percent 40 percent percent 
(1) (2) 3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
20 100 100 60 40 100 Conforming 
10 Nil 71.20 Nil 28.5 28.5 to Table 7 of 
4.75 Nil 9.40 Nil 3.7 39 eee 
2.36 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 


2) Fine aggregate 


23 


Conforming to grading Zone II of Table 9 of IS 383 


IS 10262 : 2019 


C-3 TARGET STRENGTH FOR MIX 
PROPORTIONING 
Fick = Sex + 1.65 S 
or 
Pariet x 
whichever is higher 
where 
J’ x = target average compressive strength at 
28 days, 
fx = characteristic compressive strength at 
28 days, 
S = standard deviation, and 


from Table 2, standard deviation S = 5 N/mm? 
From Table 1, X= 6.5. 
Therefore, target strength using both equations, that is, 
a) fra =f $1.65 S 
= 40+ 1.65 x 5 = 48.25 N/mm? 
b) fa =a t 6.5 
= 40 + 6.5 = 46.5 N/mm? 


The higher value is to be adopted. Therefore, target 
strength will be 48.25 N/mm? as 48.25 N/mm? > 
46.5 N/mm. 


C-4 APPROXIMATE AIR CONTENT 


From Table 3, the approximate amount of entrapped 
air to be expected in normal (non-air-entrained) 
concrete is 1.0 percent for 20 mm nominal maximum 
size of aggregate. 


C-5 SELECTION OF WATER-CEMENT RATIO 


From Fig. 1 the free water-cement ratio required for 
the target strength of 48.25 N/mm? is 0.36 for OPC 43 
grade curve. This is lower than the maximum value of 
0.45 prescribed for ‘severe’ exposure for reinforced 
concrete as per Table 5 of IS 456. 


0.36 < 0.45, hence O.K. 
C-6 SELECTION OF WATER CONTENT 


From Table 4, water content 
= 186 kg (for 50 mm slump) for 20 mm aggregate. 


Estimated water content for 120 mm slump (increasing 
at the rate of 3 percent for every 25 mm slump) 


186+ E x186 
100 


201.62 kg 


As super plasticizer is used, the water content may be 
reduced. 


Based on trial data, the water content reduction of 23 
percent is considered while using super plasticizer at 
the rate of 1.0 percent by weight of cement. 


24 


Hence the arrived water content 


= 201.62 x 0.77 
= 155.25kg ~ 155 kg 
C-7 CALCULATION OF CEMENT CONTENT 
Water-cement ratio = 0.36 
Cement content = 155/0.36 


= 430.55 kg/m? ~ 431 kg/m? 
From Table 5 of IS 456, minimum cement content for 
‘severe’ exposure condition 


= 320 kg/m? 
431 kg/m*> 320 kg/m’, hence O.K. 


To proportion a mix containing GGBS the following 
steps are suggested: 


a) Decide the percentage of GGBS to be used 
based on project requirement and quality of 
GGBS. 

In certain situations increase in cementitious 
material content may be warranted. The 
decision on increase in cementitious material 
content and its percentage may be based on 
experience and trials. 


b) 


GGBS @ 40 percent of total cementitious material 
content 


431 x 40 percent 
172.4 = 172 kg/m? 
Cement (OPC) 431 — 172 = 259 kg/m? 


C-8 PROPORTION OF VOLUME OF COARSE 
AGGREGATE AND FINE AGGREGATE 
CONTENT 


From Table 5, volume of coarse aggregate corresponding 
to 20 mm size aggregate and fine aggregate (Zone II) 
for water-cement ratio of 0.50 = 0.62. 


In the present case water-cementitious ratio is 0.36. 
Therefore, volume of coarse aggregate is required to 
be increased to decrease the fine aggregate content. As 
the water-cement ratio is lower by 0.14, the proportion 
of volume of coarse aggregate is increased by 0.028 
(at the rate of + 0.01m? for every + 0.05 change in 
water-cement ratio). Therefore, corrected volume of 
coarse aggregate for the water-cementitious ratio of 
0.36 = 0.62 + 0.028 = 0.648 m?. 


For pumpable concrete these values may be reduced 
by up to 10 percent. (see 5.5.2). Here, 10 percent 
reduction is considered. 


Therefore, volume of coarse aggregate 


= 0. 648 x 0.9 
= 0.583 2 say 0.58 m? 


Volume of fine aggregate content 
= ] — 0.58 = 0.42 m° 
C-9 MIX CALCULATION 


The mix calculation per unit volume of concrete shall 
be as follows: 


a) 
b) 


Total Volume =] m’ 

Volume of entrapped air in wet concrete 
= 0.01 m? 

c) Volume of cement 


Mass of cement 7 1 
~ Specific gravity of cement 1 000 


259 1 
~ 3.15 1000 
= 0.082 2 m? 


d) Volume of GGBS 


Mass of GGBS ` 1 
~ Specific gravity of GGBS 1 000 


= 0.057 3 m? 
Volume of water 


e) 


Mass of water 1 


= x 
Specific gravity of water 1000 


= 0.155 m° 

Volume of chemical admixture 
(super plasticizer) @1.0 percent 
by mass of cementitious material) 


Mass of chemical admixture 7 1 
B Specific gravity of admixture 1 000 


431 1 
= 1.145 1000 
= 0.003 8 mê 


25 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Volume of total aggregate 

= [(a-b)-(ctdtetf)] 

= (1-0.01) - (0.0 822+0.0 573+0.155+0.0 038) 
= 0.691 7 m° 

Mass of coarse aggregate 


g) 


h) 
g x Volume of coarse aggregate x Specific 
gravity of coarse aggregate x 1 000 

0.6 917 x 0.58 x 2.74 x 1 000 

1099 kg 

j) Mass of fine aggregate 


= g x Volume of fine aggregate x Specific 
gravity of fine aggregate x 1 000 
= 0.6 971 x 0.42 x 2.65 x 1 000 


= 769.86 = 770 kg 


C-10 MIX PROPORTIONS FOR TRIAL 
NUMBER 1 


Cement = 259 kg/m? 
GGBS = 172 kg/m? 
Water (Net mixing) = 155 kg/m? 
Fine aggregate (SSD) = 770 kg/m’? 
Coarse aggregate (SSD) = 1 099 kg/m? 
Chemical admixture = 431 kg/m? 
Free water-cementitious material ratio 
= 0.36 


NOTE — Aggregates shall be used in saturated surface dry 
condition. If otherwise, when computing the requirement of 
mixing water, allowance shall be made for the free (surface) 
moisture contributed by the fine and coarse aggregates. On the 
other hand, if the aggregates are dry, the amount of mixing 
water shall be increased by an amount equal to the moisture 
likely to be absorbed by the aggregates. Necessary adjustments 
are also required to be made in mass of aggregates. The surface 
water and percent water absorption of aggregates shall be 
determined according to IS 2386 (Part 3). 


C-11 ADJUSTMENT ON WATER, FINE 
AGGREGATE AND COARSE AGGREGATE (IF 
THE COARSE AND FINE AGGREGATE IS IN 
DRY CONDITION) 


As the coarse and fine aggregates are in dry condition, 
adjustment of water, fine aggregate and coarse 
aggregate shall be done as given in A-11. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 6.4) 


ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE ON CONCRETE MIX PROPORTIONING FOR 
HIGH STRENGTH CONCRETE 


D-0 An example illustrating the mix proportioning for 
a concrete of M70 grade using silica fume and fly ash is 
given below. Use of silica fume is generally 


D-1 STIPULATIONS FOR PROPORTIONING 


a) Grade designation 

b) Type of cement 

c) Silica fume 

d) Maximum nominal size of aggregate 

e) Exposure conditions as per Table 3 
and Table 5 of IS 456 

f) Workability 

g) Method of concrete placing 

h) Degree of supervision 

j) Type of aggregate 

k) Maximum cement (OPC) content 

m) Chemical admixture type 

D-2 TEST DATA FOR MATERIALS 


a) Cement used 
b) Specific gravity of cement 
c) Specific gravity of 
1) Coarse aggregate (at SSD condition) 
2) Fine aggregate (at SSD condition) 
3) Fly ash 
4) Silica fume 
5) Chemical admixture 
d) Water absorption 
1) Coarse aggregate 
2) Fine aggregate 
f) Moisture content 
1) Coarse aggregate 
2) Fine aggregate 
g) Sieve analysis 
1) Coarse aggregate : 


IS Sieve Sizes Analysis of Aggregate 
mm Fraction 
I I 
(20-10 mm) (10-4.75 mm) 
a) (2) (3) 
20 100 100 
10 2.8 78.3 
4.75 Nil 8.70 


2) Fine aggregate 


advantageous for grades of concrete M50 and above 
and for high performance concrete with special 
requirements, like higher abrasion resistance of concrete. 


M 70 

OPC 53 grade conforming to IS 269 
Conforming to IS 15388 

20 mm 


Severe (for reinforced concrete) 

120 mm (slump) 

Pumping 

Good 

Crushed angular aggregate 

450 kg/m? 

Superplasticizer (Polycarboxylate ether based) 


OPC 53 Grade conforming to IS 269 
3.15 


2.74 
2.65 
2.20 
2.20 
1.08 


0.5 percent 
1.0 percent 
Nil 
Nil 


Percentage of Different Fractions Remarks 
I II 100 
50 50 Percent 
Percent Percent 
(4) (5) (6) 0) 
50 50 100 Conforming 
1.4 39.15 40.55 to Table 7 of 
Nil 4.35 4.35 1.382 


Conforming to grading Zone II of Table 9 of IS 383 


D-3 TARGET STRENGTH FOR MIX 
PROPORTIONING 
S a5 Set 1.65 S 
or 
LaS tX 
whichever is higher. 
where 
J’ẹx = target average compressive strength at 
28 days, 
ty = characteristic compressive strength at 
28 days, 
S = standard deviation, and 
X = factor based on grade of concrete. 


From Table 2, standard deviation, S = 6.0 N/mm’. 


Therefore, target strength using both equations, that is, 


a) J a~ Jal oss 
= 70 +1.65 x 6.0 = 79.9 N/mm? 


b) f'a = fat 8.0 (The value of X for M 70 grade 
as per Table 1 is 8.0 N/mm’) 


= 70 + 8.0 = 78.0 N/mm? 


The higher value is to be adopted. Therefore, target strength 
will be 79.9 N/mm? as 79.9 N/mm? > 78.0 N/mm’. 


D-4 APPROXIMATE AIR CONTENT 


From Table 6, the approximate amount of entrapped 
air to be expected in normal (non-air-entrained) 
concrete is 0.5 percent for 20.0 mm nominal maximum 
size of aggregate. 


D-5 SELECTION OF WATER-CEMENTIOUS 
MATERIALS RATIO 


From Table 8, the water-cementitious materials ratio 
required for the target strength of 79.9 N/mm? is 0.29 for 
msa 20 mm. This is lower than the maximum value of 0.45. 


0.29< 0.45, hence O.K. 
D-6 SELECTION OF WATER CONTENT 
From Table 7, water content for 20 mm aggregate 


= 186 kg/m? (for 50 mm slump without using 
superplasticiser). 
Estimated water content for 120 mm slump 


isare eis 
100 


201.624 ~ 202 kg/m? 
As superplasticizer (Polycarboxylate ether based) is 
used, the water content can be reduced by 30 percent. 
Hence, the reduced water content 

= 202 x 0.70 

= 141.4 kg/m? ~ 141 kg/m? 


27 


IS 10262 : 2019 


D-7 CALCULATION OF CEMENT CONTENT 


Water—cement ratio = 0.29 
Water content = 141 kg/m? 
Cement content = 141/0.29 

= 486.2 ~ 486 kg/m’ 


It is proposed to add 15 percent fly ash in the mix, in 
such situations increase in cementitious material content 
may be warranted. The decision on increase in 
cementitious material content and its percentage may 
be based on experience and trial. 


NOTE — This illustrative example is with an increase of 10 
percent cementitious material content. 


The cementitious material content 

486 x 1.10 

534.6 ~ 535 kg/m? 
Fly ash @ 15 percent by weight of cementitious material 


= 535 x 15 percent 

= 80.25 kg/m? 
Silica fume content @ 5 percent by weight of revised 
cementitious material 


535 x 5 percent 


= 26.75 kg/m? 
Cement content = 535 — 26.75 — 80.25 
= 428 kg/m’? 
; 141 
Revised w/cm = 3357 0.264 


Check for minimum cementitious materials content, 
320 kg/m? < 535 kg/m? (428 kg/m? OPC + 26.75 kg/m? 
silica fume + 80.25 kg/m}? fly ash) Hence OK 


Check for maximum cement(OPC) content, 450 kg/m? 
> 428 kg/m?. Hence OK. 


D-8 PROPORTION OF VOLUME OF COARSE 
AGGREGATE AND FINE AGGREGATE 
CONTENT 


From Table 10, volume of coarse aggregate 
corresponding to 20 mm size aggregate and fine 
aggregate grading Zone II = 0.66 per unit volume of 
total aggregate. This is valid for water-cementitious 
materials ratio of 0.30. As water-cementitious material 
ratio is actually 0.264, the ratio is taken as 0.667. 


Volume of fine aggregate content 

= 1-0.667 

= 0.333 per unit volume of total aggregate 
D-9 MIX CALCULATIONS 


1m 
0.005 m? 


a) Total volume 


b) Volume of entrapped air 
in wet concrete 


IS 10262 : 2019 


c) Volume of cement 


Mass of cement : 1 
~ Specific gravity of cement 1 000 


428 1 
3.15 1000 
0.136 m? 

d) Volume of water 
Mass of water 1 


oe 
Specific gravity of water 1000 


0.141 m? 
e) Volume of silica fume 


Mass of silica fume x 1 
Specific gravity of silica fume 1000 
26.75 J 1 
~ 22 1000 


0.012 2 m° 
f) Volume of fly ash 


Mass of fly ash ? 1 
~ Specific gravity of fly ash 1 000 


80.25 1 
~ 22 1000 
0.036 5 m? 


Volume of chemical admixture 
(superplasticizer) (@ 0.5 percent by mass of 
cementitious material) 


g) 


Mass of chemical admixture 1 


g Specific gravity of admixture 1 000 

(535x 0.5%) x T 
1.08 1 000 

= 0.002 5 m° 

Volume ofall in aggregate 

= [(a-b)-(c+d+e+ f+g)] 


[(1-0.005) — (0.136 + 0.141 + 0.012 2 + 
0.036 5 + 0.002 5)] 


0.66 7 m° 
Mass of coarse aggregate 


h) 


)) 
= hx Volume of coarse aggregate x Specific 
gravity of coarse aggregate x 1 000 


28 


0.667 x 0.667 x 2.74 x 1 000 
1 218.9 kg = 1 219 kg 
Mass of fine aggregate 


k) 


h x volume of fine aggregate x Specific 
gravity of fine aggregate x 1 000 

0.667 x 0.333 x 2.65 x 1 000 

588.59 kg ~ 589 kg 

D-9.1 MIX PROPORTIONS FOR TRIAL 


NUMBER 1 ON AGGREGATE IN SSD 
CONDITION 


Cement = 428 kg/m? 
Fly ash = 80.25 kg 
Silica fume = 26.75kg/m* 
Water = 141 kg/m? 
Fine aggregate = 589 kg/m? 
Coarse aggregate = 1219 kg/m? 
Chemical admixture = 2.67 kg/m? 
w/em = 0.264 


NOTE — Aggregates shall be used in saturated surface dry 
condition. If otherwise, when computing the requirement of 
mixing water, allowance shall be made for the free (surface) 
moisture contributed by the fine and coarse aggregates. On the 
other hand, if the aggregates are dry, the amount of mixing 
water shall be increased by an amount equal to the moisture 
likely to be absorbed by the aggregates. Necessary adjustments 
are also required to be made in mass of aggregates. The surface 
water and percent water absorption of aggregates shall be 
determined according to IS 2386 (Part 3). 


D-10 The total mass of coarse aggregate shall be 
divided into two fractions of 20 - 10 mm and 10 - 4.75 
mm, in a suitable ratio, to satisfy the overall grading 
requirements for 20 mm max size aggregate as per 
Table 7 of IS 383. In this example, the ratio works out 
to be 50:50 as shown under D-2 (g). 


D-11 The slump shall be measured and the water 
content and dosage of admixture shall be adjusted for 
achieving the required slump based on trial, if required. 
The mix proportions shall be reworked for the actual 
water content and checked for durability requirements. 


D-12 Two more trials having variation of +10 percent 
of water-cementitious materials ratio in D-9.1 shall be 
carried out and a graph between these water- 
cementitious materials ratios and their corresponding 
strengths shall be plotted to work out the mix 
proportions for the given target strength for field trials. 
However, durability requirement shall be met. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 8.4) 
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE ON CONCRETE MIX PROPORTIONING FOR SCC 


E-0 An example illustrating the mix proportioning procedure for SCC concrete is given in E-1 to E-13. 


E- 1 STIPULATIONS FOR PROPORTIONING 


a) Grade designation M30 
b) Type of cement OPC 43 grade conforming to IS 269 
c) Nominal maximum size of aggregate 20 mm 


d) Exposure conditions as per Table 3 
and Table 5 of IS 456 
e) Characteristics of SCC 
1) Slump flow class 
2) Passing ability by L box test 
3) V- Funnel flow time (Viscosity) 


Severe (for reinforced concrete) 


SF3 (slump flow 760 mm — 850 mm) 
Ratio of h,/h, = 0.9 
Class V1 (flow time < 8s) 


4) Sieve segregation resistance SR1(<15percent) 
f) Degree of site control Good 
g) Type of aggregate Crushed angular aggregate 
h) Maximum cement content (OPC Content) 450 kg/m? 
j) Chemical admixtures type 
1) Superplasticizer normal (PCE type) 


2) Viscosity modifying agent 
k) Mineral admixture 
E-2 TEST DATA FOR MATERIALS 


a) Cement used 


Fly ash conforming to IS 3812 (Part 1) 


OPC 43 Grade conforming to IS 269 
3.15 
Superplasticizer conforming to IS 9103 


b) Specific gravity of cement 
c) Chemical admixture 
d) Specific gravity of 


1) Coarse aggregate (at SSD condition) 2.74 
2) Fine aggregate (at SSD condition) 2.65 
3) Chemical admixture 1.08 
e) Water absorption 
1) Coarse aggregate 0.5 percent 
2) Fine aggregate 1.0 percent 
f) Free (surface) moisture 


1) Coarse aggregate 
2) Fine aggregate 


Nil (absorbed moisture also nil) 
Nil (absorbed moisture also nil) 


g) Sieve analysis 
1) Coarse aggregate: 


IS Sieve Sizes Analysis of Coarse Aggregate Percentage of Different Fractions Remarks 
mm Fraction 
I II I II 100 
(20-10 mm) (10-4.75 mm) 50 percent 50 percent percent 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 

20 100 100 50 50 100 Conforming 
10 2.8 78.3 1.4 39.15 40,55 of Table 7 of 
4.75 Nil 8.70 Nil 4.35 4.35 15383 


2) Fine aggregate : Conforming to grading Zone II of Table 9 of IS 383 


29 


IS 10262 : 2019 


E-3 TARGET STRENGTH FOR MIX 
PROPORTIONING 
ta =Sagtl.65 § 
or 
Fest X 
whichever is higher. 
where 
f'% = target average compressive strength at 
28 days, 
Ją = characteristic compressive strength at 
28 days, 
S = standard deviation, and 
X = factor based on grade of concrete. 


From Table 2, standard deviation, S = 5 N/mm/?. 
From Table 1, X = 6.5. 
Therefore, target strength using both equations, that is 
a) J'a =f, t1.65 8 
= 30+ 1.65 x 5 = 38.25 N/mm? 
b) fra = fa + 65 
= 30 + 6.5 = 36.5 N/mm? 


The higher value is to be adopted. Therefore, target 
strength will be 38.25 N/mm? as 38.25 N/mm? > 36.5 
N/mm’. 


E-4 APPROXIMATE AIR CONTENT 


From Table 3, the approximate amount of entrapped 
air to be expected in normal (non-air-entrained) 
concrete is 1.0 percent for 20 mm nominal maximum 
size of aggregate. 


E-5 SELECTION OF WATER-CEMENT RATIO 


From Fig. 1, the free water-cement ratio required for 
the target strength of 38.25 N/mm? is 0.43 for OPC 43 
grade curve. This is lower than the maximum value of 
0.45 prescribed for ‘severe’ exposure for reinforced 
concrete as per Table 5 of IS 456. 


0.43< 0.45, hence O.K. 


E-6 The initial mix shall be first estimated based on 
the typical ranges of mix constituents as per 8.3 and 
keeping in view, the characteristics of the fresh concrete 
such as flowability, passing ability, segregation 
resistance and viscosity as per the data for the mix 
proportioning in E-1. 


The initial mix shall be tested for various characteristics 


30 


(materials less than 0.125 mm is 8 percent, based on 
sieve analysis) 


as per IS 1199 (Part 6) and adjustments to the initial mix 
shall be made till satisfactory characteristics are achieved. 


The various mix design parameters given in this 
example are only indicative and it may be necessary to 
carry out adjustments to these parameters during the 
use of the concrete mix at the project site. 


E-7 PROPORTIONING FOR INITIAL MIX 


E-7.1 Selection of Water Content and Cement/Fly 
Ash Content 


The class of slump flow is specified to be SF3 having a 
slump flow between 750 and 850 mm. To start with, a 
water content of 190 kg/m? along with a superplasticizer 
@ 0.6 percent by mass of cementitious material content 
is selected for the initial mix. However, the water 
content can be reduced further by increasing the dose 
of super plasticizer. 


This water content of 190 kg/m? will correspond to a 
cement content of 442 kg/m? for water cement ratio of 
0.43 as worked out in E-5. 


The cement content of 442 kg/m’ can be further divided 
into OPC and fly ash. Generally fly ash content of 25 to 
50 percent is adopted for SCC. In this illustration, as the 
cement content is on the higher side, the fly ash content 
is taken as 35 percent. Therefore, the OPC content is for 
287 kg/m? and fly ash content will be 155 kg/m’. 


E-7.2 Selection of Admixture Content 


Taking an admixture dose of 0.6 percent by mass of 
cementitious material, the mass of admixture 


= 0.6/100 x 442 = 2.65 kg/m’. 


E-7.3 Selection of Powder Content and Fine 
Aggregate Content 


The powder content (fines < 0.125 mm) required for 
SCC is generally in the range of 400 to 600 kg/m’. 
Since, the SR of class | and viscosity of V1 is required; 
the mix shall be sufficiently cohesive, (having enough 
fines). Therefore a powder content of 520 kg/m? is 
selected. This powder content will constitute the entire 
OPC, entire fly ash, and around 10 percent of Zone I 
fine aggregates. 


Fines required to be contributed by fine aggregate = Total 
powder content — (Fly ash content + cement content) 


= 520 — (155 + 287) = 78 kg/m? 
The fine aggregate has 8 percent materials < 0.125 mm 


(see 8.1). Therefore, the fine aggregate quantity = 
78/0.08 = 975 kg/m’. 


E-7.4 Selection of Coarse Aggregate Content 
Let V., be the volume of coarse aggregate. 


Assuming 1 m? of concrete, V. = (1 - Air content) - 
(Vol of water + Vol of cement + Vol of fly ash + Vol of 
admixture + Volume of fine aggregate) 


oe ian 190 287,155 
ee )= Ta 000 3.15x1000 2.2x1 000 
2.65 975 


1.08x1 000 + 2.65x1 000 
= 0.99 — (0.19 + 0.091 + 0.07 + 0.002 5 + 0.368) 
= 0.269 m? 
Mass of coarse aggregate 


= V „ x specific gravity of coarse aggregate x 1 000 
= 0.268 x 2.74 x 1 000 
= 737.06 kg/m? ~ 737 kg/m? 


E-7.5 Calculation of Volume of Powder Content 


Vol of powder content = Vol of OPC + Vol of fly ash + 
Vol of portion of fine aggregate < 0.125 mm 


287 y 155 z 78 
= 3.15x1000 2.2x1000 2.65x1 000 
=0.191] m? 


Ratio of water to powder by volume 


= 0.190/ 0.191 = 0.99 


NOTE — The water to powder ratio is expected to be between 
0.85 and 1.10. In this case, it is ok. If water to powder ratio is 
found to be less than 0.85, then the fine aggregate content shall 
be reduced to increase the ratio; if the ratio is more than 1.1, 
then the fine aggregate content shall be increased to decrease 
the ratio. In such cases, all the values shall be recalculated. 


E-8 MIX PROPORTIONS FOR TRIAL 
NUMBER 1 


Cement = 287 kg/m’? 
Flyash = 155 kg/m’? 
Water (net mixing) = 190 kg/m? 
Fine aggregate (SSD ) = 975 kg/m? 
Coarse aggregate (SSD) = 737 kg/m? 
Chemical admixture = 2.65 kg/m’, 
Free water-cement ratio = 0.43 
Powder content = 520 kg/m’? 


Water powder ratio by volume = 0.99 


31 


IS 10262 : 2019 


NOTE — Aggregates shall be used in saturated surface dry 
condition. If otherwise, when computing the requirement of 
mixing water, allowance shall be made for the free (surface) 
moisture contributed by the fine and coarse aggregates. On the 
other hand, if the aggregates are dry, the amount of mixing 
water shall be increased by an amount equal to the moisture 
likely to be absorbed by the aggregates. Necessary adjustments 
are also required to be made in mass of aggregates. The surface 
water and percent water absorption of aggregates shall be 
determined according to IS 2386 (Part 3). 


E-9 The total mass of coarse aggregate shall be divided 
into two fractions of 20 - 10 mm and 10 - 4.75 mm, in 
a suitable ratio, to satisfy the overall grading 
requirements for 20 mm max size aggregate as per 
Table 7 of IS 383. In this example, the ratio works out 
to be 50:50 as shown under E-2 (g). 


E-10 The various tests for flowability (slump flow test), 
for passing ability (L box test), for sieve segregation 
resistance and for viscosity (V funnel) shall be carried 
out and the values obtained shall be verified as per the 
data given in E.1 (e). 


In the event that satisfactory performance is not 
obtained, the initial mix shall be redesigned. Depending 
on the apparent problem, the following courses of action 
might be appropriate: 


a) Adjust the cement/powder ratio and the water/ 
powder ratio and test the flow and other 
properties of the paste. 


b) Try higher doses of fly ash and/or different 
types of additives (if available). 

c) Adjust the proportions of the fine aggregate 
and the dosage of superplasticiser. 

d) Consider using a viscosity modifying agent 
to reduce sensitivity of the mix. 

e) Adjust the proportion or grading of the coarse 


aggregate. 


In the present case, based on trials the need was felt to 
use a small dose (0.2 percent by weight of cementitious 
materials) of viscosity modifying agent to improve 
sensitivity of the mix, that is, improve the cohesiveness 
of the mix. 


E-11 Two more trials having variation of + 10 percent 
of water-cement ratio in E-10 shall be carried out and 
a graph between three water-cement ratios and their 
corresponding strengths shall be plotted to work out 
the mix proportions for the given target strength for 
field trials. However, durability requirement shall be 
met. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 9.12) 


ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE ON CONCRETE MIX PROPORTIONING FOR MASS CONCRETING 


F-0 An example illustrating the mix proportioning procedure for mass concreting is given in F-1 to F-14. 


F-1 STIPULATIONS FOR PROPORTIONING 


F-2 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 


g) 


h) 


Sieve Size 


Grade designation 

Type of cement 

Type of mineral admixture 

Maximum nominal size of aggregate 
Minimum cement content and maximum 
water-cement ratio to be adopted and/or 
Exposure conditions as per Table 3 and Table 5 
of IS 456 

Workability 

Degree of supervision 

Type of aggregate 

Maximum cement (OPC) content 
Chemical admixture 


Cement used 

Specific gravity of cement 

Fly ash 

Specific gravity of fly ash 

Specific gravity of 

1) Coarse aggregate(at SSD condition) 
2) Fine aggregate(at SSD condition) 
Water absorption 

1) Coarse aggregate 

2) Fine aggregate 

Free (surface) moisture 

1) Coarse aggregate 

2) Fine aggregate 

Sieve analysis 

1) Coarse aggregate 


150-80 mm 80-40 mm 

1 2 3 
100 100 

80 Nil 92 

40 Nil 5 

20 — Nil 

10 — — 
4.75 — — 


2) Fine aggregate 


32 


M15 

OPC 43 grade conforming to IS 269 
Fly ash conforming to IS 3812 (Part1) 
150 mm 


Moderate (for plain concrete) 


50 mm (slump) 

Good 

Rounded aggregate 

450 kg/m? 

Not required as rounded aggregate of 150 mm 
msa is being used 


OPC 43 grade conforming to IS 269 
3.15 

Conforming to IS 3812 (Part 1) 

222, 


2.74 
2.65 


0.5 percent 
1.0 percent 


Nil (absorbed moisture also nil) 
Nil (absorbed moisture also nil) 


Percentage Passing 


Fraction I Fraction II Fraction III Fraction IV Fraction V 


40-20 mm 20-10 mm 10-4.75 mm 

4 5 6 

100 100 100 

100 100 100 

90 100 100 

4 97 100 

Nil 10 78 

— 2 10 


Conforming to grading Zone II of Table 9 of 
IS 383 


F-3 TARGET STRENGTH FOR MIX 
PROPORTIONING 
Sac =Satl.65 S 
or 
ft aejare 
whichever is higher. 
where 
J «x = target average compressive strength at 
28 days, 
Jt, = characteristic compressive strength at 
28 days, 
S = standard deviation, and 
X = factor based on grade of concrete. 


From Table 2, standard deviation, S = 3.5 N/mm/?. 
From Table 1, X= 5. 
Therefore, target strength using both equations, that is, 
a) f’x=fit1.65 S 
= 15+ 1.65 x 3.5 = 20.77 N/mm? 


bf aster 
=15+5=20 N/mm 

The higher value is to be adopted. Therefore, target 
strength will be 20.77 N/mm? as 20.77 N/mm? > 
20 N/mm. 
Increase in target strength due to wet sieving through 
40 mm size sieve, as per 9.2 = 25 percent 
Therefore, final target strength = 20.77 x 1.25 
= 26.0 N/mm?. 

NOTE — This increase in target strength due to wet sieving 

effect is only for cube test results and not to be considered for 

selection of water cement ratio. 


F-4 APPROXIMATE AIR CONTENT 

From Table 11, the approximate amount of entrapped 
air to be expected in normal (non-air-entrained) concrete 
is 0.2 percent for 150 mm nominal maximum size of 
aggregate. 

F-5 SELECTION OF WATER-CEMENT RATIO 


From Fig. 1, the free water-cement ratio required for 
the target strength of 20.77 N/mm? is 0.61 for OPC 43 
grade curve. This is higher than the maximum value of 
0.6 prescribed for ‘moderate’ exposure for plain 
concrete as per Table 5 of IS 456. 


0.61 > 0.6, hence adopt 0.6. 
F-6 SELECTION OF WATER CONTENT 
From Table 12, water content 
= 125 kg (for 50 mm slump) for 150 mm aggregate. 


As rounded aggregate is used, the water content may 
be reduced by 10 kg as per 9.4, 


Hence the reduced water content 
=125-10=115kg 


33 


IS 10262 : 2019 


F-7 CALCULATION OF CEMENT CONTENT 


Water-cement ratio = 0.60 
115 
Cement content = J6 
= 191.67 kg/m? 
x 192 kg/m? 


To proportion a mix containing fly ash the following 
steps are suggested: 


a) Decide the percentage fly ash to be used based 
on project requirement and quality of fly ash. 

b) Incertain situations increase in cementitious 
material content may be warranted. The 
decision on increase in cementitious material 
content and its percentage may be based on 
experience and trial. 
NOTE — This illustrative example is with increase of 15 
percent cementitious material content. 

Cementitious material content 

= 192 x 1.15 

= 220.8 kg/m? 

z 221 kg/m? 

Water content = 115 kg/m? 

So, water-cementitious materials ratio 


= Hoz 0.52 
221 
Fly ash @ 25 percent of total cementitious material 
content 
= 221 x 25 percent 
= 55 kg/m? 
Cement (OPC) = 221 — 55 


= 166 kg/m’ 
From Table 5 and Table 6 of IS 456, minimum cement 
content for ‘moderate’ exposure condition 


= 240 — 30 kg/m? 
= 210 kg/m? 


[considering the maximum (40 mm) msa correction in 
Table 6 of IS 456, the value in Table 5 of IS 456 has 
been adjusted] 


221 kg/m?>210 kg/m’, hence, O.K. 


F-8 PROPORTION OF VOLUME OF COARSE 
AGGREGATE AND FINE AGGREGETE 
CONTENT 


From Table 13, volume of coarse aggregate 
corresponding to 150 mm size aggregate and fine 
aggregate (Zone II) for water-cement ratio of 
0.50 = 0.78. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


In the present case water-cementitious ratio is 0.52. 
Therefore, volume of coarse aggregate is required to 
be increased to decrease the fine aggregate content. As 
the water-cement ratio is increased by 0.02, the 
proportion of volume of coarse aggregate is decreased 
by 0.004 (at the rate of + 0.01 for every + 0.05 change 
in water-cement ratio). 


Therefore, corrected proportion of volume of coarse 
aggregate for the water-cementitious ratio of 
0.52 = 0.78 — 0.004 = 0.776. 


Volume of fine aggregate content = 1 — 0.776 = 0.224 
F-9 MIX CALCULATIONS 


The mix calculations per unit volume of concrete shall 
be as follows: 


f) Volume of all in aggregate 

= [(a-b)-(c+d+e)] 
= (1 - 0.002) — (0.052 7+ 0.025 + 0.115) 

= 0.805 3 m° 
Mass of coarse aggregate 


f x volume of coarse aggregate x specific 
gravity of coarse aggregate x 1 000 
0.805 3 x 0.776 x 2.74 x 1 000 

1 712.26 kg ~ 1 712 kg 

h) Mass of fine aggregate 

g x volume of fine aggregate x specific 
gravity of fine aggregate x 1 000 


0.805 3 x 0.224 x2.65 x 1 000 
478.02 ~ 478 kg 


F-10 CHECK ON MORTAR CONTENT 


a) Total volume =lm 
b) Volume of entrapped air Mortar content, M, = V, + Vet Vy t Vat Va 
in wet concrete = 0.002 m? ened 
c) Volume of cement 
Mass of cement 1 M, = mortar content; 
ee  - 
~ Specific gravityof cement 1 000 V, = volume of cement = 0.0527 m? 
166 1 V; = volume of fly ash = 0.025 m? 
= 3151 000 Va = volume of water =0.115 m? 
= 0.0 52 7 m° Va = volume of fine aggregate = 0.180m° 
d) Volume of fly ash V, = volume of air = 0.002 mê 
Mass of fly ash J 1 So, M, = 0.375 kg/m? 
Specihicgravinvof tly ash: -1.000 The volume of mortar content satisfies the requirement 
55 1 of 0.37 + 0.01 for rounded aggregates for 150 mm msa 
= xX 
2.2 1000 (see Table 15). 
= 0.025 m’ F-11 MIX PROPORTIONS FOR TRIAL 
e) Volume of water NUMBER 1 
_ Mass of water 7 1 Cement = 166 kg/m? 
Specific gravity of water 1 000 Fly ash = 55 kg/m’ 
115 1 Water (Net mixing) = 115 kg/m 
1 1000 Fine aggregate (SSD) = 478 kg/m’ 
= 0.115 m° Coarse aggregate (SSD) = 1712 kg/m 
Sieve Percentage Passing Percentage of Different Combined Combined 
Size Fractions Grading Grading 
aaa A ae P r 
mm Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction I H wl IV V Obtained Requirement 
I II ll IV V 
150-80 80-40 40-20 20-10 10-4.75 35% 30% 15% 10% 10% 100% 
mm mm mm mm mm 
D © (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8%) (© (0) a) a2) (13) 
150 100 100 100 100 100 35 30 15 10 10 100 100 
80 0 92 100 100 100 0 276 15 10 10 62.6 55 to 65 
40 0 5 90 100 100 0 15 135 10 10 35 29 to 40 
20 0 0 4 97 100 0 0 06 97 10 20.3 14 to 22 
10 0 0 0 10 78 0 0 0 1 7.8 8.8 6 to 10 
4.75 0 0 0 2 10 0 0 0 0.2 1 1.2 0to5 


34 


Free water-cementitious materials ratio 
= 0.52 


F-12 The total mass of coarse aggregate shall be divided 
into five fractions of 150/80 mm, 80/40 mm, 40/20 mm, 
20/10 mm, and 10/4.75 mm, ina suitable ratio, to satisfy 
the overall grading requirements for 150 mm max size 
aggregate as per Table 14. In this example, based on 
various adjustments the ratio works out to be 
35:30:15:10:10 as shown below, to meet the combined 
grading requirements for 150 mm msa as given in Table 14. 


NOTE — Aggregates shall be used in saturated surface dry 
condition. If otherwise, when computing the requirement of 
mixing water, allowance shall be made for the free (surface) 
moisture contributed by the fine and coarse aggregates. On the 
other hand, if the aggregates are dry, as is the present case, the 
amount of mixing water shall be increased by an amount equal 


IS 10262 : 2019 


to the moisture likely to be absorbed by the aggregates. 

Necessary adjustments are also required to be made in mass of 

aggregates. The surface water and percent water absorption of 

aggregates shall be determined according to IS 2386 (Part 3). 
F-13 The slump shall be measured and the water content 
shall be adjusted for achieving the required slump based 
on trial, if required. The mix proportions shall be 
reworked for the actual water content and checked for 
durability requirements. 


F-14 Two more trials having variation of +10 percent 
of water-cementitious materials ratio in F-11 shall be 
carried out and a graph between these water- 
cementitious materials ratios and their corresponding 
strengths shall be plotted to work out the mix 
proportions for the given target strength for field trials. 
However, durability requirement shall be met. 


ANNEX G 


(Informative) 
(Foreword, Clauses 5.3 and 6.2.4) 


GUIDELINES FOR SELECTION OF APPROPRIATE WATER REDUCING ADMIXTURES 


G-1 Cement particles have a strong tendency to 
flocculate when they come in contact with water. Even 
atmospheric moisture is sufficient to result in 
flocculation of cement. The flocculation of cement 
results in the formation of a network of cement particles 
which trap part of mix water in the network voids. The 
water which is held by cement particles at molecular 
level is not available for the hydration of the cement 
particles and for the improvement of workability of the 
mix. These effects result in the stiffening of the 
cementitious system. 


Water reducers are negatively charged organic 
molecules that adsorb primarily at the solid-liquid 
interface with cement and water. Water reducers cause 
uniformity of like charges at the cement particle 
surfaces, causing them to repel each other. This 
disperses the particles in the paste. 


G-2 Effects of Dispersion 


a) Option 1 — This dispersion increases the 
effectiveness of the water, causing the mix to 
become much more fluid for any given water 
content. The effect is called plasticising or 


35 


super plasticising, depending on the degree 
of fluidity obtained. 


Option 2 — If the increased fluidity is not 
required, the water content of the mix can be 
decreased, giving a lower water/cement ratio 
and hence increased strength and durability. 
This is called ‘water reduction’ or ‘high range 
water reduction’. 


b) 


Option 3 — A third option is to use an 
admixture dosage that will ensure both of these 
effects at the same time, for example lower 
water/cement ratio and some increase in 
fluidity. 


The primary difference between high range water 
reducing and conventional water-reducing admixtures 
is that high-range water-reducing (HRWR) admixtures, 
often referred to as superplasticizers, may reduce the 
water requirement by more than 30 percent, without 
the side effect of excessive retardation. 


G-3 The main constituents of water reducing 
admixtures (plasticisers) are lignosulhonates or selected 
carbohydrates. The typical dose of plasticisers is in the 


IS 10262 : 2019 


range of is 0.3 to 0.5 percent and water reduction of 8 to 
12 percent can be achieved. These may be adopted for 
lower grades of concrete. 


HRWR admixtures (superplasticisers) are organic 
products that typically fall into three families based on 
ingredients: 


1) Sulfonated melamine-formaldehyde 
condensate, SMFC; 

2) Sulfonated naphthalene-formaldehyde 
condensate SNFC; and 


3) Polyether-polycarboxylates, PCE. 


The typical dose of superplastisers is in the range of 
0.5 to 1.5 percent and water reduction of 15 to 30 
percent and more can be achieved. PCE type 
superplasticers are used in lower dosages and give high 
water reduction of 30 percent and more and are 
particularly suitable for high strength concrete and for 
self compacting concrete. 


G-4 The adverse effects on slump loss, delayed setting 
time of concrete and additional air entrapment shall be 
kept in mind while deciding type and dosage of various 


36 


admixtures. While retarding type superplasticisers may 
be more appropriate in certain cases to avoid abnormal 
slump loss due to longer transportation time and 
relatively lower dosages may be adopted to avoid 
adverse effects of delayed setting time of concrete and 
additional air entrainment. Few trials may be very useful 
for this purpose. 


G-5 Sometimes problems due to cement admixture 
incompatibility are experienced. An admixture that 
produces all the desired effects with one cement may 
not do the same with another cement. This problem is 
particularity experienced when the supply of cement 
and/or admixture is changed midway through a project. 
Cement admixture incompatibility may result in rapid 
loss of workability, bleeding and segregation of 
concrete, acceleration/ retardation of setting, low rates 
of strength gain and entrainment of air. Compatible 
combinations of cement and superplasticiser may be 
selected by trials or by simple tests like Marsh cone 
test. 


G-6 Admixtures shall satisfy all requirements of 
IS 9103 and IS 456. 


IS 10262 : 2019 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (144, Summer Breeze, Seasons, 
Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695003) 


ACC Ltd, Mumbai 


Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Noida 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Conmat Technologies Private Limited, Kolkata 


Construction Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Department of Science & Technology, Ministry of Science and 


Technology New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


37 


Representive(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Chairman) 


Suri S. A. KHADILKAR 
SHRI RAMAN SADANAND PARULEKAR (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Desai 
Dr BIBEKANANDA Mouapatra (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BIsHNo! 
Suri Sourav ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANTA KUMAR Basu 
Suet D. R. SeEKor (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri C. N. Jua (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH BHARGAVA 
Dr S. K. Hanpoo (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RasesH Kuare (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri N. Siva Kumar (Alternate) 


Director (CMDD) (N&W) 
Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&sS) (Alternate) 


DR A. K. CHATTERJEE 
Suri SuBprato CHowpuury (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 
Suri NitoTpot Kar (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH GuRRAM (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri SaTisH PANDEY (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
Suri Vay SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
Suri ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 
Suri S. C. Upapuyay (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr CHETAN HAZArREE (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK NAIK 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Solid Waste Research and Ecological Balance, 
Visakhapatnam 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army HQ, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


OCL India Limited, New Delhi 


Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 


The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 


Ultra Tech Cement Limited, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Education, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, R. T. 
Nagar, Bengaluru) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representive(s) 
ProF Devpas MENON 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM (Alternate) 


Pror V. K. Gupta 
Dr BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


Dr N. BHANUMATHIDAS 
Suri N. Karimas (Alternate) 


Mas Gen S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri MAN SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Dr S. Harsu (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIR SINGH 
Suriati S. A. Kausai (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri Racnuratı Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI PRANAV DESAI 
Suri RAVINDRA Kuamparia (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. AHLUWALIA 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Dr D. VENKATESWARAN 


Suri P. R. BHAT 
Suri S. J. SHAH (Alternate) 


Dr H. C. VISVESVARAYA 
Suri S. H. Jam, FIE (Alternate) 


Suri Baraji K. Moorruy 
Suri ANIL Kumar Pitar (Alternate) 


SHRI SURYA VALLURI 
Dr M. R. Katacat (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri B. Muxuopapuyay (Alternate) 


SHRI R. C. WAsoN 


Suri L. K. Jain 
Suri A. K. JAN 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


Suri SANJAY Pant, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engineering) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Surimati Divya S. 
Scientist ‘B’ (Civil Engineering), BIS 


Concrete Subcommittee, CED 2:2 


In Personal Capacity, (14A, Summer Breeze, Seasons, 
Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695003) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
Ambuja Cement Limited, Ahmedabad 


Suri Jose Kurian (Convener) 
SHRI AVIJIT CHAUBEY 


Suet J. P. DESAI 
Dr BIBEKANANDA Mouapatra (Alternate) 


38 


Organization 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, Bhopal 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ghaizabad 
CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and 


Technology New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Structural Engineering, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 

Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 

Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, Haryana 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


39 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Representive(s) 
SHRI AvINASH D. SHIRODE 
Suri K. K. MEGHASHYAM (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BisHNo! 
Suri Sourav Acuarya (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 
Surt BHAGWATI Prasan Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RAJESH Kaare (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Suri M. Rasa (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. SUDARSHAN 
Suri R. NaGeNDRa (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Dr RasesH DEOLIA 
Suri H. C. Arora (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satish PANDEY (Alternate) 


Dr B. H. BHARATH KUMAR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


SHRI BRAJESH MALVIYA 
SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
Suri ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


Dr CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI MANISH MOKAL 
Suri SUDEESH RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 


Dr CHETAN HAZARE 
Suri AvinasH HARDE (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


Dr B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr SHASHANK Biısnnol (Alternate) 


DR SUDHIR MISHRA 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM 
Dr ASHOK Kumar JAIN 


Suri D. S. Josui 
Suri HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Dr B. SIvARAMSARMA 
Suri S. MANouar (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. YADAV 
Suri Pawan Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
Suri S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


IS 10262 : 2019 


Organization 


National Institute of Technology, Warangal 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 

Research, Design and Standards Organization (Ministry of 
Railways), Lucknow 

Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, Mumbai 

Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 

Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 

Ultra Tech Cement Limited, Mumbai 


Water Resource Department (Government of M.P), Mumbai 


In personal capacity (#452, Sector-14, Sonipat, Haryana) 


In personal capacity (36 Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 


City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402 White House Apartments, R. T. 


Nagar, Bengaluru) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (M/F 1 VGN Minerva Apartments, Guruswamy 


Road, Nolambur, Chennai) 


Representive(s) 
Dr C. B. Kameswara Rao 
Dr D Rama Sesuu (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr SuGuNA NAK 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
Suri ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Jomt Director (B&S)/CB-I 
Joint Director (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH BONDE 
Suri D. N. VisHwanatu (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Sarı Vinay Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. N. DIWAKAR 
Surı Manos Kumar De (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dr A. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. JAN 
SHRI LALIT KUMAR JAIN 


Suri A. K. JAN 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


Suri R. C. Wason 
Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Working Group for the Revision of IS 10262, CED 2:2/WG 3 


In Personal Capacity, (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


In Personal Capacity, (50, Mangla Apartment, Kalkaji, New Delhi) 


40 


Suri R. C. Wason (Convener) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


Dr S. C. Marti 


(Continued from second cover) 


as ten materials. Now, apart from the four ingredients mentioned above, fly ash, ground granulated blast furnace 
slag, silica fume, rice husk ash, metakaoline and superplasticizer are six more ingredients which are generally 
used in concrete produced in practice as the situation demands. Also, now high strength concrete, self compacting 
concrete, apart from ordinary concrete and mass concrete, are also being produced and used in projects. Hence, it 
is all the more essential at this juncture to have general guidelines on proportioning concrete mixes to cover these 
aspects. 


The objective of proportioning concrete mixes is to arrive at the most economical and practical combinations of 
different ingredients to produce concrete that will satisfy the performance requirements under specified conditions 
of use. An integral part of concrete mix proportioning is the preparation of trial mixes and marking adjustments to 
such trials to strike a balance between the requirements of placement, that is, workability and strength, concomitantly 
satisfying durability requirements. 


Concrete has to be of satisfactory quality both in its fresh and hardened state. This task is best accomplished by 
trial mixes arrived at by the use of certain established relationships among different parameters and by analysis of 
data already generated thereby providing a basis for judicious combination of all the ingredients involved. The 
basic principles which underline the proportioning of mixes are Abram’s law for strength development and Lyse’s 
rule for making mix with adequate workability for placement in a dense state so as to enable the strength development 
as contemplated. From practical view point, compressive strength is often taken as an index of acceptability. This 
does not necessarily satisfy the requirements of durability unless examined under specific context. Mix proportioning 
is generally carried out for a particular compressive strength requirement, ensuring that fresh concrete of the 
proportioned mix possess adequate workability for placement without segregation and bleeding while attaining a 
dense state. In addition, the method has scope to consider the combination of wider spectrum of cement and 
mineral admixtures proposed to be used to meet the requirements of durability for the type of exposure conditions 
anticipated in service. 


Proportioning of concrete mixes can be regarded as a procedure set to proportion the most economical concrete 
mix, for specified durability and grade, for required site conditions. 


As a guarantor of quality of concrete in the construction, the constructor should carry out mix proportioning and 
the engineer-in-charge should approve the mix so proportioned. The method given in this standard is to be regarded 
as the guidelines only to arrive at an acceptable product, which satisfies the requirements of placement required 
with development of strength with age and ensures the requirements of durability. It is suggested that the concrete 
mix proportioning in the laboratory may be carried out at a temperature of 27+ 2°C, relative humidity of minimum 
60 percent, and the temperature of concrete may be 27 + 3°C. 


This standard does not debar the adoption of any other established methods of concrete mix proportioning. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded of in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’ .The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (11290). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


