( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 5499 - 1969

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF UNDERGROUND AIR-RAID SHELTERS IN NATURAL SOIL

Functional

Requirements

in Building Sectional Committee. BDC 12 "
Representing

Chairman
MAJ-GEN B. N. DAS

Engineer-in-Chief's Cent;borEJding

Branch, Army Headquarter Research Institute

Members
DRN.K.D. CHOUDHURY

( CSIR ),

DRK. R.Rao( Alternate) Bombay Munioipal Corporation, Bombay SHRI S. V. DESAI Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta DIREUTOR GENEBAL (ROAD DEVELOPMENT) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay MRSE.S.GHUYAN SHRI J. M. BENJAMIN ( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( 32 Alipore Road, Delhi 7 ) DRK.M. VONEEINZ All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health SHRI N. MAJUMDER ( Directorate General of Health Services ) SERI A. V. RAO ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI J. V. MEHTA SHRI S. K. GHOSE (Alternate ) Voltas Limited, New Delhi SHRI 0. P. PTJRI National Buildings Organization ( Ministry of SHRI RABINDER SINGH Health, Family Planning, Works, Housing & Urban Development ) SHRI K. R. JANI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Labour, Employment and RehabiSHRI B. J. RAM~AKHIANI litation Central Public Works Department SERI M. M. RANA Directorate General of Observatories (Ministry REPRESENTATIVE of Tourism and Civil Aviation ) Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry SBRI J. D. SHASTRI Planning, Works, of Health, Family Housing & Urban Development )

( Continued on page 10 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 1 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 5499 - 1969

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF UNDERGROUND AIR-RAID SHELTERS IN NATURAL SOIL
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 December 1969, after the draft finalized by the Functional Requirements in Building Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In densely populated areas considerable loss of life may be avoided by provision of proper protective air-raid shelters. It is with this view that this standard is being prepared to provide guidance to those engaged in Civil Defence ~projects. 0.3 This standard is intended for use in construction of shelters in densely populated urban areas with limited open space available. Decisions with regard to actual locations of these shelters, competent authority shall decide where these shelters should be located to suit their particular requirements. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing~in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
lays down basic requirements of design and materials for the construction of underground air-raid shelters in natural soil for protection of persons against explosion of conventional bombs. of this standard, the following definitions shall

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose apply.
*Rules for rounding

off numerical

values

( revised

).

2

IS : 5499 - 1969

2.1 Air-Raid
intended the air.

Shelters - Any premises, structure or excavation used or to be used to provide protection against hostile attack from

2.2 Underground Shelter - A shelter the floor of which is below the surrounding ground and the level of the upper surface of its ceiling does not protrude at any point by more than 1 ti above the level of the surrounding ground. Shelter whose underground parts of walls are not surrounded by a thickness of earth of at least 3 m, measured horizontally, shall not be considered as underground shelter. solid mineral matter occurring in large masses 2.3 Rock -Natural fragments. For the purpose of this standard, rock shall be designated as a continuous stony layer, the inclination of whose strata does not exceed W, and the crushing strength of which, measured on a 70-mm side cube saturated with water, is not less than 100 kg/cm2. 2.4 Non-rocky Soil - Any soil other fied as non-rocky soil. 3. MATERIALS 3.1 For the construction of the requirements of IS : 269-1967*. 3.2 The 1964t. design and construction shelters, cement shall may comply conform with the than defined in 2.3 shall be classi-

of concrete

to IS : 456-

3.3 Reinforcement -Reinforcement steel Grade I or medium tensile ( Part I )-19666. Steel reinforcement IS : 1139-196611 may also be used. 4. LIMITS 4.1 Each person. 4.2 4.3 The The OF shelter overall minimum ACCOMMODATION shall provide net area height

steel bars shall conform to mild steel bars conforming to IS : 432 conforming to IS : 1786-1966s or

accommodation

at the rate of 0.4 m2 per 20 m2.

of the shelter of the shelter

shall not exceed shall be 2 m.

*Specification for ordinary, rapid-hardening and low heat Portland cement ( second revision ). tCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (second revision ). $Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel barsand hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement : Part I Mild steel and medium steel bars ( second revision ). &Specification for cold twisted steel bars for concrete. I/Specification for hot rolled mild steel and medium tensile steel deformed bars for concrete reinforcements ( revised ).

3

IS : 5499 - 1969
4.4 Each shelter of 50 persons.
NOTE -

shall

be designed

to accommodate

a maximum

number
risk.

The limit, 50 persons,

has been specified to reduce the calamity

4.5 As far as possible shelters should be dispersed rather than concentrating in one area or floor. Where owing to lack of space, it is necessary to construct shelters in order to accommodate the maximum number of persons in the minimum space, they should be divided by traverses, zigzags, or doglegs into sections to accommodate not more than 50 persons in each section. 5. ENTRANCES 5.1 Wherever possible, it is desirable another, so that, should they be rushed may move on to the next unit to leave to connect shelters one with and become overcrowded people space for those seeking refuge.

5.2 When trenches are connected, each connecting passageway should be allowed to over sail past the actual corner so as to form a blast pocket to reduce the risk of casualties in the shelter if the bomb falls in the connecting passage. Connecting passages shall meet each other at right angles ( see Fig. 1 ).

FIG. 1

CONNECTING

PASSAGE FOR Two

SHELTERS

5.3 As far as possible, the entrance to the shelter be within the building, with short, easy and direct access from every part of the building. Steps or a slope, the inclination of which does not exceed 1 : 6, shall 4

IS : 5499 - 1969 The entrance to the shelter shall be protected in lead to the shelter. accordance with 6. The free dimensions of the entrance opening shall not be less than l-90 m in height and 0.75 m in width. 5.4 The entrance to the shelter shall be marked by a plate on which the following details shall be printed or painted in visible and indelible lettering by means of signs pointing in the direction of the shelter (see Fig. 2 ). The distance of the shelter from the sign shall be indicated in metres on the luminous portion of the sign. The sign may be placed at distances not more than 200 m apart. The nearest sign to the shelter may be placed not less than 10 m away from the shelter.
ORANGE LUMINOUS COLOUR

P

cl

/
LBLACK COLOUR

/ / ILINDICATES

1

/

DISTANCES IN METRES FROM SHELTER

All dimensionsin millimetres. FIG. 2 SIGN FOR AIR-RAID SHELTERS

6. EXIT 6.1 Shelters shall be provided with an emergency exit in the form of a passage. For this purpose a tunnel, tube, staircase, or any other suitable means of egress may be adopted. 6.2 The exit as well as the passage shall be designed in such a way as to avoid direct penetration of blast or splinters. The axis of the passage and the axis of its opening in the shelter, shall not be co-axial. 5

IS : 5499 - 1969 6.3 The free dimensions of the passage and of its opening The free dimensions shall not be less than 0.90 x O-70 m. opening shall not be less than O-70 x 0.70 m, and it shall than 2 m from the external line of the building; it shall to avoid flooding of the shelter through the passage ( see
HOOD IF REQUIRED 200 mm BRICKWORK OR CONCRETE

in the shelter of the outer not be closer be so built as Fig. 3 ).

c

SLAa

OR

CONCRETE

FLOOR

300

SECTION

OF ALTERNATE EXIT END
ETAINING WALL OF RICKWORK,CONCRETE R SAND BAGS FILLED ITH WEAK CONCRETE

ALTERNATE

CROSS

SECTION

SIMPLE WOODEN BLAST PROTECTION BE PROVlDEb~AT

DOOR MUST OTHER END

OR ALTERNATIVE IF -EXIT ABOVE CONSTRUCTED GROUND LEVEL HALF SECTION SHOWING EXIT AS CONSTRUCTED BELOW GROUND LE V-E L '

HAUNCHING HALF SECTION SHOWING EXIT AS CONSTRUCTED ABOVE GROUND LEVEL

LONGITUDINAL SECTION OF EXIT

CROSS

SECTION

Alldimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 3

EXIT PASSAGE FROM 6

UNDERGROUND

SHELTERS

IS : `5499 - 1969
6.4 The opening of the shelter into the passage shall be, as far as possible, from the entrance opening and both openings shall not be in the same wall. 6.5 The external opening of the passage shall be fitted with a door which it shall be possible to lock from the inside of the passage; the door shall be a two-leaf door, opening inwards. The leaves of the door shall External dqors shall also be ensure the ventilation of the shelter. provided with blast proof walls to minimize the risk in case the explosion occurs in the connecting passage. 6.6 Wherever practicable one exit to the shelter shall give access to the apen air and shall be so situated as to be free from the danger of falling debris. 6.7 If the entrance to the shelter -suitably protected ( see Fig. 4). is from the open air, it shall be

Hood may be constructed of brick or concrete RCC with walls slab or alternative roofing.

Note -

ISOMETRIC

VIEW
FIG. 4

OF HOOD
in millimetres.

All dimensions

PROTECTION OF EXITS
for 5 ).

6.8 The exit doors inside the shelter shall be prominently marked, example, with a luminous band painted on top of the exit ( see Fig. 7.

SHELTERS WITHIN BUILDING LIMITS

7.1 Location - When the shelter is built within the limits of the building, its walls shall not be closer than 2.0 m from the line of the external walls, except in special cases authorized by the competent authority. Where there are basements in the buildings, the shelters shall be constructed in the basements.
7

IS : 5499 - 1969

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 5 8. STRUCTURE INDICATING DIMENSION OF THE BAND

8.1 The shelter shall be monolithic, waterproof the parts of the shelter shall be firmly bonded

and damp-proof. All to each other and shall be built from reinforced concrete complying with the requirements of 3. Water or gas ducts shall not be contained in any part of the shelter. Care shall be taken to avoid flooding of the shelter in case of floods. 9. WALLS

9.1 The walls of the shelter shall be not less than 30 cm thick; they shall be calculated to resist a load caused by an external uniformly disshall be formed by steel tributed pressure of 10 tons/m 2. Reinforcement The bars placed as a mesh, one mesh near each face of the wall. aperture of the mesh formed by the calculated reinforcement and the distribution bars shall not exceed 15 cm, and the aperture of the additional mesh shall not exceed 20 cm. The diameter of the bars shall not be less than 8 mm; smaller bars may be used for the additional mesh, provided that the total weight of this mesh shall not be less than The volume of steel in the wall, comprising the 4 kg/m2 of wall. additional mesh, shall not be less than 0.5 percent of the total volume of the wall ( approximately 40 kg/m2 of concrete ).
9.2 Lateral

Protection

9.2.1 Brickwork when used shall be reinforced for affording lateral to provide resistance. to blast pressures. A minimum protection reinforcement of a pair of 6 mm # bars per 45 cm run of wall shall be provided.
NOTE Lime mortar shall not be used for construction of shelters.

8

IS :5499 - 1969 9.2.2Hollow
crete 10. ROOF concrete blocks, when and reinforced as given in 9.2.1. used, shall be filled with con-

10.1The roof slab of the shelter shall not be less than 20 cm thick. The slab shall be calculated to carry, in addition to its own weight, the dead weight of any earth/gravel cover or any slab(s) built or designed to be built above the shelter, that is, a.load of 250 kg/m2 for each slab, in addition to a superimposed load of 1 000 kg/ma and of any concentrated load imposed on different slabs. The calculated reinforcement shall be divided in such a way that the distance between two bars will not exceed 15 cm. The diameter of the bars shall not be less than 8 mm, and the volume of the steel shall not be less than O-5 percent of the total volume of the slab. If the slab is reinforced in a single direction, the span shall not exceed 4 m, and when the ceiling is crosswise reinforced, the span shall not exceed 6 m.
11. VENTILATION 11.1 Ventilation opening ( or openings) shall be provided in the vicinity of the ceiling in order to ensure the exit of the hot air. These openings shall be protected a~gainst blast and the penetration of splinters. The hot air shall flow to the exterior of the building or to the staircase, or exit passage. The total area of these openings shall not be less than O-01 ms per each m3 of volume of the shelter; no opening shall be less than 0.01 ma in area, and the least dimension of their cross-section shall not be less than 20 cm.

12.SHELTERS

IN CELLARS

12.1 Shelters, the walls of which are at a distance of more than 12 m from the walls of the cellar, shall be considered as overground shelters. The parts of the walls of the cellars at a level below ground shall be surrounded by earth in a thickness, measured horizontally, of not less than 4 m.

13. SHELTERS

IN

EXISTING of the

CELLARS except those mentioned in

13.1 All provisions are applicable.

standard

10.1

13.2 When the ceiling ments of 10, the walls less than 4 m from the strutted in such a way specified in 10. Walls

of the existing cellar does not fulfil the requireof the shelter shall be built at a distance of not existing walls, and the existing ceiling shall be that it shall support its own weight and the load shall be bonded to the ceiling of the cellar. 9

IS : 5499 - 1969 14. SHELTERS 14.1 All provisions
outside the limits

BUILT

OUTSIDE

THE BUILDINGS
to shelters built

except those of 6 and 7 shall apply of the buildings.

14.2 Emergency exits may not be provided the shelter and the walls of the surrounding of the height of the tallest building. 14.3 The roof of the shelter less than 30 cm thick. shall

when the distance between buildings exceeds one third by a layer of gravel not

be covered

( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRISAYEDS.SHAFI

Representing
Institute of Town Planners

( India ), New Delhi SHRI D. P. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Kanvinde & Rai, New Delhi SHRI SHAIJKAT RAI SHRI K. C. SRIVAST-~VA Netire;& Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New
SHRI R. L. SURI
SERI L. G. TOYE In

personal capacity ( A-116 Vasant

Vihar,

New

Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SHRI N. V. SHASTRI ( Alternate ) SHRI R. NAQARAJAN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member Director ( Civ Engg )

Delhi-22 )

)

Secretary
Sam V. K. GOQNA Deputy Director ( Architecture ), ISI

10

