(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS:z431-1963

Indian Standard
SPECIhCATION FOR STEhi WHEELBARROWS (SINGLE-WHEEL TYPE)

Construction
Chai;nan

Plant and Machinery

Sectional Committee,
Representing Branch,

BDC, 28

MAJ-CEN R. A. Looxar Members

Engineer-in-Chief's

Army HeadqwwMra

I

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army R@dqu&ers RR& I$ S. BUA~AT LT~C~L R. N. KFXWAR (.&/em&z ) Roods Whg,. Ministry of Transport 6 ComSIIRI R. 5. BHALLA munieationr Burmeh-Shell Oil Storage and Distributing MR. Ii. H. CAMPBELL Company of India Limited. Bornhay l SJJIJI A. 1'. KARXX ( RLWnulc ) Central Water and Power Commission $IJRJ S. P. CJWOIJ YHRI C. R. CJSOP~A ( Alfernofe ) Simplex Concrete Piles ( India ) Ltd., Calcuttn ~SHRI R. K. Dna GUPTA Hc3tly & Gresham Ltd., Calcutta SHWI -4. D. DHJWRA Board ( Yinistry of Railways) DJRE(.TOB ( CIVJL ESOKSEERJZG ) Railwq JOJXT ~JREWOR ( WORJ~S ) ( Akrnd~ ) National Buildings Organisation ( Ministry SJJRJ X. A. HAFEW \Vorks, Housing 8 Rehabilitation )
SJIRJ

of

SHRI K. S, SBISJI-ASAS ( Altermtr ) Lvux Machinery Ltd., Calcutta R. K. JAJ~DIA tihendelaal 1lanufacturing Corporntion Private' SHRI A.K. KHASDELWAL Ltd., Bornha) United Provinces Commercial Corporation Private SJJRJ 11. R. %JJADEVAX Ltd., Sew Delhi Hindusten Construction Co. Ltd., Bombay S~BJ L. R. J~ARWADI Public Works Depnrttnent., Government of SHRJ B. D. J~ATJWR Raianthan SHRJ V. R. BHA~SAOAR ( Al/t-mole) Jlarshalla ( Directions ) Private Ltd., Calcutta &JR1 u. >IATHI.R Gennon Dunkerley d: Co. Ltd.. Bombay SHHJ S. C. ~IAZI~DAR ~HRI S. K. GWA THAFXRTA ( Allemnle ) lCentral Building Researrh Institute (CSIR ), S1ip.J H. V. M~ac HASDASJ Roorkml

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN. 9 HAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH IltNMt ZAFAR MARG

IS : 2431.1963
( Confinued

fforn page

1) Representing C. Cornens & Sons Lt.d., Calcutta

Men&era

SHBI B. NAOCHA~;DIUJBI SEBX S. I(. BASU ( AIterwte ) The Concrete Association of India. Born&y SHBI K. K. NA.YBIAB Sasx C. V. N~znasra ( Ahnate k William Jacks It Co. Ltd., Calcutta SEBI RAJXVMAR GAUTAM NABAYAN Sasx R. 8. GODBOLE ( Allemafe ) In personal capacity ( C-2%. Defena Colony, SHBI K. NATAS~AJA~J New Delhi ) Builders' Association of India, Bombay Sam Y. G. PATEL Armstrong Smith Private. Ltd., Calcutta SHB1G.S. ROTSHEX Na$ti~a~$dings ConstructIon Corporation Ltd., SXBI V. SAXKABAX SHBI D. S. SEENOY SEBI S. s. SINEA Da. BE. SVBBABAJV Killick h'ixon & Co. Ltd., Bombay Dire&orate General of Technical Development. Ministry of Economic & Dofence Co-ordination C!e;r;l_wi Research Institute (CSIR ).

iUiller's Timber and Trading Co. Ltd., Bombay SHB~ 5. SVKVMAX~AN SHBI P. P. SIIUJEEEPANDE ( Allernote ) S~PEBIXTENDING Svar~~oa OF Central Public Works Department Wosrs ( ELEC ) EXECUTIVE ENOIHEXB ( ELEC )
MECHANICAL AXD

DWXSION ( Alkmak ) Shah Construction Co. Ltd., Bornhay SHBI J, A. TABAPOBEVAL~' I&condo Ltd., Bombay XB. S. II. TAYLOB SHBI T. H. PESRO~I ( Alternofc ) Jessop & Co. Ltd., Calcutta 11~.A. J. T~o~psos Baimer Lsrrie C Co. Ltd.. Calcutta COL H. C. VIJE Director. ISI ( Ez-oficio Member ) DR. I-I. C. VISVEWARAYA, Deputy Director ( Bldg )

WOBKSHOP

SHRX T. R. TAXEJA Extra Assistnnt Director (Bldg ). IS1

2

? . Is:Wl-1963

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR STEEL WHEELBARROWS ( SINGLE-WHEEL TYPE 0. FOREWORD

)

1

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 July 1963, after the draft finalized by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Building Division Council. 0.2 Wheelbarrow is the basic equipment put to common use for transporting materials at any construction job. It should be of robust construction to give satisfactory service over a long period and the design of its shape and size should ensure smooth running and ease of handling. This standard lays down requirements for shape, size, materials and fabrication of steel wheelbarrows of single-wheel type for general use on construction works, and is intended to provide guidance to the users as well as the manufacturers. 03 The Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has taken into consideration the views of producers, consumers and technologists and has related the standard to the manufacturing and trade practices followed in the countryin this field. Due weightage has also been given to the need for international co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. These considerations led the Sectional Committee to derive assistance from B.S.1786 : 1951 Steel Wheelbarrows issued by British Standards Institution. 0.4 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this specification, it shall be taken as a reference to its latest version. 0.5 Metric system has been adopted in India and all quantities and dimensions mentioned in this standard have been given in this system. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values ( Revised ). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of thespecitkd value in this standard. 3

ISt2431-1963 0.7 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to steel wheelbarrows, single-wheel type, and it does not include .a11the necessary provisions of a contract. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down requirements for dimensions, materials, construction and finish of steel wheelbarrows of the single-wheel type suitable for use on the building and civil engineering works.
2 TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose

of this

standard,

the following

definitions

shall

.ap~ly .
3.1 Body Body of the wheelbarrow consists of the tray or bin only. 2.2 Chassis - The structural frame which supports the body, comprising all the parts of the wheelbarrow except the body, wheel and axle. 3. MATERIALS 3.1 Steel Sheet - Steel sheets shall be not less than 160 mm in thickness, and shall conform to IS : 1079-1958 Specification for Light Gauge Structural Quality Hot Rolled Carbon Steel Sheet and Strip. 3.2 Steel Sections,Bus and Rivets 3.2.1 Steel sections and bars shall conform to*IS : 1977-1962 Specification for Structural Steel (Ordinary Quality ) or tIS : 226-1962 Specification for Structural Steel ( Standard Quality ) ( Third Revision ). 3.2.2 Rivet bars shall conform to>S : 1148-1957 Specification Bars for Structural Purposes. for Rivet

3.3 Steel Tubea - Steel tubes, if they are to be drilled, shall be medium tubes conforming togIS : 1239-1958 Specification for Mild Steel Tubes and Tubulars. If they are not to be drilled, light tubes complying with 41s : 3239-1958 may be used. 3.4 Grey Iron Castings - Grey iron castings shall conform to Grade 20 of T-IS : 210-1962 Specification for Grey Iron Castings ( Revised). 4. CAPACITY 4.1 The wheelbarrows 60 litres 85 lures -shall bc of the following nominal capacities:

*Second revision in 1975. t.$iicc Fevixd. $Sccond revision in i973. SSincr revised and split tnto various parts. 4 r

IS : 2431.- 1963 4.1.1 These nominal capacities shall be based on the capacity wheelbarrow filled with sand which irslightly heaped. of

4.2 The wheelbarrows shall withstand a proof load of 200 kg for 60 litre capacity and 300 kg for 85 litre capacity without any.< permanent deformation of the members.

5. BODY 5.1 Construction - The body shall be either cut and folded from a single sheet of steel, the joints being secured by riveting or welding, or it may be solid-drawn pressing from single sheet. Ii joints are secured by riveting, the rivets shall be of diameter not less than 6 mm and shall be placed at a spacing of not more than 10 cm.
5.1.1 The body shall have top edge reinforced by one of the following methods: a) The edge rolled over a steel rod of not less than 8 mm diameter in order to form a bead and to retain the rod. b) A mild steel band not less than 20 mm x 5 mm in cross-section closely riveted or welded to the outside of top edges. If riveted, the rivets shall be of diameter not less than 6 mm and shall be placed at each end of the strip and at intermediate points not more than 15 cm apart. 5.1.2 The body shall be fixed to the chassis by welding or with black mild steel bolts with cup heads, round necks and square or hexagonal nuts, the bolt being of not less than 8 mm diameter. 5.2 Spare Bodies - Spare bodies shall be supplied without fixing holes unless otherwise ordered. 6. CHASSIS 6.1 The design and dimensions of the frame shall be such that the distance between the centre of the axle and the nearest point of the body does not exceed 23 cm, and the distance from the centre of the axle to the end of the handles is not less than 120 cm and notgreater than 135 cm. 6.2 The chassis frame shall consist either of a single length of tube of 25 mm nominal bore, or any other suitable steel section, such as flat of size 30 v 6 mm or angle or channel section of equivalent strength, suitably bent to form a support for the wheel and the body. 6.3 The legs of the chassis shall be formed as part of the tube or other steel section used for the construction of frame or shall consist of separate length of tube or steel section similar to rhat'used for the frame, bent to form a how and wcldcd to the main frame. 5

6.4 The frame shall be reinforced with a mild steel bar not less than
30 x 5 mm in cross-section which shall be arranged to span between the chassis frame at the handle end of the body, with its ends closely formed round the frame. Each leg shall be braced by a mild steel bar not less than 30 x 6 mm in cross-section, closely formed round the bottom of the leg arid arranged to provide an intermediate support for the body. Two front braces of not less than 25 x 6 mm in cross-section shall be fked between the wheel end of the body and the chassis frame. If the leg bracing is of ` X ' type then 25 x 6 mm strip may be substituted. 6.5 The underside of the handle ends shall be not less than 50 cm and the top edge of the body not more than 60 cm above the ground level when the legs are resting on the ground. 6.6 The overall width of the handles shall be not less than 53. cm and not greater than 55 cm. The ends of the handles shall be provided with firm, comfortable and non-slip grips. 6.7 A typical design Fig. 1. 7. WHEEL 7.1 The wheel shall be constructed of mild steel or cast iron and shall be of disk type or any other suitable design to ensure adequate strength. It shall be fitted with metal rim, or solid or cushioned rubber tyre. 7.2 The diameter of the wheel shall be not less than 300 mm and the nominal width of the tyre shall be not less than 50 mm. 8. AXLE 8.1 The axle shall be either fixed to the chassis frame, in which case the I bearing shall bc located inside the wheel hub which will revolve over the axle; or the axle shall revolve between the bearings, there being no relative motion between the axle and the wheel and each bearing being secured to the chassis frame by two bolts of not less than 8 mm diameter. In the later case, the bearings shall be so designed that the axle cannot be removed from them without first dismantling the bearings. 8.2 The axle or spindle shall be not less than 25 mm in diameter and the bearing length shall be not less than 25 mm at each end. The journal portion of the axle shall be machined to appropriate tolerances and allowance, and the surface finished to ensure uniform bearing contact. The material for axle shall conform to*JS : 226-1962 Specification for Structural Steel ( Standard Quality ) ( Third Revision), if bronze bearing bushes are used, and to appropriate grade of wrought steel, such as C 40 of IS : 1570-1961 Schedule for Wrought Steels for General Engineering Purposes, if cast iron bearings are used ( see 9.1). _
*Since revised

of the wheelbarrow,

single-wheel

type is given

in

PLAN

bOxSmm

MS FLAT

E f

L-120

TO 135 cm

ELEVATION
Fxo. 1 TYPICAL SKETCH
OF

WHEELBARROW

(SISIJLF-CREEL

TYPE)

9. BEARINGS 9.1 The bearings shall be so designed that there is no side play in The bearings shall consist of axle movement or movement of the wheel. grey iron castings or pressings, or bronze bearing bushes or any other suitable bearings , of equivalent properties. 9.2 The internal diameter of bore of the bearing shall be such that the ciearance between bearing and the axle is not more than O-5 mm.

9.3 The bearing wahs shall be of adquase t-s than 5 mm to avoid premature wear and `g&ii load. 7

preferably not less way apT bearing under

IS:2431-1963 9.4 Adequate arrangements cation of bearings. 10. FINISH .lO.l The mcraI.pnrts shall be finished with two coats of black bituminous for Ready Mixed Paint, paint conforming to*IS : 158-1950 Specification firushing, Bituminous, Black, Lead-Free, Acid, Alkali, \Vater and Heat Resisting, for General Purposes. 10.2 \Vhen so specified by the purchaser the metal parts may have galvanized or- any other finish. The galvanizing shall comply with thr requiCements of the appropriate Indian Standards. 11. MARKING 11.1 Each wheelbarrow shall bc mirked with the name of manufacturer or his trade-mark, capacity, unladen weight of th3 wheelbarrow and the year of manufacture. ?I 11.1.1 The wheelbarrow may also be mal'ked with&e ISI Certification
h&irk. xm - The use of the iSI Ccrtiticaticn Mark t governed by the provirionr of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks) Act and the &da 8nd Regulations 4~ thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard-. -veyr tbc assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under 8 well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and o rated by the producer. IS1 marked

shall be provided

to facilitate

proper

lubri-

'

products are also continuously checked by IS f" for conformity to that standard a~ a Details c~nditiom under which a licence for the use of he ISI further safeguard. ce&ication Mark may be granted to manufacturcn or procesors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

of

8

