m

62 ._%22*84 : ~0.172.21

1 First Reprint AUGUST

19&

)

IS: 3824(Pait 2).1983 ( R&a&hncd 2001 1990') ( Reaffirmed )

Indian

Standard

METHODS OF EVALUATING DYNAMIC LOAD RATINGS OF ROLLING BEARINGS
PART 2 RADIAL ( ROLLER BEARINGS

First

Revision

j

I.

Scope - Covers the radial roller bearings.

methods

for

calculating

the basic

dynamic

load ratings ratings

and rating

life of

1.1 The standard also specifies methods of calculation various reliabilities, materials and operating conditions. i 1.2 This standard is not applicabt&o design where shaft or housing surface, unless that surface is equivalent washers) raceway it replace. * 2. Definitions

of adjusted

life to take into acc<)unt

the rolling elements operate directly on a in all respects to the bearing rings ( or

2.1 Life - For an individual rolling bearing, the numb& of revolutions which one of the bearing rings ( or washers ) makes in relation to the other rings ( or washers ) under the prevailing working conditions before the first evidence of fatigue develops in the material of one of the ri:lgs ( or washers ) or rolling elements. 2.2 Reliability ( In the context of bearing life ) - For a group of apparently identical rolling bearings, operating under the same conditions, the percentagd of the group that is expected to attain or exceed a specified life. 2.2.1 The reliability of an individual exceed a specified life. rolling bearing is the probability that the bearing will attain or rolling

2.3 Basic Rating Life - For an individual rolling bearing, or a group of apparently identical bearings operating under the same conditions, the life associated with 90 percent reliability.

2.4 Basic Dynamic Radial Load Rating - That constant stationary radial load which a rolling bearing can theoretically endure for a basic rating' life of one million revolutions. In the case of a single row angular contact bearing, the radial load rating refers to the radial component of that load which causes a purely radial displacement of the bearing rings in relation to each other. 2.5 Basic Dynamic Axial Load Rating - That constant centric axial load which theoretically endure for a basic rating life of one million revolutions. a rolling bearing can

2.6 Dynamic Equivalent Radial Load - That constant stationary radial fOa$ under the influence which a rolling bearing would have the same life as it will attain under the actual load conditions. 2.7 Dynamic Equilialent a rolling bearing would 2.6 Roller Diamefkr roller. Axial Load - That constant centric axial load under the influence have the same life as it will attain under the actual load conditions. in the Calculation of Load Ratings The diameter

of

of which

Applicable

at the middle of the

Note 1 --ior q iapered roller this is equal to the mean value at the large enpart! the small end of the roller.

of the diameters

at the theoretical

sharp corners of .contact

asymmetrical convex roller this is an approximation Note 2 - for'an between the railer and the ribless raceway at zero load.

for the diameter

at the point

Adopted

24 June 1983

I

@ October 1983,BIS _._._.._. -2. __ ~___
I

Or3

BUREAU OF. lND,IAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

iS : 3824 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 2.9 Roller Length Applicable in the Calculation of Load Ratings - The theoretical contact between a roller and that raceway where the contact is short&t. maximum length of

Note - This is normally taken to be either the distance between the theoretical sharp corners of the roller minus the roller chamfers or the raceway width excluding the grinding undercuts, whichever is the smaller. 2.10

Nominal Contact nominal line of action -

Angle ----The angle between a plane perpendicular to the bearing axis and the of the resultant of the forces transmitted by a bearing ring to a rolling element. of this standard, load rating, load rating, the following symbols shall apply:

3. Symbols

For the purpose radial axial

Cr
Ca
Dpr Fr Fa Lxl Ln

-

Basic dynamic

newtons newtons of load ratings, millimetres

= Basic dynamic
Roller Pitch diameter diameter radial axial =

D.re =

applicable of roller load

in the calculation set, millimetres component

= Bearing = = = Bearing Basic

= radial

of actual of actual

bearing

load,

newtons

load = axial component life, million revolutions

bearing

load, newtons

rating

Adjusted rating life for a reliability where n = Adjusted rating life Adjusted rating . revolutions life for

of ( 100 -n

) percent,

million

revolutions conditions, conditions million and for a

L101)= L,. =

IIOn-COnVentiOnal

material

and operating

Adjusted rating life for non-conventional relidbJ&ty of ( 100 -n ) percent, milliqn

material and operating revolutions of load ratings,

applicable in the calculation L"B = Rolf&`length pr = Dynamic equivalent radial load, newtons Pa = X Y Zal = ar = a3 = e = = Dynamic equivalent`axial load factor load factor load, newtons

millimetres

S Radial Axial

Number of balls or rollers in a single row bearing, bearing with equal number of rollers per row Life adjustment Life adjustment Life adjustment factor factor factor for a reliability

number

per

row

of a multi-row

other than 90 percent material operating conditions values of factors X and Y the accuracy to

for non-conventional for non-conventional

Limit value of Fa/Fr for the applicability

of different

fc = i =

A factor which depends on the geometry of the bearing which the various components are made and material Number Nominal of rows of rollers contact in a bearing degrees basic dynamic radial

components,

cx =

angle of a bearing,

4. Basic Dynamic Radial Load Rating bearings shall'be given by:

The

load

rating

for radial

roller

C2 = f. ( i

Lwe cos a )"9

23" Dne2g'2'
only applicable uniform along

Values of factor fc shall be as given in Table 1. They are maximum values, to roller bearings in which, under a bearing load, the material stress is substantially the most heavily loaded roller/raceway contact.

Smaller values of factor fc than those given in Table 1 shall be used if, under load, an accentuated stress concentration is present in some part of the roller/raceway contact. Such stress concentrations must be expected, for example, at the centre of nominal point contacts, at the extremities of line contacts, in bearings where the rollers are not accurately guided and in bearings with rollers longer than 2'5 times the roller diameter. 2

IS : 3824 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 i
TABLE 1 VALUES OF FACTOR

fc FOR RADiAL
4 )

ROLLER

BEARINGS

( Clause

Owe cos u

OR,
0.01
0'02 0'03 0'04 0'05 0'06 0'07 0.08 0'09 0.10 0'12 0'14 0'16 0.18 020 0.22 0'24 0'26 O-28 0.30

fc
52'1 60'8 66.5 70.7 74.1 76'9 79.2 81.2 82.8

E.: 87'7 88'5 88'8 88.7 88.2 87.5 86'4 85.2 83.8 Dwe cos 01 DPW

Note obtained

-

Values

of fc for intermediate

value of

are

by linear interpolation.

4.1. When calculating the basic radial load rating for two similar single row roller bearings mounted side by side on the same shaft such that they operate as a unit ( paired mounting ) in ` back-toback ' or 1 face-to-face ' arrangement, the pair is considered as one double row bearing. If for some technical replaceable independently reason the bearing arrangement is regarded as two bearings of each other, the above paragraph does not apply. which are

4.2 The basic radial load rating for two or more similar single row roller bearings mounted side by side on the same shaft such that they operate as a unit ( paired or stack mounting ) in `tandem t arrangement, properly manufactured and mounted for equal load distribution, is the number of bearings to the 7/9 power times the rating of one single row bearing. If for some technical reason the bearing arrangement is regarded as a number of single row bearings which are replaceable indempendently of each other, the above paragraph does not apply. 5. Dynamic Equivalent Radial Load - The equivalent radial load a # O", under constant radial and axial joads, shall be given as: for radial rot& bearings with

& =XFr
Values of fact0rs.X radial and Y shall be as given in Table bearings

+.YF,, 2. with a = O", and subjected \ to radial load only, is

The equivalent

load for radial roller

Pr = Fr
Note - The ability of radial roller bearings with CL= O", to support axial loads varies considerably with bearing design and execution. The bearing user should, therefore, consult the bearing manufacturer for recommendations ragarding the evaluation of equivalent load and life in cases where bearings with CL = 0' are subjected to axial load.

3

lS:3824(Part2)-1983

TABLE

2

VALUES

OF FACTORS

X AND

Y FOR'RADIAL

ROLLER

BEARINGS

( Clauses 5, 5.1, 5.2 and 0.1 )

Bearing

Type

i
X Y i x Y --

e

Single row, a#O Double a#0 row,

1

0

0.4

0'4 cot a

I.5 tan a

1

0'45 cot a

0.67

0'67 cot u

l-5 tan a

5.1 When calculating the equivalent radial load for two similar single row angular contact roller bearings mounted side by side on the same shaft such that they operate as a unit ( paired mounting ) in ` back-to-back ' or ` face-to-face ' arrangement, and which according to 4.1, is considered as one double row bearing, the X and Y factors for double row bearings in Table 2 are used. 5.2 When calculating the equivalent radial load for two or more similar single row angular contact roller bearings mounted side by side on the same shaft such that they operate as a unit ( paired or stack mounting ) in ` tandem ' arrangement, the X and Y factors for single row bearings in Table 2 are used. 6. Basic Rating Life -- The basic rating life for radial roller
1013

bearings

shall

be given

as:

LlO The values of Cr and P, are calculated

( >
-L P*

c

in accordance

with

S,l and 5.2.

6.1 This life formula is also used for the evaluation of the life of two or more single `row bearings operating as a unit, as referred to in 4.1 and 4.2. In this case the load rating Cr is calculated for the complete bearing arrangement and the equivalent load P, is calculated for the total loads acting on the arrangement, using the values of X and Y indicated in 5.1 and 5.2. 6.2 The life formula gives satisfactory results for a broad range of bearing loads. However, extra heavy load may cause accentuated stress concentrations in some part of the roller/raceway `contacts. The user shall, therefore, consult the bearing manufacturer to establish the applicability of the life formula in case where P, exceeds 0'5 Cr. 7. Adjusted Rating Life 7.1 General 7.1 .I Reliability level - The normal criterion of bearing performance is the basic rating life calculated according to this standard and this life is associated with 90 percent `reliability. However, for certain applications it may be desirable to calculate the life for other reliability levels. The adjusted rating life for a reliability, of ( 100 n ) percent'shall be

Ll = a1 Lo
Values of factor al are given in 7.2.

7.1.2 Material and operating conditions - It is recognised that the properties of the material The basic rating life calculated and the operating conditions have an influence on bearing life. according to this standard is associated with conventional material ( good quality, hardened steel ) and conventional ope ting conditions ( a bearing properly mounted, -adequately lubricated, protected from foreign 3 atter, conventionally loaded and not exposed to extreme temperature ). 4

IS : 3824 ( Part 2 ) - 1983
In certain cases from the conventional consideration. The adjusted as:
Los =

the in

bearing material characteristics such a way that it is justified material

and/or operating conditions to take their influence into and operating conditions shall

deviate special be given

rating

life for non-conventional

a2id 10
material and operating conditions and for a

The adjusted reliability of (loo-

rating life for non-conventional n ) percent shall be given as: Lna -

a1a2aeL10

For values

of factors

a2 and a3 see 7.3 and 7.4.

7.1.3 Limifafions -- In addition to t'he required fatigue life, other factors such as maximum permissible bearing deflection and minimum shaft and housing strength, shall be given due consideration when selecting the size of bearings for a given application. Particular discretion shall be exercised when utilizing adjusted rating life values which are greater than LIO. 7.2 Life Adjustment Factor for Reliability - The adjusted rating life for a reliability of ( 100 - n ) perValues of the pertinent adjustment factor al cent shall be calculated in accordance with 7.1.1. shall be as given in Table 3.

TABLE

3

LIFE ADJUSTMENT

FACTOR

FOR RELIABILITY,

01

R;liadi;y

Ln

as

90 95 96 97 98 99

.Lio L6
L4

1 O-62 0.53 0.44 0'33 0.21

L3 L, L1

7.3 Life Adjusfmenf Factor for MaferialCurrently the selection of a8 values cannot be based on quantifiable.material characteristics but only on test results and other experience made with bearValues of a2 shall, therefore, be obtained from the bearing manufacturer, ings. The use of a certain steel analysis and/or process as such is ndt sufficient justification for the to bearings use of an a2 value other than 1. Values of a2 greater than 1 may, `however, be applicable made of steel of particularly low impurity content or of special analysis. Bearing manufacturing processes affecting the properties of the material in a bearing are also to be considered in the selection of an a2 value If, for example, a reduced life is expected because of a hardness reduction caused by special heat treatment, this should consequently be considered by the manufacturer's selection of a correspondingly reduced a2 value. It may not be assumed that the use of an improved material will overcome a deficiency in lubrication. Values of a2 greater than 1 should, therefore, normally not be applied where factor a3 is less than 1 because of such deficiency. 7.4 Life Adjustment Factor for Operafing Conditions - Of the operating conditions directly influencing bearing life, the magnitude and direction of the load are considered in the calculation of the equivalent load ( 5 of Part 1 ) and deviations from normal load distribution have been explained in the Explanatory Note. 5

/
D

:
_`.

r

IS : 3824 ( Pae 2) - 1983
Operating conditions which remain to be taken into account here are the adequacy of the lubrication ( at the operating speed alid temperature ) and conditions causing changes in material properties ( for example high tcimperature causing reduced hardness ). The influence on bearing life of such conditions may be considered by the application of a life adjustment factor aa. The calculation of basic dynamic lozd rating and basic rating life in this standard assumes that bearing life is limited principally by sub-surface fatigue, that is, that the rolling elements and the rings ( washers ) raceways are sufficiently separated by a lubricant to make the probability of failures caused by surface distress negligible. Where this requirement is fulfilled as = 1, provided a lower value does not apply, for example because of a change in material propenies caused by the operating conditions. Reduction of as values should be considered, for example, where the viscosity of the lubricant is less than 20 mm*/s ( 1 mrn"/s,= 1 cSt ) for roller bearings at the operating temperature where the rotational speed is exceptionally low ( revolutions per minute multiplied by Dpa less than 10000 ). Values of as greater than 1 may be considered only whtre the lubrication conditions are particularly favourable. It may not be assumed that a deficiency in lubrication material. Where factor as is less than I, due to inadequate should, therefore, normally not be used. can be overcome by using an improved lubrication, values of a2 greater than I

/

EXPLtNATORY

NOTE

This standard was earlier published in 1936. This standard is being revised to align it with bearing - Dynamic load ratings and rating life - Part 1 Calculation IS0 281 /I -1977, `Roiling methods `. In this revision, adjusted ratin% life of bearings has been included. This standard consists of the following parts: load ratings load ratings load ratings of rolling of rolling of roller of roller bearings: bearings: _bearings: bearings: r;

IS : 3824 ( Part 1 )-1983 ` Methods of evaluating dynamic Part 1 Radial ball bearings (first revision ) ' IS : 3324 ( Part 2 )-I983 Part 2 Radial roller `Methods bearings of evaluating ( first revision dynamic ) '

IS : 3824 ( Part 3 )-I983 ` Methods of evaluating dynamic Part 3 Thrust ball bearings ( first revision ) ' IS : 3824 ( Part 4 )-I983 Part 4 Thrust roller Ball and roller bearings, .machines. This specification bearings. ` Methods of evaluating bearings ( first revision dynamic ) '

load ratings

collectively known as rolling bearings is included to help manufacturers

are being used in all modern in the proper design of these

It is often impractical to establish the suitability tion by testing a sufficient number of bearings in that required to establish this suitability. A reliable testing. life calculation is considered

of a bearing application.

related for a specific applicaOther methods are, therefore,

to be a suitable

and advantageous

substitute

for

Calculation according to this standard do not yield satisfactory results for bearings subjected to such application condition and/or of such internal design which results in considerable Unmodified truncation of the area of contact between the rolling elements and the ring raceways. calculation results are thus not applicable, for example, to groove ball bearings with filling slots which project substantially into a ball/raceway contact area when the bearing is subjected to load in application. Calculations according to this standard do not yield satisfactory r2suIts for bearings subjected to such application conditionswhich cause deviations from a normal lo ,d distcibution in the bearing, for example, misalignment, having shaft deflection, rolling element centrifugal forces or other high speed effects, and preload or extra large clearance in radial bearings. Where there is reason to the user should consult the bearing manufacturer for assume that such conditions prevail, recommendations and evaluation of equivalent load and life. 6 Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India

