**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7974-1 (1976) : Graphical symbols for use on detailed 
maps, plans and geological cross sections, Part 1: General 
rules of representation [MED 8: Mining Techniques and 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 7974( Part I)- 1976 

UDC 003-62:528*93 ( First Reprint DECEMBER t991 ) ( Reaffirmed 1989 ) 



(Reaffirmed 1999) 
Indian Standard 

GRAPHICAL SYMBOLS FOR USE ON DETAILED MAPS, 
PLANS AND GEOLOGICAL CROSS SECTIONS 

PART I GENERAL RULES OF REPRESENTATION 



1. Scope — Lays down the general rules for the representation of rocks and minerals on detailed 
maps, plans and geological cross sections. 

2. Rules of Representation 

2.1 In order to represent a type of rock on a map or on a plan, the corresponding surface shall be 
covered by the ornaments representing the rock in question. The surfaces occupied by rocks of 
different types shall be separated by a continuous thin line if, in nature, there is a clear demarcation 
between the different rock types. 

2.2 The ornaments used for the representation of rocks and minerals shall be in black and white so 
as to facifitate their reproduction on coloured backgrounds which shall be used to designate either 
age or other characteristics. The symbols provided shall keep their significance independently of 
the colours of the background. 

2.3 Since there are great variety of rocks and a considerable degree of differentiation is necessary 
in certain fields of application, it has been impossible to have an individual ornaments for each of 
the rocks that are found in nature. For this reason the relevant standards have been kept limited to 
the establishment of ornaments for the most important and the most frequently occurring rocks, end 
are based on the following principles: 

a) In order to characterise the properties of rocks, elementary symbols are chosen which shall: 

1) be as simple as possible and therefore easily traceable; 

2) express the nature of the rock in question; and 

3) be of such a dimension that several elementary symbols placed next to each other have 
enough room on the plan to be covered by the same ornament. 

b) Basic rocks shall be represented by the juxtaposition of several identical elementary 
symbols; the mixed rocks and the intermediary types by the juxtaposition of the different 
elementary symbols which characterise the constituents. 

c) In order to characterise the loose form of a rock, ornaments and symbols shall be arranged 
with no determined order; a systematic staggered arrangement shall represent the 
consolidated form of a rock. Other arrangements may be used to represent other details. 

d) The individual elements or the rows of ornaments shall be arranged either parallel to the 
stratification joints or parallel to the margin of the map. Each plan, therefore, shall 
indicate the procedure adopted. 

e) The colour of the rocks shall only be indicated in exceptional cases, and even then not by 
means of colours ( which are reserved for stratigraphy ), but rather by a slight modification 
of the elementary symbols, by letters or by special symbols. If colour is used, this method 
of representation shall be explained on the map in a key. 

2.4 A new symbol shall be chosen for any characteristic not represented by a symbol in these 
standards. In no case the individual symbol as given in these standards shall be used for any other 
meanings. 



Adopted 16 February 1976 



© April 1976, BIS 



Gr1 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS :7974 (Part I) -1976 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In many spheres of technology, science and economics, data on the geological formations and 
structure of the earth's crust are indispensable. Often, this information is given in the form of maps 
and plans annotated by conventional symbols. 

Until the present time, different symbols have been used for various fields of application within 
the country, resulting in entirely different representation of the same factor geological data. Under 
these circumstances, it has become necessary to eliminate these differences as far as possible and 
to reach some agreement on the use of a standard set of symbols and ornaments, so that maps and 
plans can be understood in the way throughout the country and in all languages. 

This standard is being issued in the following parts: 

Part I General rules of representation 

Part II Representation of sedimentary rocks 

Part III Representation of magnetic rocks 

Part IV Representation of metamorphic rocks 

Part V Representation" of minerals 

This standard is in conformity with ISO 710/1-1974 ' Graphical symbols for use on detailed 
maps, plans and geological cross sections, Part I General rules of representation' issued by 
International Organization for Standardization. 






Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



