**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9401-10 (1990) : Method of measurement of works in river 
valley projects (dams and appurtenant structures) : Part 10 
Form work [WRD 23: Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works 
For River Valley Projects] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^yj i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 9401 (Part 10) :1990 

t ». o-t J j ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN 

RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS ( DAMS AND 

APPURTENANT STRUCTURES ) 

PART 10 FORMWORK 



UDC 627-81-057-5O03-12 



(C BIS 1990 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAKBHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1990 Price Group 1 



Measurement of Works of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, RVD 23 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 25 January 1990, after the draft 
finalized by the measurement of works of River Valley Projects Sectional committee. 

In measurement of quantities, in construction of river valley projects a large diversity of methods exists 
at present according to local practices. This lack of uniformity creates complication regarding measure- 
ments and payments. This standard is intended to provide a uniform basis for measurement of form- 
work in the construction of river valley projects. 

The provisions contained in this standard shall generally have precedence over the provisions in 
IS 1200 ( Part 5 ) : 1982. However, the provisions of both the standards may be considered complimentary 
and supplementary to each other. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values » v revised)*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 9401 ( Part 10 ) : 1990 



Indian Standard 



METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN 

RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS ( DAMS AND 

APPURTENANT STRUCTURES ) 



PART 10 FORMWORK 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 10 ) covers the method of 
measurement of formwork with particular 
reference to River Valley Projects, where it is 
required to be measured separately. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard. 

IS No. Title 

IS 1200, Method of measurement of 

(Part 5) : 1982 building and civil engineering 

works; Part 5 Formwork 

( third revision ) 

3 GENERAL RULES 

3.1 Clubbing of Items 

Items may be clubbed together provided these 
are on the basis of the detailed description of 
items stated in this standard. 

3.2 Booking of Dimensions 

In booking dimensions the order shall be consiste nt 
and generaUy in the sequence of length, breadth/ 
width and height/depth. 

3.3 Description of Items 

The description of each item shall, unless stated 
otherwise, be held to include where necessary, 
transportation, handling, loading, unloading, 
storing, fabrication, hoisting, lowering, all labours 
for finishing to required shape, size and levels, 
striking and removal. 

3.4 Unit of Measurements 

All works shall be measured net in decimal system, 
fixed in its place as given below: 

a) Dimensions to the nearest 0*01 m; and 

b) Areas to the nearest 0*01 m 2 . 

3.5 Bills of Quantities 

The bills of quantities shall fully describe the 
materials and workmanship, and accurate ly 
represent the work to be executed. 



4 DESCRIPTION OF FORMWORK 

4.1 The formwork shall include the following: 

a) Splayed edges, notchings, allowance for 
overlaps, and passings at angles, sheating 
battens, strutting, bolting, nailing, wedging, 
easing, striking and removal; 

b) All supports, struts, braces, wedges as well as 
mud sills, piles or other suitable arrange- 
ments to support the formwork; 

c) Bolts, wire ties, ropes clamps spreaders, 
nails or any other items to hold the sheathing 
together; 

d) Filleting to form chamfered edges; 

e) Dressing with oil or use of Mould Releasing 
Agent to prevent adhesion; 

f) Raking or circular cutting; and 

g) In the event of gangways/stairways become 
slippery, spreading of sand and cleaning or 
otherwise to remedy the defect. 

5 TYPE OF FORMWORK 

5.1 Formwork for different type of finished surface 
shall be classified as follows: 

FINISH Fl — Surface where roughness is not 
objectionable and which are 
not exposed in general or likely 
to be plastered subsequently. 
Form sheathing may be of any 
material. 

FINISH F2 — Surfaces permanently exposed to 
view but no spe cial finish 
specified. Form material may 
be plywood, steel plate or thin 
steel lined wooden board. 

FINISH F3 — Surfaces which are exposed 
permanently and where appear- 
ance is of special importance, 
sheathing formed from tongue 
and groove boards or plywood 
sheets. 

FINISH F4 — Sheathing, having special lining 
or any other arrangement to 



IS 9401 ( Part 10 ) : 1990 



give accurate alignment and 
extra smooth eveitness of surface. 

FINISH F5 — Siipform shuttering. 

6 METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 

6.1 Formwork shall be measured separately for 
straight surfaces and curved surfaces. 

6.2 Formwork shall be measured in square metres 
of the actual surface in contact with concrete or 
any other material requiring formwork. Form- 
work to small features shall be enumerated. 
Formwork left in shall be so described. 



6 S 3 Where formwork is required to be lined with 
wall-board/hard board/polythene sheet/paper 
lining or to be coated with mould liquid or lime 
white, such formwork shall be as described and 
measured separately. 

6.4 Where lining of wall beard, asbestos, cork 
slab and the like is of permanent character, and is 
to be left in permanently, such lining shall be 
measured separately and the description shall 
include all necessary fixing. 

6.5 No deductions shall be made for any opening 
less than 0*4 m a . No deductions shall, however, 
be made for any opening/cutouts when siipform 
technique is used. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply 
with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard 
marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any from without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type of grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent in BIS giving the 
following reference : 



Doc : No.RVD23(4420) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur ShahZafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephone : 331 01 31, 331 13 15 

Regional Offices : 

Central 



Eastern 

Northern 
Southern 

Western 

Branches 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110001 

1/14, C.IT. Scheme VH M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, 
CALCUTTA 700054 

SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all Offices) 

Telephone 

f 331 01 31 

\ 331 13 75 

37 86 62 



2 18 43 

41 29 16 

6 32 92 95 



AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. PATNA. THlRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at the Ceneral Electric Press, Delhi, India 



