INAT Wdh IS 14543 : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


Packaged Drinking Water (Other 
than Packaged Natural Mineral 
Water) — Specification 


(Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.060.20 


© BIS 2016 


RG AH BRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM A, 9 Tes AHL Ht, Ae feect-110002 
=/ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2016 Price Group 8 


Drinks and Drinking Water Sectional Committee, FAD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Drinks and Drinking Water Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1998. In formulating this standard, assistance had been derived from 
following: 


a) Manual on water supply and treatment (third edition), 1991, prepared by expert Committee constituted 
under the Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi. 

b) Codex Code of practice for collecting, processing and marketing of natural mineral waters (CAC/RCP33- 
1985). 


c) EEC Directive, 80/778/EEC relating to the quality of water intended for human consumption. 


Consumption of packaged water for drinking purposes has been increasing considerably in the country. Apart 
from water shortages at times, real and perceived needs to safeguard health have also contributed to an escalating 
trade in packaged drinking water at the national and international level. Considering the consumers’ health and 
safety it has become imperative to ensure that the packaged water offered for sale is safe and free from harmful 
organisms. 


This revision has been undertaken to incorporate eight amendments. The following changes have been made in 
this revision: 


a) Definition of packaged drinking water has been revised and the permitted treatments that were earlier a 
part of the definition, have now been brought under general requirements. 

b) The limits for the requirements of Barium, Cadmium and Arsenic have been modified to align with the 
WHO Guidelines for drinking water. 


c) There is also a modification of the range of pH of the product based on local conditions. 


d) An additional Clause for “Marking on Water not Meant for Human Consumption” has been introduced 
to prevent usage of packaged water for other purposes from being consumed for drinking purposes. 


Separate standards have been formulated for packaged natural mineral water [see IS 13428 : 2005 ‘Packaged 
natural mineral water (second revision), and drinking water [see IS 10500 : 2012 ‘Drinking water (second revision)’. 


In the formulation of this standard due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 and Legal Metrology Act, 2009 and Rules framed thereunder. However, this standard is 
subject to the restrictions imposed under these rules and regulations, wherever applicable. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of the standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


PACKAGED DRINKING WATER (OTHER THAN 
PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER) — 
SPECIFICATION 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and methods 
of sampling and test for packaged drinking water (other 
than natural mineral water) offered for consumption 
and/or for sale in packaged form. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
shall apply. 


3.1 Drinking Water (Other than Natural Mineral 
Water), means water from any potable water source 
including public drinking water supply systems 
(see IS 10500). 


3.2 Packaged Drinking Water (Other than Packaged 
Natural Mineral Water), means water, other than 
natural mineral water that is likely to be used for human 
consumption and that is offered or sold in packaged 
form, by whatever name it may be called, offered or 
sold. 


4 HYGIENIC CONDITIONS 


Source water shall be collected, processed, handled, 
packaged and marketed in accordance with the 
hygienic practices given in Annex B. A check list for 
good hygienic practices and food safety system for 
packaged water processing units is given in Annex C. 


5 REQUIREMENTS 
5.1 General Requirements 


5.1.1 Water shall be derived from surface water or civic 
water supply or underground water or sea water or any 


other consistent source of water which may be 
subjected to herein under specified treatments, namely, 
decantation, filtration, combination of filtration, 
aerations, filtration with membrane filter depth filter, 
cartridge filter, activated carbon filtration, 
demineralization, remineralization, reverse osmosis 
and packed after disinfecting the water to a level that 
shall not lead to any harmful effect in the drinking water 
by means of chemical agents or physical methods to 
reduce the number of micro-organisms to a level below 
scientifically accepted level for food safety or its 
suitability: Provided that sea water, before being 
subjected to the above treatments, shall be subjected 
to desalination and related processes. 


5.1.2 It shall be filled in sealed containers of various 
compositions, forms and capacities that are suitable 
for direct consumption without further treatment. In 
case remineralization is a part of the treatment process, 
the ingredients used shall conform to food grade/ 
pharma grade quality. 


5.2 Microbiological Requirements 


Packaged drinking water shall comply with the 
requirements given in 5.2.1 to 5.2.9. 


5.2.1 Escherichia coli (or thermotolerant bacteria) shall 
be absent in any 250 ml sample when tested in 
accordance with the method given in IS 15185. 


5.2.2 Coliform, bacteria shall be absent in any 250 ml 
sample when tested in accordance with the method 
given in IS 5401 (Part 1) (see Note) or IS 15185. 


NOTE — In case of dispute, the method indicated in IS 5401 
(Part 1) shall be the reference method. 


5.2.3 Faecal Streptococci and Staphylococcus Aureus, 
shall be absent in any 250 ml sample when tested in 
accordance with the method given in IS 5887(Part 2) 
Faecal Streptococci (Enterococci) may also be tested 
by the method specified in IS 15186. 


NOTE — In case of dispute, the method indicated in IS 5887 
(Part 1) shall be the reference method 


5.2.4 Sulphite Reducing Anaerobes, shall be absent in 
50 ml sample when tested in accordance with the 
method given in Annex C of IS 13428. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


5.2.5 Pseudomonas Aeruginosa, shall be absent in 
250 ml sample when tested in accordance with the 
method given in Annex D of IS 13428. 


5.2.6 Aerobic Microbial Count 


The total viable colony count shall not exceed 100/ml 
at 20 to 22°C in 72 h and 20/ ml at 37 + 1°C in 24h 
when tested in accordance with the methods given in 
IS 5402. 


5.2.7 Yeast and mould shall be absent in 250 ml sample 
when tested in accordance with the method given in 
IS 5403 (see Note under 5.2.9). 


5.2.8 Salmonella and Shigella, shall be absent in 250 
ml sample when tested in accordance with the method 
given in IS 15187 and IS 5887 (Part 7) (see Note), 
respectively. 


5.2.9 Vibrio cholera and V. parahaemolyticus, shall 
be absent in 250 ml sample when tested in accordance 
with the method given in IS 5887 (Part 5) (see Note). 


NOTE — The membrane filtration technique outlined in 
IS 15188 may be used to pass the sample of water to be tested 
through membrane before the microbiological tests specified 
from 5.2.1 to 5.2.5 and 5.2.7 to 5.2.9 are carried out. 


5.3 Packaged drinking water shall be clear without any 
sediments, suspended particles and extraneous matter. 
It shall also comply with the requirements given in 
Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4. 


5.4 In the packaged drinking water, the maximum limit 
of the pesticide residues for pesticides as given in 
Annex D shall be as follows: 


SI No. Parameters Limits 
1) Pesticide residues Not more than 
considered 0.000 1 mg/l 
individually 


Not more than 
0.000 5 mg/1 


ii) Total pesticide 
residue 


5.4.1 The analysis for pesticide residues shall be 
conducted by a recognized laboratory using 


internationally established test methods meeting the 
residues limits specified above as given in Annex D. 


6 PACKING 


It shall be packed in clean, hygienic, colourless, 
transparent and tamperproof bottles/pouches, made of 
polyethylene (PE) conforming to IS 10146 or polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC) conforming to IS 10151 or 
polypropylene conforming to IS 10910 or polyalkylene 
terephthalate (PET and PBT) conforming to IS 12252 
or polycarbonate conforming to IS 14971 or 
polystyrene conforming to IS 10142 or sterile glass 
bottles/pouches suitable for preventing possible 
adulteration or contamination of the water or 
polyethylene flexible pouches conforming to IS 15609. 
Plastic containers shall be conforming to IS 15410. 
Guidelines for handling of polyethylene flexible 
pouches are given in Annex E. 


All packaging materials of plastic origin shall pass the 
overall migration and colour migration limits as laid 
down in the relevant Indian Standards for products for 
respective packaging materials when tested as per 
method given in IS 9845. 


7 MARKING 


7.1 The following particulars shall be marked legibly 
and indelibly on the label of the bottle/container: 

a) Name of the product (that is packaged 
drinking water); 

b) Name and address of the processor; 

c) Brand name, if any; 

d) Batch or Code number; 

e) Date of processing/packing; 

f) Treatment of disinfection, if any; 

g) Best before ... (date/month/year in capital 
letters); or Best before within... days or 
months from the date of packing/manufacture; 

h) Net quantity; 

j) Direction for storage; 


k) Keep the container away from direct sunlight; 
and 


Table 1 Organoleptic and Physical Parameters 
(Clause 5.3) 


SI No. Characteristic 
(1) (2) 

i) Colour, true colour units, Max 

ii) Odour 
iii) Taste 
iv) Turbidity, nephelometric 

turbidity unit (NTU), Max 

v) Total dissolved solids, mg/1, Max 
vi) pH 


Agreeable [Action Tendency Scale (a) or (b) or (c)] 


Requirement Method of Test, Ref to IS 
(3) (4) 
2 3025 (Part 4) 
Agreeable 3025 (Part 5) 


3025 (Part 8) 


2 3025 (Part 10) 
500 3025 (Part 16) 
6.0 - 8.5 3025 (Part 11) 


(Clause 5.3) 


IS 14543 : 2016 


Table 2 General Parameters Concerning Substances Undesirable in Excessive Amounts 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Barium (as Ba), mg/1, Max 0.7 Annex F of IS 13428 or 
IS 15302 or IS 3025 (Part 2) 
ii) Copper (as Cu), mg/1, Max 0.05 IS 3025 (Part 42)” or 
IS 3025 (Part 2) 
iii) Iron (as Fe), mg/1, Max 0.1 IS 3025 (Part 53)” or 15303 or 
IS 3025 (Part 2) 
iv) Manganese (as Mn), mg/1, Max 0.1 IS 3025 (Part 59)” or IS 3025 (Part 2) 
v) Nitrate (as NO3) mg/1, Max 45 IS 3025 (Part 34) 
vi) Nitrite (as NO2), mg/1, Max 0.02 IS 3025 (Part 34) 
vii) Fluoride (as F), mg/1, Max 1.0 IS 3025 (Part 60) 
viii) Zinc (as Zn), mg/1, Max 5 IS 3025 (Part 49)” or IS 3025 (Part 2) 
ix) Silver (as Ag), mg/1, Max 0.01 Annex J of IS 13428 
x) Aluminium (as Al), mg/1, Max 0.03 IS 3025 (Part 55) or IS 15302 
xi) Chloride (as Cl), mg/1, Max 200 IS 3025 (Part 32) 
xii) Selenium (as Se), mg/1, Max 0.01 IS 3025 (Part 56) or IS 15302 
xiii) Sulphate (as SO,), mg/1, Max 200 IS 3025 (Part 24) 
xiv) Alkaliniity (as HCO;), mg/1, Max 200 IS 3025 (Part 23) 
xv) Calcium (as Ca), mg/1, Max 75 IS 3025 (Part 40)” or IS 3025 (Part 2) 
xvi) Magnesium (as Mg), mg/1, Max 30 IS 3025 (Part 46)” or IS 3025 (Part 2) 
xvii) Sodium (as Na), mg/1, Max 200 IS 3025 (Part 45)” or IS 3025 (Part 2) 
xviii) Residual free chloride, mg/1, Max 0.2 IS 3025 (Part 26) 
xix) Phenolic compounds (as C6HsOH), Absent Clause 6 of IS 3025 (Part 43) 
xx) Mineral oil Absent Clause 6 of IS 3025 (Part 39) 
xxi) Anionic surface active agents (as MBAS), 0.2 Annex K of IS 13428” or IS 15303 
mg/l, Max 
xxii) Sulphide (as H2S), mg/1, Max 0.05 IS 3025 (Part 29) 
xxiii) Antimony (as Sb), mg/1, Max 0.005 Annex G of IS 13428” or IS 15303 
xxiv) Borates (as B), mg/1, Max 5 Annex H of IS 13428” or IS 3025 (Part 2) 
xxv) Bromates (as BrO3), mg/l, Max 0.01 ISO 15061 : 2001 
NOTES 


1 Approved international standard test methods from organizations like ISO/APHA/ ASTM/ AOAC/EPA/EN may also be followed. 


2 In case of dispute, methods given at col 4 and wherever indicated by’ shall be the reference method. 


Table 3 Parameters Concerning Toxic Substance 


(Clause 5.3) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
(69) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Mercury (as Hg), mg/l, Max 0.001 IS 3025 (Part 48) 
ii) Cadmium (as Cd), mg/l, Max 0.003 IS 3025 (Part 41) 
iii) Arsenic (as As), mg/l, Max 0.01 IS 3025 (Part 37) 
iv) Cyanide (as CN) Absent Clause 2 of IS 3025 (Part 27) 
v) Lead (as Pb), mg/l, Max 0.01 IS 3025 (Part 37) 
vi) Chromium (as Cr), mg/l, Max 0.05 Annex J of IS 13428” or 
IS 3025 (Part 2) 
vii) Nickel (as Ni), mg/l, Max 0.02 Annex L of IS 13428 
viii) Polychlorinated biphenyle (PCB) Not detectable Annex M of 13428 
ix) Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons Not detectable APHA 6440 
NOTES 


1 Approved international standard test methods from organizations like ISO/APHA/ASTM/AOAC/EPA/EN may also be followed. 


2 In case of dispute, methods given at col 4 and wherever indicated by'®™ shall be the reference method. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


Table 4 Parameters Concerning Radio-Active Residues 
(Clause 5.3) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Alpha emitters, Becquerel (Bq/l), Max 0.1 IS 14194 (Part 2) 
ii) Beta emitters, Becquerel (Bq/l), Max 1 IS 14194 (Part 1) 


NOTE — In case of non-conformity of radioactive residues, the source of water shall be abandoned and water shall be recalled 


immediately. 


m) Any other information required under the 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) 
Rules, 2011 and the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging and Labelling) 
Regulations, 2011. 


7.2 Labelling Prohibitions 


7.2.1 No claims concerning medicinal (Preventative, 
alleviative or curative) effects shall be made in respect 
of the properties of the product covered by this 
standard. Claims of other beneficial effects related to 
the health of the consumer shall not be made. 


7.2.2 The name ofthe locality, hamlet or specified place 
may not form part of the brand name unless it refers to 
a packaged drinking water collected processed at the 
place designated by that brand name. 


7.2.3 The use ofany statement or of any pictorial device 
which may create confusion in the mind of the public 
or in any way mislead the public about the nature 
origin, composition and properties of drinking water 
is prohibited. 


7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


7.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. The 
details of the conditions under which the licence for 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


8 MARKING ON WATER NOT MEANT FOR 
HUMAN CONSUMPTION 


The packaged water not likely to be used for human 
consumption shall be clearly marked, in red colour 
in both English and local language with the font size 
not less than any of the marking on the label, as 
follows: 


‘NOT MEANT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION’ 


9 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of the material shall be drawn 
and the criteria of conformity to this standard shall 
be established according to method described in 
Annex F. 


IS No. 
3025 


(Part 2) : 2004 


(Part 4) : 1983 
(Part 5) : 1983 
(Part 8) : 1984 
(Part 10) : 1984 
(Part 11) : 1983 
(Part 14) : 2013 
(Part 16) : 1984 
(Part 23) : 
(Part 24) : 
(Part 26) : 
(Part 27) : 
(Part 29) : 
(Part 32) : 
(Part 34) : 
(Part 37) : 
(Part 39) : 
(Part 40) : 
(Part 41) : 
(Part 42) : 
(Part 43) : 
(Part 45) : 
(Part 46) : 
(Part 47) : 
(Part 48) : 
(Part 49) : 
(Part 53) : 
(Part 55) : 
(Part 56) : 
(Part 59) : 2006 
(Part 60) : 2008 
4905 : 1968 
5401 (Part 1) : 
2012 


1986 
1986 
1986 
1986 
1986 
1988 
1988 
1988 
1991 
1991 
1992 
1992 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1994 
1994 
1994 
2003 
2003 
2003 


5402 : 2012 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Methods of sampling and test 
(Physical and chemical) for water 
and waste water: 

Determination of 33 elements by 
inductively coupled plasma atomic 
emission spectroscopy 

Colour (first revision) 

Odour (first revision) 

Taste rating (first revision) 
Turbidity (first revision) 

DH value (first revision) 

Specific conductance (Wheatstone 
bridge, conductance cell) 

Filterable residue (total dissolved 
solids) (first revision) 

Alkalinity (first revision) 

Sulphates (first revision) 

Chlorine, residual (first revision) 
Cyanide (first revision) 

Sulphide (first revision) 

Chloride (first revision) 

Nitrogen (first revision) 

Arsenic (first revision) 

Oil and grease 

Calcium 

Cadmium (first revision) 

Copper (first revision) 

Phenols (first revision) 

Sodium and potassium (first revision) 
Magnesium (first revision) 

Lead (first revision) 

Mercury (first revision) 

Zinc (first revision) 

Iron (first revision) 

Aluminium (first revision) 
Selenium (first revision) 
Manganese (first revision) 

Fluoride (first revision) 

Methods for random sampling 
Microbiology of food and animal 
feeding stuffs — Horizontal method 
for the detection and enumeration of 
coliforms : Part 1 colony count 
technique (second revision) 
Microbiology of food and animal 
feeding stuffs — Horizontal Method 
for the enumeration of micro- 
organisms — _  Colony-count 
technique at 30°C (second revision) 


IS No. 
5403 : 1999 


5887 


(Part 2) : 1976 


(Part 5) : 1976 


(Part 7) : 1999 


9845 : 1998 


10142 : 1999 


10146 : 1982 


10151 : 1982 


10500 : 
10910: 


2012 
1984 


12252 : 1987 


13428 : 2005 
14194 
(Part 1) : 2013 


(Part 2) : 2013 


14971 : 2001 


IS 14543 : 2016 


Title 


Method for yeast and mould count 
in foodstuffs and animal feed (first 
revision) 

Methods for detection of bacteria 
responsible for food poisoning: 
Isolation, identification and 
enumeration of Staphylococcus 
aureus and faecal streptococci (first 
revision) 

Isolation, identification and 
enumeration of Vibrio cholerae and 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus (first 
revision) 

General guidance on methods 
isolation and identification of 
Shigella 

Determination of overall migration 
of constituents of plastic aterials and 
articles intended to come in contact 
with foodstuffs — Method of 
analysis (second revision) 
Polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 
Polyethylene for safe its use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Drinking water (second revision) 
Polypropylene and its copolymers for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 
Polyalkylene terrephthalates (PET 
and PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Packaged natural mineral water 
(second revision) 

Radionuclides in environmental 
samples — Methods of estimation: 
Gross beta activity measurement 
(first revision) 

Gross alpha activity measurement 
(first revision) 


Polycarbonate resins for its safe use 


IS 14543 : 2016 


IS No. Title 


in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 


15185 : 2002 Water quality — Detection and 
enumeration of Escherichia coli and 
coliform bacteria — Membrane 


filtration method. 


15186 : 2002 Water quality — Detection and 


enumeration of intestinal enterococci 
— Membrane filtration method 


15187 : 2002 Water quality — Detection of 


Salmonella species 


15188 : 2012 Water quality — General guide to 


the enumeration of microorganisms 
by culture (first revision) 
Determination of aluminium and 


15302 : 2003 


IS No. Title 


barium in water by direct nitrous 
oxide-acetylene flame atomic 
absorption spectrometry 
Determination of antimony, iron and 
selenium in water by electrothermal 
atomic absorption spectrometry 
Containers for packaging of natural 
mineral water and packaged drinking 
water 
Polyethylene flexible pouches for 
packaging of natural mineral water 
and packaged drinking water — 
Specification 
ISO 15061 : 2001 Water quality — Determination of 
dissolved bromate — Method by 
liquid chromatography of ions 


15303 : 2003 


15410 : 2003 


15609 : 2005 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4) 
HYGIENIC PRACTICES 


B-1 FIELD OF APPLICATION 


The hygienic practices cover the appropriate general 
techniques for collecting drinking water, its treatment, 
bottling, packaging, storage, transport, distribution and 
sale for direct consumption, so as to guarantee a safe, 
healthy and wholesome product. 


B-2 HYGIENE PRESCRIPTIONS FOR 
COLLECTION OF DRINKING WATER 


B-2.1 Extraction or Collection 


In the case of extraction or collection of water intended 
for packaging from surface water or ground water or 
sea water sources or any other consistent source of 
water, it should be ensured that it is safe from pollution, 
whether caused by natural occurrence or actions or 
actions or neglect or ill will. 


B-2.2 Materials 


The pipes, pumps or other possible devices coming 
into contact with water and used for its collection 
should be made of such material that they do not change 
the quality of water. 


B-3 PROTECTIVE MEASURES 


B-3.1 All possible precautions should be taken within 


the protected perimeter to avoid any pollution of, or 
external influence on, the quality of the ground or 
surface water or sea water or any other consistent 
source of water. Preventive measures should be taken 
for disposal of liquid, solid or gaseous waste that could 
pollute the ground or surface water or sea water or any 
other consistent source of water. Drinking water 
resources should not be in the path of potential source 
of underground contamination. 


B-3.2 Protection of the Area of Origin 


The immediate surroundings of the extraction or 
collection area should be protected by limiting access 
to authorized persons only. Wellheads and spring 
outflows should be protected by a suitable structure to 
prevent entry by unauthorized individuals, pests and 
other sources of extraneous matter. 


B-4 TRANSPORT OF DRINKING WATER 
B-4.1 Means of Transport, Piping and Reservoirs 


Any vehicle, piping or reservoir used in the processing 
of water from its source to the bottling facilities, should 
be made of inert material such as ceramic and stainless 
steel which prevent any deterioration, be it by water, 
handling, servicing or by disinfection; it should allow 
easy cleaning. 


B-4.2 Maintenance of Vehicles and Reservoirs 


Any vehicle or reservoir should be properly cleaned 
and, if necessary, disinfected and kept in good repair 
so as not to present any danger of contamination of 
drinking water and of deterioration of its quality. 


B-5 ESTABLISHMENT FOR PROCESSING 
OF DRINKING WATER-DESIGN AND 
FACILITIES 


B-5.1 Location 


Establishments should be located in areas which are 
free from objectionable odours, smoke, dust or other 
contaminants and are not subject to flooding. When 
subsequent (after establishment of the unit) 
developments in the area result in any deterioration of 
the conditions, appropriate remedial measures shall be 
put in place to prevent contamination in the final 
product during its processing, filling, storage and 
dispatch. 


B-5.2 Roadways and Areas Used by Wheeled Traffic 


Such roadways and areas serving the establishment 
which are within its boundaries or in its immediate 
vicinity should have a hard paved surface suitable for 
wheeled traffic. There should be adequate drainage and 
provision should be made for protection of the 
extraction area. 


B-5.3 Building and Facilities 
B-5.3.1 Type of Construction 


Buildings and facilities should be of sound construction 
and maintained in good repair. 


One or more of the following should be installed on 
doors, hatches and other opening to the building to 
render opening pest proof: 


a) Doors, self-closing type; 
b) Air curtains; and 
c) Strip curtains. 
B-5.3.2 Disposition of Holding Facilities 


Rooms for recreation, for storing or packaging of water 
and areas for cleaning of containers to be reused should 
be apart from the bottling areas to prevent the end 
product from being contaminated. Raw materials and 
packaging materials and any other materials which 
come into contact with drinking water should be stored 
apart from other materials. 


B-5.3.3 Adequate working space should be provided 
to allow for satisfactory performance of all operations. 


B-5.3.4 The design should be such as to permit easy 
and adequate cleaning and to facilitate proper 
supervision of hygiene for drinking water. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


B-5.3.5 The buildings and facilities should be designed 
to provide separation by partition, location or other 
effective means between those operations which may 
cause cross-contamination. 


B-5.3.6 Buildings and facilities should be designed to 
facilitate hygienic operations by means of a regulated 
flow in the process from the arrival of the drinking 
water at the premises to the finished product, and 
should provide for appropriate conditions for the 
process and the product. 


B-5.3.7 Drinking Water Handling, Storing and Bottling 
Areas 


B-5.3.7.1 Floors 


Where appropriate, should be of water-proof, non- 
absorbent, washable, non-slip and non-toxic materials, 
without crevices, and should be easy to clean and 
disinfect. Where appropriate, floors should have 
sufficient slope for liquids to drain to trapped outlet. 


B-5.3.7.2 Walls 


Where appropriate, should be of water proof, non- 
absorbent, washable and non-toxic materials and 
should be light coloured. Up to a height appropriate 
for the operation they should be smooth and without 
crevices, and should be easy to clean and disinfect. 


Where appropriate, angles between walls, between 
walls and floors and between walls and ceilings should 
be sealed and smoothen to facilitate cleaning. 


B-5.3.7.3 Ceilings 


Should be so designed, constructed and finished as to 
prevent the accumulation of dirt and minimize, 
condensation, mould growth and flaking, and should 
be easy to clean. 


B-5.3.7.4 Windows 


Windows and other openings should be so constructed 
as to avoid accumulation of dirt and those which open 
should be fitted with screens. Screens should be easily 
movable for cleaning and kept in good repair. Internal 
window sills should be sloped to prevent use as shelves 
(see also B-5.3.1). 


B-5.3.7.5 Doors 


Should have smooth, non-absorbent surfaces and, 
where appropriate, be self closing and close fitting type 
(see also B-5.3.1). 


B-5.3.7.6 Stairs, lift cages and auxiliary structures 


Platforms, ladders, chutes, should be so situated and 
constructed as not to cause contamination to drinking 
water. Chutes should be constructed with provision of 
inspection and cleaning hatches. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


B-5.3.7.7 Piping 


Piping for drinking water lines should be independent 
of non-potable water. 


B-5.3.8 In drinking water handling areas all overhead 
structures and fittings should be installed in such a 
manner as to avoid contamination directly or indirectly 
of drinking water and raw materials by condensation 
and drip and should not hamper cleaning operations. 
They should be insulated where appropriate and be so 
designed and finished as to prevent the accumulation 
of dirt and to minimize condensation, mould growth 
and flaking. They should be easy to clean. 


B-5.3.9 Living quarter, toilets and areas where animals 
are kept should be completely separated and should 
not open directly on to drinking water handling areas. 


B-5.3.10 Where appropriate, establishments should be 
so designed that access can be controlled. 


B-5.3.11 The use of material which cannot be 
adequately cleaned and disinfected, such as, wood, 
should be avoided unless its use would not be a source 
of contamination. 


B-5.3.12 Canalization, Drainage Lines 


Canalization and drainage and used water lines should 
be built and maintained in such a manner as not to 
present any risk whatsoever of polluting the 
underground water source. 


B-5.3.13 Fuel Storage Area 


Any storage area or tank for the storing of fuels, such 
as, coal or hydrocarbons should be designed, protected, 
controlled and maintained in such a manner as not to 
present a risk of pollution during the storage and 
manipulation of these fuels. 


B-5.4 Hygienic Facilities 
B-5.4.1 Water Supply 


B-5.4.1.1 Ample supply of potable water under 
adequate pressure and of suitable temperature should 
be available with adequate facilities for its storage, 
where necessary, and distribution with adequate 
protection against contamination. The potable water 
should conform to IS 10500. 


B-5.4.1.2 Potable water, non-potable water for steam 
production or for refrigeration or for any other use 
should be carried in separate lines with no cross 
connection between them and without any chance 
of back siphonage. It would be desirable that these 
lines with no cross connection between them and 
without any chance of back siphonage. It would be 
desirable that these lines be identified by different 
colours. 


B-5.4.2 Effluent and Waste Disposal 


Establishments should have an efficient effluent and 
waste disposal system which should at all times be 
maintained in good order and repair. All effluent lines 
(including sewer system) should be large enough to 
carry the full loads and should be so constructed as to 
avoid contamination of potable water supplies. 


B-5.4.3 Changing Facilities and Toilets 


Adequate, suitable and conveniently located changing 
facilities and toilets should be provided in all 
establishment. Toilets should be so designed as to ensure 
hygienic removal of waste matter. These areas should 
be well lighted, ventilated and should not open directly 
on to drinking water handling areas. Hand washing 
facilities with warm or hot and cold water, a suitable 
hand cleaning preparation, and with suitable hygienic 
means of drying hands, should be provided adjacent to 
toilets and in such a position that the employee shall 
have to use them when returning to the processing area. 
Where hot and cold water are available mixing taps 
should be provided. Where paper towels are used, a 
sufficient number of dispensers and receptacles should 
be provided near each washing facility. Care should be 
taken that these receptacles for used paper towels are 
regularly emptied. Taps of a non-hand operatable type 
are desirable. Notices should be posted directing 
personnel to wash their hands after using the toilet. 


B-5.4.4 Hand Washing Facilities in Processing Area 


Adequate and conveniently located facilities for hand 
washing and drying should be provided wherever the 
process demands. Where appropriate facilities for hand 
disinfection should also be provided. Warm or hot and 
cold water should be available and taps for mixing the 
two should be provided. There should be suitable 
hygienic means of drying hands. Where paper towels 
are used, a sufficient number of dispensers and 
receptacles should be provided adjacent to each 
washing facility. Taps of a non-hand operatable type 
are desirable. The facilities should be furnished with 
properly trapped waste pipes leading to drains. 


B-5.4.5 Disinfection Facilities 


Where appropriate, adequate facilities for cleaning and 
disinfection of equipment should be provided. These 
facilities should be constructed of corrosion resistant 
materials, capable of being easily cleaned, and should 
be fitted with suitable means of supplying hot and cold 
water in sufficient quantities. 


B-5.4.6 Lighting 


Adequate lighting should be provided throughout the 
establishment. Where appropriate, the lighting should not 
alter colours and the intensity should not be less than, 


a) 540 lux (50 foot candles) at all inspection 
points, 

b) 220 lux (20 foot candles) in work rooms, and 

c) 110 lux (10 foot candles) in other areas. 


Suspended light bulbs and fixtures in any stage of 
production should be of a safer type and protected to 
prevent contamination of drinking water in case of 
breakage. 


B-5.4.7 Ventilation 


Adequate ventilation should be provided to prevent 
excessive heat, steam condensation and dust and to 
remove contaminated air. The direction of the air flow 
should never be from a dirty area to a clean area. 
Ventilation openings should be provided with a screen 
or other protecting enclosure of non-corrodible 
material. Screens should be easily removable for 
cleaning. 


B-5.4.8 Facilities for Storage of Waste and Inedible 
Material 


Facilities should be provided for the storage of waste 
and inedible material prior to removal from the 
establishment. These facilities should be designed to 
prevent access to waste or inedible material by pests 
and to avoid contamination of drinking water; 
equipment, buildings or roadways on the premises. 


B-5.5 Equipment and Utensils 
B-5.5.1 Materials 


All equipment and utensils used in drinking water 
handling areas and which may contact the drinking 
water should be made of material which does not 
transmit toxic substances, odour or taste, is non- 
absorbent, is resistant to corrosion and is capable of 
withstanding repeated cleaning and disinfection. 
Surfaces should be smooth and free from pits and 
crevices. The use of wood and other materials which 
cannot be adequately cleaned and disinfected should 
be avoided except when their use would not be a source 
of contamination. 


B-5.5.2 Hygienic Design, Construction and 


Installation 


All equipment and utensils should be so designed and 
constructed as to prevent hazards and permit easy and 
thorough cleaning and disinfection. 


B-6 ESTABLISHMENT 
B-6.1 Maintenance 


The buildings, equipment, utensils and all other 
physical facilities of the establishment, including 
drains, should be maintained in good repair and in an 
orderly condition. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


B-6.2 Cleaning and Disinfection 


B-6.2.1 To prevent contamination of drinking water, 
all equipment and utensils should be cleaned as 
frequently as necessary and disinfected, whenever 
circumstances demand. 


B-6.2.2 Adequate precautions should be taken to prevent 
drinking water from being contaminated during cleaning 
or disinfection of rooms, equipment or utensils, by wash 
water and detergents or by disinfectants and their 
solutions. Detergents and disinfectants should be suitable 
for the purpose intended. Any residues of these agents 
on a surface which may come in contact with drinking 
water should be removed by thorough rinsing with water, 
before the area or equipment is again used for handling 
drinking water. 


B-6.2.3 Either immediately after cessation of work for 
the day or at such other times as may be appropriate, 
floors, including drains, auxiliary structures and walls 
of water handling areas should be thoroughly cleaned. 


B-6.2.4 Changing facilities and toilets should be kept 
clean. 


B-6.2.5 Roadways and yards in the immediate vicinity 
of and serving the premises should be kept clean. 


B-6.3 Hygiene Control Programme 


A permanent cleaning and disinfection schedule should 
be drawn up for establishment to ensure that all areas 
are appropriately cleaned and that critical areas, 
equipment and material are designated for special 
attention. An individual, who should preferably be a 
permanent member of the staff of the establishment and 
whose duties should be independent of production, 
should be appointed to be responsible for the cleanliness 
of the establishment. He should have a thorough 
understanding of the significance of contamination and 
the hazards involved. All cleaning personnel should be 
well-trained in cleaning techniques. 


B-6.4 Storage and Disposal of Waste 


Waste material should be handled in such a manner as 
to avoid contamination of drinking water. Care should 
be taken to prevent access to waste by pests. Waste 
should be removed from the water handling and other 
working areas as often as necessary and at least daily. 
Immediately after disposal of the waste, receptacles 
used for storage and any equipment which has come 
into contact with the waste should be cleaned and 
disinfected. The waste storage area should also be 
cleaned and disinfected. 


B-6.5 Exclusion of Animals 


Animal that are uncontrolled or that could be a hazard 
to health should be excluded from establishments. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


B-6.6 Pest Control 


B-6.6.1 There should be an effective and continuous 
programme for the control of pests. Establishments and 
surrounding areas should be regularly examined for 
evidence of infestation. 


B-6.6.2 If pests gain entrance to the establishment, 
eradication measures should be instituted. Control 
measures involving treatment with chemical, physical 
or biological agents should only be undertaken by or 
under direct supervision of personnel who have a 
thorough understanding of the potential hazards to 
health resulting from the use of these agents, including 
those hazards which may arise from residues retained 
in the drinking water. 


B-6.6.3 Pesticides should only be used, if other 
precautionary measures cannot be used effectively. 
Before pesticides are applied, care should be taken to 
safeguard drinking water, equipment and utensils from 
contamination. After application, contaminated 
equipment and utensils should be thoroughly cleaned 
to remove residues prior to being used again. 


B-6.7 Storage of Hazardous Substances 


B-6.7.1 Pesticides or other substances which may 
present a hazard to health should be suitably labelled 
with a warning about their toxicity and use. They 
should be stored in locked rooms or cabinets, and 
dispersed and handled only by authorized and properly 
trained personnel or by persons under strict supervision 
of trained personnel. Extreme care should be taken to 
avoid contamination. 


B-6.7.2 Except when necessary for hygienic or 
processing purposes, no substance which could 
contaminate drinking water should be used or stored 
in drinking water handling areas. 


B-6.8 Personal Effects and Clothing 


Personal effects and clothing should not be deposited 
in drinking water handling areas. 


B-7 PERSONNEL HYGIENE AND HEALTH 
REQUIREMENTS 


B-7.1 Hygiene Training 


Managers of establishments should arrange for 
adequate and continuing training of all water handlers 
in hygienic handling of water and in personal hygiene 
so that they understand the precautions necessary to 
prevent contamination of drinking water. 


B-7.2 Medical Examination 


Persons who come into contact with drinking water in 
the course of their work should have a medical 
examination prior to employment, if the official agency 


having jurisdiction acting on medical advice, considers 
that this is necessary, whether because of 
epidemiological considerations or the medical history 
of the prospective water handler. Medical examination 
of water handlers should be periodically carried out 
and when clinically or epidemiologically indicated. 


B-7.3 Communicable Diseases 


The management should take care to ensure that no 
person, whether known or suspected to be suffering 
from, or to be a carrier of disease likely to be 
transmitted or afflicted with infected wounds, skin 
infections, sores or diarrhoea, is permitted to work in 
any drinking water handling area in any capacity in 
which there is any likelihood of such a person directly 
or indirectly contaminating drinking water with 
pathogenic micro-organisms. Any person so affected 
should immediately report to the management. 


B-7.4 Injuries 


Any person who has a cut or wound should not 
continue to handle drinking water or contact surfaces 
until the injury is completely protected with a 
waterproof covering which is firmly secured and which 
is conspicuous in colour. Adequate first-aid facilities 
should be provided for this purpose. 


B-7.5 Washing of Hands 


Every person, while on duty in a drinking water 
handling area, should wash the hands frequently and 
thoroughly with a suitable hand cleaning preparation 
under running warm water. Hands should always be 
washed before commencing work, immediately after 
using the toilet, after handling contaminated material 
and whenever else necessary. After handling any 
material which might be capable of transmitting 
disease, hands should be washed and disinfected 
immediately. Notices requiring hand-washing should 
be displayed. There should be adequate supervision to 
ensure compliance with this requirement. 


B-7.6 Personal Cleanliness 


Every person engaged in a drinking water handling 
area should maintain a high degree of personal 
cleanliness while on duty and should, at all times while 
so engaged, wear suitable protective clothing including 
head covering and footwear, all of which should be 
cleanable, unless designed to be disposed off and 
should be maintained in a clean condition consistent 
with the nature of the work in which the person is 
engaged. Aprons and similar items should not be 
washed on the floor. When drinking water is 
manipulated by hands. Personnel should not wear any 
insecure jewellery when engaged in handling drinking 
water. 


B-7.7 Personal Behaviour 


Any behaviour which could result in contamination of 
drinking water, such as eating, use of tobacco, chewing 
(for example, gum sticks, betel nuts, etc) or unhygienic 
practices, such as, spitting, should be prohibited in 
drinking water handling areas. 


B-7.8 Visitors 


Precautions should be taken to prevent visitors as far 
as possible from visiting the drinking water handling 
areas. If unavoidable, the visitors should observe the 
provisions of B-6.8 and B-7.3. 


B-7.9 Supervision 


Responsible for ensuring compliance by all personnel 
with all requirements of B-6.1 to B-6.8 and the 
responsibility should be specifically allocated to 
competent supervisory personnel. 


B-8 ESTABLISHMENT: HYGIENIC PROCESSING 
REQUIREMENTS 


B-8.1 Raw Material Requirements 


To guarantee a good and stable quality of drinking water, 
the quality criteria should be monitored regularly. 


B-8.2 Should there be a perceptible lacking in meeting 
the requirements, necessary corrective measures are 
immediately to be taken. 


B-8.3 Treatment 


The treatment may include decantation, filtration, 
combination filtration (for example, membrane filters, 
depth filters, cartridge filters, activated carbon), 
demineralization, reverse osmosis, aeration, and 
disinfection. Sea water shall be subjected to 
desalination and related process before being subjected 
to the above processes. 


B-8.3.1 Processing should be supervised by technically 
competent personnel. 


B-8.3.2 All steps in the production process, including 
packaging, should be performed without unnecessary 
delay and under conditions which will prevent the 
possibility of contamination, deterioration, or the 
growth of pathogenic and spoilage micro-organisms. 


B-8.3.3 Rough treatment of containers should be 
avoided to prevent the possibility of contamination of 
the processed product. 


B-8.3.4 Treatments are necessary controls and should 
be such as to protect against contamination or 
development of a public health hazard and against 
deterioration within the limits of good commercial 
practice. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


B-8.4 Packaging Material and Containers 


B-8.4.1 All packaging materials should be stored in a 
clean and hygienic manner. The material should be 
appropriate for the product to be packed and for the 
expected conditions of storage and should not transmit 
to the product objectionable substances beyond the 
limits specified. The packaging material should be 
sound and should provide appropriate protection from 
contamination. Only packaging material required for 
immediate use should be kept in the packing or filling 
area. 


B-8.4.2 Product containers should not have been used 
for any purpose that may lead to contamination of the 
product. In case of new containers, if there is a 
possibility that they have been contaminated, should 
be cleaned and disinfected. When chemicals are used 
for these purposes, the container should be rinsed. 
Containers should be well drained after rinsing. Used 
and, when necessary, unused containers should be 
inspected immediately before filling. 


B-8.5 Filling and Sealing of Containers 


B-8.5.1 Packaging should be done under conditions 
that preclude the introduction of contaminants in the 
product. 


B-8.5.2 The methods, equipment and material used for 
sealing should guarantee a tight and impervious sealing 
and should not damage the containers nor deteriorate 
the physical, chemical, microbiological and 
organoleptic qualities of drinking water. 


B-8.6 Packaging of Containers 


The packaging of containers should protect the latter 
from contamination and damage and allow appropriate 
handling and storing. 


B-8.7 Lot Identification 


Each container shall be permanently marked with code 
to identify the producing factory and the lot. A lot is 
quantity of drinking water produced under identical 
conditions, all packages of which should bear a lot 
number that identifies the production during a 
particular time, interval and usually from a particular 
processing line or other processing unit. 


B-8.8 Processing and Production Records 


Permanent, legible and dated records of pertinent 
processing and production details should be kept 
concerning each lot. These records should be retained 
for a period that exceeds the shelf life of the product 
or longer, if required. Records should also be kept of 
the initial distribution by lot. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


B-8.9 Product Durability 


Product durability shall be declared on the container 
as per 7.1(g). It shall be based on in-house shelf life 
study for which proper records be maintained 
conforming to declared product durability. 


B-8.10 Storage and Transport of the End-Product 


The end-product should be stored and transported 


under such conditions as will preclude contamination 
with and/or proliferation of micro-organisms and 
protect against deterioration of the product or damage 
to the container. During storage, periodic inspection 
of the end-product should take place to ensure that only 
drinking water which is fit for human consumption is 
dispatched and that the end-product specification are 
complied with. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4) 


CHECKLIST FOR GOOD HYGIENE PRACTICES AND FOOD SAFETY SYSTEMS FOR 
PACKAGED DRINKING WATER PROCESSING UNITS 


SI No. 


Requirements 


() (2) 


Answers Remarks 


Applied Not Applied 


(3) (4) (5) 


i) Building, Facilities and Locations 


a) Is the facility location area free from objectionable odour, smoke, 
dust or other contaminants and not subject to flooding? 

b) Are the areas immediately surrounding the buildings, roads, 
packing places, suitably paved, grassed and kept clean? 

c) Isadequate facility for drainage of surroundings which is designed 
to handle peak load? 

d) Is the facility used for processing water free from domestic 
animals? 

e) Is the facility surroundings free from refuse, waste materials, 
rubbish, overgrown weeds and grasses? 

f) Are there adequate facilities for the disposal of effluents and 
wastes? 

g) Are the buildings and facilities of sound construction and 
maintained in good repair? 

h) Are the buildings and facilities designed and maintained to prevent 
entrance and harboring of pests and entry of contaminants? 

j) Are building and facilities designed to facilitate hygienic 
operations? 

ii) Plant and Physical Facilities 

a) Is adequate lighting provided at working station, hand washing 
area, and storage areas? 

b) Is the lighting intensity adequate: 


1) 540 lux in all inspection area, and 
2) 220 lux in work areas and walls 


IS 14543 : 2016 


0) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


c) 


d) 


J) 


k) 


Are light fixtures safety type and protected to prevent 
contamination in the event of breakage in the processing and 
packing area? 

Is adequate ventilation provided in processing areas to minimize 
odours, noxious fumes and condensates? 

Are the barriers/traps provided at drains to prevent the entry of 
rodents from the drains into the facility? 

Is effective screening provided against entry of birds, animals, 
insects, rodents, etc 

Are doors, hatches and other openings to the building constructed 
to render opening pest proof? 

Are floors, walls, ceilings, windows and doors so designed and 
constructed as to prevent accumulation of dust, dirt and render 
them washable? 

Is product in process and storage area adequately protected from 
any leakage from external surfaces and other sources of 
contamination? 

Are immediate surroundings of extraction or collection protected 
from entry of unauthorized persons? 


iii) Raw Water Processing 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


g) 


h) 


In case of extraction/collection for processing are the sources 
free from contaminations/ impurities? 

Are water storage tanks, pipe lines utilized for handling water 
constructed and so designed as to facilitate cleaning and 
inspection? 

Are inspections of containers/carriers/pipe lines of raw water 
supply performed for the material of construction and cleanliness? 
Are possible chances of contamination from incoming water 
assessed? 

Are water storage tanks effectively cleaned to prevent entry of 
pests and potential contaminator? 

Are the storage tanks periodically cleaned and records 
maintained? 

Are the processed water contact surfaces regularly cleaned and 
sanitized? 

Are all equipment utensils so designed and constructed as to 
prevent hygiene hazards and prevent easy cleaning and sanitation? 


iv) Post-processing Handling 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 


e) 
f) 


g) 


h) 


Are cleaning operation of bottles/containers so done as to preclude 
contamination of product and product contact services with 
residues? 

Has absence of residual cleaning chemicals been ensured? 

Is preventive maintenance in place for all processing machinery 
and equipment? 

Are the primary packing materials and containers of food grade 
conforming to relevant Indian Standards? 

Are packing and sealing, where required, monitored? 

Are containers visually /electronically inspected for their 
soundness? 

Are physical hazards prevented from entering into processed 
water? 

Are glassware excluded from production area? 


13 


IS 14543 : 2016 


0) 


(2) 


(3) (4) 


(5) 


v) Packaging Material and Finished Goods Storage 


a) 


b) 
c) 


d) 


Are the primary packing materials and containers of food grade 
conforming to relevant Indian Standards? 


Are packaging material inspected to ensure their suitability? 
Are the packing materials especially primary packing material 
properly stored and properly handled to preclude contamination? 
Are packaging material purchased, stored and handled in sanitary 
manner? 


vi) Finished Product Storage and Distribution 


a) 
b) 
c) 


h) 


Is first-in-first out (FIFO) of stored product maintained? 

Is storage properly sanitized and disinfected periodically? 
Are stores protected from pest infestations? 

Are coding and tracking clear and in place? 

Are the instruction clear and in place? 

Are hold/release procedure in place and product identified? 


Are the records maintained for batch number, date of and volume 
of production? 
Are transport containers/vehicles maintained in clean condition? 


vii) Customer Handling of Products 


a) 
b) 


c) 


Are the storage instructions provided on containers? 
Is the shelf life period/best before mentioned on containers in 
accordance with FSSAI requirements? 


Are instructions provided for handling defective/damaged 
products? 


viii) Sanitary Facilities and Control 


a) 


b) 
c) 


d) 


e) 


Are toilets provided in sufficient numbers and are they provided 
with: 

1) Doors of self-closing type? 

2) Opening directly into processing areas? 

3) Hand washing signs provided in appropriate language? 

4) Proper lighting and ventilation? 

5) Proper maintenance to keep in clean and tidy manner? 

Are hand washing facilities provided adequately and conveniently 
to wash hands, foot, elbow or sensor operated taps? 

Are germicidal soaps/soap solution and hand drying facility 
provided? 

Are notice/ instructions prominently pasted in toilet directing 
employees to wash their hands on entry and re-entry into the 
packaged drinking water handling areas? 

Are the refuse receptacles self closing type maintained in a manner 
to protect from contaminations? 


ix) Personnel Hygiene and Habits 


a) 
b) 
c) 


d) 


Is any individual assigned to supervise overall sanitation of plant 
and personnel? 


Is there any person responsible for day-to-day monitoring of 
health and hygiene? 

Have the employees in processing, packing and maintenance been 
medically examined? 


Are the personnel with infectious diseases, skin infection and 


14 


IS 14543 : 2016 


a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 


open lesion or any other source of microbial contamination 
excluded from working in process/packing areas? 


e) Are the following personnel hygiene practices regularly 

maintained and monitored: 

1) Clean outer garments-protective clothing? 

2) Personal cleanliness-finger nails? 

3) Head cover-hair restraints, caps, head bands, beard cover? 
4) No tobacco in any form-smoking, chewing? 

5) No eating at work stations? 

f) Are protective clothing stored on the premises and not allowed 
to be used for outside wear? 

g) Are there clear legible notices defining limits of no smoking 
areas such as ‘NO SMOKING BEYOND THIS POINT’ 
displayed? 

h) Are personnel imparted regular training or hygienic food 
handling, processing food and personal hygiene? 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 5.4.1) 
STANDARDS ON METHODS OF RESIDUE ANALYSIS 


SI No. Characteristic Test Methods 
USEPA AOAC/ISO 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) DDT (o,p and p,p-isomers of DDT, DDE and DDD) 508 AOAC990.06 

ii) y-HCH (Lindane) 508 AOAC990.06 
iii) œ, B and HCH 508 AOAC 990.06 
iv) Endosulfan (a, B and Sulphate) 508 AOAC 990.06 
v)  Monocrotophos 8141 A = 
vi) Ethion 1657A — 

vii) Chlorpyrifos 525.28141A — 

viii) Phorate (Phorate and its oxygen analogue that is 8141A — 

phorate sulphoxide and phorate sulphone) 

ix) 2,4-D 515.1 — 
x) Butachlor 525.2, 8141A — 
xi) Isoproturon 532 — 

xii) Alchor 525.2,507 — 

xiii) Atrazine 525.2, 8141A — 

xiv) Methyl parathion (Methyl Parathion and its 8141A ISO 10695 

oxygen analogue that is methyl-paraoxon) 
xv) Malathion (Malathion and its oxygen analogue 8141A = 
xvi) Aldrin and dieldrin 525.2 AOAC 990.06 


NOTE — Test methods are for guidance and reference for testing laboratory. In case of two methods, USEP, method shall be the 
reference method. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 6) 


GUIDELINES FOR HANDLING OF POLYETHYLENE FLEXIBLE FILM 
MEANT FOR PACKING OF PACKAGED DRINKING WATER IN POUCHES 


E-1 Polyethylene flexible film meant for packing of 
packaged drinking water in pouches should have 
suitable sturdy and dust proof outer packing to prevent 
contamination during transport, storage and handling. 
The supplier must be instructed to apply such packing 
immediately after the film manufacture. Such outer 
packaging must remain intact till the final loading of 
the film on the pouch filling machine. Care should 
however be taken to clean such outer packaging and 
render the same dust-free before the same is carried 
into the filling room. 


E-2 Printing of the film must be done in such a way 
that the printing material does not interfere with the 
final product. 


E-3 Such film must be stored in dry, cool and dust- 
free environment away from strong smelling 
substances, chemicals, cleaning material, etc. It shall 
be ideal to have separate store rooms exclusive for 
packaging material. 


E-4 While handling the film the personnel should 
adhere to the following basic hygiene precautions: 


a) Finger nails of personnel should be trimmed 
close and well so that no unhygienic 
substances are found below the nail. 


b) Hands should be cleaned with disinfecting 
soap and dried, preferably gloved. 
c) Personnel should wear head cover and mask 


while handling the film. 


E-5 The pouch filling machine must have suitable 
means to sterilize the film prior to forming the pouch. 
UV sterilization may be considered taking into account 
the following aspects: 


a) The length and intensity of the lamps must 
be suitable for sterilizing the film on the active 
surface, that is, the surface that shall be in 
contact with the product and the speed of the 
machine. The equipment supplier’s certificate 
to that effect must be maintained for record. 
b) The UV lamp supplier must certify as to the 
expected life in number of hours. The filling 
machine should have a mechanism to monitor 
the number of hours of usage, suitably 
interlocked with the rest of the equipment so 
that a reliable method to record the actual 


usage is available. 


c) Partly used and unused film must be stored 
with all precautions in accordance with E-3. 
d) Guide-rods, etc, that may direct the film in 


the formation of the flexible packaging and 
other contact parts must be suitably sanitized 
with 3 percent hydrogen peroxide before start 
of every filling operation and records of the 
same maintained. 


E-6 Fumigation of the filling room with suitable agent 
is recommended. 


E-7 Size of the secondary packaging must take into 
account that at the retail point the flexible packaged 
drinking water is often refrigerated and so the 
secondary packaging should be of appropriate size to 
facilitate refrigeration in the secondary packaging 
itself. This would shield the pouches from 
contaminations. 


E-8 The following storage instructions must be issued 
to retailer/whole seller and all concerned in the supply 
chain: 


a) 


Packaged drinking water in flexible 
packaging must be handled with care. 

b) It should be stored away from sunlight and in 
a cool place. 

c) It should be hygienically stored in a place 
away from chemicals, paints pesticides and 
similar substances that can affect the product. 
d) It should also be stored away from strong 
smelling substances. 

e) Chilling the product with commercially 
produced ice must be discouraged as it would 
expose the consumer to product with possible 
contamination from ice produced with unsafe 
water. 

To check for any leakage, etc, before opening. 
Instruments used for opening/cutting sachets 
should be kept exclusive for these pouches in 
a suitable place to avoid any contamination 
and should not be used for cutting or opening 


any other non-food product. 


g) 


h) Consumer must be advised to use clean 


scissors to open sachet. 
j) Product should not be consumed, if any 
foreign material is found. 


IS 14543 : 2016 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 9) 
SAMPLING PLAN FOR PACKAGE DRINKING WATER 


F-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF 
SAMPLING FOR CONTAINERS UP TO AND 
INCLUDING 2 LITRE 


F-1.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 
samples, the following precautions and directions shall 
be observed as far as possible: 


a) Sample shall be drawn in original sealed 
bottle/container and kept protected place not 
exposed to damp air, dust or soot; and 

b) Each bottle/pouch in original shall be sealed 

and marked with full details of sampling. 


F-1.2 Scale of Sampling 
F-1.2.1 Lot 


The quantity of packaged drinking water of the same 
type belonging to the same batch of manufacture and 
packed in a day, shall constitute a lot. 


F-1.2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material 
to the requirements of the standard, samples shall be 
tested from each lot separately. 


F-1.2.3 The number of bottles/ pouches to be selected 
from a lot shall depend on the size of the lot and shall 
be according to Table 5. Separate bottle (s) shall be 
drawn for testing for the microbiological requirements. 


Additional bottles/ pouches may be drawn, if required 
for carrying out complete testing or when the samples 
are required to be sent in more than one laboratory. 


Table 5 Scale of Sampling 
(Clauses F-1.2.3, F-1.2.4 and F-1.3.1) 


SI No. No. of Bottles/Pouches Number of Samples 
in the Lot 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 5 000 
ii) 5 001 - 10 000 


10 001 - 15 000 
15 001 and above 


iii) 


On nw 


iv) 


F-1.2.3.1 The bottles/ pouches shall be chosen at 
random from the lot. In order to ensure the randomness 
of selection, procedure given in IS 4905 shall be 
followed. 


F-1.2.4 Initially the number of cartons/bags equal to 
the number of bottles/ pouches to be taken from the 
lot (according to col 3 of Table 5), shall be chosen at 
random. These cartons/bags thus selected shall be 


opened and the bottles/ pouches in these cartons/bags 
examined visually for the condition of packing, 
external appearance and the fill. The lot shall be 
considered satisfactory for inspection of other 
characteristics given in the standard, if all the bottles/ 
pouches in the cartons/bags opened are found 
satisfactory for these characteristics. 


F-1.2.5 In case any defective bottle/pouch is found 
according to F-1.2.4, twice the number of cartons/bags 
shall be opened and the bottles/ pouches examined for 
these characteristics. If no defective bottle is found; 
the lot shall be considered satisfactory for inspection 
of other characteristic given in the specification. 


F-1.3 Preparation of Test Samples 


F-1.3.1 From each of the cartons/bags opened 
according to F-1.2.4, three bottles/pouche shall be 
taken from its different layers so as to obtain three times 
the required number of bottles/pouches/ pouches in the 
sample (see col 3 of Table 5). 


F-1.3.2 In case the number of cartons/bags to be opened 
is according to F-1.2.4, the number of cartons/bags 
equal to the number of bottles/pouches in the sample 
shall be taken at random from these cartons/bags and 
then the required number of bottles/pouches picked 
up according to F-1.3.1. 


F-1.3.3 The sample bottles/pouches selected as in 
F-1.3.1 or F-1.3.2 shall be divided at random into three 
equal sets and labelled with all the particulars of 
sampling. One of these sets of sample bottles/pouches 
shall be for the purchaser, another for vendor and the 
third for referee. 


F-1.3.4 Referee Sample 


Referee sample shall consist of a set of sample bottles/ 
pouches marked for this purpose and shall bear the seals 
of the purchaser and the supplier. These shall be kept at 
a place agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier 
so as to be used in case of dispute between the two. 


F-1.4 Criteria for Conformity 


The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of the standard, if all the requirements 
are complied with. 


F-2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF 
SAMPLING FOR ABOVE 2 LITRE 
CONTAINERS 


F-2.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 


IS 14543 : 2016 


samples, the following precautions and directions shall 
be observed as far as possible: 


a) Sample shall be drawn in original sealed 
container and kept in protected place not 
exposed to damp air, dust or soot; and 

b) Each container in original shall be sealed and 

marked with full details of sampling. 


F-2.2 Scale of Sampling 
F-2.2.1 Lot 


The quantity of packaged drinking water of the same 
type belonging to the same batch of manufacture and 
packed in a day, shall constitute a lot. 


F-2.2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material 
to the requirements of the standard, samples shall be 
tested from each lot separately. 


F-2.2.3 The number of containers to be selected from 
a lot shall depend on the size of the lot and shall be 
drawn at random, according to Table 6. Separate 
container(s) shall be drawn for testing for the 
microbiological requirements. In order to ensure the 
randomness of selection, procedure given in IS 4905 
shall be followed. 


Table 6 Scale of Sampling 
(Clause F-2.2.3) 


SI No. No. of Bottles/Pouches Number of Samples 
in the Lot 
a) (2) (3) 
i) 0 - 500 5 
ii) 501 - 1 200 8 
iii) 1 201 - 3 200 13 
iv) 3 201 and above 20 


F-2.2.4 These containers shall first be examined 
visually for the condition of packing, external 
appearance and the fill. The lot shall be considered 
satisfactory for inspection of other characteristics given 
in the standard, if all the containers are found 
satisfactory for these characteristics. 


F-2.2.5 In case any defective container is found 
according to F-2.2.4, twice the number of containers 
shall examined for these characteristic(s). If no 
defective container is found, the lot shall be considered 
satisfactory for inspection of other characteristics given 
in this standard. 


F-2.3 Preparation of Test Samples 


F-2.3.1 Out of the containers selected according 
to F-2.2.3, any three containers shall be selected at 
random and stored separately. 


F-2.3.2 Each of the sample containers selected as 
in F-2.3.1 shall be divided at random into three equal 
sets and labelled with all the particulars of sampling. 
One of these sets of sample containers shall be for the 
purchaser, another for vendor and the third for referee. 


F-2.3.3 Referee Sample 


Referee sample shall consist of a set of sample 
containers marked for this purpose and shall bear the 
seals of the purchaser and the supplier. These shall be 
kept at a place agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier so as to be used in case of dispute between 
the two. 


F-2.4 Criteria for Conformity 


The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of the standard, if all the requirements 
are complied with. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 14 (2660). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2017 
TO 
IS 14543 : 2016 PACKAGED DRINKING WATER (OTHER 
THAN PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER) — 
SPECIFICATION 


(Second Revision) 
[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xii), col 4] — Delete ‘or IS 15302’. 


[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xiv), col 2] — Substitute ‘Alkalinity (as HCOs), 
mg/l, Max’ for the existing. 


[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xxi), col 4] — Delete ‘or IS 15303’. 


[Page 3, Table 3, SI No. (v), col 4] — Substitute ‘IS 3025 (Part 47)’ for the 
existing. 


(FAD 14) 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 2 DECEMBER 2017 
TO 
IS 14543 : 2016 PACKAGED DRINKING WATER (OTHER 
THAN PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER) — 
SPECIFICATION 


(Second Revision) 
(Page 2, clause 6) — Insert the following at the end of the clause: 


‘Blue tint as per list of pigments and colorants permitted in IS 9833 may be 
allowed in plastic container of 5 litre and above made of Polycarbonate and 
Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) used for packaged drinking water, provided 
the overall migration of pigment or colour used in container shall not be more 


than 60 mg/litre as per IS 9845.’ 


(FAD 14) 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 3 JANUARY 2019 
TO 
IS 14543 : 2016 PACKAGED DRINKING WATER (OTHER 
THAN PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER) — 
SPECIFICATION 


(Second Revision) 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 3025 (Part 5) : 2018 Methods of 
sampling and test (physical and chemical) for water and waste water :Part 5 
Odour (second revision)’ for ‘IS 3025 (Part 5) : 1983 Methods of sampling and 
test (physical and chemical) for water and waste water: Part 5 Odour (first 
revision)’. 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 4905 : 2015 Random sampling and 
randomization procedures (first revision)’ for ‘IS 4905 : 1968 Methods for 
random sampling’. 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 10146 : 1982 Polyethylene for its safe 
use in contact with food stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water’ for 
‘IS 10146 : 1982 Polyethylene for its safe use in contact with food stuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water (first revision)’. 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 12252 : 2017 Polyalkylene 
terephthalates (PET and PBT), their copolymers and list of constituents in raw 
materials and end products for their safe use in contact with foodstuffs and 
pharmaceuticals (first revision)’ for ‘IS 12252 : 1987  Polyalkylene 
terephthalates (PET and PBT) for their safe use in contact with food stuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water’. 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 15185 : 2016 Water quality — 
Detection and enumeration of Escherichia coli and coli form bacteria — 
Membrane filtration method for water with low bacterial background flora (first 
revision)’ for ‘IS 15185 : 2002 Water quality — Detection and enumeration of 
Escherichia coli and coli form bacteria — Membrane filtration method’. 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 15187 : 2016 Water quality — 
Detection of Salmonella species (first revision)’ for ‘IS 15187 : 2002 Water 
quality — Detection of Salmonella species’. 


Amendment No. 3 to IS 14543 : 2016 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 15303 : 2003 Determination of 
antimony, iron and selenium in water by electro thermal atomic absorption 
spectrometric method’ for ‘IS 15303 : 2003 Determination of antimony, iron 
and selenium in water by electro thermal atomic absorption spectrometry’. 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 3025 (Part 67) : 2018 Methods of 
sampling and test (physical and chemical) for water and waste water : Part 67 
Determination of dissolved bromate — Method by liquid chromatography of 
ions’ for ‘ISO 15061 : 2001 Water quality — Determination of dissolved 
bromate — Method by liquid chromatography of ions’. 


(FAD 14) 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 4 NOVEMBER 2019 
TO 
IS 14543 : 2016 PACKAGED DRINKING WATER (OTHER 
THAN PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER) — 
SPECIFICATION 


(Second Revision) 
[Page 2, clause 7.1 a)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


ʻa) Name of the product in capital letters (that is, PACKAGED DRINKING 
WATER);’ 


[Page 2, clause 7.1 g)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
‘g) BEST BEFORE........ (DATE/MONTH/YEAR); or BEST 
BEFORE. ....... DAYS OR MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF PACKAGING/ 
MANUFACTURE (in capital letters);’ 


[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xviii), col 2] — Substitute ‘Residual free 
chlorine, mg/l, Max’ for ‘Residual free chloride, mg/l, Max’ 


(Page 4, clause 8) — Delete. 


(FAD 14) 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 5 JUNE 2020 
TO 


IS 14543 : 2016 PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
( OTHER THAN PACKAGED NATURAL 
MINERAL WATER ) — SPECIFICATION 


(Second Revision ) 


(Page 3, Table 2, Note 1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘D Approved and validated international test methods from ISO/APHA/ASTM/AOAC/EPA/EN may also 
be followed.’ 


(Page 3, Table 3, Note 1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘D Approved and validated international test methods from ISO/ APHA/ASTM/AOAC/EPA/EN may also 
be followed.’ 


(FAD 14) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 6 FEBRUARY 2021 
TO 


IS 14543 : 2016 PACKAGED DRINKING WATER (OTHER 
THAN PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER) — 
SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


(Page 1, clause 5.1.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘5.1.1 Water shall be derived from surface water or civic water supply or 
underground water or sea water or any other consistent source of water which 
may be subjected to herein under specified treatments, namely, decantation, 
distillation, filtration, combination of filtration, aerations, filtration with membrane 
filter, depth filter, cartridge filter, activated carbon filtration, demineralization, 
remineralization, reverse osmosis and packed after disinfecting the water to a 
level that shall not lead to any harmful effect in the drinking water by means of 
chemical agents or physical methods to reduce the number of micro-organisms 
to a level below scientifically accepted level for food safety or its suitability: 
Provided that sea water, before being subjected to the above treatments, shall be 
subjected to desalination and related processes.’ 


(Page 1, clause 5.2.3, Note) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
‘NOTE — In case of dispute, the method indicated in IS 5887 (Part 2) shall be the referee 
method’. 


(Page 2, clause 5.2.8, line 3) — Substitute ‘(see Note under 5.2.9)’ for 
‘(see Note)’. 


(Page 2, clause 5.2.9, Note, line 4) — Substitute ‘5.2.1 to 5.2.3, 5.2.5’ 
for ‘5.2.1 to 5.2.5’. 


(Page 2, clause 6) — Insert the following at the end: 
‘Glass bottles shall be conforming to IS 1107 or IS 11984.’ 


[Page 2, clause 7.1 g)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘g) BEST BEFORE........ (DATE/MONTH/YEAR); or BEST 
BEFORE........ DAYS OR MONTHS FROM  PACKAGING/ 
MANUFACTURE (in capital letters);’ 


[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xix), col 2] — Substitute ‘Phenolic compounds (as 
C,H.OH), mg/l, Max’ for “Phenolic compounds (as C,H.OH)’. 


[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xix), col 3] — Substitute ‘0.001’ for ‘Absent’. 


[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xx), col 2] — Substitute ‘Mineral oil, mg/l, Max’ 
for ‘Mineral oil’. 


[Page 3, Table 2, SI No. (xx), col 3] — Substitute ‘1.0’ for ‘Absent’. 


(Page 3, Table 3) — Insert the following new entry at the end: 


Table 3 
SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
x) Uranium, mg/l, Max 0.03 IS 3025 (Part 65) 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Substitute ‘IS 3025 (Part 2) : 2019 Methods of sampling 
and test (physical and chemical) for water and waste water: Part 2 Determination 
of selected elements by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry 
(ICP-OES) (first revision)’ for ‘IS 3025 (Part 2) : 2004 Methods of sampling and 
test (physical and chemical) for water and waste water : Part 2 Determination of 
33 elements by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry’ 


(Page 5, Annex A) — Insert the following new entries at appropriate places: 


IS No. Title 


1107 : 1986 Specification for aerated water glass bottles, crown finish 
type (second revision) 


IS No. Title 


3025 (Part 65): Methods of sampling and test (physical and chemical) for 
2014 water and waste water: Part 2 Application of inductively 
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) — 

Determination of 62 elements 


11984 : 1986 Specification for glass bottles for free flowing liquids 


(FAD 14) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


