IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998

!vvj9Trn

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

*e&m
Orml*H&W

Indian Standard

PULSE TECHNIQUES AND APPARATUS
PART 1 PULSE TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

ICS 33.120.10

c

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 PriceGroup 7

February 1998

Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee, LTD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard @`act1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Eltctr~ttics and Telecommunication Division Council. `The objective of this standard (Part 1) is to standardize the definitions of an internally consistent, mathematically rigorous and general set of pulse terms which am applicable to a wide range of technologies and disciplines. The terms are also applicable in a measurement situation, regardless of the means of measurement or the means for waveform evaluation employed. This standard (Part 1) covers pulse terms and definitions. The Part 2 of this standard covers pulse measurement and analysis, general considerations. This standard (Part 1) is largely based on IEC Pub 469-l(1987) `Pulse techniques and apparatus: Part 1 Pulse terms-and definitions', issued by the Ihtemational Electrotechnical Commission.

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998

Indian Standard

PULSE.TECHNIQUESANDAPPARATUS
PART 1 PULSE TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
1 SCOPE This standard (Part 1) provides fundamental definitions for general use in time domain pulse technology. It defines terms fot pulse phenomena and pulse characteristics which are prerequisite to: technical communication of efficient information, standards for methods of pulse characteristic measurement, standards for pulse apparatus, and standards for apparatus which employ pulse techniques.
NOTE--Throughout the remainder of this standard, is included in `pulse' and `wave'.

`transition'

2.3 Waveform, Epoch and Feature 2.3.1 Waveform, Waveform Pulse Waveform, Transition

A manifestation or representation [for example, graph, plot, oscilloscope presentation, equation(s), table of co-ordinates or statistical data] or a visualization of a wave, pulse or transition.
NOTE Thn~ughout the rcmaindcr of this standard:

`pulse waveform' is included in `waveform'. `transition waveform' is included in `pulse waveform' and `waveform'.

2 GENERAL TERMS 2.1 Co-ordinate System Throughout the following, a rectangular Cartesian co-ordinate system is assumed in which, unless otherwise specified: time (t) is the independent variable taken along the horizontal axis, increasing in the positive sense from left to right; magnitude (m) is the dependent variable taken along the vertical axis, increasing in the positive sense or polarity from bottom to top; the following additional symbols are used: = base of natural logarithms; e a, 6, c, etc= real parameters which unless otherwise specified may have any value and either sign; and = a positive integer. n

2.3.2 Wavefonn Epoch The span of time for which waveform data are known or knowable. A waveform epoch manifested by equations may extend in time from -00 to +m or, like all waveform data, may extend from a first datum time &J to a second datum time t1 (see Fig. 1). 2.3.3 Waveform Feature A specified portion or segment of, or a specified event in, a waveform. 2.4 Qualitative Adjectives The adjective in this clause may be used individually or in combination, or in combination with adjectives in 2.5, to modify any substantive term in this standard. 2.4.1 Descriptive Adjectives 2.4.1.1 Major (minor) Having or pertaining to greater (lesser) importance, magnitude, time, extent, or the like. than another similar feature(s). 2.4.1.2 Ideal Of or pertaining to perfection in, or existing as a perfect exemplar of, a waveform or a feature. 2.4.1.3 Reference Of or pertaining to a time, magnitude, waveform feature or the like, which is used for comparison with, or evaluation of, other times, magnitudes, waveforms,
1

-

-

2.2 Wave, Pulse and Transition 2.2.1 Wove A modification of the physical state of a medium which propagates in that medium as a function of time as a result of one or more disturbances. 2.2.2 Pulse A wave which departs from a first nominal state, attains a second nominal state and ultimately returns to the first nominal state.
NOTEThroughout the remainder of this standard, `pulse' is included in `wave'.

2.2.3 Transition A portion of a wave or pulse between a first nominal state and a second nominal state.

TIME ORIGIN UNE

PUEE

START TOPCENTREPW'T WLSESTOPIJNE

E

E
UNE
DltfAL

v--m--_-----

um

--

SSlUlJNE

PtJlSE START TIME
PULSE slop

TIME

b

IL

PULSE WAVEFORMEPOCH

FIG.1 SINGLEPULSEWAVEFORM

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998

features or the like. A reference entity mav. or may not, be an ideal entity. 2.4.2 Time-Related Adjectives 2.4.2.1 Periodic (aperiodic) Of or pertaining to a series of specified waveforms or features which repeat or recur regularly (irregularly) in time 2L4.2.2 Coherent (incoherent) Of or pertaining to two or more repetitive waveforms whose constituent features have (lack) time cotrelation. 2.43 Magnitude-Related APjectives Ofor pertaining to two or more repetitive waveforms whose sequential ronstituent features have (lack) time correlation. 2.4.3.1 Proximal (distal) Of or pertaining to a region near to (remote from) a fast state or region of origin. 2.4.3.2 Uesial Of or pertaining to,the region between the proximal and distal regions. 2.4.4 Polarity-Related Adjectives 2.4.4.1 Un%olar Of having or pertaining to a single polarity. 2.4.2.2 Bipolar Of having or pertaining to both polarities. 2.4.5 Geometrical Adjectives 2.4.5.1 Trapezoidal Having or approaching the shape of a trapezoid. 2.4.5.2 Rectangular Having or approaching the shape of a rectangle. 2.4.5.3 Triangular Having or approaching the shape of a triangle. 2.4.5.4 Sawtooth Having or approaching the shape of a right-angled triangle (see Fig. 2, waveform D). 2.4.5.5 Rounded Having a curved shape characterized by a relatively gradual change in slope. 2.5 Quantitative Adjectives
The adjectives in this clause may be used individually or in combination, with adjectives in 2.4, to modify any substantive term in this standard.

2.51 Integer Adjectives

The ordinal integers @tat is, first. second, .., nth, last) or the cardinal integers (that is, 1.2, .`..,n) may be used as adjectives to identify or distinguish between similar or identical features. The assignment of integer modifiers should be sequential as a function of time within a waveform epoch and/or within features thereof. 25.2 Mathematical Adjectives All definitions in this clause are stated in terms of time (the independent variable) and magnitude (the dependent variable), Unless otherwise specified, the following terms apply only to waveform data within a waveform epoch. These adjectives may also be used to describe the relation(s) between other specified variable pairs (for example, time and power, time and voltage). 2.5.2.1 Insmtaneous Pertaining to the magnitude at a specified time. 2.5.2.2 Positive (negative) peak Pertaining to the maximum (minimum) magnitude. 2.5.23 Peak-to-peak Pertaining to ,the absolute value of the algebraic difference between the positive peak magnitude and the negative peak magnitude. 2.5.2.4 Root-mean-square (rms) Pertaining to the square root of the average of the squares of the values of the magnitude. If the magnitude takes on n discrete values, mi, its root-mean-square value is:

1 r ,. ,j=n F

t#j

wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of are equal.

If the magnitude is a continuous function of time, m(t), its rms value is:

The summation or the integral extends over the interval of time for which therms magnitude is desired or, if the function is periodic, over any integral number of periodic repetitions of the function. 2.5.2.5 Average Pertaining to the mean of the values of the magnitude. If the magnitude takes on n discrete values, mi, its average value is: 3

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998

m=

0
1
f2 - t1

1 j=" - C mi n j=l

2.5.3 Functional Adjectives

2.53.1

Linear

wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of
mj aR? eX@.

If the magnitude is a continuous its average value is: m=

function of time, m(t), 2

Pertaining to a feature whose tiagnitude varies as a function of time in accordance with the following relation or its equivalent:

m=a+bt 2.5.3.2 Exponential
Pertaining to a feature whose magnitude varies as a function of time in accordance with either of the following relations or their equivalents: m=ue -bl

The summation or the integral extends over the interval of time for which the average. magnitude is desired or, if the function is periodic, over by integral number of periodic repetitions of the function. 2.5.2.6 Average absolute Pertaining to the mean of the absolute values of the magnitude. If the magnitude takes on n discrete values, mj, its average absolute value is:

( I

5' m(r) dt I1

m = a (l-e-") 2.533

Gawian

Pertaining to a waveform or feature whose magnitude varies as a function of time in accordance with the following relation or its equivalent: m = ae+(`-e)z . where b >o

wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of mj are equal.
If the magnitude

2.5.3.4 Trigonometric Pertaining to a waveform or feature whose magnitude varies as a function of time in accordance with a specified trigonometric function or by a specified relationship based on trigonometric functions (for example, cosine squared). 2.6 Time-Related Dehitions 2.6.1

is a continuous

function of time, m(t),

its average absolute value is: Im(t) Idt
The summation or the integral extends over the interval of time for which the average absolute magnitude is desired or, if the function is periodic, over any integral number of periodic repetitions of the function. 2.5.2.7 Root sum of $quares (rss) Pertaining to the square root of the arithmetic sua of the squares of the values of the magnitude. If the magnitude takes on n discrete values, mj, its root sum of squares value is:

Instant

Unless otherwise stated, a time specified with respect to the first datum time, to, of a waveform epoch, 2.6.2

Interval

algebraic time difference calculated by subtracting the time of a first specified instant from the time of a second specified instant. 2.6.3

The

Duration

mrss =

The absolute value of the interval during which a
specified waveform or feature exists or continues. 2.6.4 Period

mj

wherein the time intervals between adjacent values of are equal.

If the magnitude is a continuous function of time, m(t), its root sum of squares value is:

The absolute value of the minimum interval after which the same characteristics of a periodic waveform or a periodic feature recur. 2.6.5

Frequency

mrss = [ [m'(t)dl];
The summation or the integral extends over the interval of time for which the root sum of squares magnitude is desired or, if the function is periodic, over any integral number of periodic repetitions of the function. 4

The reciprocal of period. 2.6.6 Cycle The complete range of states or magnitudes through which a periodic waveform or a periodic feature passes before repeating itself identically.

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998 2.7 Reference Lines and Points The reference lines and points defined in this clause
of a sequence of curvilinear segments which an? defined by equations of the third degree.

and used throughout the remainder of this standard are constructions which are (either actually or figuratively) superimposed on waveforms for descriptive or analytical purposes. Unless otherwise specified, all defined lines and points lie within a waveform epoch. 2.7.1 Time Origin Line A line of constant and specified time which, unless otherwise specified, has a time equal to zero and passes through the first datum time, to, of a waveform epoch (see Fig. 1). 27.2 Magnitude Origin Line A line of specified magnitude which, unless otherwise specified, has a magnitude eqaal to zero and extends through the waveform epoch (see Fig. 1). 2.7.3 Time Reference Line A line parallel to the time origin line at a' specified instant. 2.7.4 Time Referenced Point A point at the intersection of a time reference line and a waveform. 2.75 Magnitude Reference Line A line parallel to the magnitude origin line at a specified magnitude. 2.7.6 Magnitude Referenced Point A point at the intersection of a magnitude reference line and a waveform. 2.7.7 Knot A point 4, mk (where k = 1,2,3 .....n) in a sequence of points wherein TV S &+Ithrough which a cubic natural spline passes (see Fig. 3). 2.7.8 Cubic Namral Spline A catenated piecewise sequence of cubic polynomial functiqns p(l, 2). p(2. 3)..., p(n-1, n) between knots tlrnl and tzmz and hni3...t(n_lpqn-~~ and tarn,, respectively, wherein: a) at all knots, the first and second derivatives of the adjacent polynomial functions are equal, and b) for all values of t less than tl and greater than In the function is linear (see Fig. 3 and 5.5).
NOTE - The cubic natural spline yields a curve which, throughout. is continuous and has continuous fmt and second derivatives. The resulting curve is the rigorous mathematical embodiment of what is conventionally called a smooth curve drawn through a group of points (that is. knots) and it consists

2.8 Miscellaneous
2.8.1 Pulse Shape

For descriptive purposes, a pulse waveform may be imprecisely described by any of the adjectives, or combinations thereof, in 2.4.1.1, 2.4.4, 2.4.5 and 2.5.3.2 to 2.5.3.4, inclusive. When so used these adjectives describe general shape only and no precise distinctions are defined. For tutorial'purposes, a hypothetical pulse waveform may be precisely defined by the further addition of the adjective `ideal' (see 2.4.1.2). For measurement or comparison purposes, a pulse waveform may be precisely defined by the further addition of the adjective `reference' (see 2.4.1.3). 2.8.2 Transition Shape For descriptive purposes, a transition waveform may be imprecisely described by any of the adjectives, or combinations thereof, in 2.4.1.1, 2.44, 2.4.5.5 and 2.53. When so used, these adjectives describe general shape only and no precise distinctions are defined. For tutorial purposes, a hypothetical transition waveform may be precisely defined by the further addition of the adjective `ideal' (see 2.4.1.2). For measurement or comparison purposes, a transition
waveform may be precisely defined by the further addition of the adjective `reference' (see 2.4.1.3). t&3

Pulse Po7ver

The power transferred or transformed by a pulse(s). Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical adjective (& 25.2), average power over a specified interval is assumed.
2.0.4 Pulse Energy

The energy transferred or transformed by a pulse(s). Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical adjective (see 2.5.2), the total energy over a specified interval is assumed. 3 SINGLE PULSE WAVEFORM
3.1 Major Pulse Waveform 3.1.1 Base Features

The two portions of a pulse waveform which represent the first nominal state from which a pulse departs and to which it ultimately returns. 3.1.2 Top The portion of a pulse waveform which represent the second nominal state of a pulse.
5

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998 3.1.3 First Transition The major transition waveform of a pulse waveform

otherwise specified, d-14 mesial line is at the 50 percent reference magnitude (see Fig. 1). 3.26 Magnitude Reference Point
3.2.6.1 Proximal (distal) point A magnitude referenced point at the intersection of a

between the base and the top. 3.1.4 Lust Transition
The major transition waveform of a pulse waveform

between the top and the base. 3.2 Magnitude Characteristics
and References

waveform and a proximal (distal) line (see Fig. 1). 3.2.6.2 Me&l point A magnitude referenced point at the intersection of a waveform and a mesial line (see Fig. 1). 3.3 Tie
3.3.1 Characteristics and References

All magnitude characteristics unless otherwise specified, are derived from data within the waveform epoch. 3.2.1 Base Magnitude
The magnitude of the base as obtained by a specified

Pulse Start (Stop) Time

procedure or algorithm. Unless otherwise specified both portions of the base are included in the procedure or algorithm (see Fig. 1 and 53.1). 3.2.2 Top Magnitude
The magnitude of the top obtained by a specified procedure or algorithm (see Fig. 1 and 53.1 for

The instant specified by a magnitude referenced point

on the first (last) transitik of a pulse waveform. Unless otherwise specified, the pulse start (stop) time is at the mesial lSnt on the first (last) transition (see Fig. 1). 3.3.2 Pulse Duration
The duration between pulse start time and pulse stop

suitable algorithms). 3.2.3 Pulse Amplitude The algebraic difference between the top magnitude and the base magnitude (see Fig. 1). 3.2.4 Percent Reference Magnitude A reference magnitude specified by:
9

time (see Fig. 1). 3.3.3 Transition Duration
The duration between the proximal point and the distal

point on a transition waveform. 3.3.3.1 First (last) transition duration
The transition duration of the first (l&t) transition

waveform in a pulse waveform (see Fig. 1).
NOTE-Previously called `rise (fall) time'.

where o<x< 100 (x)% iur = M,, = Mt = M&t and (x)% measurement.

3.3.4 Time Reference Lines percent reference magnitude base magnitude top magnitude M, are all in the same unit of
33.4.1 &!se start (stop) line The time reference line at pulse start (stop) time (see

Fig. 1). 33.4.2 Top centre line
The time reference line at the average of pulse start

3.q.5 Magnitude Reference Lines 3.2.5.1 Base line (top line)

time and pulse stop time (see Fig. 1). 33.5 Pulse Time Reference Points

The magnitude reference magnitude (see Fig. 1).

line at the base (top)
335.1 Top centre paint

3.2.5.2 Proximal (distal) line A magnitude reference line at a specified magnitude in the proximal (distal) region of a pulse waveform. Unless otherwise specified, the proximal (distal) line is at the lO(90) percent reference magnitude (see Fig. 1). 3.25.3 Mesial line A magnitude reference line at a specified magnitude in the mesial region of a pulse waveform. Unless

A specified time referenced point or magnitude referenced point on a pulse waveform top. If no point is specified, the top centre point is the time referenced point at the intersection of a pulse waveform and the top centre line (see Fig. 1). 33.5.2 First (lust) base point Unless otherwise specified, the first (kt) datum point in a pulse epoch (compare with base centre point, 5.3.2.7) (see Fig. I).

6

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998 3.4 Other Pulse Waveform 3.4.1 Pulse Corner A continuous pulse waveform feature of specified extent which includes a region of maximum curvature or a point of discontinuity in the waveform slope. Unless otherwise specified, the extent of the comers in a rectangular or a trapezoidal pulse waveform are as specified in the following,table: Corner First Second Third Fourth First point First base point Fit transition distal point Top centre point Last transition proximal point Last point First transition proximal point Top centre point Last transition distal point Last base point The algebraic difference between two specified Unless otherwise magnitude reference lines. specified, these two magnitude reference lines are the waveform base line and the magnitude origin line (see Fig. l), in which case the offset is the base magnitude (see 3.2.1). 5.2.2 Offset Waveform A waveform whose base line is offset from, unless otherwise specified, the magnitude origin line. 5.23 Composite Waveform Features 5.1.2 Bipolar Pulse Two pulse waveforms of opposite polarity which are adjacent in time and which are considered or treated as a single feature. 5.1.3 Staircase Unless otherwise specified, a periodic and finite sequence of steps of equal magnitude and of the same polarity. 5.2 Waveforms Superposition 5.2.1 Offset Produced by Magnitude

3.4.2 Pulse Quadrant One of the four continuous and contiguous pulse waveform features of specified extent which include a region of maximum curvature or a point of discontinuity in the:waveform slope. Unless otherwise specified, the extent of the quadrants in a rectangular or a trapezoidal pulse waveform are as specifkd in the following table: Quadrant First Second Third Fourth First point First base point First transition mesial point Top centre point Last transition point mesial Last point First transition mesial point Top centre point Last transition mesial point Last base point _

A waveform which is, or which for analytical or descriptive purposes is treated as, the algebraic summation of two or more waveforms (see Fig. 2). 5.3 Waveforms Produced by Continuous Superpositjon of Simpler Waveforms 5.3.1 Pulse Train A continuous waveforms. 53.2 repetitive sequence Definitions of pulse Time

Pulse Train Time-Related

5.3.2.1 Pulse repetition period The interval between the pulse start time of a first pulse waveform and the pulse start time of the immediately following pulse waveform in a periodic pulse train. 5.3.2.2 Pulse repetition frequency The reciprocal of pulse repetition 5.3.2.3 Pulse separation period.

4 SINGLE TRANSITION WAVEFORM 4.1 Step A transition waveform which has a transition duration which is negligible relative to the duration of the waveform epoch or to the duration of its adjacent first and second nominal states. 4.2 Ramp A linear feature. 5 COMPLEX WAVEFORMS of Pulses and Transitions

The interval between the pulse stop time of a first pulse waveform and the pulse start time of the immediately following pulse waveform in a pulse train. 5.3.2.4 Duty factor Unless otherwise specified, the ratio of the pulse waveform duration to the pulse repetition period of a periodic pulse train.

5.1 Combinations 51.1 Double Pulse

TWOpulse waveforms of the same polarity which are adjacent in time and which are considered or treated as a single feature.

7

IS 14501 i Part 1) : 1998 5.3.2.5 OdOfratio Unless otherwise specified, the ratio of the pulse waveform duration to the pulse separation of aperiodic pulse train. 5.3.2.6 Base centre line The time reference line at the average of the pulse stop time of a first pulse waveform and the pulse start time of the immediately following pulse waveform in a pulse train. 5.3.2.7 Base centre point A specified time referenced point or magnitude referenced point on a pulse train waveform base. If no point is specified, the base centre point is the time referenced point at the intersection of a pulse train waveform base and a base centre line [compare with $rst (last) base point, see 3.3.5.2)1 5.3.2.8 Pulse train epoch The span of time in a pulseltrain for which waveform data are known or knowable and which extends from a first base centre point to the immediately following base centre point. 5.3.3 Square Wave A periodic rectangular pulse train with a duty factor of 0.5 or an on/off ratio of 1. 5.4 Waveforms Produced by Non-continuous Time Superposition of Simpler Waveforms 5.4.1 Pulse Burst A finite sequence of pulse waveforms. 54.2 Pulse Burst Time-Related Definitions 5.5 Waveforms Waveforms Produced by Operations on

All envelos definitions in this clause are based on the cubic natural spline (or its related approximation, the draught&an's spline) with knots at specified points. All burst envelopes extend in time from the first to the last knot specified, the remainder of the waveform being: a) b) that portion of the waveform which precedes the first knot, and that portion of the waveform which follows the last knot.

Burst envelopes and their adjacent waveform bases, taken together, comprise a continuous waveform which has a continuous first derivative except at the first and last knots of the envelope. 55.1 Pulse Train Top (Base) Envelope

Unless otherwise specified, the waveform defined by a cubic natural spline with knots at each point of intersection of the top centre line and the top line (the base centre line and the base line) ,of each (between adjacent) pulse waveform(s) in a pulse train. 5.5.2 Pulse Burst Top Envelope Unless otherwise specified, the waveform defined by a cubic natural spline with knots at:

4 b)
cl

5.4.2.1 Pulse burst duration The interval between the pulse start time of the first pulse waveform and the pulse stop time of the last pulse waveform in a pulse burst. 5.4.2.2 Pulse burst separation The interval between the pulse stop time of the tast pulse waveform in a pulse burst and the pulse start time of the first pulse waveform in the immediately following pulse burst. 5.4.2.3 Pulse burst repetition period The interval between the p&e start time of the first pulse waveform in a pulse burst and the pulse start time of the first pulse waveform in the immediately following pulse burst in a sequence of periodic pulse bursts. 5.4.2.4 Pulse burst repetition frequency The reciprocal of pulse'burst repetition period.

the first transition mesial point,of the first pulse waveform in a pulse burst, each point of intersection of the top centre line and the top line of each pulse waveform in a pulse burst, and the last transition mesial point of the last pulse waveform in a pulse burst (see Fig. 3).

5.5.3 Pulse Burst Base Envelope Unless otherwise specified, the waveform defined by a cubic natural spline with knots at: that point of intersection of the pulse burst top envelope and the pulse burst waveform which precedes the first pulse waveform in a pulse burst, b) each point of intersection of the base centre line and the base line between adjacent pulse waveforms in a pulse burst, and cl that point of intersection of the pulse burst top envelope and the pulse burst waveform which follows the last pulse waveform in a pulse burst (see Fig. 3).

4

8

IS l45Ol( Part 1) : 1998 . WAVEFORU A

wNEFoRY

c

WAVEFOR~J

D

cowosmE WAVEFORU

FIG.2 COMPOSITE WAVEITIRM

WENTOF PLUSEBURSTTOP~
PUISE BURST ~ENVEKWE

I

I ,

--I

_

1 ---+ / /

/

I r-----

I

' /
PULSE
EASE LINE PULSE $m -awELoPE I

OF PUSE

BURST BASE fNVEWPE

--=i

FIG.3 PULSEBURSTENVELOPES

9

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998 6 TIME RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN DIFFERENT PULSE WAVEFORMS 6.1 Pulse Advance (Delay) The occurrence in time of one pulse waveform before (after) another pulse waveform. 6.2 Pulse Advance (Delay) Interval The interval by which the pulse start time, unless otherwise specified, of one pulse waveform precedes (follows) the pulse start time, unless otherwise specified, of another pulse waveform. 6.3 Pulse Coincidence (Non-coincidence) The occurrence (lack of occurrence) of two or more pulse waveforms in different waveforms either essentially simultaneously or for a specified interval. 6.4 Pulse Coincidence Duration (Non-coincidence) distortion. Quantitative defined in 7.1. 7.2.1 Preshoot A distortion which precedes a major transition. 7.22 Overshoot measures of distortion are

A distortion which follows a major transition. 7.2.3 Rounding A distortion in the form of a rounded feature which occurs where relatively abrupt change in slope is desired or expected. 7.24 Spike

A distortion in the form of pulse waveform of relatively short duration superimposed on an otherwise regular or a desired pulse waveform. 7.25 Ringing

The interval between specified points on two or more pulse waveforms in different waveforms dtiring which pulse coincidence (non-coincidence) exisb. 7 DISTORTION, 7.1 Distortion 7.1.1 Pulse Wavbfom Distortion The algebraic difference in magnitude between all corresponding points in time of a pulse waveform and a reference pulse waveform. Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical adjective (see 2.5.2). peak-to-peak pulse waveform distortion is assumed (see Fig. 4). 7.1.2 Percent Pulse WaveformDistorlion Pulse waveform distortion expressed as a percentage of, unless otherwise specified, the pulse amplitude of the reference pulse waveform. 7.1.3 Pulse Waveform Feature Distortion The algebraic difference in magnitude between all corresponding points in time of a pulse waveform and a reference pulse waveform feature. Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical adjective (see 2.5.2), peak-to-peak pulse waveform feature distortion is assumed (see Fig. 4). 7.1.4 Percent Pulse Waveform Feature Distortion Pulse waveform feature distortion expressed as a percentage of, unless otherwise specified, the pulse amplitude\of the reference pulse waveform. 7.2 Qualitative Distortion Terms The terms defined in this clause are colloquial terms which qualitatively describe various types of JITTER ANDPLUCTUA'lTON

A distortion in the form of a superimposed damped osciilatory waveform which, when present, usually follows a major transition. 7.2.6 Tilt A distortion of a pulse top or pulse base wherein the overall slope over the extent of the pulse top or the pulse base is essentially constant and other than zero. Tilt may be of either polarity. 7.27 Valley

A distortion in the form of a portion of a pulse waveform between two specified peak magnitudes of the same polarity. 7.3 Jitter and Fluctuation

7.3.1 Jitter The instability of a time characteristic of the pulse waveforms i.&a pulse tram with respect to a reference time, interval or duration. Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical adjective (see 2.5.2), peak-to-peak jitter is assumed. 7.3.2 Fluctuation The instability of the pulse amplitude or other magnitude characteristic of the pulse waveforms in a pulse train with respect to a reference pulse amplitude or a reference magnitude. Unless otherwise specified by a mathematical adjective (see 2.5.2), peak-to-peak fluctuation is assumed. 8 MISCELLANEOUS PULSE TERMS `pulse'

.

Throughout this clause, where applicable, includes `pulse train' and/or `pulse burst'.

NOTE-All terms listed in8.1.1,8.2.1.8.3 and 8.4.1 have their conventional technical meanings. All other terms have unique

10

PULSE WAVEFORM

PEAK-TO-PEAK ii!ifzkw~"

Extent of data included in pulse waveform feature distortion: = Pulsebasedistortion, B = First transition distortion, c = Pulse top distortion, and D = Last transition distortion.
Al andA

--+--i-"--"--r-*1 ----wA A.i i

-__-_C__t_---___
I

m-u_---

II

I

FIG. 4 PULSE WAVEFORM DISTORTION AND PULSE WAVEFORM FEMURE DISTORTION

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998
meanings in pulse bology and m individually defined. However, some defined terms also have conventionaltechnical meanings. In any particularuse of such tm, the distinction between conventional usage and pulse usage can only be determinedfrom context.

8.1.4.6 Differentiation A shaping process in which a pulse is converted to a wave whose shape is or approximates the time derivative of the pulse. 8.1.4.7 Integration A shaping process in which a pulse is converted to a wave whose shape is or approximates the time integral of the pulse. 8.2 Operations 8.2.1 Generui Activation, deflection, sequencing, switching and 8.22 deactivation, clearing, blanking, resetting, selection, reading, setting, starting, stopping, storing, writing may occur or be performed. by a Pulse

23.1 Operations on a Puise al.1 General

Amplification, attenuation, conditioning, conversion, coupling, demodulation, detection, discrimination, reflection and reception, inversion, filtering, transmission may occur or be performed. 8.1.2 Clumping A process in which a specified instantaneous magnitude of a pulse is fixed at a specified magnitude. all instantaneous after clamping, Typically, magnitudes of the pulse are offset, the pulse shape remaining unaltered: 8.1.3 Delaying A process in which a pulse is delayed in time by active circuitry or by propagation. 81.4 Shaping

Synchronizing

Thk process of rendering a first pulse train or other sequence of events synchronous with a second pulse train. 8.2.3 Strobing A process in which a first pulse of relatively short duration interacts with a second pulse or other event of relatively longer duration to yield a signal which is indicative of (typically, proportional to) the magnitude of the second pulse during the first pulse. 8.24 Sampling

A process in which the shape of a pulse is modified to one which is ideal or more suitable for the intended application wherein time and/or magnitude characteristics may be changed. Typically, some property(ies) of the original pulse is/are preserved. 8.1.4.1 Regeneration A shaping process in which a pulse with de&d reference characteristics is developed from a pulse which lacks certain desired characteristics. 8.1.4.2 Stretching A shaping process in which pulse duration is increased. 8.1.4.3 Clipping A shaping process in which the magnitude of a pulse is constrained at one or more predetermined magnitudes. 8.1.4.4 Limiting A clipping process in which the pulse shape is preserved for all magnitudes between predetermined clipping magnitudes. 8.1.4.5 Slicing A clipping process in which the pulse shape is preserved for all magnitudes less (greater) than a predetermined clipping magnitude.

A process in which &robing pulses yield signals which are proportional to the magnitude (typically, as a `function of time) of another pulse or event. 8.25 Triggering initiates a

A process in which a transition predetermined event or response.

8.3 Operation Involving the Interaction of Pulses Addition, chopping, coding, comparison, decoding, encoding, modulation, subtraction, mixing, summation and superposition (see also 5) may occur or be performed. 8.4 Logical Operations with Pulses The pulse is considered in this clause as a logical operator. Frequently, some operations defined in 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3 are often logical operations in the sense of this clause. 8.4.1 General `AND', `NAND', `OR', `NOR' `exclusive OR', inversion, inhibiting, enabling, disabling, counting or other logical operations may be performed. 12

IS 14501( Part 1) : 1998 8.4.2 Slivering A process in which a typically unwanted pulse of relatively short duration is produced by a logical operation. Typically, slivering is a result of partial pulse coincidence. 8.4.3 Guting A process in which a first pulse enables or disables portions of a second pulse or other event duration of the first pulse. 8.4.4 Shifting A process in which logical states in a specified sequence are transferred without alteration of the sequence from one storage element to another by the action of a pulse. for the

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Sfundurdv Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of tbe activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to co~ected matters in the country.

BIS haa the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in.any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the. course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright he addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as tbe need arises on tbc basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; _ a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian S&dards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest.issuc of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. LTD 21( 1430 ).
Amendments

Issued She

Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OFINDIANSTANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bbavan, 9 Bahadur Sbah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: `Central Eastern
:

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 337 84 99,337 85 61 { 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 { 602025 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 I5 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 { 832 78 91,832 78 92
.

Manak Bhavan, 9 Babadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI llooO2 l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054

:

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAl600113 Western
:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAl400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. JAJPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW, NAGPUR. PA'I'NA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

