**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 987 (1988) : Methods for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to bleaching with sodium chlorite [TXD 
5: Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 987 - 1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 
DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 
TEXTILE MATERIALS TO BLEACHING WITH 

SODIUM CHLORITE 

( First Revision ) 



Fiist Reprint MARCH 1992 
UDC 677016-473-4: 535-684-32 



© Copyright 1989 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAKBHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

g^ J March 1989 



IS : 9S7 - 1988 

Indian Standard 

METHODS FOR 
DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 
TEXTILE MATERIALS TO BLEACHING WITH 

SODIUM CHLORITE 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
20 July 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division Coimcil. 

OJ! This standard was first published in 1958 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 105/N - 
1978 Textiles — Tests for colour fastness N03 
Colour fastness to bleaching : Sodium chlorite : 
Mild' and ISO 105/N - 1978 Textiles — Tests 
for colour fastnsess N04 Colour fastness to 
bleaching; Sodium chlorite; Severe', issued by 
the International Organization for Standardi- 
zation ( ISO ). Further* the sampling clause and 
the assessment of colour fastness have been 



modified similar to other latest Indian Standards 
on colour fastness tests. 

0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of 
considerable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and the 
depth of shade of the dyestuif used but also upon 
the nature of the fibre and the method of dyeing 
or printing employed; the same colouring matter, 
when used in dyeing or printing different fibres 
or when applied by different methods upon the 
same fibre, may give vastly different results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for 
determining colour fastness of textile materials 
to different agencies and processes likely to effect 
change in colour is, therefore, necessary. 



!• SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes two methods for 
determination of colour fastness of textile mate- 
rials composed of natural or regenerated cellulose, 
and synthetic fibres to the action of bleaching 
with sodium chlorite as employed in textile pro- 
cessing. 

1.2 In the first method {see 6) mainly applicable 
to textile materials made of regenerated cellulose 
and synthetic fibres, a comparatively mild test 
has been prescribed. In the second method 
{see 7), mainly applicable to textile materials 
made of natural cellulose textiles, a comparatively 
severe test has been prescribed. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with 
specified adjacent fabrics is treated with sodium 
chlorite solution, rinsed and dried. The numerical 
ratings for change in colour of the specimen and 
staining of the adjacent fabrics are evaluated 
with grey scales. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine the conformity of a lot 



of coloured textile material to a specification 
shall be selected so as to be representative of the 
lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the rele- 
vant material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fastii^ss 
of the material in the lot shall be held to be re- 
presentative of the lot. 

4. COMPOSITE SPECIMEN 

4.1 Two Adjacent Fabrics — 10 x 4 cm, each 
made of a fibre to be assessed for staining. 

4.2 Preparation of Composite Specimen 

4.2.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, place 
a specimen 10 x 4 cm between two adjacent 
fabrics and sew along all four sides to form a 
composite specimen. 

4.2.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn, knit 
or weave it into fabric and treat as in 4.2.1 or 
form a layer of parallel lengths of it between ttie 
two adjacent fabrics, the amount of yarn taken 
being approximately equal to half the combined 
mass of the adjacent fabrics, sew along all four 



1 



18:987-1988 



sides to hold the yam in place and to form a com- 
posite specimen. 

4^.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, 
comb and compress an amount approximately 
equal to half the combined mass of the adjacent 
fabrics, into a sheet 10 X 4 cm. Place the sheet 
between two adjacent fabrics and sew along all 
four sides to hold the fibre in place and to form 
a composite specimen. 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Glass Contains with Reflux Condenser — or 

other means of reducing evaporation of the bath, 
and so preventing its modification during the test. 

5.2 Grey Scales for Evaluating Change in Colour 
and Staining 

6. FIRST METHOD 

6.1 Reagent 

6.1.1 Sodium Chlorite Solution — Containing 
one gram of sodium chlorite (800 g/kg ) per litre 
{see Note) brought to pH 3-5 with acetic acid 
immediately before use. 

Note — The concentration of sodium chlorite solution 
used should be determined by titration with sodium 
thiosulphate solution. One millilitre of 01 N sodium 
thiosulphate solution is equal to 0*002 26 g of sodium 
chlorite (NaClO,). 

6.2 Procedure — Wet out the composite speci- 
men in sodium chlo»*ite solution and immerse it 
in bath containing sodium chlorite solution for 
one hour without agitation at a temperature of 
80 ± 2°C, using a liquor ratio of 50 : 1. At 
the end of the period, remove the specimen from 
the bath and rinse it for 10 minutes in cold run- 
ning tap water. Remove the stitching from two 
long sides and one short side of the specimen, 
open it out and dry it in air in shade at a tempe- 



rature not exceeding 60°C with the three parts in 
contact only at the remaining line of stitclung. 

6.3 Evaluation — Evaluate the change in colour 
of the test specimen by the method prescribed 
in IS : 768 - 1982* and the degree of staining of 
two pieces of adjacent fabrics by the meAod 
prescribed in IS: 769 - I982t. 

Note 1 — Treated test specimens and the pieces of 
adjacent fabrics should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained their normal moisture content 
before evaluation. 

Note 2 — In case of doubt in the assessment of colour 
fastness ratings by a sin^e observer, tiie assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall average 
rating should be reputed. 

7. SECOND METHOD 

7.1 Reagent 

7.1.1 Sodium Chlorite Solution — containing 
2-5 g of sodium chlorite (800 g/kg) per litre 
{see Note under 6.1 ) and 0-1 g of tetrasodium 
pyrophosphate ( Na^PjOy-lOHjO ) per litre, 
brought to pU 3*5 with formic acid immediately 
before the test. 

7.2 Procedure — Same as in 6.2. 

7.3 Evaluation — Same as in 6.3. 
8. REPORT 

8.1 The report shall mclude: 

a) The numerical rating for change in colour 
of the test specimen, 

b) The numerical ratings for staining of two 
adjacent fabrics used in the preparation of 
the composite specimen, and 

c) The method used. 



*Method for evaluating change in colour {first revision ). 
f Method for evaluating staining (first revision ). 



Reprography Unit, BIS^ New Delhi, India 



