( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 4545 (Part 3 ) - 1983

METHODS OF MEASLJREMENT ON RECEIVE S FOR TELEVHS BROADCAST TRANSMISSB
PART 3 GEOMETRICAL PROPERTIES OF THE PICTURE

Radio Communication;
Chairman
SHRI H.S. JOLLY

Sectional Committee,
All India Radio,

LTDC 20

Representing New Delhi

Members to Shri H. S. Jolly ) ADDITIONALDIRECTORSTANDARDS (S&T ) JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS( S & T ) - IV ( Alternate ) CDR S. S BA~DwAN LT-CDR A. BHO MICK ( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. BASAK SHRI V. V. R. PRABHU ( AIternate ) SHRI H. M. RHATNAGAR SHRI V. K. SETHI ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. CHANDRAMOULI SHRI K. RAMASESHU ( Alternate ) SHRI R. G. DEODHAR SHRI M. L. DI-IAR SHRI P. K. DHINGRA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. GHOSE SHRI N. KRISHNANKUTTY ( Alternate ) The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers Association ( RETMA ), Bombay Pcico Electronics ) Federation of Associations of Small Industries of India, New Delhi of Electronics and Telecommunication Institution Engineers, New Delhi Directorate of Coordination ( Police Wireless ), Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi Ministry ) ( Continued on page 2 ) of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi Rr Electricals Ltd, Bombay
SHRI 0. P. KHUSHU ( Alternate

Ministry Ministry

of Railways ( RDSO ) of Defence (DPI) (N ), New Delhi Small Scale New Industry, Delhi

Development Commissioner, New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Bharat Electronics

Association,

Ltd, Bangalore

Wireless Planning-and Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communications ), New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Indian Telenhone ) National Test House, Calcutta Industries Ltd. Bannalore

SHRI B.P. GHOSE SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate SHRI J. GUPTA SHRI T. S. BUXI ( Alternate ) SHRI J. GUPTA SHRI P. S. SACHDEV( Alternate SHRI B. S. GUPTA DR S. K. HAJELA SHRI S. JANAKIRAMAN

SHRI R. P. MATHUR ( Alternate ) LT-COL KRISHAN LAL LT-COL B. S. NATRAJAN ( Alternote

0 INDIAN

Copyright

1956 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher sh311 be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 4545 -( Part 3 ) - 1983 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members
SHRI R. LALWANI SHRI V. V. CHAUDHARY ( Alternate ) SHRI R. C. PANDEY SHRI C. M.-KRISHNA MURTHY ( Alternate SHRI A. K. N. PRASAD SHRI M. G. SRIDHARAN( Alternate ) SHRI W. V RAMANA SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BORKER ( Afternate ) SHRI P. K. RANGOLE SHRI H. K. JAIN ( Alternate SHRI M. SANKARALINGAM

Representing Posts & Telegraphs Ministry ) Hindustan Electronics Directorate Aeronautics Ltd. Bangalore Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Engineering of Supplies Research and Institute, New of Defence Board, New Delhi

( DTD & P ) ( AIR ), Bangalore

Central Electronics Pilani Directorate General Delhi Department

) Disposals,

SHRI R. S. ARORA( Alternate ) SHRI S. SHARMA DR K. S. K. SAI ( Alternate ) SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN SHRI ISHWARDUTT ( Alternate) SHRI SURESH CHANDRA SHRI K. K. TANEJA SHRI H. S. DUREY ( Alternate SHRI C. M. THIRU~URTHY SHRI N. SRINIVASAN,

of Electronics,

New Delhi Development

Electronics Trade and Technology Corporation Ltd, New Delhi

National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi Directorate General of Technical Development, Delhi ) Gujarat Communications and Electronics Vadodara Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) Secretary

New Ltd,

Director

( Electronics

)
SHRI D. K. NAYYAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS-I

Panel for TV Receivers,
Convener
SHRI N. N. MOHANTY

LTDC 2O/P3

All India Radio, New Delhi

Members
SHRI A. S. GUIN ( Alternate

to
M/s Chawla & Company, New Delhi Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing ( Ministry of Communication ). New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Association, New Delhi Federation of Associations of Small Industries India Ltd, New Delhi Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi U.P. Electronics Corporation Ltd, Lucknow Relations Information & Public Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad The Radio Electronic and Television Manufacturers Association, Bombay Electronic Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), New Delhi I ) Centra~la$ectronics Engineering Research Institute, of

SHRI M. L. ARORA ASSISTANT WIRELESS ADVISER ( PLANNING-I ) SHRI H. M. BHATNAGAR SHRI R. B. LAL ( Alternate SHRI R. S. BHATNAGAR

Shri N. N. Mohanty

)

)

SHRI K. B. BORKER SHRI M. BUTCHIRAJU SHRI P. JANARDHAN ( Aiternate SHRI R. K. CHAKRAVARTI SHRI A. GHAFFAR SHRI S. JANAKIRAM SHRI K. L. KANDOI SHRI S. MITRA

SHRI INDERJEET BANAUDHA( Alternute SHRI C. L. KAUL ( Alternafe II ) SHRI A. RAZZAQUE REPRESENTATIVE SHRI P. K. SANDELL SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN ( Afternute SHRI C. S. ARORA ( A/f ernate II ) SHRI V. V. R. SASTRY SHRI V. K. SEKHRI SHRI SURESHCHANDRA SHRI INDERJEET BANAUDHA ( Alternate

Tamil Nadu Local Administration Radio and Television Manufacturers Organization. Madras Electronics Trade and Technology Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi I ) Bharat Flectronics Ltd, Bangalore Electgf;;,Components Industries National ) Physical Laboratory, Association, New

New Delhi

2

IS : 4545 ( Part 3 ) - 1983

Indian Stapdard

METHODS OFMEASUREMENT ON RECEIVERSFORTELEVISIONBROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART 3 GEOMETRICAL ( PROPERTIES OF THE PICTURE

First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
Part 5 Sensitivity Part 6 Selectivity and response to undesired signals Part 7 Fidelity Part 8 Compatibility with audio visual recording equipment Part 9 Electrical and acoustic measurements at audio frequency 0.4 This standard ( Part 3 ) is largely based on IEC Publication 107-l ( 1977 ) Recommended methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmission: Part 1 General considerations electrical measurements other than those at audio-frequencies, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised 1.

0.1 This Inidan Standard (Part 3 ) (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 December 1983, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The first version of IS : 4545 covered the methods of measurement for television broadcast receivers having monochromes vision reception. With the introduction of colour television receivers, this standard is now being revised to make it applicable to receivers designed for both monochrome and colour vision reception and published in a number of parts to deal with different characteristics of television receivers. 0.3 This standard ( Part 3 ) covers methods of measurements for geometrical properties of the picture. Other parts in this series are: Part 1 General considerations Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements Part 4 Synchronizing quality 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) covers methods of measurement for geometrical properties of the picture, namely: a) Picture size, b) Curvature of picture screen, cl Geometrical distortion, d) Non-linearity of scanning, Picture outline distortion, f) Convergence errors, d Over and under scanning and centring, h) Brightness, j) Contrast, and k) Brightness transfer characteristic.

the dimensions of the available picture reproduction area is defined by maximum picture height in centimetres, maximum picture width in centimetres and effective picture area in square centimetres. It is assumed that under standard measuring conditions, the visible part of this area is completely filled with the television picture. 2.2 Method of Measurement - The maximum picture height and width are determined by means of a sliding gauge, cathetometer or other suitable device. To ascertain the effective picture area, a photograph of the picture reproduction area may be taken from a point situated on the optical axis of this area at a distance of ten times the maximum picture height. From this photograph the effective picture area may be determined. 2.3 Presentation of Results - The results shall include a note of which method of measurement has been used. This is because the results obtained by the photographic method are not directly comparable with those obtained by means of(a gauge or similar device. 3

e>

1.2 This standard ( Part 3 ) shall be read conjunction with IS : 4545 ( Part 1 )-1983*. 2. PICTURE SIZE 2.1 Definitions - The picture

in

size as given by

*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General considerations ( jirsf revision ).

IS : 4545 ( Par,t 3 ) - 1983 3. CURVATURE 3.1 Definition OF PICTURE SCREEN

- The curvature of the picture screen is defined by the ratio between the picture depth and the maximum picture height or maximum picture width, whichever has the greatest curvature, only the selected one being stated with the result. The picture depth is defined as the distance between two geometrical planes, both perpendicular to the optical axis, one going through the point nearest to the observer and the other going through the most distant points of the visible reproduction area.

Both horizontal and vertical non-linearity shall be measured in terms of geometrical distortions along a horizontal and a vertical line approximately through the centre of the picture area. If the relative phase between the mains supply and the received signal vertical scan synchronization significantly influences the non-linearity of scanning, the measurements shall be made with the test signal generator not locked to the mains supply frequency but with the difference frequency suitably low. 4.3.2 Method of Measurement - The vision rf carrier shall be modulated by the appropriate electronically generated video signals as per standards and -50 dB input power shall be fed to the receiver. An electronically generated test pattern may be used consisting of a system of horizontal and vertical lines, both equidistant in time, dividing the picture area into elementary areas of approximately square shape. It is preferable but not essential that these dividing bars themselves be visible but at least the corners of the elementary areas ( intersection points of the lines > shall be visible. It is desirable to use at least ten dividing bars because the information given by the measurements increases with the number of dividing bars. If desired, the horizontal and vertical lines may be used separately for these measurements. To ascertain the nonlinearity, a photograph of thereproduced pattern may be taken under the same conditions as mentioned in 2.2. A cathetometer or other suitable means may also be used as an alternative but only if the picture is sufficiently stable. The distance between two adjacent intersection points of the projected pattern is used to determine the instantaneous velocity. The total distance traversed divided by the number of intervals is used to determine the mean velocity. 4.3.3 Graphic Representation - The nonlinearity is plotted on a linear time scale as abscissa and a linear-percentage scale as ordinate. The equal time intervals corresponding to the divisions of the picture area by the line pattern are marked on the abscissa. The difference between the instantaneous velocity and the mean velocity is plotted as a percentage of the mean velocity at the centre of each time interval on the abscissa. In the graph ( see Fig. 1 ), short-time nonlinearity of scanning such as results from scan ringing, does not necessarily appear. To measure such deviations, a finer pattern may be necessary, but to reduce measurement errors, measurements may be taken over groups of lines.
4

3.2 Method of Measurement - The picture depth may be measured with the aid of a travelling microscope or other suitable means. 4. GEOMETRICAL DXSTORTION

4.1 Introduction - Any deviation in the reproduced picture from the transmitted signal relationship between time and the coordinates of the picture elements is a geometrical distortion. Geometrical distortions may be dived into three categories as described in 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4. 4.2 Influence of Mains Supply Related Effects +,n Ge,ometrical Distortion - A part of the total geometricaldistortion may be caused by effects related to the mains supply. These are most noticeable when the mains supply frequency differs slightly from the field frequency. 4.2.1 Method of Measurement - The receiver is operated from a mains supply differing by approximately 1 Hz from the field frequency. The excursion of the points in the picture where the greatest vertical or horizontal displacements are observed is noted and the displacements are measured. 4.2.2 Presentation of Results - The displacements measured aro expressed as a percentage of the active horizontal or vertical scan periods as appropriate. 4.3 Non-Linearity of Scanning

4.3.1 Distinction is made between horizontal and vertical non-linearity. Horizontal non-linearity is evaluated by means of the relative deviation ofthe horizontal velocity of the scanning spot projected orthogonally on to the tangential plane through the centre of The relative the picture reproduction area. deviation is the difference between the instantaneous velocity and the mean velocity, expressed as a percentage of the mean velocity of the scanning spot and is given in graph representing the deviation as a function of time. Similarly, vertical non-linearity is evaluated by means of the relative deviation of the vertical velocity of the scanning spot.

IS : 4545 ( Part 3 ) - 1983
Non-linearity *-,

FIG. 1

EXAMPLEOF NON-LINEARITY GRAPH The distances bl, b,, similarly defined.
cl, c2, dl

4.4 Picture Outline Distortion 4.4.1 ~Picture outline distortions are deviations from a true rectangle of the largest completely visible contour of approximately the correct aspect ratio formed by the test pattern. 4.4.2 Method of Measurement -The vision rf carrier shall be modulated by the appropriate electronically generated video signak as per standards and -50 dB input power shall be fed to the receiver. An electronically generated test pattern as described in 4.3.2 may be used. If desired, the horizontal and vertical lines may be used separately for these measurements. To ascertain the picture outline distortions, a photograph of the reproduced pattern may be taken under the conditions specified in 2.2. The distorted reproduction of the contour of the largest completely visible rectangle formed by the test pattern and having approximately the correct aspect ratio is traced ( see Fig. 2B > or a similar projection ~of the reproduced pattern on a plane perpendicular to the optical axis. This contour is normally adequate and shall be reproduced with the results. If one form of distortion predominates, it may be measured in accordance with the following methods. The corner points A, B, C and D are marked and the auxiliary lines AB, BC, CD, DA, KF, and HE are then drawn so that AE = EB, BF= FC, CH= HD and DK = KA ( see Fig. 2B ). The distance between AB and the point of the contour lying farthest away from AB inside the quardrilateral ABCD is called al. The greatest distance between the line AB and that part of the contour between A and B lying gufside the quardrilatesal ABCD is called a,.
5

and

dz are

It is possible to specify the following distortion percentages: Horizontal trapezium distortion:
T H = AD-BBC AD + BC
X

100 percent

and Vertical trapezium distortion:
X 100 percent ARDC T v = AS + DC

If the contours AB and DC lie completely outside the quardrilateral ABCD, only a2 and b, may be measured and the Horizontal barrel distortion: a, + b, Bn = 2 X AD + Bc
X

100 percent lie completely only al and bl

If the contours AB and DC within the quadrilateral ABCD, may be measured and the Horizontal pin-cushion CEZ= 2 X
" + 15' AL) + LfIc X 100

distortion: percent

Similarly if only c2 and then Vertical barrel distortion: B,=2x C? + n*
AU 4 CD

L&may be measured

X 100 percent

and if only cl and d, may be measured then Vertical pin-cushion distortion:
C, = 2 X ~~f$J!! X

100 percent by the

Parallelogram distortion angle 01in degrees!

is expressed

IS : 4545-( Part 3 ) - 1983 Ripple distortion of the contour is present when the contours AB , CD, BC and DA show undulations ( see Fig. 2B ). If desired, the peak-to-peak value of such undulations or oscillations may be expressed as a percentage of picture height or width (see Fig. 2C, 2D and 2E >, the values being taken from the contour reproduction. Greater distortions of picture outline may occur nearer the centre of the screen than that defined by the largest completely visible rectIn this case, the angle of the test pattern. measurements shall be repeated for smaller rectangles and the sizes of all the rectangles used recorded with the results. Since the picture outline distortion may also be influenced by beam current, additional measurements may be made by increasing the background level of the pattern. The background level or levels used shall be recorded with the results as a percentage of the signal voltage difference between black_level and white level. 5. OVERALL GEOMETRICAL DISTORTION ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 5.1 Definition - The measurement procedure provides an overall indication of scanning nonlinearity and picture outline distortion. It may be used to give more rapid results than the separate methods described in 4. 5.2 Method of Measurement - A grill pattern is applied to the receiver having at least 14 horizontal lines and 19 vertical lines. The vertical lines shall be of approximately sine-squared form with a duration at the half amplitude points of 0'2 to 0'3 ps. The amount of signal drive applied to the picture tube shall be such that any defocusing that may occur does not affect the accuracy of measurement. Each horizontal line shall consist of a pair of specially adjacent lines, one in each of the pair of interlaced fields. The peaks of the horizontal and vertical lines shall be at white level and the background normally at black level. In order to ascertain the effect of beam current, the background shall be adjustable in level. The point of intersection of the horizontal and vertical lines nearest to the geometrical centre of the picture is defined. The mean vertical line spacing is determined by measuring the distance between the second vertical line to the left and the second vertical line to the right of the centre intersection and dividing by 4. The mean horizontal line spacing is determined in the same way with the second horiand below the centre zontal lines above intersection. Using the mean spacing as a reference, the horizontal displacements of the vertical lines from their theoretically correct positions along all the horizontal lines are measured. The process is then repeated for the vertical scan direction by measuring the vertical displacements of the horizontal lines along all the vertical lines. The measurements may be conveniently'carried out by pho.tographing the pattern. Where the picture is sufficiently stable, measurements may be carried out using a sliding gauge,cathetometer, or other suitable device. 5.3 Presentation of -Results - The displacements of the intersections of the pattern are to be expressed as a percentage of the maximum picture width and height respectively. They are to be tabulated identifying the intersections by assigning a pair of coordinates obtained by numbering the lines in the direction of scan, the first representing the vertical scan direction and the second, the horizontal scan direction ( see Fig. 2F ). 6. CONVERGENCE ERRORS ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME RECEIVERS ) TV

6.1 Definition - Convergence errors are the extent to which all three electron beams of a colour display tube fail to converge upon a common phosphor triad over the entire screen area. 6.2 Method of Measurement - Au rf signal modulated by grill pattern having at least 14 horizontal lines and 19 vertical lines at power level of -50 dB is applied to the receiver. The vertical lines shall be of approximately sine-squared form with a duration at the half amplitude points of 0'2 to 0'3 CLS. The amount of signal drive applied to the picture tube shall be such that any defocusing that may occur does not affect the accuracy of measurement. Each horizontal line shall consist of a pair of specially adjacent lines, one in each of the pair of interlaced fields. The background of the patterns shall be at black level and the peaks of both horizontal and vertical lines shall be at white level. The vertical and horizontal separation between the red and green components and the vertical and horizontal separation between the blue and green -components is measured along the vertical and horizontal lines at their intersection ( see Fig. 2F ). 6.3 Presentation of Results - The results are to be tabulated for: 4 red/green horizontal error, b) red/green vertical error, c) blue/green horizontal error, and d) blue/green vertical error.

IS : 4545 ( Part 3 ) - 1983

.
l

.
.

.
.

.
.
l

0

.

.

.

.

l

l

0 .

l

.

l

l

l

.

-I
1

FIG. 2A TESTPATTERN FORPICTURE OUTLINE DISTORTION MEASUREMENTS SHOWING PIN-CUSHION DISTORTION

FIG. 2E OSCILLATIONS IN THE VERTICAL SCAN (s)

Intersection

3-a

FIG. 2B

DIAGRAMFORASSESSING PICTURE OUTLINE DISTORTION VALUES

FIG. 2F (a) TESTPATTERN FORMEASUREMENT CONVERGENCE ERRORS

---H-a
FIG. 2C UNDULATIONS IN THEHORIZONTAL SCAN(p) AND THEVERTICAL SCAN(q)

I
td

-.-.

c.+I

I

b

!
C

I &__._

!

I I

-

I

-Screen: . . . . ..red. --blue:

a b c d

= red/green horizontal error = red/green vertical error = blue/green horizontal error = blue/green vertical error

FIG. 2D

OSCILLATII~Itry,THEHORIZONTAL 7

FIG. 2F (b) MEASUREMENT OF CONVERGENCE ERRORS

IS : 4545 ( Part 3 ) - 1983 The separations measured are expressed as a percentage of maximum picture width and related to the appropriate intersection. The intersections may be identified by assigning a pair of coordinates obtained by numbering the lines in the directions of scan, the first representing the vertical scan direction and the second, the horizontal scan direction ( see Fig. 2F ). 7. OVER AND -UNDER-SCANNING AND CENTRING 7.1 Definition - The displayed picture area may not correspond with the total active picture of the applied signal, some parts being obscured due to over-scanning. Alternatively, the displayed picture may not entirely fill the available screen area due to under-scanning. 7.2 Method of Measurement - An electronically generated test pattern may be used consisting of a system of horizontal and vertical lines both equidistant in time dividing the picture into elementary area of approximately square shape. One vertical and one horizontal line shall correspond with the mid-points of the active picture period and means shall be included to identify the centre of the picture as represented by the intersection of these two lines. The number of lines included in the pattern depends upon the required accuracy of measurement. The centre of the screen area is derived from the maximum picture height and width, determined as in 12. The separation of the mid-point of the pattern from the centre of the screen and the amounts of over-and under-scanning are measured on the horizontal and vertical scanning axes. 7.3 Presentation of Results - The over and under-scanning, also the displacement of the centre of the picture, are plotted on line diagrams for the horizontal and vertical scanning axes expressed as a percentage of the maximum picture height and width ( see Fig. 3 ).
NOTE 1 -This measurement may be carried out over a range of power supply voltages as described in 5 of IS : 4545 ( Part 1 ) - 1983*.

a) the maximum brightness available under the specified conditions, b) limitation due to geometrical distortion, c) limitation due to deterioration and d) limitation due to flicker.
setting

of focus,

Factors (a), (b) and (c) may vary with the of the controls. Since the black level is usually adjusted to approximate to the ambient illumination reflected from the picture screen, it i9 desirable to measure the maximum brightness for black level settings, corresponding to typical values of ambient illumination for which the receiver is designed. The factors (a), (b) and (c) also depend on the area of the picture at peak white level. Highlight flicker is related to the brightness decay time of the screen material ( see 8.3 ). 8.2 Maximum Highlight Brightness Characteristics 8.2.1 Dejnition - Maximum highlight brightness is the highest luminance value that can be measured at the screen for a stated black level when the signal described below is applied to the receiver. 8.2.2 Method of Measurement - The input shall be a television signal with test card modulation at a level of - 50 dB (mW). The black level output shall be set at levels of 1, 3 and 10 nits successively by means of the brightness control. The contrast control shall be advanced in steps from minimum to maximum for each setting of black level and the peak white output measured at each step until no further increase in brightness occurs. The focus and synchronization controls shall be adjusted for best possible performance. If by means of adjustment of other controls, such as sensitivity, a further increase in brightness may be obtained, this shall be noted and measured. 8.2.3 Graphic Representation - For each of the specified black levels, the peak white luminance values are plotted on a linear scale as ordinate and arbitrary units of contrast control setting as abscissa. An example is given in Fig. 4. Where applicable, on each curve, an indication shall be made at which it is considered the brightness is just usable and limited by distortion and/or loss of focus. The criterion of distortion or loss of focus employed shall be indicated with the results. If, in the course of observation, mother deleterious effects take place, these shall be noted.
NOTE- Tf it is suspected that the EHT regulation affects the brightness, the brightness measurements in .8.2 shall be repeated using a pattern containing a large area at peak white,

measurement shall be repeated NOTE 2 - This using a range of adjustments of the appropriate user controls.
NOTE 3 - This measurement using pic.ture content having average values. low, medium

may

be carried

and high

out

8. BRIGHTNESS 8.1 Factors limiting the useful brightness of a television picture for a specified set of conditions of use are:
*Methods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General (first revision ). for television considerations

s

IS : 4545 ( Part 3 ) - 1983
~Honrcntn! underscan .I 5%---------9J

Horizontal

axis

Maximum

picture

height

and width

(100%)

Centre of active

picture

area

I
-i--+-----.`"`i;
FIG. 3

A5%

Off

centre

f
Vertical axis

-_j+__ I I I "I
Vertical over scan

EXAMPLE OF OVER- AND UNDER-SCANNING AND CENTRING

90

0
MIN CONTRAST oe5 CONTRQ!.. SFTTSNG M A :;

A = picture distortion (10% vertical expansion) f3 = loss of focus (3 MHZ bars no longer resolved)

FIG. 4

MAXIMUM HIGHLIGHT BRIGHTNESSCHARACTERISTICS

9

IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983 8.3 Brightness Decay Characteristic - The highlight brightness, where flicker becomes objectionable, is related to the brightness decay characteristic of the phosphor. The decay ! characteristic shall therefore be measured or taken from the data of the picture tube manufecturer. 9. CONTRAST 9.1 Definition - Contrast is the ratio of the luminance of a peak white area of the picture screen to the luminance of a black area of the picture screen. 9.2 Halation-Limited Contrast - The halationlimited contrast depends on the following factors: a) Relative size of black and white areas. In general, the contrast deteriorates as a greater portion of the tube screen is excited by electrons. b) Points where luminance is measured. In general, the contrast deteriorates as these points approach each other. 9.3 Halation-Limited Large Area Contrast 9.3.1 DeYinition - Halation-limited large area contrast is the maximum contrast measured using a pattern consisting of broad black and white vertical bars, as described in 9.3.2. 9.3.2 Method of Measurement - The signal used and the pattern produced on the screen are shown in Fig. 5A and 5B. The tube beamcurrent shall be cut off in the black areas of the picture.
tt i-7
-WHITE

The luminance of the white areas of the picture shall be sufficiently high to facilitate the measurement. The luminance values L1, L,, La of the three square areas indicated in the figure are measured without ambient illumination of the screen. If necessary, a mask, leaving free the required area, may be used with the luminance meter. The halation-limited large area contrast is given by: 2Lz
a1 = L,+L,

9.4 Halation-Limited

Detail Contrast

9.4.1 Definition - Halation-limited detail contrast is the maximum contrast measured using a pattern consisting of one small black area on a white field, as described in 9.4.2. 9.4.2 Method used is shown shall be out off centre of the white area shall the measurement. of Measurement - The pattern in Fig. 6. The beam-current in the small black area is the picture. The luminance of the be sufficiently high to facilitate

The luminance values L,, L,, LB, L4 and L, ofthe five areas indicated in the figure shall be measured without ambient illumination on the screen. If necessary, a mask, leaving free the required area, may be used with the luminance meter. When L1 is measured, the instrument or the mask shall be moved about slightly to obtain a minimum reading. The halation-limited by:
ard=

detail

contrast

is given

rLr
L-$,-i
th-

L+Ls+L+L
4Ll

-BLACK

The halation-limited detail contrast may be different in the corners of the picture and it may be desirable to repeat the measurement in at least one corner with a suitably modified pattern.

+
5A

Modulation waveform for Measurement Halation-Limited Large Area Contrast

of

58

Test Pattern

for Measurement of Halation-Limited Large Area Contrast

FIG.

5

HALATION-LIMITED LARGE AREA CONTRAST

FIG. 6 TEST PATTERN FOR MEASUREMENTOF HALATION-LIMITED DETAIL CONTRAST

1

IS : 4545 ( Part 3 ) - 1983 9.5 Maximum Usable Detail Contrast 9.5.1 Definition - The maximum usable detail contrast is the ratio of the maximum usable highlight brightness for a stated black level, and the brightness of the black level for specified conditions of measurement. 9.5.2 Method of Measurement - The method of measurement indicated in 8.2.2 shall be used. 9.5.3 Graphic Representation - Contrast is plotted on a linear scale as ordinate for each black level and ~arbitrary units of contrast control setting as abscissa. An example is given in Fig. 7. 9.5.4 Limiting Factors - Corresponding cations are made as detailed in 8.2.3. indiLO = luminance that would be caused by the ambient illumination with P = 1. The contrast with ambient illumination then becomes: Lw + Lr = Lw + PLO q =
Lb f Lr Lb +
@LO

9.7 Reflection Characteristic of the Picture Screen 9.7.1 Definition - The reflection characteristic of the picture screen is the ratio of the luminance value measured in the direction of the optical axis to that of an ideally diffusing surface measured under exactly the same conditions as a function of the angle of incidence of the ambient illumination, the receiver being switched off. 9.7.2 Method of Measurement-The front of the receiver shall be illuminated by a source of light equivalent to standard illuminant C* ( Standard illuminant C corresponds to a black-body temperature of about 6 500" K >. The receiver shall not be operating. A magnesium carbonate block shall be placed on the optical axis in contact with and in front of the optical surface nearest the viewer. The luminance values of the magnesium carbonate block and the face of the receiver adjacent to the carbonate block shall be measured, varying the angle of incidence of the ambient illumination. 9.7.3 Expression shall be expressed of Results - The result as the ratio between the

9.6 Contrast with Ambient Illumination - The contrast is adversely affected by ambient illumination on the screen. The luminance values of the black and white parts of the picture are increased by an equal amount. If, without ambient illumination, the luminance of the black part is Lb and the luminance of the white is Lw, then the large-area contrast is:
L,.. -

OL1 = Lb
With ambient illumination an amount I, shall be added to both Lb and Lw. Lr being the luminance due to ambient light reflected by the picture screen:
Lr = PLO

where p = reflection coefficient of the picture screen ( see 9.7 ), and
100

*As defined by the International Commission on Illumination,Report 1931.

90 80

70 0 60 f = 50 ci 2 40
0 v

E
30

20 10 n
" MIN CONTRAST A = picture
B s FIG, distortion loss of focus

0.5 CONTROL
( MHz

MPX SETTING
expansion resolved ) )

( IO y0 vertical bars no longer

7

MAXIMUM USABLE DETAIL CONTRAST CURVES

11

IS : 4545( Part 3 ) - 1983 luminance of the face of the receiver and that of the magnesium carbonate block corrected for its known reflectance. 9.8 Directional Character&tie of the Picture
Screen 9.8.1 Definition - The directional characteristic of a particular point of the picture screen represents the relation between the angle of observation relative to the optical axis and the ratio of the luminance at that point, observed in that direction, to its tuminance observed along the optical axis. The measurement is made in the absence of ambjent illumination. This characteristic gives information of the usable angle of observation.

luminance and the corresponding picture.modu* lation percentage for various parts of the picture. 11.2 Method of Measurement - A television signal of level - 50 dJ3 (mW), modulated with a step pattern consisting of vertical bars, shall be applied to the receiver input terminals. The steps of the signal shall preferably cover the range in approximately 10 equal steps from 3 to 100 percent picture moduiation ( sfe Fig. 8 ). The mean level of the modulation then corresponds to approximately 50 percent. The controls of the receiver shall be set so that 3 percent modulation corresponds to each of the black levels stated in 8.2 and 100 percent picture modulation corresponds to the related maximum usable highlight brightness ( see 8.2.3 ). The luminance at each level of the step waveform shall be measured.

10. DEFINITION

AND FOCIJS

10.1 Definition - The vertical and the horizontal definitions are expressed as the maximum number of lines which can be resolved in the vertical and the horizontal directions as read from the definition wedges on a reproduction of the standard test card. 10.2 Method of Measurement - The receiver shall be set up for standard image or standard video output voltage with standard test card modulation. The definition in the corners and the centre of the screen shall be read from the definition wedges of the test card reproduction. The values found depend on the focus setting. The definition in the corners may not be a maximum when the focus is set for best definition in the centre, and also the vertical definition may not be a maximum when the focus is set for best horizontal definition. Before the definition is read, the focus shall be adjusted in such a manner that the best overall compromise is obtained. 11. BRIGHTNESS
11.1 Definition TRANSFER CHARACTERISTIC

l--b

------A

FIG. 8 MUDULATION WAVEFORM FOR BRIGHTNESSTRANSFERCHARACTERISTIC 11.3 Graphic Representation - The brightness transfer characteristic shall be plotted on a logarithmic picture modulation percentage scale as abscissa and a logarithmic luminance scale as ordinate for each value of stated black level and corresponding maximum usable highlight brightness ( see Fig. 9 ). The slope at any point of this curve is called the gradation.

cteristic

represents

The -brightness transfer charathe relationship between the

t FIG. 9

2
PICTURE

4

6

8 10

2
PERCENTAGE

4

6 8 lo2

MODULATION

BRIGHTNESS TR;TSFER CHARACTERISTIC 6

