RAT Alte IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


act art URS A caret Aras AY 
ug (ata AR eater DT) 
ATT 19 Tea a 
( TEA TRITT ) 


Method of Measurement of Works in 
River Valley Projects 
(Dams and Appurtenant Structures) 


Part 19 Electro-Mechanical Works 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2022 Price Group 4 


Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works for River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works for River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, had been approved 
by the Water Resources Division Council. 


In the measurement of quantities, in the construction of river valley projects, a large diversity of methods exists 
at present according to local practices. Lack of uniformity creates complication regarding measurement and 
payments. This standard is intended to provide a uniform basis for measurement of various items of electrical 
works carried out in River Valley Projects. 


This Indian Standard (Part 19) was first published in the year 2009. In this revision the major modifications that 
are being brought about include addition of explanatory text for making the contents of the standard lucid and 
self-explanatory. General clause of the standard has been updated to cover the requirements of clubbing of items, 
booking of dimensions, description of items, dewatering, mill tolerances etc. The table 1 has been updated with 
the following: 


a) Measurement units 
b) Site adjustment/extra measurement to reflect the site specific requirements, and 
c) Following new items have been added 
i) Mandatory spare parts, 

ii) Special tools and devices, 

111) Associated transmission system, and 

iv) Drainage dewatering system 

This Indian Standard is published in several parts. The other parts in this series are: 


Part 1 Excavation for foundation 

Part2 Dewatering 

Part3 Grouting 

Part4 Concrete works 

Part5 Masonry 

Part6 Ventilation pipes and other embedded materials 
Part7 Joints 

Part8 Instrumentation 

Part9 Lining 

Part 10 Form work 

Part 11 Diaphragm walls 

Part 12 Topographical surveys 

Part 13 Earth and fill dams 

Part 14 Canal works 

Part 15 Investigation works 

Part 16 Tunneling 

Part 17 Hydromechanical and related metal works 
Part 18 Sheet piling 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis should be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 


Indian Standards 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN 
RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
(DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES ) 


PART 19 ELECTRO-MECHANICAL WORKS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 19) covers the method of 
measurement of electromechanical works in terms of 
units of measurement for the works carried out in river 
valley projects. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS Title 


9401 (Part2) Method of measurement of works 


: 2003 in river valley projects (dams and 
appurtenant structures): Part 2 
Dewatering (first revision) 
3 GENERAL 


3.1 Electromechanical works are not amenable to 
simple measurement techniques for the purpose of 
payment. The bill of quantities is framed in such a way 
that measurement for the purpose of payment can be 
done on the basis of completion of various stages of 
work carried out in accordance with specifications and 
approved drawings. As such the bill of quantities and 
detailed scope of work is generally brought out in terms 
of sets or numbers of equipment. 


3.2 Clubbing 


Items may be clubbed together provided that breakup 
of clubbed items is agreed to be on basis of detailed 
description of items, stated in this standard. 


3.3 Booking of Dimensions 


In booking dimensions, order shall be consistent and 
generally in sequence of length, width, and height or 
depth or thickness. 


3.4 Dimensions 


Unless otherwise stated all work shall be measured net 
in decimal system, as fixed in its place, as given in 3.4.1 
to 3.4.3. 


3.4.1 Linear dimensions including diameter shall be 
measured to the nearest 0.001 m. 


3.4.2 Areas shall be worked out to nearest 0.001 m?. 
3.4.3 Weights shall be worked out to nearest 0.5 kg. 


3.5 Description of Items 


The description of each item shall include conveyance 
and delivery, handling, loading, unloading, storing, 
rehandling, installation/erection testing and 
commissioning including all inputs for finishing to 
required shape and size. 


3.6 Work to be Measured Separately 


Wherever dewatering is resorted to, it shall be 
measured in accordance with IS 9401 (Part 2). 


3.7 Mill Tolerance 


Mill tolerances/rolling margins shall not be considered 
if the weight is determined by standard weight basis. In 
case where details of actual weights are available the 
same should be adopted. 


4 BILL OF QUANTITIES 


Items of work shall fully describe the materials/ 
components/processes and truly represent the work 
to be executed. For the purpose of this standard the 
works shall be categorized into stages/activities. 


IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 


4.1 Stages/ Activities 


4.1.1 Design, engineering, fabrication, manufacture, 
shop testing, assembly, painting, handling and 
forwarding etc. of all items including all spare parts, 
tools and required auxiliaries and accessories. 


4.1.2 Freight and Insurance, including handling, 
loading/unloading, and delivery up to site. 


4.1.3 Erection, testing and commissioning of all units 
upto satisfactory operation thereof. 


5 MEASUREMENTS 


Electromechanical works in the river valley projects 
can be categorized into various items as given below in 
Table 1. The units of measurement of each works along 
with site adjustment/extra measurement, wherever 
applicable, have been mentioned against each item. 


5.1 Unless otherwise specified, the dimensional 
measurement at works and at site should be carried 
out during inspections to ensure manufacturing and 
operational accuracy and completeness of items 
in accordance with the approved drawings. The 
approved drawings shall incorporate bill of materials 
indicating various components with their description, 
size, quantity, material, specifications, and theoretical 
weights in case of fabricated components. The bill of 
materials shall form the basis for ensuring completeness 
to enable acceptance of sets of different items of works. 


5.2 Unless otherwise specified, an additional allowance 
of 2.5 percent of the weight of the structure shall be 
made for shop and site rivet heads in riveted steel 
structures. 


5.3 Unless otherwise specified, in the case of welded 
steel structures 1.5 percent of the weight of structure 
shall be added to the weight. 


5.4 The theoretical weight of components in the bill 
of materials incorporated in the approved drawings 
shall be based on unit weight given in relevant Indian 
Standards. No deduction shall be made for holes of area 
less than 0.01 m?. 


5.5 The theoretical weights of components in the bill of 
materials incorporated in the approved drawings shall 
be based on the details given below: 


a) The weight of steel sheet, plate and strip shall 
be taken from relevant Indian Standards on 
standard weight basis for every millimeter of 
sheet thickness. For rolled sections like girders, 
channels, angles, rounds, steel strips etc, weights 
given in relevant Indian Standard shall be used. 


b 


wm 


Unless otherwise specified, weights of cleats, 
brackets, stiffeners, distance pieces, separators, 
diaphragms, gussets (taking overall rectangular 
dimension), base plates, packing pieces shall be 
added to the weight of respective items. 


c 


wm 


For forged steel/steel castings, weight shall 
be calculated on the basis of relevant Indian 
Standards. 


5.6 Unless otherwise specified for linear measurement 
of length, the pipes including welds shall be considered 
as continuous pipes and the weight shall be calculated 
on standard weight basis. For bends, the length along 
each axis of the curve shall be measured and weights 
be calculated accordingly. 


IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 


Table 1 Various Items of Electromechanical Works in River Valley Projects 


( Clause 5 ) 


SINo Equipment Measurement Unit Site Adjustment/Extra Measurement 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Turbine and governor In No. Site specific equipment wise/part wise 
breakup may be made 
ii) Main inlet valve (MIV) In No. — 
iii) Generator, excitation and automatic In No. Site specific equipment wise/part wise 
voltage regulator (AVR) breakup may be made 
iv) Bus duct In lot per unit Length of main and tap bus conductors 
with enclosure, in metre, and support 
structures by weight for site adjustment 
v) Generator step-up transformers Number of transformers installed along — 
with assembly of various auxiliaries at 
site 
vi) Cross-linked poly-ethylene (XLPE) or In lots per cable or per unit The support structure by weight and 
oil filled high voltage (HV) cables the length of cable, in metre, for site 
adjustment 
vii) HV switch gear (Gas Insulated In lot per bay The support structure by weight and 
Switchgear (GIS), etc.) the bus duct of each type, in metre, for 
site adjustment 
viii) Pot-yard/switchyard In lot with respect to each bay /unit Unit rates/measurement for site 
adjustment 
ix) Direct current (DC) battery system Lot per battery system = 
x) Control and monitoring system Lot per section/unit, as applicable — 
xi) Protection system Lot per section/unit, as applicable 
xii) Power and control cables including Lot — 
cable trays 
xiii) 11 kV Switch gear Lot per section/panel of each type — 
xiv) Diesel Generator (DG) sets including “No” of each type of DG = 
step-up transformers 
xv) Auxiliary and station transformer “No” of transformer of each type — 
415V Switchgear Lot per section/unit, as applicable 
xvi) Power line carrier communication Lot per set Unit measurement of each equipment 
system (PLCC) equipment of outdoor and indoor installations 
xvii) Illumination system Lot per section/panel — 
xviii) Public address system Lot Length of wiring and conduiting 
including accessories, in metre, for site 
adjustment 
xix) Optical fibre cable link between dam and Lot — 
powerhouse including termination, etc 
xx) Electrical workshop Lot = 
xxi) Electric Overhead Travel (EOT) cranes No. of cranes Installed and — 
for power house commissioned 
xxii) Cooling water system Lot per system Unit charges for pumps, valves, 
filters, strainers of each type for site 
adjustment fire dampers, etc., in m? 
xxiii) Grounding system lot — 


IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SINo Equipment Measurement Unit Site Adjustment/Extra Measurement 
0) (2) (3) (4) 

xxiv) Fire fighting system Lot a) Unit price of each type of the 
equipment of firefighting and 
detection, etc. 

b) No. of pumps, valves of each 
type for site adjustment 

c) Pipes of each size including 
fittings by metre 

d) Unit measurement of fire 
extinguishers of each type 

e) Cable, etc., as per S. No.12 

xxv) High pressure (HP) compressed air Lot a) Unit measurement of each type 
system of compressor 

b) No. of valves of each type for site 
adjustment 

c) Pipes of each size including 
fittings by metre 

xxvi) Low pressure (LP) compressed air Lot a) Unit measurement of each type 

system of compressor 
b) No. of valves of each type for site 
adjustment 
c) Pipes of each size including 
fittings by metre 
xxvii) Oil filtration plant Lot per system for purification of a) No. of valves of each type for site 
transformer oil and bearing oil adjustment 
b) Pipes of each size including 
fittings by metre 

xxvili) | Workshop equipment Lot — 

XxIx) Elevators Lot — 

XXX) Ventilationof tunnels through exhaust | Per hour of operation of exhaust blowers Length of ventilation pipe to be 

blowers and pipe considered 

XXxXi) Air conditioning: Lot As per consumption in KW during 

a) Equipment during operation Speen 
b) Equipment during installation 

xxxii) Instrumentation (for seismological Lot — 

quality control lab, water level recorder, 
meteorological, etc. 

xxxiii) | Control room equipment and instruments Lot — 

xxxiv) | Water level recorder equipment Lot — 

XXXV) Telemetry for transmission of hydraulic Lot — 

data 

xxxvi) | Computerization of the project Lot = 

xxxvii) | Maintenance during operation stage Lot = 

xxxviii) | Transformers of switchyard No. — 

xxxix) | High voltage electrical supply system Lot per item of each type of = 

equipment/substation/line 

xl) Warning system Lot per item of each type of equipment — 
xli) Cable gallery Lot Running meter of each size of cable. 

xlii) Mandatory spare parts Lot — 

xliii) Special tools and devices Lot — 


Table 1 ( Concluded) 


IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 


SINo Equipment Measurement Unit Site Adjustment/Extra Measurement 
a) (2) (3) (4) 

xliv) Associated transmission System Km — 

xlv) Drainage dewatering system Lot — 


IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works for River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 23 


Organization 
NHPC Faridabad 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 
Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Energy Infratech Private Limited, Gurugram 


Ferro Concrete Construction (India) Private Limited, 
Indore 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, Mumbai 
In Personal Capacity 


Irrigation Department, Govt of Kerala, 
Thiruvananthapuram 


Irrigation Department Government of Haryana 


Irrigation Department Government of Punjab 
Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Karnataka Power Corporation Limited, Bengaluru 
Larsen and Toubro (ECC Limited), Mumbai 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation, Faridabad 


North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited, 
Shillong 


SJVN Limited, Shimla 


Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited, 
Gandhinagar 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


Water Resources Department, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 


Representative(s) 


SHRI J. R. CHAUDHARY (Chairman) 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (CIVIL) (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH GUPTA 


DIRECTOR (HPM DIVISION) 
DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (CosT APP) (HWF) 
DIRECTOR (Cost APP) (IRR) (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI PRAMOD CHAND TEWARI (Alternate) 


Dr MAHAVIR BIDASARIA 
SHRI ER ANUPAM BIDASARIA (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT JOSHI 
H. L. ARORA 
Suri K. A. JosHy 


SHRI PARDEEP YADAV 


SHRI KULDIP SINGH TAKSHI 
SHRI JATINDER PAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CIVIL DESIGN) 


SHRI K. K. GUPTA 
SHRI SANTANU MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR PANDEY 
SHRI JAGAT SINGH YADAV (Alternate) 


GENERAL MANAGER (CIVIL) 
DEPUTY GENERAL MANAGER (CIVIL) (Alternate I) 
SENIOR MANAGER (CIVIL) (Alternate II) 


SHRI B. C. BORA 


SHRIM. C. VERMA 
Suri V. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
Suri V. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


DGM (OMS-CivIL) 
AGM (Cost ENGG) (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER, BODHI W.R.D 


IS 9401 (Part 19) : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, HEAD (CIVIL DESIGNS) 
New Delhi GENERAL MANAGER (HYDRO-POWER) (Alternate) 


Water Resources Dev and Management, IIT Roorkee SHRI GOPAL CHAUHAN 


BIS Directorate General SHRI DWAIPAYAN BHADRA SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (WRD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms LALTHAN PARI 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (WRD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 23 (15663). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


