NAT HIAF IS 16479 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


sdt Tou Tis TAS CHS Hat HTAA 
Cd Afan- Reen cht HATA 
adat aa atteror fT 


( Teel JAGO ) 


Performance Requirements and Test 
Procedures of Braking Systems 
for Wheeled or High-Speed Rubber 
Tracked Earth Moving Machines and 
Construction Equipment Vehicles 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 53.100 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 8 


Material Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Material Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. This standard addresses the general requirements, requirement of a service brake 
system, secondary brake system and a parking brake system. Additional requirements have also been specified 
for hydrostatic braking systems, systems with combined brake and steer function, performance and warning 
devices for stored energy sources, braking systems with electronic machine control systems, test conditions and 
performance tests. This standard is intended to replace the requirements currently notified under CMV(A)R, 1989. 


While deriving this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following: 


ISO 3450 : 2011 Earth moving machinery — Wheeled or high-speed rubber-tracked machines — Performance 
requirements and test procedures for brake systems 


Rule 96 A of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 already lays down certain technical prescriptions and 
requirements which have been suitably considered. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16479 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND TEST 
PROCEDURES OF BRAKING SYSTEMS FOR 
WHEELED OR HIGH-SPEED RUBBER TRACKED 
EARTH MOVING MACHINES AND 
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT VEHICLES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies minimum performance 
requirements and test procedures for the service, 
secondary and parking brake systems of wheeled and 
high-speed rubber-tracked earth-moving machines, for 
the uniform assessment of those brake systems. 


1.1 It is applicable to the following earth-moving 
machinery, operating on work sites or in mining, or 
travelling on public roads: 


a) Self-propelled, 
machines, 


b) Self-propelled, rubber-tyred construction 
equipment vehicles (as defined under CMV(A) R 
1989), 


c) Self-propelled rollers and landfill compactors, 


rubber-tyred —_ earth-moving 


d) Self-propelled scrapers, 


e) Remote-control machines, wheeled or rubber- 
tracked; 


f) Derivative earth-moving machines with rubber 
tyres; and 


g) Earth-moving machines with rubber tracks and a 
maximum machine speed > 20 km/h. 


1.2 It is not applicable to pedestrian-controlled earth- 
moving machinery (see IS/ISO 17063 : 2003) or crawler 
earth-moving machines with steel or rubber tracks 
that travel at < 20 km/h (see IS/ISO 10265 : 2008). 
While purpose-built underground mining machines 
are not within the scope of this National Standard, its 
provisions can generally be applied to those machines 
with some braking performance modifications and 
additions (see Annex A). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 


of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated. 


IS No. Title 
IS/ISO 6165: Earth-moving machinery — Basic 
2012 types — Identification and terms and 


definitions 


IS/ISO 7133: 
1994 


Earth-moving machinery — Tractor 
- scrapers — Terminology and 
commercial specifications 


IS/ISO 9248 : 
1992 


Earth-moving machinery — Units 
for dimensions, performance and 
capacities, and their measurement 
accuracies 


IS/ISO 10265 
: 2008 


Earth moving machinery — 
Crawler machines — Performance 
requirements and test procedures for 
braking systems 


IS/ISO 10968 Earth-moving machinery — 


: 2004 Operator ’s controls 
IS/ISO 6014: Earth-moving machinery — 
1986 Determination of ground speed 
IS/ISO 6016: Earth-moving machinery — 
2008 Methods of measuring the weightes 


of whole machines, their equipment 
and components 


IS/ISO 8811: Earth-moving machinery — Rollers 


2000 and compactors — Terminology and 
commercial specifications 

IS/ISO 15998 Earth-moving machinery — 

: 2008 Machine-control systems (MCS) 


using electronic components — 
Performance criteria and tests for 
functional safety 


IS/ISO 17063 
: 2003 


Earth-moving machinery — 
Braking systems of pedestrian- 
controlled machines — Performance 
requirements and test procedures 


IS 16479 : 2020 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS/ISO 6165 and the following shall apply: 


3.1 Braking System — All components which combine 
together to stop and/or hold the machine, including the 
brake control(s), brake actuation system, the brake(s) 
themselves and, if the machine is so equipped, the 
retarder. 


3.1.1 Service Brake System — Primary system used for 
stopping and holding the machine. 


3.1.2 Secondary Brake System — System used to stop 
the machine in the event of any single failure in the 
service brake system. 


3.1.3 Parking Brake System — System used to hold a 
stopped machine in a stationary position and which, if 
applicable, may also be part of secondary brake system. 


3.1.4 Hydrostatic Brake System — Hydrostatic or other 
similar propel drive system used to meet one or more of 
the brake system requirements. 


3.1.5 Braking System Components 


3.1.5.1 Brake control — Component directly activated 
by the operator to cause a force to be transmitted to the 
brake(s). 


3.1.5.2 Brake actuation system — All components 
between the brake control and the brake(s) which 
connect them functionally. 


3.1.5.3 Brake — Component which directly applies a 
force to oppose movement of the machine. 
NOTE — The different types of brake include friction, 


mechanical, electrical, regenerative devices and hydrostatic or 
other fluid types. 


3.1.5.4 Common component — Component that 
performs a function in two or more brake systems. 


Example — Pedal, valve. 


3.1.5.5 Retarder — Energy-absorption device normally 
used to control machine speed. 


3.2 Hydrostatic Drive System — Hydraulic system 
where hydraulic motors form a direct drive to the 
wheels or track to propel the machine and slow machine 
movement. 


3.3 Machine Test Weight — Operating weight of 
a machine which includes the heaviest combination 
of cab, canopy, operator protective structures (if 
required) with all their components and mountings, 
any combination of equipment approved by the 
manufacturer of the machine, including operator and 
full liquid systems in accordance with IS/ISO 6016 (for 
example machine configuration and direction of travel 
having the most adverse effect on braking). 


NOTES : 

1 For rollers, the sprinkler water reservoir(s) shall be full. 

2 For self-propelled scrapers with semi-trailed units, towed 
trailers and all types of dumpers, the machine test weight 
shall also include the maximum specified payload as per the 
machine manufacturer’s specifications. For all other machines, 
the payload shall not be included. 


3.4 Stopping Distances — Distance travelled by the 
machine from the point on the test course at which the 
machine brake control actuation begins (for example, 
operator actuates the brakes) to the point on the test 
course where the machine is fully stopped. 


NOTES: 
1 It is expressed in metres (m). 


2 It does not take into account the operator reaction time, 
unless stated, but does take into account the system reaction 
time. 


3.5 Mean Deceleration (a) — Average rate of change 
in the velocity of the machine from the instant the brake 
control actuation begins until a full stop is achieved. 


NOTE — It is expressed in metres per second squared (m/s2), 
calculated from: 


R 


c= 
2, 
Where, 
v= Velocity of the machine immediately prior to 
the brake control being activated, in meters per 
second (m/s); and 
s = Stopping distance, in metres (m). 


3.6 Burnishing — Procedure used to condition the 
frictional surfaces of a brake. 


3.7 Brake System Pressure — Fluid pressure available 
to the brake control. 


3.8 Brake Application Pressure — Measured fluid 
pressure used to actuate the brakes. 


3.9 Modulated Braking — Ability to continuously 
and progressively increase and decrease the braking 
force by operation of the brake control. 


Example — A system allows the braking force to be 
increased and decreased over time, based on single or 
repeated movements of the brake control. 


3.10 Test Course — Surface upon which the test is 
carried out. 


NOTE — See 5.3. 


3.11 Cold Brakes — Brake systems containing friction 
elements condition of brakes 


where: 


a) The brakes have not been actuated in the previous 
hour except in accordance with the applicable 
performance test (see 6); 


b) The brakes have been cooled to 100°C or less 
when measured on the brake disc or the outside of 
the brake drum; and 


c) In the case of totally enclosed brakes, including 
oil-immersed brakes, the temperature measured 
on the outside of the housing closest to the brake 
is below 50°C or within the brake manufacturer’s 
specifications. 


3.12 Maximum Machine Speed — Maximum speed 
determined in accordance with IS/ISO 6014, or 
equivalent. 


3.13 Back Throttling — Action of applying slight 
forward or reverse power to a hydrostatic or other 
similar drive system in order to hold the machine 
stationary. 


3.14 Derivative Earth-Moving Machine — Machine 
with a combination of features from other earth-moving 
machines, thereby creating different configurations or 
arrangements. 


Example — Machine having the front-mounted 
equipment of a loader on a non-self-loading, rear- 
mounted dumper body. 


3.15 Safe State — Condition in which, after 
a malfunction of the machine control system, 
the controlled equipment, process or system is 
automatically or manually stopped or switched into 
a mode that prevents unexpected performance or the 
potentially hazardous release of stored energy. 


3.16 Dumper — Self-propelled crawler or wheeled 
machine with an open body, which transports and dumps 
or spreads material, and where loading is performed by 
means other than the dumper [IS/ISO 6165]. 


NOTE — For semi-trailed dumpers, (see ISO 7132 : 2003, 
Figs 3, 16 and 20). 


3.16.1 Rigid-frame Dumper — Dumper having a rigid 
frame and wheel or crawler steering [IS/ISO 6165]. 
NOTE — Rigid-frame and articulated-frame dumpers are 
illustrated in ISO 7132: 2003, Figs 1 and 2, 8 and 9, 14 and 15, 
and 18 and 19. 
3.16.2 Articulated-frame Dumper — Wheeled machine 
dumper with an articulated frame which accomplishes 
the steering of the dumper [IS/ISO 6165]. 
NOTE — Rigid-frame and articulated-frame dumpers are 


illustrated in ISO 7132:2003, Figs. 1 and 2, 8 and 9, 14 and 15, 
and 18 and 19. 


3.17 Trailer — Transport machine with one or more 
axles which, according to its design, is suitable and 
intended for coupling to a self-propelled machine. 


3.18 Fully Developed Deceleration Rate — Maximum 
continuous deceleration rate which the machine is 
capable of developing on a specified constant slope, 
with a specific machine test weight and surface 
condition and an initial (prior to deceleration) machine 
travel speed. 


IS 16479 : 2020 


3.19 Purpose-Built Underground Mining Machine 
— Specialized earthmoving machine designed for 
underground use which may have a lower height profile 
and trailer attached. 


Example— Underground dump trucks, tele-dumpers, 
load haul dumps, scoops, coal haulers, power trams, 
chock carriers, personnel carriers, loading machines. 


3.20 Machine Control System (MCS) — Components 
needed to fulfill the function of the system, including 
sensors, signal processing unit, monitor, controls and 
actuators or several of these. 
NOTE — The extent of the system is not limited to the 
electronic controls, but is defined by the machine-related 
function of the complete system. It therefore consists generally 
of electronic, non-electronic and connection devices. This 
can include mechanical, hydraulic, optical or pneumatic 
components/ systems. [IS/ISO 15998] 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


The requirements of this clause apply to all machines 
within the scope of this National Standard. 


All brake systems shall be designed, constructed and 
installed such that contamination and/or its effects are 
minimized. 


4.1 Required Brake Systems 


4.1.1 All machines shall be equipped with a: 
a) service brake system; 
b) secondary brake system; and 
c) parking brake system. 


Service, secondary and parking brake systems may 
share common components or functions and do not 
have to be three independent and separate systems. 


4.1.2 No brake system (including hydrostatic systems) 
shall contain a disconnecting device, such as a clutch or 
shiftable gear-box which allows disabling of the brake, 
except for systems in accordance with a) and/or b), as 
follows: 


a) Any device designed to disconnect the service or 
secondary brake power source for cold weather 
starting shall require application of the parking 
brake before disconnection can take place; and 


b) A parking brake disconnect (release) designed to 
allow movement of disabled machines shall be 
located outside the operator’s station unless it can 
be reapplied immediately. 


4.1.3 All machines shall have service brakes of an 
equal nominal capacity rating applicable to each of the 
wheels (or equivalent) of at least one axle. Dumpers 
and self-propelled scrapers with semi-trailed unit(s) 
shall have service brakes applicable to at least one 
axle of the towing machine and one axle of each semi- 
trailed unit. 


IS 16479 : 2020 


4.1.4 For rollers, the service and secondary brakes 
shall apply to all power-driven drums and wheels. 
Each drum of a split drum shall have the same nominal 
brake torque. The brake of a single-drum roller and a 
combined roller shall apply to all wheels and to the 
drum. 


4.1.5 If the parking brake is intended to stop creep 
movement, the parking brake system shall permit 
actuation of the parking brake during travel. 


4.2 Common Components 


Service, secondary and parking brake systems can share 
common components. Where common components are 
used, the machine’s braking performance shall meet 
the requirements for secondary brake systems given in 
4.5 and 4.7, as applicable. If there is a failure in any 
single component within the brake system — except 
for tyres, drum or track — braking performance shall 
be in accordance with Table 3. 


Acceptable performance is achieved for common brake 
control failure as follows. If there is a failure with a 
common brake control (lever, pedal, etc) used to actuate 
the combined service and secondary brake systems, and 
there is another dynamic braking capability provided 
with the machine (for example, parking brake with 
dynamic braking capability), the dynamic braking 
capability shall stop the machine after the failure within 
120 percent of the stopping distance for secondary 
brakes (under secondary test conditions) in accordance 
with Table 3. This dynamic braking capability may 
be applied automatically and without modulation. An 
indication should be given to the operator simultaneous 
with, or before, application of the brake system, if 
applied automatically. 


4.3 Brake Control Systems 


All brake system controls shall be capable of being 
applied by an operator from the operating position. 
Parking brake system controls shall be arranged so that, 
unless immediately reapplied, they cannot be released 
once applied. Unintended brake control activation can 
be avoided through compliance with IS/ISO 10968. 


Brake control systems should be designed to avoid 
any unintended application or release of brakes during 
normal operation. This does not preclude the automatic 
application of a brake system due to intended design 
conditions that also meet the requirements of this 
National Standard. 


The arrangement of the brake system controls should be 
in accordance with IS/ISO 10968. Ifnot, an instructional 
sign shall be provided (for example, using symbols) 
explaining the control arrangement. Brake pedals and 
hydrostatic brake system controls are obvious and may 
not require machine instructions. 


A brake control system shall prevent or minimize 
any uncontrolled braking performance (random brake 
applications, releases or sporadic braking performance, 
etc) during normal operation (start, stop or normal 
travel operation of the machine, etc). 


Electric, electronic and electronic machine control 
systems (MCS) for service, secondary or parking 
brakes shall comply with IS/ISO 15998. 


The operator should be able to apply the service or 
secondary brake while retaining control of the steering 
device on the machine with at least one hand. 


4.4 Service Brake Systems 


All machines shall meet the service brake performance 
requirements given in 6, as applicable. The service brake 
system shall have modulated braking for machines 
designed for maximum machine speeds greater than 6 
km/h. Ifa travel mode that limit the maximum machine 
speed to 6 km/h or less can be selected, modulation is 
not required in this mode. 


If other systems receive power from the service brake 
system, any failure in those systems that reduces 
service brake system performance shall be considered 
as a failure in the service brake system. 


4.5 Secondary Brake Systems 


All machines shall meet the secondary brake 
performance requirements given in 6, as applicable. 
The secondary brake system shall have modulated 
braking for maximum machine speeds greater than 20 
km/h. 


4.6 Parking Brake Systems 


All machines shall meet the parking brake requirements 
of 6, as applicable. After application of the parking 
brake, the parking brake system shall not depend on an 
exhaustible energy source or continuous operator action 
(for example, hand or foot effort). The parking brake 
system may use common components, provided the 
requirements of 6.4 and Table 2 are met. The parking 
brake, operating according to the manufacturer’s 
specifications, shall be in accordance with Table 2, 
regardless of any contraction of the brake parts or 
leakage of any kind. 
NOTE — Mechanical springs are not considered to be an 
exhaustible energy source. Back throttling by a hydrostatic 
drive system does not meet the parking brake requirements, 
as back throttling requires continuous operator action. The 
parking brake shall require an action by the operator prior to 
release of the parking brake control. The parking brake shall 
not automatically release during normal start up or upon loss 
of power to the parking brake system or parking brake MCS. 
A parking brake may be applied automatically (for 
spring- or control-system-activated), in which case it 
shall be applied or remain applied after the machine is 
in a stopped condition and the engine shut down. 


Machines with the capability for a self test of the 
parking brake shall include design provisions that 
the machine does not propel unless there is a propel 
activation by the operator during the self-test. 


4.7 Hydrostatic Brake Systems 


For a machine fitted with a hydrostatic brake system, 
the service and secondary brakes shall be in accordance 
with 4.4 and 4.5, respectively. 


Typical hydrostatic brake systems have an exhaustible 
power supply and would not be able to meet the 
requirements for parking brakes given in 4.6. 


Service brake application shall be obtained by one of 
the following means: 


a) Operation of a single control; 


b) Moving the foot from the drive pedal to the brake 
pedal; and 


c) At the start of the braking sequence, releasing 
the drive control(s) and moving to the neutral or 
reverse propel position using hand or foot. 


A brake system additional to the service brake may be 
used to hold the machine when there is creep movement. 
A machine may be held stationary, regardless of the 
grade, using the throttle of the hydrostatic or similar 
propel drive system (back throttling). 


4.8 Systems with Combined Brake and Steer 
Function 


If the braking system has a combined brake and steer 
function and is used as the secondary brake system, the 
machine shall maintain controllability during secondary 
brake stopping distance testing in accordance with 6. 
While remaining within the applicable secondary brake 
stopping distance specified in Table 3, the machine 
shall not veer outside a boundary lane, X, on either side 
of the machine, in accordance with Fig. 1. 


X W X 


a 


Fic. 1 MARINE LOADING ARM 
4.9 Performance and Warning Devices for Stored 
Energy Sources 


If stored energy (for example, reservoirs, accumulators) 
is used for the service brake system, the stored energy 


IS 16479 : 2020 


system shall be equipped with a low-energy warning 
device. The remaining pressure on the third service 
brake application after the warning signal shall 
have sufficient energy to provide secondary brake 
performance in accordance with Table 3, as applicable 
to the machine. 


The warning device shall readily attract the operator’s 
attention by providing a continuous (for example, 
steady or pulsating) visible and/or audible warning. 
Gauges indicating pressure or vacuum do not meet this 
requirement. 


4.10 Braking Systems with Electronic MCS 


The electronic control system for a braking system 
shall meet safe state requirements as determined by the 
manufacturer using a risk assessment methodology. An 
electronic MCS complying with IS/ISO 15998 meets 
such safe state requirements. 


If the maximum machine speed is limited by design 
to less than 6 km/h, these safe state requirements are 
fulfilled when any of the braking systems can bring the 
machine to a stop within the brake stopping distances 
given Table 3. 


Braking systems on machines that meet the 
requirements of this National Standard also achieve 
the safety concept of IS/ISO 15998 for earth-moving 
machinery braking systems. A risk assessment of the 
brake MCS needs to be carried out to determine if 
functional braking after any single failure involving 
an electrical and/or electronic MCS meets the braking 
performance requirements of this National Standard. 


NOTE — IS/ISO 15998 also requires additional testing of the 
MCS to verify its performance and modes of failure. 


4.11 All performance requirements given in this 
National Standard that apply to the service, secondary 
and parking brakes of a machine also apply to the 
combination of a machine and trailer(s). 


The trailer or trailed unit (s) do not require brakes if the 
towing machine’s brakes meet the service, secondary 
and parking brake requirements when tested with the 
combined machine and trailer weight, including the 
specified trailer payload. The trailer brakes should 
be evaluated for protection against jack-knifing, if 
applicable. 


4.12 Machine Instructions and Labels 


4.12.1 Operational limitations of the brake control 
system according to the manufacturer’s specifications, 
if applicable, shall be included in one or the other of 
the following: 


a) Operator’s manual; 
b) Instructional sign; and 
c) Machine monitor displays. 


Example — Operating precautions for braking system 
default conditions where the brake or retarding 


IS 16479 : 2020 


operating characteristics may be automatically changed 
creating new brake performance characteristics, such 
as automatic shift of the transmission to neutral or 
potential damage to the parking brake due to propelling 
through the parking brake. 


If brake burnishing is recommended by the brake or 
machine manufacturer, the brake burnishing procedure 
shall be included in the operator’s or maintenance 
manual for the machine. 


The manufacturer of any machine equipped with a 
retarder shall provide the following instructions: 


in the operator’s manual, the maximum machine speed 
and/or the transmission gear to be engaged when the 
loaded machine descends specific slopes as specified 
by the machine manufacturer; and an instruction sign 
or machine monitor display containing the information 
specified in a), located in the operator’s compartment 
and readily visible to the operator. Instructional signs 
or machine monitor displays showing the retarding 
ability for slopes shall not exceed the minimum brake 
holding performance of the service and parking brakes 
as a percentage holding slope (see 6.4.2). 


4.12.2 Braking System and Periodic Verification 
Instructions 


Information on brakes may be provided in manuals, 
labels or other means readily available to the operator 
while in the operator’s station along with precautions 
about the limitation of this information. If braking 
system and periodic verification instructions are 
provided by the machine manufacturer, they should 
include the following: 


a) Daily brake check method instructions: 


1) a method for verifying the functionality of the 
service and parking brakes; or 


2) provisions for verifying the functionality of 
the secondary brakes if the service and/or 
parking brake check method does not verify 
functionality of the secondary brakes. 


b) In-service, periodic or post-maintenance brake 
verification instructions: 


1) a method for verifying the functionality of 
the service and parking brakes including 
acceptance criteria; or 


2) a means of verifying the functionality of the 
secondary brakes. 


The instructions are to include a notice to the user 
that the machine is to be immediately taken out of 
service until corrected, if the service, secondary or 
parking brakes do not operate within specifications or 
performance requirements as defined by the daily brake 
check method, in-service, periodic or post-maintenance 
brake verification. 


Instructions for the periodic verification of braking 
systems may give test conditions different than those 


prescribed in this National Standard in order to permit 
testing or other verification by the user. 


4.12.3 Additional Instructions for Machines Designed 
to Tow Trailers 


If applicable, information on the machine’s allowable 
trailer towing capacity shall be provided in machine 
manuals or labels along with any other applicable trailer 
towing instructions or precautions by the earth-moving 
machinery manufacturer. The information, if provided, 
should include the maximum un-braked trailer towing 
load and the maximum combination of payload and 
towing load for the earth-moving machinery. 


4.13 Estimating Brake Slope Capability 


The estimated brake slope capability defines the ability 
of a braking system to stop and hold a machine on a 
slope. Other factors, such as ground conditions, side- 
slopes, speed, payload retention or the need to maintain 
the machine within the earth-moving machinery 
manufacturer’s specifications can limit the machine’s 
operating slope capability to slopes less steep than those 
where the brakes are actually able to stop and hold the 
machine. Annex B gives one method for estimating 
brake slope capability. 


5 TEST CONDITIONS 


5.1 Overall Test Parameters 


The manufacturer’s operational precautions shall be 
observed when carrying out the performance tests. All 
machine parameters related to braking systems shall 
be within the machine manufacturer’s specifications, 
including tyre size and pressure, brake adjustment, 
warning actuation points and braking system pressures, 
which shall be within the machine manufacturer’s 
specification range. No manual adjustment, such 
as readjustment to prevent diminished or improved 
braking performance, shall be made to the braking 
system during any single performance test. 


The instruments used to carry out the measurements 
shall be of an accuracy and be measured in units in 
accordance with IS/ISO 9248. 


The performance requirements given in Tables 2 and 
3 shall be achieved from single-stop and hold testing 
at the service limit condition for the braking systems. 
These requirements shall be validated by physical 
testing or alternative means, including calculation and 
extrapolation from physical test data. The validation 
means shall be recorded in the test report in accordance 
with 7. 


See 6.4.3 and 6.6 for alternative braking system 
performance test methods. 


NOTE — Hydrostatic brake systems typically are not 
materially affected by brake wear limits. 


5.2 General Test Conditions 


When the machine transmission provides a selection of 
gear ratios, the stopping tests shall be conducted with 
the transmission in the gear corresponding to the test 
speed specified. The power train may be disengaged 
prior to completing the stop. 


Retarders shall not be used during the service brake 
performance tests, but may be used during the secondary 
brake performance test. A hydrostatic or similar propel 
drive system is not considered to be a retarder. 


Machines with operator-selectable, multiple-drive 
axles shall be brake-performance tested with the non- 
braked selectable axle(s) disengaged. 


Equipment (blades, buckets, dozers, etc) shall be in the 
transport position recommended by the manufacturer. 


Burnishing or conditioning of brakes before testing 
is permissible. The burnishing procedures shall be 
verified by a review of the supplied instructions or in 
consultation with the machine or brake manufacturer. 


Immediately prior to testing, the machine shall be 
operated until the engine, transmission and machine 
fluids are at normal operating temperature(s) as 
specified by the manufacturer. The machine test speed 
shall be that speed measured immediately prior to the 
brake control being applied. 


Brake-holding performance tests shall be performed 
with the power train disengaged and the engine at 
worst case (for example, idle or stopped) except for 
hydrostatic or similar propel drive systems, which shall 
be engaged to the power train. 


When testing a vibratory roller, all tests shall be 
conducted without vibration. 


On machines where hydrostatic braking is used as the 
service brake, the stopping and holding performance 
(for example, back throttling) of the service brake 
system shall be tested with the engine running. 


At minimum, all data required for completion of the 
test report in accordance with 7 shall be recorded. 


5.3 Test Course 


The test course shall consist of a hard, dry surface 
with a well-compacted base. Ground moisture may be 
present to the extent that it does not adversely affect the 
braking test. 


The test course shall not have a slope of more than 3 
percent at right-angles to the direction of travel. 


Slope in the direction of travel shall be no greater 
than 1 percent, or as specified for the test being carried 
out. The exceptions to this are rigid-frame dumpers, 
articulated-frame dumpers and tractor-scrapers of 
over 32 000 kg machine test weight, for which the test 
course shall have a downward slope of (9 + 1) percent 
in the direction of machine travel. The approach to the 


IS 16479 : 2020 


test course shall be of sufficient length, smoothness 
and uniformity of slope to ensure the required machine 
speed is reached before the brakes are actuated. 


5.4 Machine Test Configuration 


Service brake and secondary brake system stopping 
distance tests except for those carried out on hydrostatic 
brake systems shall be conducted with cold brakes. 


For rigid-frame dumpers, articulated-frame dumpers 
and tractor scrapers of over 32 000 kg machine test 
weight, the transmission shall be engaged in a gear in 
which the engine does not exceed the maximum engine 
rotational speed, in revolutions per minute (r/min) or 
frequency (min`), specified by the manufacturer. 


All brake tests shall be performed using the machine 
configuration (excluding the service limit requirements 
given in 5.1) having the most adverse effect on braking 
and with the machine test weight applicable to the 
machine type. 


Record the axle load distribution as applicable and 
report the results in the test report (see 7). 
NOTE — As stated in the definition of 3.3, the machine test 


weight for all dumpers and self-propelled scrapers also include 
the maximum payload specified by the machine manufacturer. 


6 PERFORMANCE TESTS 


6.1 General 


The following performance tests shall be performed on 
all machines within the scope of this National Standard 
and on all braking systems, as applicable, under the test 
conditions given in 5. The brake holding and control 
forces shall be measured and reported in accordance 
with 7. 


NOTE — The provisions of 6.3 are not applicable to service 
brake systems not fitted with stored energy sources (for 
example reservoirs or accumulators). 


6.2 Braking System Controls 


During the performance tests, the control forces shall 
not exceed the values given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Maximum Force Levels for Braking 
System Controls during Performance Tests 


( Clause 6.2 and 6.3.2 ) 


SI No. Type of Control Maximum 
Force to be 
Applied N 

a) (2) (3) 


(i) Finger grasp (flip levers and switches) 20 
(ii) Hand grasp: 


a) upwards 400 
b) downwards, sideways, fore-aft 300 
(iii) Foot treadle (ankle control) 350 
(iv) Foot pedal (leg control) 600 


IS 16479 : 2020 


6.3 Stored Energy Sources 


6.3.1 Service Brake System Recovery Capacity 


Set the engine speed control to obtain the maximum 
engine rotational speed (r/min) or frequency (min`). 
Measure the brake application pressure near the brake. 
The service brake system’s stored energy sources shall 
have the capacity to deliver at least 70 percent of the 
pressure measured during the first brake application 
after the service brakes have been fully applied: 


a) for dumpers, self-propelled scrapers and wheeled 
excavators, 12 times at the rate of four applications 
per minute; and 


b) for all other machines, 20 times at the rate of six 
applications per minute. 


6.3.2 Secondary Brake System Capacity 


If the service brake system’s stored energy sources 
are used to apply the secondary brake system, the 
stored energy source capacity shall meet the following 
requirement with the energy source disconnected and 
the machine stationary. 


The remaining capacity of the service brake system’s 
stored energy sources shall meet the secondary 
brake stopping requirements specified in Table 3, as 
applicable, after five full service brake applications at 
a rate of < 1 s on and 1 s off. The full service brake 
applications shall be within the force level requirements 
of Table 1. 


6.3.3 Test Performance 


The stored energy system for the service brakes shall 
be tested to and shall achieve the requirements given 
in 4.9. 


The warning device shall activate prior to automatic 
application of a secondary brake system during the test. 


The service brake system’s stored energy may be 
reduced by any suitable means for testing. 


6.4 Holding Performance 


6.4.1 General 


All machines shall be tested in both the forward and 
reverse directions. 


For hydrostatic or similar propel drive systems, back 
throttling may be used to meet the holding performance 
criteria for service brake systems and, if used, shall be 
reported in the test report. 


6.4.2 Service and Parking Brakes 


With the machine’s power train as specified in 5.2, the 
service and parking brake systems shall be capable 
of holding the machine motionless on a slope in 
accordance with Table 2. 


Table 2 Service and Parking Brake 
Holding Performance 


( Clauses 6.3.2 and 6.4.3 ) 


SI No. Brakes Machine Type Slope 
Percent 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 


(i) Service brake Rigid-frame dumpers and 20 
articulated-frame dumpers 
having a machine test 


weight>32 000 kg 


Rollers (self-propelled, 20 
ride-on vibratory steel- 
wheeled, static-wheeled and 
rubber-tyred) 


Rigid-frame dumpers, 25 
articulated-frame dumpers, 
semi-trailed dumpers and 

their combinations with 
towed trailers having a 
machine test weight < 32 

000 kg 


All other — earth-moving 25 
machinery, including self- 
propelled scrapers 


Construction equipment 25 
vehicle (as defined under 
CMVR) 

ii) Parking brake Rigid-frame dumpers, 15 


articulated-frame dumpers, 
self-propelled scrapers and 


their combinations with 
towed trailers 

Rollers (self-propelled, 20 
ride-on vibratory steel- 
wheeled, static-wheeled and 
rubber-tyred) 

Semi-trailed dumpers 20 
All other — earth-moving 20 
machines 


6.4.3 Brake Holding Performance Tests 


a) Brake holding performance tests may be carried 
out either: 


b) at a test site with the specified slope and slip- 
resistant surface, 


c) onatiltplatform witha slip-resistant surface, and by 
applying a pulling force to the stationary machine 
with the brake applied and the transmission in 
neutral on a test course with a slope of no more 
than lpercent slope in the direction of travel. 


d) For alternative c), the pulling force shall be 
applied horizontally near the ground to achieve a 
minimum force equivalent to the slopes specified 
in Table 2. The equivalent force, expressed in 
newtons, shall be: 


1) 1.46 times the machine test weight, in 
kilograms for a 15 percent slope, 


2) 1.92 times the machine test weight, in 
kilograms for a 20 percent slope, and 


3) 2.38 times the machine test weight, in 
kilograms for a 25 percent slope. 


Pulling force testing has limitations versus testing on a 
slope. The machine’s holding capacity on a slope can 
change due to a change in axle weight distribution and 
all the wheels might not be restrained by the brakes. 


Another alternative, d), is to use the machine’s 
propel system to simulate a static grade equivalent 
and demonstrate holding performance as required in 
Table 2 by conducting a propel stall test as follows. 


Place the machine on a horizontal surface. Energize the 
propel system to a level that generates the equivalent 
brake holding requirements given in Table 2 for the 
applicable machine while simultaneously engaging the 
brake holding system being tested. Record the propel 
system output during the test simultaneously with the 
wheel speed in order to demonstrate that there was no 
motion during the brake holding test. 


Measurement of indirect parameters, such as torque/ 
pressure/current may be used with the accompanying 
calculations (for example, gear ratio, tyre size) to 
determine ground force output. The calculations related 
to measured parameters and brake holding performance 
shall be included in the brake test report. Holding 
performance is considered to have been successfully 
verified when the braking holding system resists 
movement during propel system application of the 
tractive force equivalent to the holding requirements of 
Table 2. Tyre or track movement during the test and 
before meeting the holding performance requirements 
of Table 2 shall be considered a failure of brake holding 
performance. 


6.4.4 Durability Test of Parking Brake When Used as 
Secondary Brake 


If the parking brake system is used as part of the 
secondary brake system, the parking brake shall 
meet the holding performance requirements of Table 
2 following one dynamic stop from the machine test 
speed in accordance with 6.5, with the machine test 
weight appropriate to the machine (see 3.3), and on a 
level surface with no adjustment of the parking brake. 
For rollers, the parking brake durability test requires 
the roller to be subjected to five stops. Locking-up of 
the tyres is permitted when applying the parking brake. 


6.5 Stopping Performance 


6.5.1 General 


All machines shall be tested to the stopping distances 
given in Table 3. 


Stopping shall be from one of the following machine 
test speeds, as applicable, within a tolerance of 
+2 km/h: 


IS 16479 : 2020 


a) for rigid-frame dumpers and articulated-frame 
dumpers of machine test weight <32 000 kg, 
stopping from either 80 percent of the maximum 
machine speed or 32 km/h, whichever is the greater 
(see 6.5.5 for those dumpers having a machine test 
weight >32 000 kg); 


b) for machines with a maximum speed of <32 km/h, 
stopping from that speed; 


c) for all other machines stopping from 80 percent 
of the maximum machine speed or 32Km/h. 
whichever is greater; and 


d) for construction equipment vehicle as defined 
under CVMR, 80 percent of machine maximum 
speed. 


Beginning with cold brakes, except for hydrostatic 
brake systems, the service and secondary brake system 
stopping distance tests shall be conducted twice, once 
in each direction of the test course with the machine 
travelling forward, and with at least 10 min between 
stops. 


The measured stopping distance and machine speed 
shall be the average of the two tests (one in each 
direction of the test course) for the service and 
secondary brake systems, and shall be reported in the 
test report in accordance with 7. 


6.5.2 Service Brake Systems 


The service brake system shall stop the machine within 
the stopping distance for the applicable machine type 
specified in Table 3. 


6.5.3 Secondary Brake Systems 


The secondary brake system shall stop the machine 
within the stopping distance for the applicable machine 
type in accordance with Table 3. 


The secondary brake system shall be tested to measure 
the stopping of the machine in the event of any single 
failure in the service brake system. During this test, 
modify the service brake system or use equivalent 
means to simulate the most adverse single failure of the 
service brake system. 

NOTE — National or other regulations, which could be more 

stringent, can apply. If the machine is equipped with a retarder, 

it may be used prior to and during the test. 


6.5.4 Heat Fade Test for all Machines Except Rigid- 
Frame and Articulated-Frame Dumpers with Machine 
Test Weight >32 000 kg 


This test shall be performed on all machines except 
rigid-frame and articulated-frame dumpers of machine 
test weight >32 000 kg. 


Apply and release the service brakes to complete four 
consecutive stops at, or as near as possible to, the 
maximum deceleration of the machine without sliding 
of the tyres or tracks. After each stop, the machine test 
speed according to 6.5.1 shall be regained as quickly 


IS 16479 : 2020 


as possible using maximum machine acceleration. 
A fifth consecutive stop shall be measured which shall 
not exceed 125 percent of the service brake stopping 
distance according to Table 3. 


6.5.5 Brake Tests for Rigid-Frame and Articulated- 
Frame Dumpers with Machine Test Weight >32 000 kg 


The test shall be performed on rigid-frame dumpers and 
articulated-frame dumpers of over 32 000 kg machine 
test weight, on the test course for those machines as 
specified in 5.3. The transmission shall be engaged 
in a gear in which the engine does not exceed the 
maximum engine rotational speed, in revolutions per 
minute (r/min) or frequency (min), specified by the 
manufacturer. 


The service brake system shall be tested by means 
of five stopping tests at 10 min to 20 min intervals 
between stops from a machine speed of > (50 + 3) km/h 
or the maximum machine speed if less than 50 km/h. 
The stopping distance shall not exceed that specified 
in Table 3. 


The secondary brake system shall be tested by means 
of a single stopping test carried out from a machine 
speed of 25 + 2 km/h. If the machine is equipped with 
a retarder, it may be used prior to and during this test. 
The stopping distance shall not exceed that specified 
in Table 3. 


6.6 Alternative Testing 
6.6.1 Lab Testing 


For braking system functions capable of being 
reproduced in a lab environment, alternative lab testing 


may be used to determine service, secondary and 
parking brake performance. The lab test equipment 
should be capable of producing the same operating 
environment as the brake would see in the machine. The 
test system shall be set up to resist and measure torque 
to the brake at a torque level capable of driving through 
the brake holding force and brake retarding force. The 
lab test system shall be validated by correlation with 
prior historical machine test data. 


For service brake and secondary brake systems, the 
dynamic load on the brakes shall be duplicated in 
order to meet the cold brake stopping performance 
requirements of this National Standard. This data shall 
be measured and recorded in the test report as specified 
in 7. 

For parking brake systems, the maximum brake holding 
torque should be measured and recorded in the test 
report as specified in 7. 


6.6.2 Alternative Secondary Brake Testing for 
Hydrostatic or Similar Propel Drive Machines 


On machines using secondary brakes other than 
hydrostatic or similar propel drives, the retarding force 
of the propel motors shall be removed from the drive 
train. Alternatively, the motors and gear final drives 
may be disengaged from the drive train before stopping 
distance tests are run. 


However, if it is difficult to remove the propel drive 
motor retarding force or disengage the motor and gear 
final drive from the drive train, the secondary brake 
system may be tested as follows. 


Table 3 Stopping Performance 
( Clauses 4.2, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 6.3.2, 6.5.1, 6.5.2, 6.5.3, 6.5.4 and 6.5.5 ) 


SI No. Machine Type Maximum Stopping Distances 
(s) 
Service brake Secondary brake 
m m 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
(i) Scrapers, rigid-frame dumpers and articulated-frame dumpers with machine test v? +0.1(32- ve +0.1(32- 
weight? 32 000 kg and semi-trailed dumpers of any weight* 440° ( » 4 Gew 
(ii) Scrapers, rigid-frame dumpers and articulated-frame dumpers with machine test v v? 
weight > 32 000 kg 46 -26a 32 -2.60 
(iii) Rollers m 
We 0.4 (5 + vty? 
750 10-264) 75 
(iv) All other earth-moving machines, including towed trailers with payloads v +0.2 (5 + v) 0.4 (5 + v)+ v? 
160 ` 80 
(v) Construction equipment vehicles (as defined under CMVR) 2 40.15 (v) 0.4 (5 + v)t? 
130 ` 80 
NOTE: 


v initial speed, in km/h 
a test slope as a percentage between 8 percent and 10 percent. 


* The term 0.1 (32-v) is deleted from the formula for speeds over 32 km/h. 


10 


With the machine stationary, including any movement 
for drive train tolerance, and with the variable motors 
set to maximum displacement and any mechanical 
transmissions set in the lowest speed range, apply the 
secondary brake and engage the propel drive system 
at the full rated pressure, alternately in forward and 
reverse. The machine shall remain stationary with 
creep movement of less than 30 mm/s other than drive 
train tolerance in the brake/drive train components. 


7 TEST REPORT 


The test report shall contain the following information: 
a) Reference to this National Standard; 
b) Place and date of measurement; 
c) Type of machine; 
d) Make of machine; 
e) Model and serial number of the machine; 


f) Condition of the braking system (new, in operation 
for 1 000 h, within manufacturer’s specifications, 
etc); 


g) Weight and axle distribution of the machines as 
tested, in kilogram; 

h) Manufacturer’s approved maximum machine 
test weight and maximum axle distribution, in 
kilogram; 

j) As applicable, drum size, track size, tyre size, ply 
rating, tread pattern and pressure, in Newton per 
square metres ; 


k) Description of the brakes (for example disc or 
drum, hand or foot control); 

m) Type of braking system (for example mechanical 
or hydraulic); 

n) Surface of the test course (for example, asphalt, 
concrete or soil); 


11 


IS 16479 : 2020 


p) Longitudinal and cross slope of the test course; 

q) Results of all stopping and holding tests and, if 
applicable, alternative brake holding calculations 
or methods; 


r) Percentage of the service brake system stored 


energy after the brake application test calculated 
from (see 6.3.1): 


= P2 x100 


Pp, 


Residual pressure as a percentage; 


Brake application pressure during the first 
brake application; and 

Lowest brake application pressure measured 
during subsequent brake applications. 

Force levels applied to the controls (see 4.3 
and 6.2); 

Machine maximum speed and if applicable, 
machine test speed, in kilometers per hour; 


t) 
u) which tests were carried out using the 
hydrostatic v)brake system as one of the 
braking systems; 

if 


v test results, 


< 


Parking brake durability 
applicable (see 6.4.4); 


WwW 


S 


If applicable, a statement of evaluation and 
supporting information to the effect that 
maximum brake wear does not materially 
affect brake performance results; 


Sa 


If applicable for estimating brake slope 
capability, type of tyres, tyre pressure, 
measured tyre rolling radius, and fully 
developed deceleration rate. 


y 


IS 16479 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
BRAKING FOR PURPOSE-BUILT UNDERGROUND MINING MACHINES 


A-0 IMPORTANT 


Underground mining is one of the most regulated 
work sectors worldwide. Requirements can be very 
prescriptive in nature. This annex is an attempt to 
describe generic braking performance for purpose- 
built underground mining machines. Because of the 
prescriptive nature of underground mining regulations, 
it is necessary to research the regional underground 
mining requirements where machines are intended to be 
used to confirm the regional regulatory requirements. 


A-1 GENERAL 


This annex presents recommendations for braking 
systems used in underground mining applications. The 
provisions given in the main body of this National 
Standard should only be applied to purpose-built 
underground mining machines with the recommended 
additions and modifications in this annex. Machinery 
designed for surface use that is used underground 
should be evaluated by the manufacturer and the end 
user. 


No device that traps a column of fluid to hold the brake 
in the applied position should be installed in any brake 
system, unless the trapped column of fluid is released 
when the equipment operator is no longer in contact 
with the brake activation device. 


NOTE — Some information on regional requirements for coal 
or gassy mining applications is given in A-12. 


A-2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this annex, the terms and definitions 
given in 3 and the following apply. 
NOTE — For purpose-built underground mining machines, the 
maximum specified payload as per the machine manufacturer’s 
specifications is included in the machine test weight (see 3-3), 
except where noted in A-10.2 for testing without payload after 
the loaded braking performance has been tested. 


A-2.1 Peak Deceleration — Maximum deceleration 
value derived during a brake test run. 


A-3 BRAKE SYSTEM CONTROLS (SEE 4.3) 


The parking brake control should be considered a 
primary control as per IS/ISO 10968. It should have 
a distinct shape and colour in relation to the other 
controls. 


NOTE — There are different regional requirements for the 
movement required to apply the parking brake control. Typical 
underground mining applications use a push-to-apply motion 
on the parking brake control. However, there are regions that 
require pull to apply. 


12 


A-4 SERVICE BRAKE SYSTEMS ( see 4.4) 

A-4.1 Stopping Performance 

The recommended formula for the service brake 
stopping distance, s, in metres, is 

y? 


264 


_ vt 
"2.6. 


S 


Where, 
v= Initial speed, in km/h; 
t= Time of 0.35 s; and 


a= Mean deceleration, in m/s? 
(= 0.28g or 2.75 m/s’). 


This represents 28 percent brake efficiency, 
recommended for machines used on gradients of 
up to 20 percent (11.3°). If a brake efficiency of 20 
percent were used, it would be the brake efficiency 
recommended for machines used on gradients of up 
to12.3 percent (7°). 


When tested for stopping performance, the machine 
should demonstrate at least a 0.75 m/s? fully developed 
deceleration rate after the design slope has been 
accounted for. 


If the machine is used on gradients of more than 
20 percent, the minimum brake efficiency should be 
8 percent more than the sine, expressed as a percentage 
of the maximum slope on which the machine is intended 
to be used. 


A-4.2 Holding Performance 


The service brake should be capable of holding the 
machine stationary (no creep) on the maximum design 
grade plus a 20 percent factor of safety. 


A-5 SECONDARY BRAKE SYSTEMS (see 4.5) 


The recommended formula for the secondary brake 
stopping distance, s, in metres, is Equation (A-1), 
except that, for secondary brakes, t= 1 s and a = 0.18g 
or 1.77 m/s?. 


When tested for stopping performance, the machine 
should demonstrate at least a 0.45 m/s? fully developed 
deceleration rate after the design slope has been 
accounted for. Hydrostatic brake systems should not 
be used as the secondary brake. Retarders should not 
be used during secondary brake system performance 
testing. 


Secondary brakes on purpose-built underground mining 
machines may be applied without modulation. 


If secondary brakes are applied automatically, there 
should be a warning given to the operator prior to their 
application. 


If automatic brakes are separate from the secondary 
brake system, their performance should be at least the 
same as that of the secondary brake. 


A-6 PARKING BRAKE SYSTEMS (see 4.6) 


The parking brake should be capable of holding the 
machine stationary on the maximum design slope with 
a 20 percent factor of safety. The minimum design 
slope is 25 percent. 


The parking brake should be applied automatically 
whenever the engine is stopped by the operator, or stops 
for any other reason (for example, the operation of the 
automatic engine protection system). For an engine 
stoppage, the response time of the parking brake should 
not exceed 2 s from the time the engine ceases rotation. 


If the parking brake has been automatically applied, it 
should have to be released by a specific action of the 
operator. 


The machine should be fitted with an interlock system 
to prevent it from being driven with the parking brake 
applied. Procedures or a system that accommodates a 
daily brake test (as described in 4.12.2) can be provided. 
A means of moving the machine in an emergency 
situation can be provided. 


Machine retrieval instructions should be supplied to 
explain the procedure for releasing the parking brake. 
Automatic parking brakes should include a means 
in the machine operator’s compartment to apply the 
brakes manually without shutting off the equipment 
and to release and reengage the parking brakes without 
having to start the equipment. If the brake is manually 
released, the brake should be automatically reapplied 
when the machine is started. A means of preventing 
the machine from being restarted until the brake is 
manually applied also meets this recommendation. 


Hydrostatic drive trains should be disconnected during 
parking brake testing. 


The parking brake should be released only by a control 
that does not operate any other equipment function, 
that is, dedicated solely to the parking brake system. 
The parking brake holding performance can be checked 
by performance on the actual slope or by achieving 
sufficient holding performance while being towed 
against the parking brake on the level. 


A-7 HYDROSTATIC BRAKE SYSTEMS 
(see 4.7) 


For machines with hydrostatic transmissions, back 
throttling should not be used to meet the holding 
performance criteria. For service brake holding, the 
parking brake may be used in addition to the service 
brake to hold the machine when there is creep 
movement. 


13 


IS 16479 : 2020 


A-8 MACHINES 
TRAILERS (see 4.11) 


DESIGNED TO TOW 


If the towing machine’s brakes alone cannot meet the 
service, secondary and parking brake requirements, 
as applicable, when tested using the machine and 
trailer weight plus the total towing machine and trailer 
payload, then the towed trailer(s) should be equipped 
with brakes that act on each trailer wheel as part of 
these systems. If the trailer is designed with wheels that 
have an equally distributed load in all the conditions, 
then the brakes need only act on the wheels required to 
meet the stopping requirements. 

The trailer brakes should act on both sides of an axle. 
The trailer service brakes, secondary brakes and parking 
brakes should be designed such that they cannot be 
applied independently of the tractor’s brakes. 

The towing machine’s parking brake control should 
apply the parking brakes of the machine and of any 
towed trailers, if so equipped. 

Trailer parking brake systems should be designed such 
that they are applied automatically whenever the trailer 
is disconnected from the towing tractor. 

If there are no parking brakes on the trailer and the 
trailer needs to be set by itself, a means should be 
provided on the trailer to hold it stationary (chocks are 
not preferred). 

Machine/trailer combinations should be tested only in 
the forward direction. 


A-9 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS (see 5.2) 


Retarders should not be used during service and 
secondary brake testing. 


All machines should be tested on a test course as 
described in 5.3. 


A-10 PERFORMANCE TESTS (see 6) 


A-10.1 Holding Performance (see 6.4) 


a) See A-4.2 for the recommended service brake 
holding performance. 

b) See A-6 for the recommended parking brake 
holding performance. 


A-10.2 Stopping Performance (see 6.5) 
A-10.2.1 Service Brakes (see 6.5.2) 


See A.4.1 for the recommended service brake stopping 
performance. 


The testing of purpose-built underground mining 
machines for stopping performance should be as 
follows: 


a) Machines that travel as fast in reverse as they do 
in forward, for example, load haul dump (LHD) 
machines: 


IS 16479 : 2020 


1) five stops in forward at the maximum test mass 
with maximum specified payload; 


2) five stops in reverse at the maximum test mass 
with maximum specified payload; 


3) five stops in forward at the maximum test mass 
without payload; and 


4) five stops in reverse at the maximum test mass 
without payload. 


b) Machines that travel primarily in forward, 
forexample, dumpers or machines with trailers: 


1) five stops in forward at the maximum test mass 
with maximum specified payload; and 


2) five stops in forward at the maximum test mass 
without payload. 


These tests should be run at a minimum of 80 percent 
of maximum speed. 


The stops should be separated by a maximum of 10 
min. 


The peak deceleration should be recorded. 


A.10.2.2 Secondary Brakes (see 6.5.3) 


See A.5 for the recommended secondary brake stopping 
performance. 
The testing of purpose-built underground mining 
machines for stopping performance should be as 
follows: 
a) three stops in forward at the maximum test mass 
with maximum specified payload; and 
b) three stops in forward at the maximum test mass 
without payload. 
These tests should be run at maximum speed or 25 
km/h, whichever is the lesser speed. 


The stops should be separated by a maximum of 10 
min. 


A-11 TEST REPORT (see 7) 


Some jurisdictions require that fully developed 
deceleration rates be reported. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.13 ) 
BRAKE SLOPE CAPABILITY CALCULATION METHOD 


B-1 Brake slope capability (BSC) can be calculated 
using the fully developed deceleration rate, measured 
with an accelerometer during the brake stopping 
performance testing. BSC is a measure of the brake’s 
ability to stop and hold the machine, not of the 
machine’s operating slope capability. Other factors 
need to be considered when determining the machine 
slope capability on the specific area where the machine 
is intended to work (see 4.13). 


BSC, the percent slope on which the brakes stop a 
machine, can be calculated using equation (B-1) and 
the measured fully developed deceleration rate, DR: 


BSC = {[(DR + b).MR.TR] — SR}-100 ... (B.1) 
Where, 


DR = Brake deceleration rate, the fully developed 
deceleration rate, in gs, where g is defined as 
the deceleration rate, in metres per second 
squared divided by 9.8; 


= The slope on which the machine is evaluated 
or tested, it is divided by 100 for the equation; 


SR = Brake stopping rate, the desired deceleration 
rate, in gs, on a slope (typical desired 
deceleration rates are 0,06g ~ 0,08g for primary 
brakes and 0.03g ~ 0.04g for secondary 


brakes); 


14 


MR = Machine mass ratio, the ratio of the mass 
of a machine during testing according to this 
International Standard divided by the machine 
mass on the work site, the actual machine 
mass including payloads and any options for 
or modifications to the machine; 


TR = Tyre radius ratio, the ratio of the machine 
tyre radius during testing according to this 
International Standard to the machine tyre 
radius on the work site, thereby allowing for 


different tyre options. 


Equation (B-1) can be applied to both primary and 
secondary brake systems using the appropriate desired 
deceleration rate for the particular brake system. 


For W <2, X shall be 1.25W. 


For W >2, X shall be 2 m. This is intended to limit the 
machine veering outside the required public road traffic 
lane width. 


Key: 
W width of machine over wheels or tracks, m 
X width of boundary lane, m 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Material Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 07 


Organization 
BEML Ltd, Karnataka 
Airport Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Haridwar 
Caterpillar India Pvt. Ltd, Tiruvallur 
Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi 


Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd, 
Ranchi, Jharkhand 


Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of Heavy 
Industries & Public Enterprises, New Delhi 


Directorate Gen Factory Advice Service & Labour 
Institute, Mumbai 

Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Escorts Construction Equipment Ltd, Faridabad 

Fact Engineering and Design Organization, 
Udyogmandala 

Heavy Machine Building Plant, Ranchi 

Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity 
JCB India, Ballabgarh 


John Deere India Pvt Ltd, Pune 

Jost’s Engineering Company Limited, Mumbai 
Komatsu India Private Limited, Bengaluru 

L & T Limited, Bangalore 


McNally Bharat Engineering Co Ltd, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 
SHRI V. SEKAR (Chairman) 


SHRI K. S. KUNWAR 
SHRI JASPAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN NAND SAHAY 
Suri C. S. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. BHAGCHANDANI 
SHRI S. K. BHAUMIK (Alternate) 


Suri K. REJI JOSE 
SHRI V. BHASKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI A. K. Saini (Alternate) 


SHRI PARAG MAJUMDAR 
Suri P. K. Smaa (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHIL LAKRA 
SHRI SANJAY CHAVRE (Alternate) 


SHRI G. P. NIJALINGAPPA 
Suri B. N. Jua (Alternate) 


SHRI M. ARUMUGAM 
Suri P. BALAKRISHNA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. BHATTACHARJEE 
SHRI P. P. PANbeEy (Alternate) 


SHRI FAIZ AHMED 
SHRI Laxmı Cuanp Tyaai (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. PLAI 
Suri Jupy CHANDY (Alternate) 


Suri R. PRASAD 
Suri S. Mustari (Alternate) 


Suri K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


Suri G. N. VENKATESH 


SHRI SAURABH DALELA 
Suet VIVEK Rawat (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
Suri Ray ANAND (Alternate) 


Suri N. SINGH NINDI 
SHRI DALJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. RAJENDRAN 
SHRI VIKRANT SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI G. S. NARAYANA 
Suri K Kesuava (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Bose 
SHRI SANDIPAN Daw (Alternate) 


15 


IS 16479 : 2020 


IS 16479 : 2020 


Organization 


Ministry of Defence, Directorate of Quality 
Assurance, New Delhi 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 
Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 


National Council for Cement and Building Material, 
Ballabgarh 


National Mineral Development Corpn Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Projects & Development India Ltd, Noida 


Tata Hitachi Construction Machinery Company Pvt 
Ltd, Kharagpur 

Terex India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 

The Automotive Research Association of India, 
Pune 


TRF Limited, Jamshedpur 


Voltas Limited, Thane 


Volvo Construction Equipment, Bengaluru 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 

CoL R. DHANKAR 

Lt CoL GuRJEET SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 

SHRI RAMiI SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI DILIP VISHWANATHAN 

SHRI PANDIAN SEKAR (Alternate) 
SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 

SHRI S. BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 
SHRI S. J. RAO 

Suri S. K. Roy (Alternate) 
SHRI MADHUKAR ANAND 

Suri P. S. CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 
Suri K. L. Rao 

Suri K. K. Funpa (Alternate) 
SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 

Suri ABHIJIT Manata (Alternate) 


SHRI S. R. ACHARYA 


DR. KRISHNA PRASAD 
SHRI Tony WEIR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. AKBAR BADUSHA 


SHRI AMIT GUPTA 
SHRI SUDHIR Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. PRASHAR 
SHRI HEMANT PITALE (Alternate) 


Suri V. R. S. P. POLIPALLI 
Suri K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms KuaAsHBoo KUMARI 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Material Handling Systems Subcommittee, MED 7:1 


Organization 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


AGROMEC, Meerut 
Airpot Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 


ELECON Engineering Company Ltd, Vallabh Vidyanagar 


Representative(s) 


Suri S. M. AMANULLAH (Convener) 
Suri A. K. Roy CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. JAIN 
Suri B.S. Jan (Alternate) 


Suri K. S. KUNWAR 
SHRI JASPAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. S. MAHAL 
Suri P. K. Basu Ray (Alternate) 


Suri P. B. PATEL 
Suri C. S. SHAH (Alternate) 


16 


Organization 


Heavy Machines Building Plant, Ranchi 


Jost’s Engineering Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 

National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 

Nayveli Lignite Corporation Ltd, Neyveli 


Office of the Development Commissioner SSI, New Delhi 


Voltas Ltd, Thane 


IS 16479 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. PRASAD 
Suri S. Mustari (Alternate) 


SHRI K. VISHVANATH 

SHRI MuKesu Jamnanas (Alternate) 
SHRI SUNIL JUMDE 

Suri RAKESH Rawat (Alternate) 
SHRI K. SHANMUGAM 

SHRI S.R. SRIDHARAN (Alternate) 
SHRI J. K. ARYA 

Suri M. Arı RAHMAN (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. PRASHAR 
SHRI HEMANT PITALE (Alternate) 


Earth Moving Machinery Subcommittee, MED 7:2 


Organization 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 
Belaz-Enrika Mining Equipment Services Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (A Subsidiary of Coal India Ltd), 
Dhanbad 


BEML, Bengaluru 
Caterpillar India Pvt Ltd, Tiruvallur 


Department of Heavy Industry, Ministry of Heavy Industries 
& Public Enterprises, New Delhi 


Escorts Construction 
Equipment Ltd, Faridabad 

Fact Engineering and Design Organization, Udyogmandala 

Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers Association 
(ICEMA) C/o CII, New Delhi 

JCB India, Ballabgarh 

John Deera India Pvt Ltd, Pune 

Komatsu India Private Ltd, Bengaluru 


L&T Limited, Bengaluru 


National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, Hyderabad 
Terex India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


The Automotive Research Association of India ( ARAI), Pune 
Volvo Construction Equipment, Bengaluru 


17 


Representative(s) 


SHRI M. ARUMUGAM (Convener) 
SHRI S. RATNAKER (Alternate) 


SHRI PRABHAKAR KOHALE 
SHRI SHANTANU BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN NAND SAHAY 
SHRI CHANDRA SEKHAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri K. R. RADHAKRISHNA 


SHRI RAMAKRISHNA 
SHRI PRAJEESH SANKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHIL LAKRA 
SHRI SANJAY CHAVRE (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH MATHUR 
Suri Faiz AHMED (Alternate) 


Suri C. RADHA KRISHNA PILLAI 
Suri Jugy CHANpy (Alternate) 


Suri K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


SHRI SAURABH DALELA 
Suet VIVEK Rawat (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
SHRI KrisHnat PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI M. RAJENDRAN 
SHRI VIKRANT SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri G. S. NARAYANA 
SHRI M. SuresH Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri G. G. KRISHNA 


DR KRISHNA PRASAD 
SHRI Tony WEIR (Alternate) 


Suri A. AKBAR BADUSHA 


SHRI V. R. S. P. POLIPALLI 
SHRI K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 07 (14347). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


