IS 13605.: 1982
(Reaffirmed 2003)

Fm

%?T WaT % fei FIT i;FTtdT;T +a T&T
fs_wJT c\

Indian Standard

METHODFORMACROETCHTEST FORZINCANDZINCALLOYS
UDC 669.55'620'183'255

Q BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK December 1992

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAPAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

(I

Price Group 1

Metallography

and Heat Treatment

Sectional Committee,

MTD 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Metallography and Heat Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. Metallographic specimens Macroetching is used to reveal the heterogeneity of metals and alloys. and chemical analysis will provide the necessary detailed information about specific localities but they cannot give data about variation from one place to another unless an inordinate large number of specimens are taken. Macroetching, on the other hand, will provide information on variations in: (1) structure, such as grain size, flow lines, columnar structure, dendrites, etc, and (2) variations in chemical composition The information provided about variations in chemical composition as evidenced by segregation. is strictly qualitative but the location of extremes in segregation will be shown. Chemical analysis or other means of determining the chemical composition would have to be performed to determine Macroetching will also I show presence of discontinuities and voids, the extent of variation. such as seams, laps, porosity, flakes, bursts, extrusion rupture, cracks, etc. In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from ASTM E340 Standard Methods for Macroetching Metals and Alloys, American Society for Testing and Materials. Test

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13685: 1992

Indian Standard

METHODFORMACROETCHTEST FORZINCANDZINCALLOYS.
1 SCOPE Macroetching is the etching of specimen for examination with unaide-d eye at low magnifications and is used to reveal the macrostructure of zinc and zinc alloys products, such as bars, billets, forgings and castings. The present procedure is intended to be followed for classicharacteristic zinc and zinc alloys, fying, structure and incidence of certain processing defects and is applicable to zinc and zinc alloy products. : 2 SIGNIFICANCE Macroetching is a simple test which provides information about the heterogeneity of the It will show: (a) variation in structure sample. such as grain size, flowlines columnar structure dendrite.etc; and (b) presence of macro segregation. 3 SAMPLING 3.1 When using macroetching as an inspection procedure, sampling should be done in an early stage of manufacturing so that if the material proves defective, the minimum amount of unHowever, the sample necessary work is done. should not be taken so early that further working can introduce serious defects. The sample is usually taken after ingot breakdown and after most chances of flaking and bursts have passed. Billets or blooms going into small sizes are Materials sampled after initial breakdown. going into forging billets or other products are sampled at near finish size, sampling may be done systematically or on a random basis. 3.1.1 Some common listed as follows. methods of sampling are seeking information section is used. 3.1.4 Castings Specimen should be cut from different depending upon the features sought. regions. on lamination, a transverse

3.2 When macroetching is used to solve a problem, then the problem itself largely dictates the sample location on the workpiece and the stage of manufacture; for example, when looking for pipe, the sample should represent the top of the ingot, or when looking for burst, the sample should be taken as soon after hot working as possible. 3.3 Sample may be cold cut by any convenient means. Saw and abrasive cut off wheels and EDS cutting are particularly effective. ?`he surface to be examined should be properly prepared before macroetching. 4 SPECIMEN PREPARATION

4.1 Sample preparation need not be elaborate. Any method of presenting a smooth surface with a minimum amount of cold work will be satis: factory. Discs may be faced on a lathe or a shaper. The usual procedure is to take a roughing cut, then a finish cut. This will generate a smooth surface and remove cold work layer from prior operations. Grinding may also be employed using a free cutting wheel and light finishing cut. When fine details are required, the specimen should be finished through the series of metallographic paper. 4.2 Sample preparation need not be elaborate. Any method of presenting a smooth surface with a minimum amount of cold work will be satisfactory. Discs may be faced on a lathe or shaper. The usual procedure is to take a roughing cut, then a finish cut. This will generate a smooth surface and remove cold work from prior operations. Grinding may also be employed using a fine wheel and light finished cut. When Ene detail is required, the specimen should be finished with metallographic paper. 4.3 After surface preparation, the sample should be cleaned carefully with suitable solvents. Any grease, oil or other residue left on the surface will produce uneven attack during macroetching. Therefore, care should be taken not to touch the sample surface or contaminate it in any other way after it has been cleaned. 5 SOLUTIONS 5.1 The most common solutions for mdcroetching zinc and zinc alloys are given in Table 1. 1

3.1.1.1 Billets, blooms and hot-rolled products Discs are usually cut from these products near Discs the end, but fish tails should be avoided. from large blooms can be cut into smaller pieces for ease in handling. 3.1.2 Forgings and Extrusion Discs, cut transverse to the long dimension, are used for examining bursts, voids, etc. Forging should be cut parallel to flash lines to show flow lines. Macroetching of an unprepared spccimen shows surface defects, such as shuts, flats, seams, etc. 3.1.3 Sheets and Plates While looking for defects in sheets, as large a When sample as possible should be taken.

IS l3605 : 1992 Table 1 Macroetchants for Zinc and Zinc Alloys ( Clauses 5.1 and 6 >
Alloy Cu-free zinc Solution HCI ( cone ) Composition 50 ml 50 ml Procedure Comments

alloys
Zn alloy containing Cu

Immerse in solution for about I5 sec.
Remove smut by wiping under running water. Repeat until desired contrast is obtained, then dry. Immerse in solution until good contrast is obtained. Rinse iti running water and dry. Repeat if necessary.

Grain structure

I-W
Cr108 Na,SOI or Na,SOd.lOH,O H,O

200 g 1.5 g 3.4 g 100 ml

Grain

structure

5.2 Caution must be observed in mixing the acids as many of the acids may cause chemical burns. The acid should be added slowly to Mixing and etching should be done in a water. fume hood, as many of the solutions are aggressive and may give irritating fumes. 6 PROCEDURE The specimen shall be etched to reveal structure by immersion or by swabbing or by both means. The time of etching will vary depending upon the composition, size and structural condition. Generally speaking 30 s to 10 min will be Suficient. Etching should be stopped when the preferred structural details have been revealed. Over-etching can lead to misinterpretation and hence light etching is better. Table 1 gives the time for various etchants, but should be used as a guide only. The actual time to develop a structure properly may be quite different from After etching specimen should that suggested.

be washed in running water and blown dry with compressed air. 7 EXAMINATION
7.1 Any

OF SPECIMENS

special condition like segregation, banding, voids, etc, that can be observed should be rrported. A low magnification ( X 10 ) stereo microscope can be used for observation, if necessary. Normally it is essential to see the surface from various angles to observe flow defects and banding. The macrograin size for forged billets can be compared with specified macrostructures and level of grain size reported.

7.2 The acceptance and rejection criterion for these macrostructures has to be worked out according to the type of alloy and application. Therefore, the basis of macroetching inspection will be a matter of agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser, if this technique is being used as a quality test.

.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is deviled and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, types or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additidns'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. MTD 22 ( 3759 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone t 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 533843, 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78.91, t 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 1640

Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093 Andheri ( East )

235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Swataotra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

