NAT HIAF IS 14489 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


saar Ach ranee AN 
gan atteror — Rf tifar 


( TET TRIAT ) 


Occupational Health and 
Safety Audit — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.100 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2018 Price Group 9 


Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee, CHD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1998 to meet the growing awareness of safety in the industrial sector and 
introduction of various Acts for implementing directives of the statutory bodies. The need was felt to formulate 
a guideline to audit safety aspects in the industrial and other units of concern. While formulating this standard, 
utmost care was taken to cover all the possible elements relating to Occupational Health and Safety. 


With the passage of time, it was felt to revise the standard with a view to incorporate new elements which are 
relevant to the industry in the present context including the safe behavior of workers at work place. Thus, this 
standard only gives guidance for auditing of industrial units for Occupational Health and Safety parameters. 


The basic elements of occupational health and safety systems as identified are given in Annex A. An indicative list 
of types of records to be examined during the audit is given in Annex B. A sample checklist elaborating the various 
elements of occupational health and safety systems are given in Annex C for guidance. 


IS 14489 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND 
SAFETY AUDIT — CODE OF PRACTICE 
( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard establishes audit objectives, criteria and 
practices and provides guidelines for establishing, 
planning, conducting and documenting observations of 
audit(s) on occupational health and safety systems at 
work place. 


It provides guidelines for evaluating the effectiveness 
of health and safety programs, verifying the availability 
and implementation of elements of occupational health 
and safety systems and the system’s ability to achieve 
defined safety objectives. This standard focuses on 
general Occupational Health and Safety Audit to 
be carried out in various industries including Major 
Accident Hazard industries. Specific audits can be 
carried out in areas identified based on the general 
Occupational Health and Safety Audit or in the high 
risks operations or when there is a high frequency of 
accidents. Based on the identified elements, type of 
hazards and nature of the work carried out, a detailed 
safety audit checklist for conducting the audit should 
be developed. 


This standard can be used as a guideline for self- 
demonstration of conformance to IS / ISO 45001 to 
others and for compliance to IS 15793. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this Indian standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revisions, and parties 
to agreements based on this Indian standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the Indian Standards indicated 
below. 


IS/ISO No. Title 
15793: 2007 Managing environment, 
occupational health and safety 
legal compliance — Requirements 
of good practices 
45001 : 2018 Occupational health and 
safety management system — 


Requirements with guidance for 
use (second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Auditee — An organization to be audited. 


3.2 Audit Team — A team of persons designated as 
auditors who are suitably qualified and have experience 
to perform these audits. 

NOTE — The auditor designated to lead the audit team and 


manage a safety audit is called a ‘Audit Team Leader’ (lead 
auditor). 


3.3 Client — An organization which appoints auditing 
agency / team to carry out third party audit on its behalf. 


3.4 Nonconformity — The non-fulfillment of specified 
requirement. 


3.5 Observation — A statement of fact made in the 
course of an audit and preferably substantiated by 
objective evidence. 


3.6 Objective Evidence — Qualitative or quantitative 
information, records or statements of fact, which is 
based on observation, measurement or test and which 
can be verified. 


3.7 Occupational Health and Safety Audit (Audit) — 
A systematic, objective, documented and independent 
evaluation to determine whether, the activities conform 
to the requirements of the occupational health and 
safety systems and procedures. 


NOTES 


1 Henceforth in this document only the words ‘audit’ shall 
be used in place of the words ‘occupational health and safety 
audit’. 

2 The audit typically applies to, but is not limited to a safety 
system or elements thereof, and is applicable to process, 
products, or to services. Such audits are often called ‘safety 
system audit’, ‘process safety audit’ and ‘service safety audit’. 
3 There are two types of audits, external and internal. External 
audits are those carried out by agencies external to the auditee 
organization. Internal audit are those carried out by the 
employees designated by the management for this purpose. 
Such employees may be selected preferably from amongst 
those not having direct responsibility in the areas being 
audited and having no responsibility for implementation of 
recommendations. 

4 One of the objectives of the OH & S audit is to identify 
the areas for continual improvement. An audit should not be 


IS 14489 : 2018 


confused with ‘Periodic Safety Inspection’ activities performed 
by plant personnel for the purpose of checking effectiveness of 


implementation of Safety System. 


3.8 Occupational Health and Safety (OH 
& S) System — The organizational structure, 
responsibilities, procedures, processes and resources 
specified by top management of an organization as 
required for implementing occupational health and 
safety objectives. 


NOTES 


1 Henceforth in this document only the words ‘OH & S’ shall 
be used in place of the words ‘occupational health and safety’ 


2 The areas to be covered under the OH & S system are given 
in Annex A 

3 The OH & S system should only be as comprehensive as is 
needed to meet the objectives. 


3.9 Organization — Company, corporation, firm, 
enterprise or institution or part or combination thereof 
whether incorporated or not, public or private, that has 
its own functions and administration. 


NOTE — For organization with more than one operating unit, 
a single operating unit may be defined as an organization. 


3.10 Recommendation — Suggestion made by the 
audit team in the course of audit for improvement in 
the OH & S system. 


4 AUDIT GOALS, OBJECTIVES, ROLES AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 


4.1 Audit Goals 


Audits are normally designed to achieve one or more of 
the following goals: 


a) To provide the auditee with an opportunity to assess 
its own OH & S system against aOH & S system 
standard and identify areas for improvement; 


b) To determine the conformity of the implemented 
OH & S system with specified requirements and 
identify areas for improvement; and 


c) To meet regulatory requirements. 
NOTES 
1 These audits may be periodic, or may be prompted by 
significant changes in the organization’s OH & S system, 


process, product or service or by a need to follow up on 
corrective action as specified in 4.1.2. 


2 Audits are not aimed at, nor should result in a transfer of the 
responsibility to achieve safety from auditee management to 
the auditing organization. 


3 Audits are not a certification of the safety performance of the 
auditee organization. 


4.2 Audit Objectives 


OH & S audits are conducted with the following 
objectives: 


a) To carry out a systematic, critical appraisal of 
all potential hazards involving personnel, plant, 
services and operation method; and 


b) To ensure that OH & S system fully satisfies the 
legal requirements and those of the company’s 
written safety policies, objectives and program. 


4.3 Roles and Responsibilities 
4.3.1 Auditors 


4.3.1.1 Audit team 


It is desirable to have the OH & S audit team comprising 
of two or more auditors; with different specialized 
backgrounds, which are complementary. One of the 
auditors should be designated as the lead auditor and 
should have overall charge and responsibility. Auditors 
should be qualified, trained and experienced in the 
related areas. 


4.3.1.2 Lead auditor 5 responsibilities 


The lead auditor is ultimately responsible for all phases 
of the OH & S audit. The lead auditor should have 
management capabilities and experience and should be 
given authority to make final decisions regarding the 
conduct of the audit and any audit observations. 
The lead auditor’s responsibilities also cover: 

a) Selecting the audit team members; 

b) Preparing the audit plan; 

c) Planning the field visit; 

d) Defining the 

assignment; 


requirements of each audit 


e) Communicating with client, auditee and other 
auditors regarding audit requirements; 


f) Briefing the audit team and guide the auditors to 
prepare the working document; 


g) Reporting critical nonconformities resulting in 
imminent danger to the auditee immediately; 


h) Interacting with the client and auditee’s 


management; 


j) Reporting any major obstacles encountered in 
performing the audit; 


k) Maintaining agreed time schedule. 


m) Preparing audit report with the help of auditors; 
and 


n) Reporting the audit results objectively, clearly, 
conclusively and without delay. 
4.3.1.3 Auditors’ responsibilities 
Auditors are responsible for: 
a) Complying with the applicable audit requirements; 


b) Scheduling and carrying out assigned 
responsibilities effectively and efficiently; 


c) Preparing additional checklist if required; 

d) Documenting the observations; 

e) Reporting the audit findings; 

f) Verifying the effectiveness of corrective actions 


taken as a result of the earlier audits; and 


g) Retaining and safeguarding documents pertaining 
to the audit ensuring such documents remain 
confidential, and treating privileged information 
with discretion. 


4.3.1.4 Auditors’ duties 


Auditors should be free from bias and influences, 
which could affect objectivity. Auditors should not be 
indecisive and aggressive. Auditor should: 


a) Remain within the audit scope; 
b) Exercise objectivity; 


c) Collect and analyse evidence that is relevant and 
sufficient to permit the drawing of conclusions 
regarding the audited OH & S safety system; 


d) Remain alert to any indications of evidence that 
can influence the audit results and possibly require 
more extensive auditing; 


e) be able to answer such questions as presented by 
the auditee with respect to the relevance of the 
auditor’s queries; 

f) Should be able to convince the auditee about any 
apprehension, if any, regarding audit findings; 

g) Ensure that the procedures, documents and other 
information specifying requirements of the 
OH & S system are known, available, understood 
and used by the auditee’s personnel; 


h) Ensure that all the documents and other information 
used to describe the safety system are adequate to 
achieve the required OH & S objectives; and 


j) Act in an ethical manner at all times. 


4.3.1.5 Attributes of auditors 


Trust, integrity, confidentiality and discretion are 
essential to auditing. Auditors should possess the 
following personal attributes to enable them to act in 
accordance with the purposes of auditing described 
in 4: 
a) Ethical, that is, fair, truthful, sincere, honest and 
discreet; 
b) Open-minded, that is, willing 
alternative ideas or points of view; 


to consider 


c) Diplomatic, that is, tactful in dealing with people; 

d) Observant, that is, actively aware of physical 
surroundings and activities; 

e) Perceptive, that is, instinctively aware of and able 
to understand situations; 

f) Versatile, that is, adjusts readily to different 
situations; 

g) Tenacious, that is, persistent, focused on achieving 
objectives; 

h) Decisive, that is, reaches timely conclusions based 
on logical reasoning and analysis; and 


IS 14489 : 2018 


j) Self-reliant, that is, acts and functions 
independently while interacting effectively with 
others. 

4.3.2 Client 
Client should: 

a) Determine the need for and the purpose of the OH 
& S audit and initiate the process; 

b) Select the auditing organization; 


c) Agree in consultation with the lead auditor the 
general scope of the audit such as what OH & S 
system standard or document is to be selected as 
reference and the time schedule; 


d) Define the audit reporting requirements; 
e) State specific confidentiality requirements, if any; 
f) Receive the audit report; and 
g) Determine follow-up action to be taken in 
consultation with the auditee. 
4.3.3 Auditee 
Auditee should: 


a) Inform relevant officials and staff about the 
objectives and scope of the audit; 


b) Appoint one or two officials to coordinate / liaise 
with audit team; 


c) Provide all resources needed for the audit team 
in order to ensure an effective and efficient audit 
process; 

d) Provide access to the facilities and evidential 
material as requested by the auditors; 


e) Co-operate with the auditors to facilitate 


achievements of audit objectives; 
f) review of the audit results; and 


g) Ensure implementation of corrective actions based 
on the audit report 


5 AUDIT METHODOLOGY 


5.1 Initiating the OH & S Audit 
5.1.1 Scope 


The client in consultation with lead auditor and auditee 
organization make the final decisions on which OH & S 
system elements, physical locations and organizational 
activities are to be audited within a specified time frame. 


The scope and depth of the audit should be designed to 
meet the client’s specific information needs. Generally 
the audit is carried out to cover the following aspects: 


a) Identification of areas of OH & S system, which 
require improvement; 

b) Assessment of effectiveness of measures taken for 
controlling the hazards; 


c) Recommendation of measures to strengthen the 
OH & S system; 


IS 14489 : 2018 


d) Implementation of these measures; and 
e) Monitoring of the changes. 


Actions with respect to serial number (a), (b) and (c) 
are the responsibility of the audit team whereas those 
at serial number (d) and (e) are the responsibility of the 
auditee. 


The standards or documents with which the auditee’s 
OH & S system is required to comply should be 
specified by the client. This may include the relevant 
legal requirements, concerned Standards, codes of 
practices and the requirements specified by the auditee 
(see 5.1.3). 


Sufficient objective evidence should be available to 
demonstrate the operation and effectiveness of the 
auditee’s safety system. 


The resources committed to the audit should be 
sufficient to meet its intended scope and depth. The 
audit will cover the objectives laid down and auditors 
may also contact individual worker to ascertain their 
perceptions about the existing OH & S system, to 
gain their involvement, to encourage comments and 
suggestion relating to safety and invite cooperation to 
bring the company to an approved OH & S standard. 


5.1.2 Audit Frequency 


The need to perform an audit is determined by the client, 
taking into account specified or regulatory requirements 
and any other pertinent factors. Significant changes 
in management, organization, policy, techniques or 
technologies, and products that could affect the OH & S 
system, or changes to the system itself and the results of 
recent previous audits, are typical of the circumstances 
to be considered when deciding audit frequency. It 
is desirable that organizations have a combination 
of external and internal OH & S audit system. While 
the external audit in respect of organizations may be 
conducted once in two years, or as specified by any 
statute, the frequency of internal audit may be set once 
in every year. Records of accidents and dangerous 
occurrences should be examined and used to identify 
high-risk areas and activities and consequently the 
frequency of internal audit may be increased. 


5.1.3 Preliminary Review of Auditee’s Requirements of 
OH & S System 


Client shall send the auditee’s specified requirements 
and description of OH & S system including 
manufacturing processes, organization structure etc. 
to the lead auditor. As a basis for planning the OH 
& S audit, the lead auditor should review adequacy 
of the auditee’s specified requirements and recorded 
description of the methods for meeting the OH & S 
system requirements (such as the safety manual or 
equivalent). If this review reveals that the system 
described by the auditee is not adequate to meet the 
requirements, further resources should not be expended 


on the audit until such concerns are resolved to the 
satisfaction of the client, the lead auditor and, where 
applicable, the auditee. While it is desirable to have a 
well-defined set of specified requirements and recorded 
description, in their absence, audit may be conducted 
with reference to legal requirements and concerned 
standards. 


5.2 Preparing the OH & S Audit 


5.2.1 Audit Plan 


The audit plan should be finalized by the lead auditor 
after consultation with the client and communicated 
to the auditors and auditee. The audit plan should be 
flexible in order to permit changes in emphasis based 
on information gathered during the audit, and to permit 
effective use of resources. The plan should include: 


a) Audit objectives and scope; 
b) Schedule of audit activities; 
c 


wm 


Identification of reference documents (such as 
the applicable OH & S system standard and the 
auditee’s description and specified requirements 
of their safety system); 


d) Composition of the audit team as specified at 
4.3.1.1; 


e) Identification of the organizational units to be 
audited; 


f) Schedule of meetings to be held with auditee 
management; 


g) List of documents to be perused by the audit team; 
and 


h) Audit report distribution and the expected date of 
issue. 


5.2.2 Audit Team Assignments 


Each auditor should be assigned specific OH & S 
system elements or functional departments to audit. 
Such assignments should be made in consultation with 
the auditors concerned. The lead auditor should hold a 
briefing session for his team prior to the audit at which 
he will ensure that preparations are complete and that 
all members are aware of their roles. 


5.2.3 Working Documents of the Audit Team 


The documents required to facilitate the audit may 
include: 


a) Check-lists used for evaluating OH & S system 
elements (normally prepared by the auditor 
assigned to audit that specific element), 


b) Forms for documenting 
supporting evidence. 


observations and 


Working documents should be so designed that they 
do not restrict additional audit activities, which may 
become necessary as a result of information gathered 
during the audit. Working documents involving 


confidential or proprietary information shall be suitably 
safeguarded by the auditing organization. 


5.2.4 Questionnaire of Preliminary Information 


The lead auditor would send to the auditee management 
a questionnaire seeking information about various 
elements of OH & S system as given in Annex A. This 
would be filled in by the auditee and returned for study 
by the audit team before the field visit. 


5.3 Executing the OH & S Audit 


5.3.1 Opening Meeting 
The purpose of an opening meeting is to: 


a) Introduce the members of the audit team to the 
auditee’s senior management; 


b) Explain the scope and objectives of the audit; 


c) Provide a short summary of the methods and 
procedures to be used to conduct the audit; 


d) Establish the official communication 
between the audit team and the auditee; 


links 


e) Confirm that the resources and facilities needed by 
the audit team are available; 


f) Fix a schedule of visits to individual plants / 
departments; 


g) Discuss with the auditee’s senior management the 
areas of concern and areas of focus suggested by 
the audit team; 


h) Confirm the time and date for the closing meeting 
and any interim meetings of the audit team and the 
auditee’s senior management; and 


j) Clarify ambiguities if any, in the audit plan. 


5.3.2 Presentation by Auditee 


Auditee should make a presentation on organization, 
structure, manufacturing processes and the OH & S 
system. 


5.3.3 Examination of Records 


Information should be collected through examination 
of documents and records. A sample list of documents 
and records to be examined is given in Annex B. 
Nonconformities should be noted. 


5.3.4 Field Visit 


Audit team should carry out field visit along with the 
concerned officials of the auditee. Checklist given 
in Annex C as guidance may be used for the audit 


purpose. 
5.3.5 Interviews 


The auditor is expected to interact with various 
levels of employees including the top management 
to gather information on the OH & S system and 
its implementation. Information collected through 


IS 14489 : 2018 


interviews should be verified from other sources such 
as physical observation and scrutiny of records. 


5.3.6 Audit Observations 


All audit observations should be documented. After 
all activities have been audited, the audit team 
should review all of their observations to determine 
which are to be reported as nonconformities. 
The audit team should then ensure that these are 
documented in a clear, concise manner and are 
supported by evidence. Nonconformities should be 
identified in terms of the specific requirements of 
the statutes, standards or other related documents 
against which the audit has been conducted. The 
lead auditor should review observations with the 
responsible auditee manager. All observations 
of nonconformities should be intimated to the 
auditee and acknowledged by the auditee. When 
recording a nonconformance, enough details 
should be provided so that auditee can reconfirm 
the observations later. 


5.3.7 Audit Recommendations 


The auditor should make recommendations to the 
auditee for the improvements to the OH & S system. 
In case of an organization whose OH & S system 
specified requirements / description are well developed, 
it would be sufficient to point out nonconformities 
with the requirement. However, when these are not 
well laid down, it becomes more important to make 
recommendations. These recommendations are of 
following two types: 


a) for improvement in the 


requirements; and 


system’s specified 
b) for more effective implementation of the specified 
requirements of the system. 
NOTE — It is up to the auditee to determine the ways 
and means of actions to improve the OH & S system as 
per recommendations of the audit team. However, the 


recommendations regarding compliance with statutory and 
legal requirements are to be fully implemented. 


5.3.8 Closing Meeting with Auditee 


At the end of the OH & S audit, prior to preparing the 
audit report, the audit team should hold a meeting with 
the auditee’s senior management and those responsible 
for the functions concerned. The main purpose of 
this meeting is to present audit observations and 
recommendations to the senior management in such a 
manner as to ensure that they clearly understand the 
results of the audit. The lead auditor should present 
observations and recommendations, taking into account 
their perceived significance. The lead auditor should 
also present the non-conformities in a summarized 
manner. The audit team’s conclusions regarding the 
OH & S system’s effectiveness should be presented. 
The deliberations of the closing meeting should be 
recorded. 


IS 14489 : 2018 


5.4 OH & S Audit Documents 
5.4.1 Audit Report Preparation 


The audit report is prepared by the audit team under 
the direction of the lead auditor, who is responsible for 
its accuracy and completeness. The audit report should 
be issued within the agreed time period. If it cannot be 
issued within agreed time period, the reasons for the 
delay should be intimated to the auditee in writing. 


5.4.2 Report Content 


The audit report should faithfully reflect both the tone 
and content of the audit. It should be dated and signed 
by the lead auditor. It should contain the following 
items, as applicable: 

a) An executive summary of the report highlighting 
important observations and recommendations. 

b) Introduction, scope, objectives, overview of the 
site and plant description; 

c) The names of audit team members, auditee’s 
representative, and audit dates; 

d) Details of the audit methodology which is 
followed; 

e) Identification of the reference documents against 
which the audit was conducted (safety system 
standard, auditee’s safety manual, etc); 

f) Observations of nonconformities as well as good 
practices; 

g) Audit team’s judgement of the extent of the 
auditee’s compliance with the applicable OH & S 
system standard and related documentation; 

h) The system’s ability to achieve defined objectives; 
and 


j) the recommendations for improvement. 


5.4.3 Report Distribution 


The OH & S audit report should be sent to the client 
/ auditee signed by the lead auditor. Any additional 
distribution should be determined by the client / auditee. 


5.4.4 Record Retention 


Audit report should be retained by agreement between 
the client, the auditing organization and auditee, and in 
accordance with any regulatory requirements. 


6 OH & S AUDIT COMPLETION 


The audit is completed upon submission of the audit 
report to the client / auditee. 


7 ACTION FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF 
OH & S AUDIT REPORT 


The auditee is responsible for determining and initiating 
corrective action on audit recommendations. 


The auditee should prepare an action plan for 
implementation of audit report; specifying action by 
concerned departments and time limits for completion. 
This may be in consultation with the auditing 
organization or client. The time limit for completion 
may be decided considering the importance and safety 
implications of the recommendation. One of the most 
important follow-up actions is the communication of the 
content of the audit report to appropriate personnel in 
the auditee organization. The agreed recommendations 
for action with target dates for implementation of 
the recommendations should also be conveyed to 
implementing agency. Where no action is proposed to 
be taken (although it may have been recommended in 
the course of the audit) the reasons for this decision 
should be documented. If it is not feasible to implement 
some of the recommendations of the audit team then 
the auditee should inform about such recommendations 
to the client specifying reasons. This information may 
also be conveyed to the auditor. 


The auditee should develop a monitoring system 
for implementation of the recommendations and 
periodically assess the implementation status of 
the audit report. If needed a follow-up audit can be 
conducted to review implementation of the audit 
recommendations. 


Considering the requirements including the legal 
aspects the auditee can plan for the next audit. 


ANNEX A 


IS 14489 : 2018 


( Clauses 3.8 and 5.2.4 ) 


ELEMENTS OF OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY (OH & S) SYSTEMS 


A-1 OH & S MANAGEMENT 


a) OH & S Policy b) |OH&S organizational set-up 
c) Safety manual d) Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) 
e) Plant modification procedure f) Work permit system 
g) Contractors’ safety system h) Plant design andlayout 
j) Medical management of accidents k) Management of emergencies (natural / 
man-made) 
m) | Employee selection and placement n) Safety culture 
p) Statutory licences, approvals and records |q) Motivational and promotional measures for 
OH&S 
r) Hazard identification and job safety s) Product safety 
analysis 
t) Safety training u) Change management 
A-2 PHYSICAL HAZARD 
a) | Housekeeping b) | Machine and general area guarding 
c) Material handling d) | Electrical safeguarding 
e) Safety in storage and warehousing f) Hazard assessment of new equipment 
g) | Hazards from radiation sources h) | Control measures for specialised industrial 
hazards like work at height and work in 
confined space 
A-3 CHEMICAL HAZARD 
a) Transportation of hazardous substances b) | Handling of hazardous substances 
c) Storage of hazardous substances d) Spill control measures 
e) Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) f) Gas cylinders 
g) | Labeling and colour coding h) | Hazardous waste management 
A-4 FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARD 
a) Organisationalsetup for fire fighting b) Built in safety in civil design and construc- 
tion 
c) Built in Safety in Electric Circuits and d) | Explosive substances 
Equipment 


IS 14489 : 2018 


e) Fire safety in handling flammable and ex- | f) Fire detection and alarm system 
plosive materials 

g) | Passive and active fire protection system |h) | Fixed fire extinguishing system 

j) Portable Fire Extinguishing System k) Fire fightingequipment andfacilities 

m) | Fire drill n) | Fire fightingtraining 

p) Static electricity and lightning 


A-5 INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE / OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH 


a) Vibration, heat stress, Nnn-ionizing radi- | b) Work place monitoring for hazardous 
ations, ventilation, illumination and noise chemicals 

c) First aid facilities and occupational health |d) | Periodic medical examination 
centre (OHC) 

e) Personal protective quipmentandemergen- | f) Occupational disease 
cy equipment 


A-6 ACCIDENT / INCIDENT REPORTING, INVESTIGATION AND ANALYSIS 


a) Accident reporting, b) | Accident investigation 
c) Analysis of accidents d) Implementation of recommendations 
e) Reporting andinvestigation of near -miss 

incidents 


A-7 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS (ON-SITE / OFF SITE) 


a) Site specific details b) | Duties and responsibilities of key personnel 
c) Identification of emergencies and accident | d) | Declaration and termination of emergency 
scenario 
e) Resources-evacuation / transport f) Communication facilities 
g) Medical care h) Updation of emergency plan 
j) Periodic drills / exercises k) | Training of plant personnel 
m) | Public awareness programmes n) Mutual-aid programme 
p) | Emergency control centre 
A-8 SAFETY INSPECTION 
a) Inspection programme b) Safety Related Deficiency (SRD) Report 
c) Safety inspection records d) | Methodology and inspection team 
e) Compliance of recommendations 


IS 14489 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.3.3 ) 


TYPES OF RECORDS TO BE EXAMINED DURING THE SAFETY AUDIT 


a) OH & S policy; 

b) Safety organization chart; 

c) Training records on safety fire and first-aid; 
d) Record of plant safety inspections; 

e) Accident investigation reports; 


f) Accidents, dangerous occurrences and near miss 
incidents - statistics and analysis; 


g) Record of tests and examinations of equipment 
and structures as per statutes; 


h) Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for various 
operations; 
j) Record of work permits; 


k) Record of work environment monitoring 
(flammable, toxic and explosive substances); 


m) Maintenance, testing and calibration records of 
fire detection and fire fighting equipment; 


n) Medical records of employees; 

p) Records of industrial hygiene surveys (noise, 
ventilation, illumination, dust etc.); 

q) Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS); 

r) On-site emergency plans and record of Mock 
Drills; 

s) Records of storage of hazardous solid waste and 
its disposal; 

t) Records of gaseous emissions and effluent 
discharges to the environment; 


u) Housekeeping inspection records; 
w) Minutes of safety committee meetings; 
y) Statutory licences and approvals; 


z) Records of any modifications carried out in plant 
or process; 


aa) Maintenance procedure and records; 


ab) Instrumentation and equipment calibration and 
testing records; 


ac) Planned shutdown maintenance procedures; 


ad) In service inspection manuals, records including 
that of material handling; 


ae) OH & S budget; 
af) Inspection books and other statutory records; 
ag) Records of previous audits and safety analysis; 


ah) Procedures for safe transportation of hazardous 
substances; 


aj) Calibration records; 


ak) Records for break down of plants during the 
process of manufacture; 


am) Records for waste material generated and their 
disposal; 
an) SOP for disposal of waste materials; and 


ap) Records for issue of PPE items to the personnel 
working in process building. 


IS 14489 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 5.3.4 ) 


SAMPLE CHECKLIST FOR SAFETY AUDIT 


C-1 OH & SMANAGEMENT 


C-1.1 OH & S Policy 


a) Does the organization have OH & S policy? 

b) Who has signed the OH & S policy? 

c) Whether the OH & S policy is per guidelines of 
the statutory provisions? 

d) When was the OH & S policy declared and 
adopted? 

e) Whether the OH & S policy reviewed periodically? 

f) Whether the OH & S policy is available in local 
language and made known to all? 

g) What was the last date of updation? 

h) Does the policy find a place in the annual report? 


C-2 OH & S ORGANIZATIONAL SET UP 


C-2.1 Safety Department 


a) Does the factory have a safety department and 
what is strength of safety department? 

b) Whether the strength and qualifications of Safety 
Officers are as per the statutes? 

c) Does the head of safety department report to the 
Chief Executive? 

d) How often are the safety officers retrained in the 
latest techniques of total safety management? 
What is the frequency of retraining? 

e) What additional duties the safety officer is required 
to do? 

f) What is the power of safety officer vis-a-vis unsafe 
condition or unsafe act? 


C-2.2 Safety Committee(s) 


a) Does the factory has a safety committee(s)? What 
are the types, structures and terms of reference of 
the committees? 


b) Is the constitution of the safety committee(s) as 
per the statute? 

c) How are the members of safety committee(s) 
selected? (elected / nominated) 

d) How often are the meetings of safety committee(s) 
held? 

e) Are the recommendations of the committees(s) 
implemented? 

f) Are the minutes of the safety committee(s) 
meetings circulated among the members? 


10 


g) Are the minutes forwarded to the trade union(s) 
and chief executive and occupier? 


h) Whether the management and trade union play 
their active roles in supporting and accepting the 
committee(s) recommendations? 


j) How are the safety committee(s) members 
apprised of the latest development in safety, health 
and environment? 


C-2.3 Safety Budget 


a) What is the annual safety budget? 


b) How much percentage is this budget of the total 
turnover of the company? 


c) How much budget has been utilized till date? 
d) Is the safety budget adequate? 
e) How is the safety budget arrived at? 


f) What is the pattern of expenditure for the last five 
years? 


g) What are the approved 
expenditure in this budget? 


sanctions for the 


h) Does this budget get reflected in the annual report 
of the company? 


C-3 SAFETY MANUAL 


a) What is the periodicity of updation / review of 
safety manual? 

b) Does the safety manual adequately address all the 
hazards in the plant? 


c) Are the employee made aware of safety rules / 
instruction mentioned in the safety manual? 


C-4 STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES 
(SOP) 


a) Are written Standard / safe operating procedures 
available for all operations and processes? 

b) Whether the written Standard / safe operating 
procedures are displayed or made available and 
explained in the local language to the workers? 

c) Whether concerned section and safety department 
prepares standard / safe operating procedure 


jointly? 

d) Are standard / safe operating procedures reviewed 
and updated? 

e) Have the workers been informed of the 


consequences of failure to observe the standard / 
safe operating procedures? 


C-5 PLANT MODIFICATION PROCEDURES 
a) What is the system for effecting any change in the 
existing plant, equipment or process? 


b) Whether the P & I diagrams and other related 
documents are updated accordingly? 


c) Whether hazard assessment 
implementation of modification? 


done before 


C-6 WORK PERMIT SYSTEM 


a) What types of work permits exist in the factory? 


b) Are the necessary forms detailing required safety 
precautions have been prepared and used for each 
type of work-permit? 


c) Is the responsibility assigned to authorized person 
for issuing of safety work permit? 


d) Is the copy of safe work permit sent to safety 
officer before execution of the job? 

e) Is validity period specified in the safety work 
permit? 


f) Are the records of work permit available and 
maintained in proper order? 


C- 6.1 Control Measures for Work at Height 

a) Is adequate safe access provided to all places 
where workers need to work? 

b) Are all such access in good condition? 

c) Are all scaffolds are properly designed and 
erected? 

d) Are scaffolds inspected every day before work 
begins? 

e) Are ladders securely clamped or lashed in place? 

f) Are planks in good condition? 

g) Are scaffold walkaways, platforms, runs or stairs 


free of debris, grease, any unnecessary obstruction 
and projecting nails? 
h) Are the scaffolds higher than 20 m.? If yes, is a 


netting or intermediate railing provided between 
toe-boards and hand railings? 


j) Are folding stepladders properly used? 

k) Are ladders set up at the proper slope of about 1:4? 
m) Do workers use hand lines to lift tools or materials? 
n) Are proper ladders used around electrical hazards? 


p) On sloping roofs, are crawling boards, lifelines, 
safety belts and edge protection provided where 
needed? 

q) Whether the weak spots, skylights, or deteriorated 
asbestos-cement boards through which a worker 
might fall while working in the roof has been 
identified and safety net provided appropriately? 

r) Are the workers being medically examined for 
their fitness to work at height? 


11 


IS 14489 : 2018 


C-6.2 Work in Confined Space 
a) Is work permit system followed for working in 
confined space? 


b) Whether monitoring of the atmosphere inside 
the confined space is carried out and ensured that 
there is no flammable or toxic gas in the area? 


c) Whether the person entering the confined space 
is using suitable personal protective equipment 
(PPE)? 


d) Is rescue team available in case of any emergency? 


C-7 CONTRACTORS’ SAFETY SYSTEM 


a) Is there any system for selection of contractors? 

b) Are there any guidelines on contractor’s safety 
and training? 

c) Whether contract document includes necessary 
safety and welfare clauses as per statutes? 

d) Is there any programme to ensure use of PPE by 
contractors personnel? 

e) Do the contractors have their own safety 
organization? 

f) Are the contractors reporting all accidents and 
injuries? 

g) Are contractor workers trained to observe safety at 
work place? 

h) Whether contractor workers are engaged in 


process / operations? If yes, are they aware of safe 
operating procedures? 


C-8 PLANT DESIGN AND LAYOUT 


a) Whether hazardous operations in the plant are 
segregated? 

b) Whether occupational health & safety aspects are 
considered during the design? 

c) Are all the equipment provided with adequate 
space for working, maintenance etc.? 

d) Are the storage tanks provided with enough space 
/clearance between them? 

e) Whether the plant layout has taken care of 
the movement of firefighting equipment and 
emergency exits? 


C-9 MEDICAL 
DENTS 


MANAGEMENT OF ACCI- 


a) Are medical facilites available with trained first 
aid staff and equipment in round the clock shift for 
all including contractors? 

b) Is the ambulance van available for round the clock 
basis with the dedicated driver? 

c) Is there any mutual aid scheme available with 
the nearest hospitals to manage and treat injuries 
during emergency? 


IS 14489 : 2018 


d) Are the workers / contractor workers aware of 
emergency medical facilities? 


C-10 MANAGEMENT OF EMERGENCIES 
(NATURAL / MAN-MADE) 


a) Does the system exist to detect and control these 
Emergencies? 


b) Are the employees aware of the measures to be 
taken during emergencies? 


C-11 EMPLOYEES SELECTION AND PLACE- 
MENT 


a) Whether norms are available for selection of 
different category of employees? 


b) Whether pre-employment medical examination is 
being conducted for employees? 


c) Is there any procedure to evaluate safety 
awareness and record of the employees during 
their promotion? 


C-12 SAFETY CULTURE 


C-12.1 Attitudes of Managers 


a) Do the managers follow the plant safety rules at all 
times? 

b) What are their attitudes towards safety reviews 
and audits? 

c) What is the response of management to safety 
violation? 

d) Whether safety related decisions are taken in 
consultation with the workers? 

e) What is the attitude of the managers towards non 
use of personal protective equipment? 


C-12.2 Attitudes of Workers 


a) Whether workers are aware of the consequences 
of their wrong actions? 

b) Are laid down safe working procedures followed 
strictly? 

c) What is the attitude of the workers towards their 
own mistake, which can prejudice safety? 

d) Do the workers report near miss incidents and 
suggest safety improvements? 

e) Are the workers aware of the system of rewards 
and sanctions relating to safety matters? 


f) What is the attitude of workers towards use of 
personal protective equipment? 


C-13 STATUTORY LICENSES, APPROVALS 
AND RECORDS 


a) Whether all the safety related Acts / Rules 
(with latest amendments) applicable to your 
organization identified, informed to all employees 
and complied? 


12 


b) Whether the licences have been validated? 


C-14 MOTIVATIONAL AND PROMOTIONAL 
MEASURES FOR OH & S 


a) Does the factory have occupational health and 
safety suggestion scheme? 


b) Are occupational health and safety contests 
organized in the factory? 


c) Does the factory participate in National Awards? 


d) Has the factory been awarded during last five 
years? 


e) Does the organization publish safety bulletin / 
newsletters? 


f) Whether the safety bulletins are widely distributed? 


g) How is the occupational health and safety 
information including accident statistics 
disseminated in the factory? (Bulletin boards, 
Newsletter etc.) 


h) What are the activities conducted during National 
Safety day / week? 


j) What is the percentage of Workers participating in 
the various safety promotional activities? 


C-15 HAZARD IDENTIFICATION AND JOB 
SAFETY ANALYSIS 


a) Was an initial process hazard analysis (PHA) 
completed? 


b) What are the stages of PHA? Whether a dedicated 
group is identified for PHA? 


c) Was the PHA appropriate for the complexity of 
the process and identify, evaluate, and control the 
hazards involved in the process? 


d) Does the hazard evaluation use one or more of the 
following PHA methodologies: What-If Anysis, 
Process Checklist, Hazard and Operability Study 
(HAZOP), Failure Mode and Effects Criticality 
Analysis (FMECA), Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) or 


any other appropriate equivalent methodology? 


wm 


e) Does PHA assures addressing issues of inherent 

safety features with respect to material and their 

properties? 

Does the PHA address the hazard identification, 

incidents history, consequences of failures 

(engineering and administrative controls), human 

factors, consequent analysis with respect to possible 

safety and health effects of failure of controls? 

g) What are the stages of PHA? Whether a dedicated 
group is identified for PHA? 

h) Does the system exists to promptly address 
findings and recommendations of PHA? 

j) Are the PHA’s updated and revalidated at least 


every five years by a qualified team to assure that 
the PHA is consistent with the current process? 


k) Whether the activities requiring Job Safety 
Analysis have been identified? 


m) Whether the identified jobs for Hazard 
Identification have been carried out by trained and 
experienced persons? 


n) Whether the checklists have been prepared on 
each Job Safety Analysis and are being used while 
carrying out the job? 


C-16 PRODUCT SAFETY 
a) Whether hazards arising from use of the products 


are identified? 

b) Whether material safety data sheet prepared for 
the products? 

c) Are all the products 
appropriately? 


labeled and packed 


d) Whether safety instructions are given along with 
products? 


e) Whether policy exists for recall of products? 


C-17 SAFETY TRAINING 


a) Whether training needs have been identified? 


b) Is there any programme of induction training, its 
duration and topics covered? 


c) Whether the assessment of the trainees has been 
carried out? 


d) What are the infra-structural facilities available 
for training? 

e) Whether training is conducted by qualified person? 

f) Whether trainers are being re-trained from time to 
time? 

g) Whether proper records of training program 
conducted are maintained? 

h) How training programs are evaluated? 


j) Whether schedule for training on occupational 
health and safety is available and maintained? 


k) Whether the training programmes are reviewed? 


m) Are all the employees periodically trained / 
retrained and what is the frequency of such 
training? 

n) Are the retraining needs identified whenever a 
new process / products and change in existing 
process introduced? 


p) Whether training covers top management? 
q) How many hours of safety training is given to 
different employees? 


C-18 CHANGE MANAGEMENT 


C-18.1 Management of Change 


a) Are there written procedures for managing change 
to process chemicals, technology, equipment and 


13 


IS 14489 : 2018 


procedures and changes to facilities that affect the 
plant process / system operation? 


b) Do the procedures assure that the technical basis 
for the proposed change addressed prior to any 
change? 

c) Do the procedures assure that the impact of the 
change on safety and health addressed prior to any 
change? 

d) Do the procedures assure that modifications to 
operating procedures are addressed prior to any 
change? 

e) Do the procedures assure that the necessary time 

period for the change is addressed prior to any 

change? 

Do the procedures assure that the authorization 

requirements for the proposed change are 

addressed prior to any change? 


wa 


Are employees involved in operating a process, 
and maintenance and contract employees whose 
job tasks will be affected by change informed of, 
and trained in, the change prior to the start-up of 
process or affected part of process / operations? 


8 


h 


wm 


Is the safety information is reviewed and updated 
on changes? 


j) Are the operating procedures or practices updated? 


C-18.2 Mechanical Integrity 


a) Does the mechanical integrity program include 
for all mechanical equipment including pressure 
vessels and storage tanks, piping and components, 
relief devices and vent systems, emergency 
shutdown systems, pumps, control systems? 


b) Are there written procedures to maintain the on- 
going integrity of process equipment? 

c) Whether training been provided to each employee 
involved in maintaining the on-going integrity of 
process equipment? 

d) Are inspections and tests performed on each item 
of process equipment included in the program? 


e) Does the inspection and test frequenciesmeet 
the manufacturer’s recommendation and good 
engineering practice? 

f) Are inspections and tests performed more 
frequently if determined necessary by operating 
experience? 

g) Are deficiencies in equipment that are outside 
limits corrected before further use so as to assure 
safe operation? 


h) In the construction of new plants and equipment, 
whether quality assurance programme is 
implemented to ensure that equipment fabricated 
is suitable for the process? 


j) Are appropriate checks and inspections made 
during equipment installation stage? 


IS 14489 : 2018 


k) Are the suitability of maintenance materials, 
spareparts and equipment ensured during 
maintenance? 


C-19 PHYSICAL HAZARD 


C-19.1 Housekeeping 


a) Are all the passages, floors and the stairways in 
good condition? 


b) Is glass door taped or otherwise marked to make it 
visible to workers? 


c) Do you have the system to deal with the spillage? 


d) Do you have sufficient disposable bins clearly 
marked and whether these are suitably located? 
Are containers of refuse (waste) and trash emptied 
at the end of every day or soon after they are full? 
Are the containers or bins regularly cleaned? 


e) Are drip trays positioned wherever necessary? 


f) Do you have adequate localized extraction and 
scrubbing facilities for dust, fumes and gases? 
Please specify. 


g) Whether walkways are clearly marked and free 
from obstruction? 


h) Do you have any inter-departmental competition 
for good housekeeping? 


j) Has your organization elaborated good 
housekeeping practices and standards and made 
them known to the employees? 


k) Are there any working conditions, which make the 
floors slippery? If so, what measures are taken to 
make them safe? 


m) Does the company have adequate measures to 
suppress polluting dust arising out of materials 
stored on the roadside? 


C-19.2 Machine and General Area Guarding 


a) Whether machinery and equipment which can 
cause physical injuries to operator have been 
identified? 

b) Are all moving parts and point of operation of 
machinery adequately guarded? 

c) Are all fixed guards securely bolted in position 
and in good condition? 

d) Are all interlock guards for prevention of physical 
injury in good condition? 

e) Are all emergency stop buttons effective and 
clearly labeled? 

f) Are the operators for machines having moving 
parts aware of the danger of working with loose 
clothing? 

g) Are the openings where there is free fall hazard 
covered or fenced securely? 


14 


C-19.3 Material Handling 


a) Are adequate equipment available for handling 
materials? 


b) Are the workers aware of the hazards associated 
with material being handled? 


c) Where manual handling is necessary, are the 
workers been trained? Do they practice this? Are 
workers warned for lifting of excessive weight? 
(Maximum weight of material for adult male and 
female are 55 Kg and 30 Kg respectively) 


d) Do workers follow safe procedures for storage of 
materials? 


e) Is the register maintained to record particulars 
of examination of all lifting machines, tools and 
tackles? 


f) Are all the statutory examinations and tests carried 
out and certified by competent person(s)? 


g) Are the operators of crane, lifts, hoists and other 
mechanized operations adequately qualified? 


h) Is the safe working load clearly marked? 


j) Has the person employed to operate crane, 
forklift, or to give signals to crane been medically 
examined for eyesight and colour vision? 


k) Is the frequency of eyesight and colour vision 
examination as per the latest rules? 


C-19.4 Electrical Safeguarding 


a) Are licensed electricians available for electrical 


work? 

b) Whether area classification for electrical 
equipment has been carried out? 

c) Do the electrical fittings conform to area 


classification for electrical equipment? 


d) Is a ground fault current interrupter system 
(ELCB) in use? 

e) Are all connections made by using appropriate 
plugs, receptacles or enclosures? Are fuses 
provided? 


f) Are there any make shift connection bare wires or 
damaged cables? 


g) Is there a system of ensuring periodical inspection 
of hand tools, extension boards used for electrical 
work? 

h) Do the workers use proper types of PPE during the 
working on live line? 

j) Is the separate work permit issued for working on 
high voltage line? 

k) Whether the process(s) and equipment that 


generate and accumulate static charge have been 
identified? 


m) Whether all such equipment including pipelines 
for flammable materials are properly bonded and 
earthed? 

n) Whether earth pit resistance is measured and the 
record maintained? 


p) Whether lightning arrestor has been installed and 
is adequate? 


C-19.5 Safety in Storage and Warehousing 


a) Whether the Material Safety Data Sheet for all 
chemicals is available? 

b) Are the chemicals stored as per their hazardous 
properties including the incompatibility? 

c) Are all containers clearly, indelibly labelled? Are 
all chemicals stored as per safety regulations? 

d) Whether all racks and steel cages have sufficient 
load bearing capacity? 

e) Is adequate natural ventilation provided to store 
room? Is there any emergency exit? 

f) Whether adequate firefighting arrangement 
existing in flammable chemical storage? 


g) Whether methodology for handling spillages 
of hazardous chemical available along with the 
equipment required handling the spillage? 

h) Whether aisles are marked and emergency exits 
displayed? 


C-19.6 Hazard Assessment for New Equipment 


a) What is the system for effecting any change in the 
existing plant, equipment? 

b) Is there system for evaluating hazards from new 
equipment? 

c) Whether the P and I diagrams and other related 
documents are updated accordingly? 


d) Is any Job Hazard Analysis (JHA) carried out after 
installation of new equipment? 


C-19.7 Hazards from Radiation Sources 


a) Whether licences have been obtained for storage / 
handling of radioactive material? 

b) Whether approved Radiological Safety Officer 
appointed? 

c) Whether appropriate PPEs are used against 
radiation hazards? 

d) Is the flooring of the radioactive material handling 
area amenable for proper decontamination? 

e) Is the storage room of radiation source as per the 
licence condition? 

f) Are all persons working in the facility have 
radiation safety training? 

g) Is the operators handling devices using radioactive 
materials qualified and possess the necessary 
certificate? 


15 


IS 14489 : 2018 


h) Is the periodical radiation monitoring carried out? 


j) Are the records of inventory of radioactive 
material maintained in the standard format and 
submitted to the competent authority as per the 
period specified? 

k) Are emergency handling tools available? 


m) Are the personnel monitoring badges (TLD, 
Pocket dosimeter etc.) assigned and worn by each 
radiation worker? 


n) Are the radiation symbol and red light displayed 
as required? 


C-20 CHEMICAL HAZARD 


C-20.1 Transportation of Hazardous Substances 
a) What potentially hazardous materials are 
transported to or from the site (including wastes) 
b) What mode of transport are used? 
1) Road, 
2) Rail, and 
3) Pipelines 


1) Road 
i) Does the company employ licenced 
vehicle of its own / outside sources? 
ii) Are the loading / unloading procedures in 
place and safety precautions displayed? 


iii) Is there a provision to check the healthiness 
of road tanker with respect to explosives 
rules? 


iv) Are loaded tankers or trucks parked in a 
specific area on-site? 


v) Do all truck and tanker drivers carry 
transport emergency (TREM) card or 
instruction booklet? 


vi) Do all truck and tanker drivers get training 
in handling emergencies during transport? 


vii) Are all the tankers marked for proper 
Hazchem code? 


2) Rail 
i) What hazardous materials are transported 
by rail? 
ii) Does the company have a direct siding on 
site? 
iii) Are tankers or other wagons used in 
transportation? 
3) Pipelines 
i) What materials are transported to and 
from the site by pipelines? 


ii) Are the pipelines underground or over 
ground? 


IS 14489 : 2018 


iii) Are corrosion protection 
employed in pipelines? 


measures 


iv) Whether intermediate booster pumps are 
used? 


v) What is the maximum, minimum and 
average transfer rates? 


vi) Are the pipelines extended in the public 
domain? 

vii) Are the pipelines dedicated for each type 
of chemicals? 


viii) Are the pipelines fitted with safety 
equipment such as leak detectors, 
automatic shut-off valves etc.? 


ix) What is the frequency and method of 
testing of the pipeline? 

x) Is there written procedure for tackling 
leakages in pipeline? 


C-20.2 Handling of Hazardous Substances 


a) What are the hazardous substance handled in the 
factory? 


b) Whether quantity of hazardous substances is above 
the threshold limit specified in the Manufacture, 
Storage and Handling of Hazardous Substances 
Rule, 1989? If yes, then required documentation is 
available as per the rule. 

c) Whether written procedure for handling the 

hazardous substance is available and operators 

are trained for handling such substances including 
actions required in case of leakages and spillages? 

d) Are the employees aware of the hazards arising 

from hazardous substances and safety precautions 

to be taken during handling of these? 


C-20.3 Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) 


a) Are the material safety data sheets available for all 
the chemicals handled, used and manufactured in 
the factory? 


b) Whether the latest MSDS are displayed at strategic 
locations? 


c) Is it available in local language? 


C-20.4 Spill Control Measures 


a) Whether spill control procedure is available? 


b) Whether spill collection pit / sump is available at 
the workplace? 


c) Whether methodology for recovery / disposal of 
collected material has been established? 


C-20.5 Storage of Hazardous Substances 


a) Whether storage vessels are identified with the 
capacity as required under MSIHC, Rules 1989. 


b) What are the storage pressure and temperature? 


16 


c) Whether vessels are above ground / underground? 

d) If any of the tanks storing flammable material, 
whether electrical equipment and fittings are as 
per electrical area classification? 

e) Is the bunded area takes into account the total 
quantity of the largest tank? 


f) Whether the bund perimeter takes 
consideration of trajectory of leak from tank? 


into 


g) Are the vessels properly bonded and earthed and 
whether periodically checked and record maintained? 

h) Are the vessels fitted with remotely controlled 
isolation valves? 

j) Are vessels provided with emergency vent, relief 
valve, bursting disc, level indicator, pressure 
gauge, overflow line? 

k) Where do such vents discharge? 

m) Are the vessels provided with alarms for high 
level, high temperature and high pressure? 

n) Are standby empty tanks or any other alternate 
systems provided for emptying / transfer in case 
of emergencies? 

p) What are the provisions made for firefighting / 
tackling emergency situations around the storage 
vessels? 

q) Has any consequence analysis for loss of 
containment been carried out? 

r) Whether the vessels are tested as per statute? 

s) Whether log sheets are filled up on daily basis for 
recording the parameters of these vessels? 

t) Whether monitors for detection of leakage of 
flammable / toxic material installed? 

u) Whether the chemicals stored are as per their 
compatibility? 

C-20.6 Gas Cylinders 

a) What are the various gas cylinders used in the 
plant? 

b) Are valid licenses available for storing all these 
cylinders? 

c) Are the cylinders stored and segregated as per 
their compatibility? 

d) What are the measures taken for combating any 
emergency in the cylinders storage area? 


e) Whether integrity test certificates are obtained 
from the suppliers of the cylinders? 

f) Are the cylinders chained and secured properly 
along with the valve caps and proper identification 
colour code? 

g) Are the cylinders protected from heat or sun and 
rain? 

h) Whether monitors for detection of leakage of 
flammable / toxic gas installed? 


C-20.7 Labeling and Colour Coding 
a) Are all the containers, vessels and storage tanks 
labeled for its content and capacity? 


b) Whether the pipelines are colour coded as per 
IS 2379? 


c) Is any plant specific colour code followed? 


d) Whether the colour codes are 
conspicuously in the working areas? 


displayed 


C-20.8 Hazardous Waste Management 
a) Is identification done for various types of 
hazardous wastes? 


b) Are these quantities less than those specified by 
the Hazardous Wastes (Management & Handling) 
Rules, 1989? 


c) What are their disposal modes? 


d) What are the systems / measures adopted for 
controlling air / water / land pollution? 


e) Whether the solid waste like combustibles, plastic, 
metals etc. segregated? 


C-21 FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARD 


C-21.1 Organisational Set-up for Fire Fighting 

a) What is the total strength of fire station and fire 
crew? 

b) How many fire crews are available in each shift? 
c) Is there fire squad identified in each shift? 
d) Standing fire order is available with latest revision 
e) How is the communication with fire station? 
f) Does fire safety inspections carried out? 


g) Does emergency procedure available for leakage 
or combustion of flammables? 

h) What measures are available to control the fire 
load in the plant area? 

j) Whether technical knowledge and skills of the 
manager and staff responsible for overall fire 
safety of the plant is adequate? 

k) How many major and minor incidents / fires were 
there in the factory during the last five years? Give 
department / plant wise. 

m) Have all the fires / incidents been investigated and 
corrective actions taken? Give break-up. 


n) Resources: 
1) Adequacy of protective clothing (coat, trouser, 
gloves, boots and helmets); 


2) Availability of SCBA for firefighting 
operations and spare cylinders (at least 2 for 
each SCBA); 

3) Adequacy of hose, nozzles, ladders, lighting 
equipment and pumps; and 


17 


IS 14489 : 2018 


4) Communication facility at fire station, walkie 
talkie sets during firefighting. 


C-21.2 Built in Safety in Civil Design and 
Construction 


a) Whether the two safe means of escape available? 
Are they in separate directions? 


b) Is emergency exits provided to the building 
handling flammables? 


c) Whether emergency lights are provided? 


d) Whether fire / smoke detectors are installed in fire 
prone areas? 


e) Whether fire call points are provided in different 
areas? 


f) Whether Fire hydrants are provided near the 
buildings? 

g) Is ventilation system in plant handling flammables 
is adequate to prevent formation of flammable 
mixtures? 


h) Is adequate separation is provided between 
combustible / flammable materials and other 
material to restrict the fire growth? 

j) Access routes for fire fighting operations is 
available for areas having high fire load 

k) Whether building changes interferes with fire 
detection and / or fire suppression systems? 


m) Whether building changes cause unreasonable fire 
loading / openings in the fire rated walls? 


C-21.3 Built in Safety in Electric Circuits and 
Equipment 
a) Are the electrical equipment in areas where 
flammables mixture is likely to be present of 
flame-proof type? 
b) Are lightning arrestors are provided to the 
buildings / structures storing flammable materials? 


c) Whether adequate bonding and grounding of 
electrical equipment / pipelines provided? 


C-21.4 Explosive Substances 


a) Whether necessary license / approval taken from 
concerned statutory bodies? 

b) Whether systems for explosion suppression, 
high speed fire detection with deluge, sprinklers, 
explosion venting etc. are provided? 

c) Whether explosion resistant walls or barricades 
are provided around explosive storage? 

d) Whether explosive substance storage areas are 
restricted for entry? 

e) Whether only trained persons are handling 
explosive substances? 

f) Whether explosive substances are stored and 
transported in approved containers only? 


IS 14489 : 2018 


g) Whether electrical fixtures in areas handling 
explosives are explosion proof type? 


h) Whether adequate measures are taken to prevent 
any sources of ignition where explosive substances 
are handled? 


C-21.5 Fire Safety in Handling Flammable and 
Explosive materials 


a) Whether emergency procedure is available for 
control of leakage? 


b) Whether emergency measures are displayed 
locally in case of accidental spillage / leakage? 


c) Whether facility is provided for safe drainage 
of combustible or flammable liquids in case of 
leakages? 


d) Whether highly flammable liquids are stored 
under inert atmosphere? 


e) Whether flammable storage tanks are provided 
with flame arrestors? 


f) Whether suitable PPEs are provided? 


C-21.6 Fire Detection and Alarm System 
a) What type of fire detection and alarm system 
provided? 


b) Whether all fire prone areas of the plant are 
covered with fire detection system? 


c) Whether fire detection equipment and smoke 
alarms in good operating condition? 


d) Whether the number of fire call points are adequate 
and free from obstruction? 


e) Whether regular inspection / maintenance / testing 
of fire detection and alarm system carried out and 
records maintained 


f) Whether any atmospheric monitoring is carried 
out for explosive mixture of gases or vapours? 


g) Whether emergency power supplies are provided 
to fire detection and fire alarm system? 


h) Whether smoke detectors are located considering 
ventilation pattern? 


j) Whether annunciation of fire is local or in the 
control room or in both places? 


k) Whether fire panel is constantly attended? 


C-21.7 Passive and Active Fire Protection System 
a) What are the passive fire protection measures 
available? (barriers, doors, dampers etc.) 
b) Are the areas requiring fire barriers identified? 
c) Whether the fire barrier provided is of adequate 
ratings? 
d) Whether ventilation ducts in flammable areas have 


been provided with isolation dampers of suitable 
fire rating? 


18 


e) Whether sprinklers / deluge are installed wherever 
necessary? 


f) Whether regular inspection / maintenance / testing 
of fire protection system carried out and records 
maintained? 


C-21.8 Fixed Fire Extinguishing System 


a) What are the sources of firewater and whether they 
are dedicated to the fire extinguishing system? 


b) Whether the capacity of dedicated water reservoir 
is adequate to supply to hydrants for minimum 
2h? 

c) Whether un-interrupted power supply is provided 
to the firewater pumps? 


d) Whether the extinguishing medium selected is 
appropriate to the class of fire (water, gaseous, 
foam, dry powder)? 

e) Whether fire hydrants layout is available? 

f) Whether additional (over minimum requirement) 
fire hoses, nozzles are available? 

g) Whether the hydrants lines are kept pressurized? 

h) Whether regular inspection / maintenance / testing 
of fixed fire extinguishing systems carried out and 
records maintained? 


C-21.9 Portable Fire Extinguishing System 


a) Whether suitable type and numbers of fire 
extinguishers provided? 

b) Whether the fire extinguishers are located at 
conspicuous position and easily accessible? Are 
they fully charged and tagged? 

c) Whether fire extinguishers periodically inspected, 
tested, refilled and records maintained? 

d) Whether defective / unchecked fire extinguishers 
present at site? 


e) Whether additional 
available? 


fire extinguishers are 


C-21.10 Fire Fighting Equipment and Facilities 


a) Whether fire tenders (water / foam) are available? 

b) Whether the fire-fighting system and equipment 
approved, tested and maintained as per relevant 
standard? 

c) Whether the SCBA / fire suit provided to fire 
fighting team for immediate action? 

d) What is system for maintenance / recharge of 
SCBA? 

e) Is proper access available for fire fighting 
equipment? 

f) Whether fire hose cabinets are in good condition, 
easily visible, and accessible? 

g) Whether drill tower is available? Are fire personnel 
carrying out regular fire drill? 


h) What is the communication facility at fire station? 
Is it adequate? 


C-21.11 Fire Drill 
a) Whether mock fire drills are conducted? What is 
the frequency of drills? 


b) Whether fire drills are also performed in night 
shift 


c) Whether feedback of fire drill is documented? 
d) What is the system of mutual-aid scheme? 
C-21.12 Fire Fighting Training 
a) Whether there is a system of providing fire- 
fighting training to plant personnel? 
b) What is the frequency and duration of such 
training? Whether training records are maintained? 


c) Whether fire squads are identified for different 
areas for first-aid fire fighting and rescue, and 
suitably trained? 


d) Are all personnel conversant with the fire 
prevention and protection measures? 


e) Whether the fire staff are sent for refresher / 
advanced training courses? 


C-21.13 Static Electricity and Lightning 
a) Whether all vessels and pipes are provided with 
suitable bonding and grounding? 


b) Whether arrangement has been made for 
grounding the tanker containing flammable liquid 
during loading / unloading? 


c) Whether spark resistant tools are provided? 


d) Whether lightning protection is provided and is 
adequate? 


e) Whether antistatic clothing, hand gloves and 
footwear are provided? 


C-21.14 Pressure Relief System 


a) Whether the listing of all ‘pressure plants’ [as 
defined under Factories Act] has been done? 


C-22 INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE / OCCUPA- 
TIONAL HEALTH 


C-22.1 Ventilation, Illumination, Noise, Vibration, 
Heat stress and Non-ionizing Radiations 


C-22.1.1 Ventilation 
a) Whether any ventilation study has been carried 
out? 
b) Whether natural ventilation is adequate or not? 


c) Whether dust / fumes / hot air is generated in the 
process? 


IS 14489 : 2018 


d) Is there any exhaust ventilation system in any 
section of the plant? 


e) Is periodic / preventive maintenance of ventilation 
system carried out and record is maintained? 


f) Does any ventilation system re-circulate the 
exhausted air in work areas? 


g) Is the work environment assessed and monitored 
for chemical and physical hazards? 


h) Whether PPE are provided to workers exposed to 
dust / fumes and gases? 


C-22.1.2 Illumination 
a) Whether illumination study has been carried out 
for the assessment of illumination level? 


b) Is there any system of periodical cleaning and 
replacing the light fittings / lamps in order to 
ensure that they give the intended illumination 
levels? 


c) Are the workers subject to periodic optometry 
tests and records maintained? 


d) Are emergency lighting available at first aid 
center. 


C-22.1.3 Noise 


a) Whether any noise study conducted? 

b) Are there any machines / processes generating 
high-noise? 

c) Whether engineering and administrative controls 
been implemented to reduce noise exposure below 
the permissible limits? 


d) Is there a system of subjecting all those employees 
to periodic audiometric test who work in high- 
level noise areas? 


e) Whether the workers are made aware of the ill 
effects of high noise? 


f) Whether ear muffs / plugs are provided and used? 


C-22.1.4 Vibration 
a) Are there equipment which contribute excess level 
of vibrations and whether they are identified? 
b) Whether any vibration study has been carried out? 


c) Are the measures taken to combat vibration to 
acceptable levels? 


d) What is the frequency for measurements of 
vibration? 


e) Are the records of measurements and maintenance 
of equipment / system maintained? 
C-22.1.5 Heat Stress / Cold stress (Extremes of Tem- 


perature) 


a) Are there sources from equipment increasing 
the heat load in work places? 


19 


IS 14489 : 2018 


b) Whether evaluation of heat stress is carried out? 


c) Whether natural ventilation is adequate to 
minimize the heat stress in work environment? 


d) Are resources available to deal with very hot or 
very cold conditions (drinking water, lined gloves, 
insulated boots)? 


e) Do workers know the symptoms of heat cramps / 
heatstroke or frost bite / hypothermia? 


f) Are the personal protective equipment suitable for 
reducing the effects of heat stress available? 


C-22.1.6 Non-ionising Radiations 


a) Does the work involve likely exposure to 
non-ionising radiations (ultraviolet, infrared, 
radiofrequency, microwaves, lasers, etc.) 

b) Whether risk assessment have been done for all 
work areas involving presence of non-ionising 
radiations? 


c) Are the work areas displayed with relevant safety 
signs? 

d) Are the employees aware about the hazards of 
non-ionising radiations? 

e) Does written procedures exists for working in 
non-lonising radiations? 

f) Is the work environment monitored periodically 
for physical hazards and control measures initiated 
whenever deviation from permissible values is 
observed? 

g) Whether suitable personal protective equipment 
are provided to workers exposed to non-ionising 
radiations? 


C-22.2 Work Place Monitoring for Hazardous 
Chemicals 


a) Whether the dust, fumes, smoke aerosols and 
mist are monitored as per statute and records 
maintained? 

b) Whatare the types of detectors used for monitoring 
concentration of hazardous chemicals? 

c) Is any alarm system installed for any leakage of 
hazardous chemicals? 

d) Are antidotes available for toxic chemicals? 


e) Are control measures initiated whenever deviation 
from permissible values is observed? 


C-22.3 First Aid Facilities and Occupational 
Health Centre (OHC) 


a) Are adequate numbers of first aid boxes provided? 
Give location details? 

b) Are qualified / trained first aiders available in each 
shift? 

c) How many qualified / trained first aiders are 
available at each plant / department? 


20 


d) How many persons are trained / given refreshers 
training in first aid in a year? 
e) Whether occupational health center is provided? 


f) Does OHC conform to the provisions of the 
existing statutes? 


g) Are the Medical Attendants / Doctors available in 
each shift? 


h) What facilities are available for transportation of 
the injured to hospital? 


j) Are the names of the trained first aiders displayed? 


k) Are the name of nearest hospitals and its telephone 
number available in OHC? 

m) Does the plant have any special preventive 
medicine program? 

n) Is ambulance posted in proper place and is it 
available whenever required? 


p) Are sufficient numbers of anti-dotes available in 
case of any emergency? 


q) Are fire safety measures provided in first aid centre? 


r) Are emergency lighting arrangements available at 
first aid centre? 


C-22.4 Periodic Medical Examination 


a) Whether the periodical medical examination of 
employees, required under relevant statute is 
carried out? 


b 


wm 


Whether it is ensured that contractors employee 
are medically examined during pre-employment 
as well as during the course of employment? 


Cc 


wm 


During the periodical medical examination of the 
workers, are they examined as per the hazardous 
process in which they work? (First schedule of 
The Factories Act, 1948) 


d) Are the records of all 
maintained? 


such examination 


C-22.5 Personal Protective Equipment and Emer- 
gency Equipment 
a) Whether list of required PPE for each hazardous 
activity is available? 
b) Whether feedback from workers obtained during 
selection of PPE? 
c) Have the workers been trained in proper use of 
PPE including BA sets? 
d) What is the system of procurement, inspection, 
issue, maintenance and replacement of PPE? 
e) Whether qualitative and quantitative fit-check for 
respirators is ensured prior to use? 
f) What are the arrangements for safe custody and 
storage of PPE? 
g) Are the contractor’s workers provided with the 
required PPE? 


h) Do the PPE conform to any standard? 

j) Are sufficient eye wash fountains and safety 
showers available? 

k) Whether appropriate respiratory protective devices 
are available in accordance to the hazard potential? 


m) Are the staff members trained in the right uses of 
respiratory protective devices? 


C-22.6 Occupational Diseases 


a) Whether pre-employment medical checkup data 
available? 

b) During the medical checkup, is any person found 
having occupational diseases mentioned in 3" 
schedule of The Factories Act, 1948? 

c) Whether the medical practitioner informed the 
Chief Inspector of Factories about the occurrence 
of the occupational disease? 


C-23 ACCIDENT / INCIDENT REPORTING, 
INVESTIGATION AND ANALYSIS 


C-23.1 Accident 
Management 


Reporting and Database 


a) What is the procedure for accident / incident / 
dangerous occurrence reporting? 


b) Whether the accident data for the last five years 
for reportable and non-reportable accidents are 
available? 


C-23.2 Accident Investigation 


a) Are all the accidents investigated? 

b) Whether accident investigation procedure is 
documented? 

c) Whether accident investigation 
submitted to top management? 


reports are 


d) How are the findings from accident investigation 
reports communicated to workers? 


C-23.3 Analysis of Accidents 
a) Whether accident analysis is done as per IS 3786? 
b) Whether root causes of accidents are analysed? 


c) Is the accident statistics effectively utilized? If 
yes, how? 


d) What nature of injuries occurred during the last 
five years? 


C-23.4 Implementation of Recommendations 


a) How does the management ensure implementation 
of the recommendations to avoid recurrence of 
accidents and incidents? 


C-23.5 Reporting and Investigation of Near-miss 
Incidents 


a) Are all near-miss 
investigated? 


incidents reported and 


21 


IS 14489 : 2018 


b) Is there any system of classifying and analyzing 
the near-miss incidents? 


C-24 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 


C-24.1 Site Specific Details 


a) Are the site area maps (including layout, access 
roads and assembly points) available in control 
room / emergency control centre? 


C-24.2 Duties and Responsibilities of Key 
Personnel 


a) Is the hierarchy of emergency response personnel 
right from site emergency controller downward, 
and alternative officials identified? 


b) Are the duties and responsibilities assigned to 
the designated officials during emergency, both 
during and outside normal working hours clearly 
identified and understood by them? 


C-24.3 Identification of Emergencies and Accident 
Scenario 


a) Are the possible accident scenarios leading to 
emergency identified and known to the operating 
personnel? 


b) Are approved emergency preparedness plans (on- 
site and off-site) in place? 


C-24.4 Declaration and Termination of Emergency 


a) Is the list of designated officials who are to be 
communicated about declaration and termination 
of emergency available in the control room / 
emergency control centre? 

b) Are the methods of communication (siren, 

public address system etc.) for declaration and 

termination of an emergency known to all the 
workers? 


C-24.5 Resources-evacuation / Transport 


a) Are the following resources (equipment, personnel 
and procedures) required to handle emergency 
available? 


1) 
2) 
3) 


Communications, 
Public announcement systems 


Monitoring of hazardous releases into the 
environment, 


4) 
5) 


Emergency shelters at the facility, 


Emergency exits with proper illumination, 
with uninterrupted power supply , 


6 


wm 


Direction for emergency exit / escape route 
marked in haulage / Alleyways, 


7 
8) 


i 


Transport for evacuation of plant personnel, 


Medical care including administration of 
antidotes, and 


IS 14489 : 2018 


9) Security / maintenance of law and order. 


C-24.6 Communication Facilities 


a) Does the emergency control centre have direct 
communication links with the fire station and the 
plant control room? 


b) Are there adequate alarm points from which an 
emergency alarm can be raised? 

c) Is there infrastructure available for ensuring 
backup electric power supply for communication 
links where required 


C-24.7 Medical Care 
a) Is the procedure for emergency medical care 
available? 


b) Whether the system has been tested at regular 
frequency through mock drill / exercises for its 
adequacy? 

c) Does the system of periodic replacement of 
antidotes and medicines required in emergency 
exist? 


C-24.8 Updation of Emergency Plan 


a) Is the emergency plan updated based on the 
feedback from the periodic drills / exercises? 


b) Are the contact details of all concerned officials 
kept updated in the emergency plan? 


C-24.9 Periodic Drills / Exercises 


a) Are mock-exercises conducted at 
intervals? 


stipulated 


b) Are the scenarios varied in the mock-exercises 
to ensure that all possible factors including 
meteorological conditions, affected plant 
personnel covered? 

c) Whether emergency preparedness Plans have been 
tested and reviewed at regular frequency through 
mock drill for its adequacy 


C-24.10 Training of Plant Personnel 


a) Are the plant personnel trained in handling 
emergency equipment? 


C-24.11 Public Awareness Programmes 


a) Are public awareness programs conducted for the 
people around the site regarding the actions to be 
taken in case of off-site emergency? 


C-24.12 Mutual-aid Programme 


a) Are the types of accidents where external 
organizations would be involved in remedial 
actions identified? Are their responsibilities 
defined? 


22 


b) Is the plant responsible for rendering mutual aid 
assistance to any other external organizations? 
Does this assistance effect the plant’s emergency 
preparedness? 


c) Whether the communication channels for mutual 
assistance identified and known with and between 
two organizations? 


C-24.13 Emergency Control Centre 


a) Is the emergency control center located beyond 
the effective distances of identified emergency 
scenarios? 


b) If the emergency control center is located within 
the effect distance, is it suitably protected that it 
will be available in case of emergency? 


C-25 SAFETY INSPECTION 


C-25.1 Inspection Programme 
Are checklists available for inspections? For example 
availability of checklists like: 


a) Handling, Storage and Transportation of hazardous 
chemicals; 


b) Electrical hazards; 

c) Fire safety; 

d) Hand and portable power tools; 

e) Machine hazards; 

f) Lifting equipment; 

g) Ladders and scaffolding; 

h) Environmental Monitoring; 

j) Civil structure; 

k) House keeping; 

m) Emergency equipment; and 

n) Gas cylinder and other pressure vessels used / 
available in the organization. 


C-25.2 Safety Related Deficiency (SRD) Report 
a) Are SRDs generated based on the area wise 
checklists? 
b) What is the procedure for resolving the SRDs? 


c) Whether the procedure exists for notification and 
root cause analysis of non-conformities and action 
taken on them? 


C-25.3 Safety Inspection Records 


a) Are the safety inspection records maintained? 


C-25.4 Methodology and Inspection Team 


a) Is there written procedure for safety inspection? 


b) Whether safety inspection is carried out by a 
designated team? 


c) What is the frequency of safety inspections? 
d) Whether an inspection report is generated? 


C-25.5 Compliance of Recommendations 


a) To whom the recommendations are submitted 


b) Are recommendations of safety 
complied in time? 


inspections 


23 


IS 14489 : 2018 


c) Is compliance of recommendations sent to top 
management? 


d) Is compliance of recommendations reviewed by 
safety committee? 


e) Does top management follows-up the compliance? 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 08 (10003). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern :1/14C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


