**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 12317-1 (1988) : Ceramic and glass insulating materials 
for telecommunication and allied purposes. Part 1: General 
requirements and classification of ceramic and glass 
insulating materials [ETD 2 : Solid Electrical Insulating 
Materials and Insulation Systems] 



aj^&vi iimmK-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nvF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



rS: 12317 (Parti )-1988 

Indian Standard < Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CERAMIC AND GLASS INSULATING 
MATERIALS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION 
AND ALLIED PURPOSES 

PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND CLASSIFICATION OF CERAMIC 
AND GLASS INSULATING MATERIALS 



UDC 62r315'612-62r315'612-6 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 
<5r 1 November 1988 



IS : 12317 ( Part 1 )- 1988 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
CERAMIC AND GLASS INSULATING 
MATERIALS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION 
AND ALLIED PURPOSES 

PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND CLASSIFICATION OF CERAMIC 
AND GLASS INSULATING MATERIALS 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 22 March 
1988, after the draft finahzed by the Solid 
Electrical Insulating Materials Sectional Com- 
mittee had been approved by the Electrotechni- 
cal Division Council. 

0.2 The Indian Standard IS : 6659-1976* giving 
definition and general requirements was origin- 
ally published in 1971. First revision of this 
standard was published in 1976, to include 
requirements of certain other grades of 
ceramics. Methods of tests for ceramics for 
telecommunication and allied purposes are 
covered by IS : 7571-1974t. 

0.3 This standard is being brought out in three 
parts as under: 

Part 1 Definitions, classification and general 

requirements; 
Part 2 Methods of tests; and 
Part 3 Specification for individual materials. 

0.3.1 With the publication of Part 1 and 
Part 3 of this standard, all grades of ceramics 
in different sections of IS : 6659-1976* shall be 
withdrawn and with the publication of Part 2 of 
this standard IS : 7571-19741 shall be 



withdrawn, aligning the text of this standard in 
line with the development at lEC level. This 
standard will include the requirements of 
porcelain materials also for high frequency. 

0.4 This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the general 
requirements and classification of ceramics and 
glass insulating materials for telecommunication 
and allied purposes. 

0.5 In preparing this standard, considerable 
assistance has been derived from lEC Pub 672-1 
( 1980 ) 'Specification for ceramic and glass 
insulating materials : Part 1 Definition and classi- 
fication', issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission. 

0.6 Specification for ceramic insulating mate- 
rials used for manufacture of bushings and insu- 
lators are covered by IS : 8765-1978*. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a 
particular requirement of this standard is com- 
plied with, the final value, observed or calculat- 
ed, expressing the result of a test or analysis, 
shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the 
same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



♦Electronic grade ceramic materials {first revision ), 
tMethods of tests for ceramics for telecommunication 
and allied purposes. 



♦Ceramic insulating materials for electrical purposes. 
fRuIes for rounding of numerical values ( revised ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the require- 
ments, classification and definitions applicable to 
ceramic, glass and glass-ceramic materials used 
as electrical insulating material. 

1.2 This standard does not cover the require- 
ments of porcelain materials required for power 
frequency appUcation. 



2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard the follow- 
ing terms in addition to those covered in 
IS : 1885 ( Part 62 )-1985* shall be applicable. 



♦Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 62 Solid insulat- 
ing materials. , 



IS : 12317 ( Part 1 )- 1988 



2.2 Ceramic Insulating Materials — Inorganic 
material shaped before firing of which the 
principal constituents usually comprise poly- 
crystalline silicates, alumino-silicates, titanates, 
or oxides. 

2.3 Glass Insulating Materials — Melted or 
sintered vitreous inorganic materials which have 
solidified essentially without crystallization. 

2.3.1 Annealed Glass —G\diS% slowly cooled 
from the annealing temperature so that the 
residual stresses can be ; neglected in relation to 
any applied stress. 

2.3.2 Toughened Glass — Glass prepared by 
prestressing so that all body surfaces are in 
compression and the interior tension zone is 
thus fully protected by the compressed skin. 

2.4 Glass-Ceramic Materials — Insulating mate- 
rials, derived from glass which has been treated 
to induce a substantial amount of crystallinity. 

2.5 Glazes — Coatings substantially of glass 
obtained by melting and having a smooth 
surface. They may contain colouring or specify- 
ing components. 

2.6 Fuchsine Porosity— An indication of liquid 
absorption by means of fuchsine dye pene- 
tration under pressure. 

2.7 Bulk Density ( P^ ) — The quotient obtained 
by dividing the mass of the test specimen by the 
apparent volume ( including open and closed 
pores ). 

2.8 Open ( Aaparent ) Porosity { Pa) — The 

ratio of the volume of open pores to the 
apparent volume expressed as a percentage. 

2.9 Transformation Temperature ( F, ) — Defi- 
ned by an inflexion in the temperature-expan- 
sion curve of glass when heated at a constant 
rate. At the inflexion temperature, internal 
stresses in the glass are reduced within a few 
minutes. 

2.10 Resistance to Thermal Shoclc ( /\0 — 

The ability of the material to withstand rapid 
changes in temperature, normally determined 
by transference of specimens from a hot oven 
to a cold water bath. 

3. GROUPING ( CLASSIFICATION ) 

3.1 The composition and properties, groups of 
ceramic materials are given below: 



Ci — ceramics based on alkaline, 
— silicates ( porcelain ). 



alumino 



C2 — ceramics based on magnesium silicates 
( steatites and forsterites ). 

Cs — ceramics dielectrics based on titania 
or titanates modified with stannates 
or zirconates niobate ( high permitti- 
vity ceramics ) : 

( a ) TiOa, ( b) MgO TiOs ( c ) CaOTiOa, 
( d ) BaOZrOg, ( e ) SrO TiOa, 
( f ) BaOTiOa 

C4 — ceramics based on alkaline — earth 
alumino — silicates. 

Cs — ceramics based on alumino silicates 
( mullite ceramics, AUOa, Si02 very 
low alkali ). 

Cs — high alumina ceramics. 

C7 — special oxide ceramics [ ( a ) AI2O3, 
(b) MgO,(c)ZrOJ. 

3.1.1 Ci, C2 and C4 groups of ceramics are 
having silicates as an essential ingredients and 
have found extensive use in high frequency 
applications due to its low power losses at 
high frequency. 

3.1.2 C3 — This group of ceramics is used as 
dielectrics in capacitors. 

3,1.'3 C5 and Cq — These groups of ceramics 
are used as substrate for him resistors. 

3.1.4 C7 — This group is used as having high 
dielectric proporties at both high and low 
temperature as such are used in manufacturing 
of resistor tubes, vacuum tubes and insulators, 
etc. Since these ceramics have excellent 
mechanical properties with good stability at 
elevated temperature. 

3.2 Depending upon the composition and pro- 
perties groups of glass insulating materials are 
given below: 

Gi — alkali-hme-silica glasses 

G2 — chemically resistant borosilicate glasses 

G3 — electrically resistant borosilicate glasses 

G4 — alumina-lime-silica glasses 

Gs — lead oxide-alkali-silica glasses 

Ge — barium oxide-alkali-silica glasses 

3.3 The composition and properties groups of 
glass-ceramic materials will be designated as 
GC. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Pfess, Deltiu India 



