UDC 681.3'01: 16

IS:1237211887 180 5806 -1984

lnd/`an
PRESENTATION ( IS0 Title
:

Standard
DECISION

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

OF SINGLE-HIT

TABLES of Single-Hit

Information

Processing - Specification Decision Tables )

National

Foreword

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 5806-1984, `information processing Specification of single-hit decision tables', issued by the international Organization for Standardizaa :ion ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee and approval of the Eiectronic$ and Telecommunication Division Council. in the adopted n Indian Standards; Wherever &ead as `Indian standard certain terminology and conventions attention is specially drawn to the following: Standard' appear referring are not identical to this standard, with those usec they should bc

the words `international Standard'.

Zross References International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard

IS0 2382/l-1984 Data processing-Vocabuterms iary - Part 01 : Fundamental

IS : 1885 ( Part 52/Set 1 )-1980 Eiectrotechni. cai vocabulary: Part 52 Data processing; Section 1 Fundamental terms ( Technically equivalent ) IS : 1885 ( Part 52/Set 7 )-1980 Eiectrotechnicai vocabulary: Part 52 Data processing, Settion 7 Digital computer programming ( Technically equivalent )

IS0 rr;/7-1977 Data processing-Vocabu- Sectton 07 : Drgrtai computer programming

Adopted 10 August 1987

8

October 1988, BIS I

Or 7

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MAR6

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 119999

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 12372 - 1987 IS0 5806 - 1984

1

Scope

and field

of application

3.5

This International Standard specifies the basic format of singlehit decision tables and the relevant definitions, together with recommended conventions for preparation and use.
NOTES 1 This International Standard is concerned with the use of decision of cornouter-based infor-

"ELSE'`-rule: The actions to be taken for all combinations of conditions not covered by the other rules in the table.
NOTE -- The use of the ELSE-rule facility is optional.

3.5
of the documentation statements. for the preparation and use of

tables in the context mation systems. representation 2 The format

condition: A description of a contingency to be considered in the representation of a problem, or a reference to other procedures to be considered as part of the condition.

It is not concerned

with other uses, such as for the

of program and

conventions

"multiple-hit" Standard.

decision tables are outside the scope of this International

3.7 action: A description of an operation to be taken in the formulation of a solution.

3.8 condition entry: An indication of the relevance of a condition to a particular rule.

2

References
Vocabulary -

IS0 2382, Cata processing
Part 1: Fundamental

3.9 action entry: An indication of the relevance of an action to a particular rule.

terms. programming.

Part 7: Digital computer

3.10 condition stub: A list of all the conditions to be considered in the description of a problem.

3

Definitions

3.11 action stub: A list of all the actions to be taken in the solution of a problem.

For the purpose of this International Standard the following definitions apply.

3.1

decision table: A table of all contingencies that are to be considered in the description of a problem together with the action to be taken (from IS0 2382/l). "single-hit" decision table: A decision table where any set of conditions will be satisfied by one, and only one, rule.

3.12 table heading : The symbolic name or other means of referencing a decision table from other documents. Alternatively, or in addition, a clear description of the table.

3.13 3.2

initialisation section: An optional list of unconditional actions to be executed sequentially before the first condition is examined; it may be written in the row which follows that of the table heading.

3.3

"multiple-hit" decision table: A decision table where at least one set of conditions will be satisfied by more than one rule (see note 2 to clause 1).

3.14 limited entry table: A decision table where all the conditions and actions are completely described without reference to the rules (see annex B, example 1).

3.4 rule: A single column through the condition and action entry parts of the table, defining a unique set of conditions to ba satisfied and the actions to be taken in consequence. A rule is satisfied if all conditions meet the condition entries of the rule.

3.15

extended entry table: A decision tab& where the conditions and actions are generally described but are incomplete: the specifications are completed by the values specified in the rules (see annex B, example 2).

3

IS : 12372 - 1987 IS0 5808 - 1984

3.16

mixed entry table: A decision table whose stub consists of rows in which limited and extended entries are written (see annex 6, example 4). complete table: A decision table where for all combinations of condition entries there exists a satisfying rule.

4
4.1

Format
Decision

tables

3.17

The general representation of a decision table is given in figure 1. The body of the table shall be divided into four parts by double lines, drawn close (or alternatively, single thick lines) : this is to separate the condition parts from the action parts, and stubs from entries.

NOTE - In practicalterms extended entry tables will includelimited entries and are therefore mixed entry tables. Any extended or mixed entry table tiay be transformed into a limited entry table (sea annex 6, example 3).

Table heading lsee 3.12) First condition (see 3.6) -kee First condition entry 3.81

Last conditionFirst action (see 3.7) -

.n

Lwt condition entry First action entry kee 3.9)

-

_

Last action entry

lFigure 1 General format

Last rule (optional position for ELSE-rule)

NOTE - The reading of a decision table may be facilitated by drawing: single thin horizontal lines between separate conditions, and similariyfor separateactions; singlethin vettical lines between separaterules. Con-

ditions, actionsand rulesof a de&ion table may optionallybe named, to allow a unique reference.

4

IS : 12372- 1997 180 5808- 1984

4.2

Condition

entries
Form Y N Text, a value or a code Meaning within rule The stated condition shall be fulfilled in satisfying this rule (Y = "Yes"). The stated condition shall not be fulfilled in satisfying this rule (N = "No"). The text for value or code) completes the specification of the otherwise incomplete condition for this rule; the condition shall then be fulfilled in satisfying the rule. If a code is used then it shall be described in a cross-referenced note. The stated condition is not relevant to the satisfaction of the rule: alternatively, the condition is logically impossible in the context of this rule; this may optionally be emphasized by the symbol "#"instead of "_" Application

limited entries

extended entries

anywe
of entry

I

NOTE -

Any binary notation may be used to designate condition values.

4.3

Action

entries

I

-Form

1

Meaning within rule The stated action shall be taken when this rule is satisfied. The text for value or code) completes the specification of the otherwise incomplete action for this rule; the action shall be taken when the rule is satisfied. If a code is used then it shall be de scribed in a cross-referenced note.

1 Application I
limited entries extended entries

I
Text, a value or a code

I
5
5.1 Relationships Conditions between

The stated action shall not be taken when this rule is satisfied.

w I

type

of entry

table

elements

In any rule the last action to be taken should indicate where the next procedure is described unless the table is complete in itself,

The relationship between successive conditions is the logical "AND": the first condition to be tested is assumed to be preceded by "IF". [Example: IF (first condition) AND (second condition), . . , AND (last condition)l. The order in which conditions are listed may be of importance. However, if the order is of no importance, tables may be easier to read if the more important, or "key" conditions are stated first: such a sequence might differ from the sequence preferred in programming.

5.3

Rules

The relationship between successive rules is the logical exclusive "OR". The sequence of rules in a decision table is irrelevant: note, however, the convention that if an ELSE-rule is used then, to aid readability, it generally appears as the last rule in the table (see figure 1).

5.2

Actions

The relationship between actions means successive execution: the first action to be taken is assumed to be preceded by "THEN", and the first action, the second action, . . , and the last action are successively executed. Actions shall be stated in the order in which they are to be taken: where the execution sequence diiers between rules then the actions shall be described as many times as necwry to show the various sequences. The use of sequence numbers is not recommended due to possible confusion with e~ter&ed entry codes (see 4.3).

6 Relationships

between

decision

tables

A large, and/or complex, problem may be described by a set of decision tables. There are four types of relationship, which may be combined :
a)

sequence; selection; repetition; nesting.

t

b) c) d)

IS : 12272- t987 IS0 5898- 1984

When decision tables are related then each shall be logically complete. The conditions in one table shall be tested independently of the results of condition tests in another: the effect of this requirement is that there is no relationship be tween the rules of related tables. This does not preclude such practices as the result of a condition test in one table being indicated through an action in that table (for example setting a flag) so that the indication may be inspected through a condition test in a subsequent table.

This action will be the last to be taken in any rule where the succeeding table must be subsequently interpreted.

6.2

Selection relationship

Decision tables form a selection if the first table'has more than one alternative immediate successor, as shown in figure 3. It is recommended that in a selection the preceding table shall include actions providing pointers to the successive tables. The appropriate action will be the last to be taken in any rule where one of the succeeding tables must be subsequently interpreted.

6.1

Sequence relationship

Two decision tables form a sequence if the first table has an immediate successor, as shown in figure 2. More than two decision tables may also form a sequence if the same general rule applies, that is, the nth is the only immediate successor to the (n- 11th. It is recommended that in a sequence the preceding table shall include an action providing a pointer to the succeeding table.

6.3

Repetition relationship

A decision table may be interpreted by repetition if at least one rule requires reexamination of the condition in that table (see figure 4). Such a rule, or rules, require(s) to take as a last action some pointer to the same table.

TABLE 1

f

I

PROCESSTABLE2

11

1

L

TABLE2

Figure2 -

Sequenceof decision tables

6

IS:12372-1987 IS0 5806- I984

r

TABLE 1

PROCESS TABLE 2 PROCESS TABLE 3

I

1

TABLE 2

TABLE 3

t

Figure 3 -

Selection of decision tables

--c

TABLE 1

REPEATTABLE

1

II

-

1

Figure 4 -

Repetition of a decision table 7

IS : 12372 - O&87 180 5896 - 1984

6.4

Nesting

relationship

Two decislsin :abics have a nesting relationship if one table is completely fntesp:eted whilst testing a condition (see figure 5) or taking an action (see figure 6) in the other. The relationship is as defined for nesting routines (see IS0 23W7). The nesting table will require some appropriate form of pointer in the relevant condition, or action, to the nested table. The

nested table will require an action which similarly points back to the nesting table. This action shall be the last taken for any rule in the nested table which is to continue the nesting relationship. The point indicated in the nesting table will be: for a condition, the condition from which the original exit was made, since the results of interpreting the nested table will be relevant to the test of that condition; for an action, the next relevant action.

TABLE 1

(PERFORM TABLE 2) CONDITION TEST \I

RETURN TO TABLE 1

1

NOTE -

In this example, before CONDITION TEST in TABLE 1 is tested, TABLE 2 is executed and then CONDITION TEST in TABLE 1 is tested.

Figure 5 -

Nested tables (exit at condition)

6

IS : 12372- 1987 180 5808- 1984

I

TABLE A

I

-4

TABLE B

RETURN TO TABLE A

7

Figure 6 -

Nested tables (exit at action)

9

IS : 12372- 1907 180 5806- 1984

6.6

Combinations

of relationships

TABLES 3 and 4 each have a nesting relationship with TABLE 5 in order to evaluate a condition. The selection available from TABLE 1 is either _ repetition of TABLE 1; sequencing to TABLES 2, 3lnesting to 5; or sequencing to TABLES 2, 4lnesting to 5.

Any permutation of relationships may be used as necessary to describe the problem and its solution. Figure 7 illustrates a number of combined relationships. TABLE 1 has two rules requiring repetition of that table. Two other rules sequence to TABLE 2. TABLE 2 has two rules sequencing further to TABLE 3 and two rules to TABLE 4.

,
TABLE 3

TABLE 4

r

' TABLE-5

Figure 7 -

Combined relationships 10

IS : 12372 - 1987 IS0 5808 - 1984

7
7.1

Interpretation
Columnar

of decision tables

method

condition has I'-" entries for some, but not all, of the remaining rules then the condition is only tested for rules specifying other than "-`I entries; d) repeat steps b) and c) until all conditions have been examined, i.e. being tested or ignored; e) either a single rule is found which is satisfied by all the results of the condition tests or, if no rules remain then the ELSE-rule applies: whichever is true the actions specified for that rule are taken in sequence.

The satisfied rule is found by determining the particular case and then comparing this case with each of the rules in turn. The steps required are a) test all conditions and identify their values for the particular case; b) compare the values found with each rule in turn`until a single identical set of values is found and take all the actions specified for that rule, in sequence; c) if no rule is satisfied by the values for the particular case then all the actions specified for the ELSE-rule shall be taken in sequence.

7.3

Completeness

7.2

Linear method

By definition (see 3.2) the results of either method of interpretation must result in one, and only one, rule being satisfied. If an ELSE-rule is included in the table then, by definition (see 3.51, it cannot apply to a case which is satisfied by a specified rule. Any table which includes an ELSE-rule is always complete. The ELSE-rule is, in effect, a default rule. The employment of an ELSE-rule requires care since it will be followed instead of rules omitted from the table by mistake. If a table does not include an ELSE-rule then all logically possible permutations of conditions should be specified. For such a table care shall be taken in its preparation so that no permutation will be uncovered. The verification of completeness is an essential part of preparation.

The satisfied rule is determined by a sequential test of each condition in turn. The steps required are a) test the first condition;

b) ignore all those rules which are not satisfied by the result of this condition test; cl test the next condition Gvhichis relevant to the remaining rules: in effect this means ignoring any remaining conditions with only `I-" condition entries (see 4.2). If the next

11

IS : 12372- 1887 IS0 5808- 1984

Annex A Recommendations for preparation

(This annex forms part of the standard.)

A.1

Condition entry construction

It is recommended that when a decision table is first drafted the full permutation of condition entries is listed before any attempt is made to reduce the size of the table. This will ensure that no combination of conditions is overlooked.
The complete number of rules in any table is always the product of the number of values permitted for each condition entry. Example: A table has three conditions. For the entries a) b) cl condition 1 has two values; condition 2 has three values; condition 3 has four values.

Step 2: Divide the quotient from step 1 by the number of values for the next condition entry, to obtain the number of consecutive rules for each value. Step 3: Continue dividing each successive quotient by the number of values for successive conditions. The final quotient should be 1. Example: An extended entry table has three conditions: a) b) c) condition 1 has two values: Y, N ; condition 2 has three values: A, 6, C; condition 3 has four values: 1, 2, 3, 4.

Complete number of rules = 2 x 3 x 4 = 24 Rules per value, condition 1 = 24 + 2 = 12 (i.e. 12 x Y's, 12 x N's). Rules per value, condition 2 = 12 + 3 = 4 (i.e. 4 x A's, 4 x B's, 4 x C's). Pt:les per value, condition 3 = 4 + 4 = 1 (i.e. one each of 1, 2, 3, 4). The complete permutation of condition entries is therefore as follows :

Complete number of rulw = 2 x 3 x 4 = 24 The general procedure for constructing entries is therefore as follows: Step 1: Divide the total number of rules by the number of values permitted for the first condition entry, This will give the number of consecutive rules required for each of those values.

Condition 1

NOTE sought.

This method is cumbersome for large tables, and other methods of assuring completeness should be

12

IS : 12372 - 1987 IS0 5806 - 1984

A.2

Splitting

up tables

For certain types of problems the number of conditions may be
such that the number of rules is very large. A table which can-

not be written on one sheet of paper becomes difficult to read. It is recommended that such tables be split up at some logical boundary to produce two or more tables, arranged in a suitable sequence or selection (see 6.1, 6.2).
Example :

One method of splitting is as follows: Construct a table based upon the first condition entry having only a single value. For each of the other permitted values of that entry provide a single rule: the "dash" symbol is then inserted in such rules for subsequent condition entries and a single action is provided referencing the succeeding tablets).

Process table 3

_

__-

-

----

-

x

1

13

IS : 12372 IS0 5806

- 1987 - 1984

A.3

Table

simplification
by in-

Note that for many tables it is possible to reduce the size owing to the presence shown of below mutually the two exclusive conditions conditions. In the be example can obviously

Extended spection.

oi mixed entry tables can only be simplified This can be a particularly difficult exercise.

amalgamated.

Limited entry tables may be simplified described below, are satisfied.

if certain requirements,

Any two rules may be combined a) they contain precisely

if, and only if and seFEMALE EMPLOYEE?

the same combination

quence of actions; b) their condition entries differ by only a single row.

In the combined

rule the "Y" and "N" entries are replaced by

the dash symbol ("-"I. It may be possible to combine rules, following pairs of previously It should, combined be

A.4

Rule count

checking
number of rules in any for each of

the above procedure.

however,

noted that a dash symbol in the condition entn/ of one rule does not mean the same as a 7"' Example : a) 1 Condition A Condition B
Condition Action P C

As stated earlier (see A. 1) the complete condition.

or "N" of another.

table is the product of the number of values permitted a table, using the following a) procedure:

This fact may be used to check the completeness

Step 1 : ior each "simple" count "I"

rule (i.e. one which contains

Full table

no dash symbols) b) Step 2:

For each

rule containing

dash symbols

the

count is the product Y
Y -.

of its "factors"

: if a condition has a
by the

Y
N -

N
Y -

N
N _

Y
Y -

Y
N -

N
Y x

N
N x

specific value the factor is 1; if the dash symbol is used the factor is the number of alternative dash. c) Step 3: Add the number of counts together to obtain values represented

Action Q Action R

II -- I - I - I - I - I x I - I x x x x x x x xxxxx---

the total number

of rules in the completed number.

table and com-

pare with the expected Where an "ELSE"

Action S

rule has been used, the rule count may not the number of rules involved shall be de-

In this table the first four rules may be combined. has the same actions but cannot be combined. and eighth rules may also be combined. b) Simplified table

The fifth rule The seventh

be readily checked: rived by examination. Example: following

From the table shown counts

as`example 16.

1, annex

B, the

may be obtained: rules is therefore

4, 2, 1, 1, 8. The total

number of "simple"

14

IS : 12372 - 1987 IS0 5806 - 1984

Annex Examples

B tables

of types of decision

(This annex forms part of the standard.) Example 1 Limited entry decision table Example 2 Extended entry decision table

Table 3 -

Control breaks Grade =

Table 7 -

Deduction analysis A--_111112

I

Merge records Print emc4ovee details

AXI-I-I-III I
-

lxlxlxlx

I

I

I

Close down

Example 3 -

Conversion of extended entry table to limited entry

The limited entry table below is an example of how the extended entry table shown at example 2 above might be converted. Note that for logical completeness an "ELSE" rule has been introduced together with an additional action row.
Table 7 Deduction analysis

Set deduction value = 20 Set deduction value = 30 Set deduction value = 40 Set deduction value = 60 Process table 6 Process table 6 Process table 9 Process table 20

II
II

-I-lxl-l-lxl-l-I-I-I-lxl-l-lx
)( --x I I

l-ll-lI

-

)( -_-_ I

_

x

-

.

x 1

x _
I

x -

I

I

.I

11

x -

x -

x _

x -

-

-

-

-

-

I x

15

IS : 12372 - 1997 180 5806 - 1984

Example 4 -

Mixed entry decision table

Move T to MO Set IND Unset IND ~~~-~-J-~-~_l-l-l-l-I_

II -

I -

I -

I-I-I-I-I-I-lxl-lxl-l-l

Code used MI = record in master file input area MO = record in master file output area = record in transaction fib input area T IND = indicator that MO holds previously inserted record A = amendment transaction D = deletion transaction = insertion transaction I

Reprography

Unit,

16

BIS, New Delhi, In4$,+1 ;

