**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


(1977) :  On-load  tap  changers  [ETD  16:  Transformers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangarara  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
ON-LOAD  TAP-CHANGERS 

(FiDh  Reprint  JULY  1999) 
UDC     621.314.214.332 


®  Ctjgrrigkt  1978 

BUREAU   OF  INDIAN   STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 

NEW  DELHI  110002 

^"^  January  1978 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1        MAY  19ft0 
TO 
IS  s  8468 -1977    SPECSFIGATION  FOR 
ON-LOAD  TAP-CHANGERS 


( Pag$  10,  eUmte  8.4^  lim  3  )  -r-  Substitute  <  live  'far  *  line  *. 

r  P^i  12»  dausi  8.6.1«2(b),  lin$  7  ]  —  Substitute  '  numufacturer  *fir 
'nmufacturer  \ 

{  Pagi    18.   daust  8.ie.7,   AftfA'nf  )— Substitute    ^Ugkmng*  for 
*  Ughiing  \ 


(  P€ig$  %  dausi  8«2(c)  ]  —  Delete. 

(  Pagt  10,  €laMS4  8.5,  pwra  1 )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the 
existing  para: 

Tests  shall  be  performed  to  verify  that  the  temperature  rise  above 
oil  of  each  type  of  contact  which  carries  current  continuoiMly  in  service 
does  not  exceed  20^C,  when  the  contacts  have  reached  a  steaciy  tempera* 
ture  after  carrying  the  maximum  rated  through  current/ 

[  Pag$  \O.TahU  I )  ]  —  Delete. 

(  P0gi  17,  TaU$  4.  col  1,  #iiA7  8  )  —  Substitute  •  140 '/^r  •  !«•. 

( Pagin  18  and  19,  elausi  9.2 )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the 
existing  clause: 

<9.2  PermiMlblo  Variatiosi  of  Amdliary  Sopply  —  The  auxiliary 
supply  for  the  driving  motor  shall  be  415V  ( +  10  percent,  —  15  per- 
cent), 3-phase,  4-wire,  50Hz  and  for  the  electrical  of  motor  drive 
mechanism  llOV  (  +  10  percent,  —  15  percent)  1-phase,  50Hz  unless 
otherwise  specified  by  the  purchaser/ 

[  Pag$  20,  daus$  10.1(h)  ]  —  Delete. 

(  Pag§  SO,  dmui  G-S,  formula  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the 
existing  formula: 


Addesidom 

[  Page  9,  dausi  7.1(h)  ]  —  Add  the  following  new  item  after  7.1(h): 
«j)  Direction  of  ilow  of  power.* 
(BTOC  16) 


Printed  it  PkiiMainvK  New  Delhi.  Ph .  5726147 


IS  t  Mts-itn 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
ON-LOAD  TAP-CHANGERS ^ 

Transformers  Sectional  Gommittcc,  ETDG  16 

Chairman 
Shri  U.  K.  Patwarohan 
Pra>og  Electricalt  Pvt.  Ltd,  Bombay 

Membirs  Ripr$sentmg 

Shri  S.  Ammeerjan  Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd  (R  9l  D)  Unit, 

Bhopal 
Shri  N»  S.  S.  Arokiaswamy  Tamil  Nadu  Electricity  Board,  Madrat 

Shri  M.  K.  Sundararajan  (AUemaU) 
Shri  B.  G.  Bhakby  Kirloskar  Electric  Co  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Dr  B.  N.  Jay  ARAM  (Alternate) 
Shri  A.  V.  Bheemarao  Gujarat  Electricity  Board,  Vadodara 

Shri  J.  S.  Iyer  (Alternate) 
Shri  S.  D.  Chotraney  Bombay  Electric  Supply  and  Transport  Under- 

taking, Bombay 
Shri  Y.  K.  Palvankar  (Alternate) 
DiRRCTOR  (Transmission)  Central  Electricity  Authority,  New  Delhi 

[Deputy    Director    (Trans- 
mission)) (Alternate) 
Shri  T.  K.  Ghose  Calcutta  Electric  Supply  Corporation  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  P.  K.  Bhattacharjee  (Alternate) 
Joint  Director  (Sub-Station)  Research,    Designs    and    Standards   Organization 

Deputy  Director  Standards  (Ministry  of  Railways),  Lucknow 

(Electrical)  (Alternate) 
Shri  J.  K.  Khanna  Directorate    General    of   Supplies    and    Disposals 

(Inspection  Wing),  New  Delhi 
Shri  K.  L.  Garg  (Alternate) 
Shri  B.  S.  Kochar  Rural  Electrification  Corporation  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Shri  R.  D.  Jain  (Altnnnte) 
Shri  J.  R.  MAHAfAN  Indian      Electrical      Manufacturer's     Association, 

Bombay 
Shri  P.  K.  Philip  (Alternate) 
Shri  D.  B.  Mehta  Tata      Hydro-Elrrtric    Power    Supply    Co    Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri  R.  Chandramouli  (AUmiate) 
Shri  D.  V.  Narke  Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  Bhopal 

Shri  Ishwar  Chandra  (Alternate  I) 
Shri  Prem  Chand  (Alternate  II) 
Shri  I.  S.  Patel  Hindustan  Brown  Bovcri  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  V.  N.  Prahlad  National  Ekrtrical  Industries  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  A.  G.  Gurjar  (Alternate) 

(Continued  on  page  2) 


O  Copyright  1978 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (XIV  of  1957)  and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


n  I  S468.1977 


{Omiinuid  frim  page  1) 


Membirs 
Shri  K.  N.  Raicaswamy 


Pradip  Lamp  Works,  Patna 
Siemens  India  Ltd,  Bombay 

Delhi  Electric  Supply  Undertaking,  New  Delhi 

NGEF  Ltd,  Bangalore 

Karnataka  Electricity  Board,  Bangalore 


Rtpreser^ing 
Directorate   General   of  Technical    Development, 
New  Delhi 

Shrx  S.  K.  Palhan  (AlUrmU) 
Shri  Chandra  K.  Rohatoi 
Shri  D.  P.  Sahoal 

Shri  A.  R.  Salvi  {Alternate) 
Shri  I.  C.  Sanoar 

Shri  R.  C.  Khanna  (AUernate) 
Shri  K.  G.  Shanmukhappa 

Shri  P.  S.  Raman  (Alternate) 
Shri  M.  A.  Sharifp 

Shri  B.  C.  Alva  {Alternate) 
SuPERiNTBNDiNO  ENGINEER  Andlira    Pradesh    State    Electricity    Department, 

(Operation)  (Electricity  Projects  and  Board),  Hyderabad 

SXJPERINTENDINO     ENGINEER 

Technioal  (Projects)  {Alternate) 
Shri  C.  R.  Varier  Crompton  Greaves  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  V.  Manerikar  {Alternate) 
Shri  T.  Rajaraman,  Director  General,  ISI  (Ex-officio  Member) 

Deputy  Director  (Elec  tech) 

Secretary 
Shri  Vijai 
Deputy  Director  (Elec  tech),  ISI 

Panel  for  On-Load  Tap  Changers,  ETDC  16  :  P5 
Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Ltd,  Bhopal 


Convener 
Shri  D.  V.  Narke 


Members 
Shri  S.  C.  Aoarwal  {Alternate  to 
Shri  D.  V.  Narke)  .       ^      ,  ^ 

Shri  R.  C.  Chandramouli  Tata    Hydro-Electric    Power    Supply    Co    Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri  S.  V.  Manerikar  Crompton  Greaves  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  V.  N.  Prahlad  National  Electrical  Industries  Ltd,   Bombay 

Shri  A.  G.  Gurjar  {Alternate) 
Shri  C.  S.  N.  Raju  NGEF  Ltd,  Bangalore 


IS  I  8468-1977 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
ONLOAD  TAP-CHANGERS 

0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  26  May  1977,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Transformers  Sectional 
Committee  haa  been  approved  by  the  Electrotechnical  Division  Council. 

0.2  This  standard  is  based  on  lEC  Doc:  14B  (Central  Office)  10,  revision 
of  Publication  214  (1965)  'On-load  tap-changers*,  issued  by  the  Inter- 
national Electrotechnical  Commission. 

0.3  For  selecting  an  on-load  tap-changer  for  a  particular  application  re- 
ference should  be  made  to  IS:  8478-1977*. 

0.4  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing 
the  result  of  a  test  shall  be  bounded  off  in  accordance  with  IS:  2-1960t. 
The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should 
be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


SECTION  I     GENERAL 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  on-load  tap-changers  for  power  transformers, 
and  their  motor-drive  mechanisms.  It  relates  mainly  to  oil-immersed  tap- 
changers. 

1.2  Tap-changers  for  transformers  for  railway  rolling  stock  are  not  covered 
by  this  standard. 

Note  1  —  As  this  standard  deals  only  with  on-load  tap-changers   the  expression  is 
shortened  to  *tap-changer*  in  the  remainder  of  this  standard. 

NoT£  2  —  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard  a  synthetic  insulating  liquid,  for  example, 
askarel  is  regarded  as  an  oil. 

2.  DEFINrnONS 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 


*  Application  guide  for  on-load  tap-changers. 

t Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  {revised). 


IS  s  84«8.1977 

2.1  Definltfons    Relating    to    On-Load    Tap-Changers    (Excluding 
Motor^Drive  Mechanisms) 

2«l«i  On-Load  Tap-Changer  —  A  device  for  changing  the  tapping  con- 
nections of  a  winding,  suitable  for  operation  whilst  the  transformer  is  ener- 
gised and  is  on-load.  Generally,  it  consists  of  a  diverter  switch  (2.1.3)  with 
a  transition  impedance  (2.1.6)  and  a  tap  selector  (2.1.2)  which  can  be  with 
or  without  a  change-over  selector  (2.1.5),  the  whole  being  operated  by  the 
driving  mechanism  (2«1.7).  In  some  forms  of  tap-changers,  the  functions 
of  the  diverter  switch  and  the  tap  selector  are  combined  in  a  selector  switch. 

2.1 .2  Tap  Selector  —  A  device  designed  to  carry,  but  not  to  make  or  break 
current,  used  in  conjunction  with  a  diverter  switch  to  select  tapping 
connections. 

2*1 .3  Diverter  Switch  —  A  switching  device  used  in  conjunction  with  a 
tap  selector  to  carry,  make  and  break  currents  in  circuits  which  have  already 
been  selected. 

Note  —  Diverter  switches  of  spring-operated  type  include  an  independent  means  of 
storing  energy  for  their  operation. 

2.1.4  Selector  Switch  —  A  switching  dt;vicc  capable  of  making,  carrying 
and  breaking  current,  combining  the  duties  of  a  tap  selector  and  a  diverter 
switch. 

2.1.5  Change- Over  Selector  —  A  device  designed  to  carry,  but  not  to  make 
or  break  current,  used  in  conjunction  with  a  tap  selector  or  selector  switch 
to  enable  its  contacts  and  the  connected  tappings,  to  be  used  more  than  once 
when  moving  from  one  extreme  position  to  the  other. 

2.1.6  Transition  Impedance  —  A  resistor  or  reactor  consisting  of  one  or 
more  units  bridging  the  tapping  in  use  and  the  tapping  next  to  be  used,  for 
the  purpose  of  transferring  load  from  one  tapping  to  the  other  without 
interruption  or  appreciable  change  in  the  load  current,  at  the  same  time 
limiting  the  circulating  current  for  the  period  that  both  tappings  are  used. 

2.1.7  Driving  Mechanism  —  The  means  by  which  the  drive  to  the  tap- 
changer  is  actuated. 

Note — The  mechanism  may  include  an  independent  means  of  storing  energy  to 
control  the  operation. 

2.1.8  Set  of  Contacts  — •  A  pair,  or  combination  of  pairs,  of  individual 
fixed  and  moving  contacts,  operating  substantially  simultaneously. 

2.1.9  Main  Contacts  and  Main  Switching  Contacts  of  Diverter  Switch  or  Selector 
SwiUh 

2.1.9.1  Main  contacts  —  Any  set  of  through-current  carrying  contacts 
which  has  no  transition  impedance  between  the  transformer  winding  and 
the  contacts  and  which  does  not  switch  any  current. 

2.1«9«2  Main  switching  contacts  —  Any  set  of  contacts  which  has  no 
transition  impedance  between  the  transformer  winding  and  the  contacts 
and  which  breaks  the  currenu 


IS  I  8468  •  1977 

2A.10  Transition  Contacts  —  Any  set  of  contacts  where  a  transition  im- 
pedance is  in  series  between  the  transformer  winding  and  the  contacts. 

NoTB  —  In  the  caie  of  reactor  traniition  tap-chaxiffers  this  set  of  contact!  is  used,  in 
many  inttances,  to  carry  the  through-current  in  the  turn  tap-position. 

2.1.11  Circuladng  Current  —  That  part  of  the  current  which  flows  through 
the  transition  impedance  at  the  time  when  two  tappings  are  bridged  during 
a  tap-change  operation  and  which  is  due  to  the  vt)ltage  difference  between 
the  tappings. 

2.1.12  Switchid  Current  —  The  prospective  current  to  be  broken  during 
switching  operation  by  each  set  of  main  switching  or  transition  contacts 
incorporated  in  the  diverter  switch  or  selector  switch. 

2*1 .13  Recovery  Voltage  —  The  power  frequency  voltage  which  appears 
across  each  set  of  main  switching  or  transition  contacts  of  the  diverter 
switch  or  selector  switch  after  these  contacts  have  broken  the  switched 
current. 

2*1 .14  TafhChange  Operation  —  A  complete  sequence  of  events  from  the 
initiation  to  the  completion  of  one  tap-change. 

2.1.15  Cycli  of  Operation  —  The  movement  of  the  tap-changer  from  one 
end  of  its  range  to  the  other  and  the  return  to  its  original  position. 

2.1.16  Insulation  Lenet^r-  The  withstand  values  of  the  impulse  and  power 
freguency  test  voltages  to  earth,  and  where  appropriate  between  the  phases 
and  between  those  parts  where  insulation  is  required. 

2.1.17  Rated  Through-Current  (/u)  —  The  current  flowing  through  the 
tap-changer  towards  the  external  circuit,  which  the  apparatus  is  capable  of 
transferring  from  one  tapping  to  the  other  at  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage 
and  which  can  be  carried  continuously  while  meeting  the  requirements  of 
this  standard. 

Note  —  As  to  the  relationship  between  a  rated  through-current  and  relevant  step 
voltage,  ut  5.2. 

2.1.18  Afaxtmtfui  Rated  Through-Current  (/um) — The  rated  through- 
current  for  which  both  the  temperature  rise  of  the  contacts  (8.5)  and  the 
service  duty  test  (8.6.1)  apply. 

2.1.19  Rated  Step  Voltage  {1/%)  —  For  each  value  of  rated  through-current, 
the  h^hest  permissible  voltage  between  terminals  which  are  intended  to  be 
connected  to  successive  tappings  of  a  transformer. 

NoTB  —  If  a  rated  step  voltage  is  given  in  connection  with  a  rated  through-current,  it  is 
called  'relevant  rated  8tq>  voluge*. 

2.1.20  Maximum  Rated  Step  Voltage  (C/jm)  —  The  highest  value  of  the  rated 
step  voltage  for  which  the  tap-changer  b  designed. 

2.1.21  Rated  Frequency  —  The  frequency  of  the  alternating  current  for 
which  the  tap-changer  is  designed. 

2.1.22  Number  of  Tap  Positions  of  the  Tap-Changer 

*     2.1.22.1  Number  of  inherent  tap  positions  —  The  highest  number  of  tap 


IS  s  8468-1977 

positions  for  half  a  cycle  of  operation  for  which  a  tap-changer  can  be  used 
according  to  its  design. 

2.1  •22.2  Number  of  service  positions  —  The  number  of  tap  positions  for 
half  a  cycle  of  operation  for  which  a  tap-changer  is  used  in  a  transformer. 

Note  —  Terms  defined  in  2.1.22.1  and  2.1.22.2  are  generally  given  as  the  db  values  of 
the  relevant  numbers,  for  example,  ±  1 1  positions;  they  are  prinapally  valid  also  for  the 
motor-drive  mechanism. 

When  using  the  term  'Number  of  tap  positions'  in  connection  with  a  transformer,  this 
always  refers  to  the  number  of  service  tap  positions  of  the  tap-dianger. 

2.1  •22*3  Run-through  tap  —  The  taps  of  the  tap-changer  connected  to 
the  tap  winding  of  the  transformer,  but  the  tap-changer  when  electrically 
operated  through  these  taps  continues  to  run  to  the  next  tap  without  stop- 
pmg  at  these  particular  taps. 

2«1.23  Type  Test  —  A  test  made  on  a  tap-changer  or  the  components  of  a 
tap-changer,  or  a  range  of  tap-changers  or  components  all  based  on  the 
same  design,  to  prove  compliance  with  the  standard. 

Note  —  A  range  of  tap-changers  is  a  number  of  tap-changers  based  on  the  same  design 

and  halving  the  same  characteristics,  with  the  exception  of  the  insulation  leveb  to  earth 

and  possibly  between  phases,   the  number  of  steps  and  the  value  of  the  transition 

impedance. 

2.1 .24  Routine  Test  —  A  test  made  on  each  finished  tap-changer,  the 
design  of  which  has  been  verified  by  type  tests,  to  establish  that  the  tap- 
changer  is  without  manufacturing  defects. 

2.2  Dcfinitioiis  Relating  to  Motor-Drive  Mechanisms 

2.2.1  Motor-Drive  Mechanism  —  A  driving  mechanisms  (j^^  2.1.7),  which 
incorporates  an  electrical  motor  and  control  circuit. 

2.2.2  Step-by-Step  Control  —  Electrical  and  mechanical  devices  stopping 
the  motor-drive  mechanism  after  completion  of  one  tap-change  indepen- 
dently of  the  operating  sequence  of  the  control  switch. 

2.2.3  Tap  Position  Indicator  —  Electrical  and/or  mechanical  devices  for 
indicating  the  tap  position  of  the  tap-changer. 

2.2.4  Tap-Change  in  Progress  Indication  —  A  device  indicating  that  the 
motor-drive  mechanism  is  running. 

2.2.5  Limiting  Devices 

2.2.5.1  Limit  switches  —  Electro-mechanical  devices  preventing  opera- 
tion of  the  tap-changer  beyond  either  end  position  but  allowing  operation 
towards  the  opposite  direction. 

2.2.5.2  Mechanical  end  stop  —  A  device  which  physically  prevents 
operation  of  the  tap-changer  beyond  either  end  position  but  allows  operation 
towards  the  opposite  direction. 

2«2*6  Parallel  Control  Devices  —  Electrical  control  devices  to  move,  in  the 
case  of  parallel  operation  of  several  transformers  with  tappings,  all  tap- 


IS  t  8468-1977 

changers  to  the  requires  position  and  to  avoid  divergence  of  the  respective 
motor-driye  mechanisms. 

NoTB  —  Such  dcviceg  would  be  necessary  also  in  the  case  of  single-phase  transformers 
forming  a  three-phase  bank  when  each  single-phase  tap-changrr  is  ntted  with  its  own 
motor-drive  mechanism. 

2.2.7  Emergency  Tripping  Device  —  An  electrical  and/or  mechanical  device 
for  stopping  the  motor-drive  mechanism  at  any  time  in  such  a  way  that  a 
special  action  should  be  performed  before  the  next  tap-change  operation 
can  be  started. 

2.2.8  Overcurrent  Blocking  Device  —  An  electrical  device  preventing  or 
interrupting  operation  of  the  motor-drive  mechanism  for  the  period  in 
which  an  overcurrent  exceeding  a  preset  value  is  flowing  in  the  transformer 
winding.  The  blocking  device  may  be  in  the  form  of  a  contactor  in  the 
motor-drive  mechanism. 

2*2.9  Operation  CounUr  Mechanism  —  A  device  indicating  the  number  of 
tap-changes  accomplished. 

2.2.10  Manual  Operation  of  Tap-Changer  —  Operation  of  the  tap-changer 
manually  by  a  mechanical  device,  blocking  at  the  same  time  operation  by 
the  electrical  motor. 

2.2.11  Motor-Drive  Cubicle  —  A  cubicle  housing  the  motor-drive 
mechanism. 

3.  SERVIGE  CONDITIONS 

3.1  Temperature  of  Tap-Changer  Environment  —  Unless  more 
onerous  conditions  are  specified  by  the  purchaser,  on-Ioad  tap-changers 
shall  be  regarded  as  suitable  for  operation  over  a  temperature  range  of 
—5  to  lOO'^C!  when  the  cooling  medium  is  oil. 

Note  —  The  value  of  lOCC  quoted  above  is  based  on  a  maximum  ambient  tempera- 
ture of  50°G  as  specified  in  IS:  2026(Part  I)-1977*. 

3.2  Temperature  of  Motor-Drive  Mechanism  Environment  —  Un- 
less more  onerous  conditions  are  specified  by  the  purchaser^  motor-drive 
mechanisms  are  regarded  as  being  suitable  for  operation  in  any  ambient 
temperature  between  — 5®G  and  SO^'C. 

3.3  Overload  Conditions  —  Tap-changers  subjected  to  overload  condi- 
tions in  accordance  with  IS:  6600-1972t  shall  generally  be  restricted  to  the 
occasional  overload  conditions  stated  in  IS:  2026  (Part  I)-1977*  if  not 
specifically  ordered  for  other  overload  conditions  by  the  transformer 
manufacturer  {see  IS  :  8478  -  1977 J). 

NoTB  —  Tap-changert«  like  other  switching  devicef,  usually  have  a  shorter  thermal  time 
constant  than  electromagnetic  devices  of  the  same  current  ratings. 


^Specification  for  power  traniformen:  Part  I  General  (first  revishn), 

I  Guide  lor  loading  of  oil-immersed  transformers. 
Application  guide  for  on^load  tap-changers. 


18  t  8468-1977 

4.  INFORMATION  REQjUIRED  WITH  TENDER  AND  ORDER 

4.1  The  technical  information  that  the  purchaser  is  required  to  supply  with 
the  tenders  and  orders  is  given  in  IS :  8478  - 1977*. 


SECTION  2    ON-LOAD  TAP^HANGERS 

(EXCLUDING  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  MOTOR-DRIVE 
MECHANISMS) 

5.  RATING 

5.1  Rsitod  Ohamcterbttcs  —  The  characteristics  of  a  tap-changer  that 
shall  be  used  to  determine  the  rating  are  as  given  in  5.2  to  5.6. 

5.2  Rated  ThrongfaiFGarreiit  —  The  rated  through-current  is  inter* 
related  with  a  relevant  rated  step  voltage.  Therefore  a  tap-changer  may 
have  different  combinations  of  rated  through-current  and  relevant  rated 
step  voltage. 

53  Maximnm  Rated  Throngh-Gurrent  —  Preferred  values  of  maximum 
rated  through-current,  shall  be: 

100,  200,  400,  800,  1  250,  1  600,  2  000,  2  500  and  3  150  A. 
Adoption  of  other  values  does  not  invalidate  compliance  with  this  standard. 

5«4  Ratad  Step  Voltaga  —  This  shall  be  stipulated  by  the  purchaser. 

5.5  Ratad  Fraqvancy  —  The  rated  frequency  shall  be  50  Hz. 

S«6  Ratad  IiUBiilation  Laval  —  This  shall  be  stipulated  by  the  purchaser. 

6.  DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION 

6.1  Mttitl^g  Davicaa  for  tha  Protaetian  of  Tap-Ghaiigara  Agalsiat 
Traaaiant  Voltagaa  —  For  tap-changers  which  incorporate  limiting 
devices  for  transient  voltages,  the  manufacturer  of  the  tapi-changer  shall  ^ve 
full  details  of  the  protective  characteristics,  together  with  any  limitations 
which  shall  be  imposed  during  tests  on  the  completed  transformer. 

When  spark  gaps  are  used,  care  has  to  be  taken  to  ensure  that  after 
spark-over,  tfie  discharge  is  quenched  automatically. 

6.2  Oil  Laval  Gaugaa  —  If  diverter  or  selector  switches  are  located  in 
separate  oil  containers  breathing  freely  to  the  atmosphere,  oil  level  gauges 
shw  be  provided. 

6*3  Suitable  protective  devices  may  be  provided  in  the  tap-changer. 


^Application  guide  for  oa-load  tap-changen. 

8 


U  t  8ttS.lf77 

1.  MAUONO 

1.1  Bach  tap-changer  shall  be  provided  with  a  name-plate  of  weather-proof 
material  fitted  in  a' visible  position  showing  at  least  the  items  indicated 
below.  The  entries  shall  be  indelibly  mailced  (for  example  by  etc;hing, 
engraviiig  or  stamping). 

a)  Number  of  thb  standard^  Ref:  IS  :  8468, 

b)  Kfanufacturer's  name, 

c)  Kfanufacturer's  serial  number, 
d^  Manufacturer's  type  designation, 

e)  Yearof  manufkcture, 

f)  RAted  through-current, 

g)  Rated  step  voltage,  and 
h)  Rated  insulation  level. 

7.1«1  The  tap-changers  may  also  be  marired  with  the  ISI  Certification 
Mark. 

Nan  — Theme  of  the  ISI  Gertifiaitioii  Maik  is  governed  by  the  proviiioiis  of  the 
Indian  Standards  Inrtitiition  (Certification  Maria)  Act  and  the  Rules  and  Rmiktioni 
made  tfaereundcr.  The  ISI  Mark  on  products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standardoonveyi 
the  assurance  that  diey  haye  been  produced  to  comply  with  the  requircmenti  of  that 
standard  under  a  wdMefined  syitem  of  inipectiony  testing  and  quality  control  mdiich  ii 
devised  and  supervised  by  ISI  and  operated  by  the  producer.  ISI  marked  products 
are  alio  continuously  diecked  by  ISI  tat  conformity  to  that  ftandard  at  a  lurmer  lafe- 
cuard.  Details  of  conditkmi  under  which  a  licence  for  the  uie  of  the  ISI  Certification 
Maifc  may  be  spranted  to  manufacturen  or  procenon,  may  be  obtained  from  the  Indian 
^      '      ilmdrntion. 


8.  TESTS 

8.1  Tyjfm  TMto  —  The  type  tests  shall  be  performed  on  the  samples  of  the 
relevant  t»p-changer  or  components  after  their  final  development.  The 
fidlowing  shall  constitute  the  type  tests : 

Mechanical  test  (8.3)^ 

Auxiliary  drcmti  insulation  tests  (8.4), 

Test  for  temperature-rise  of  contacts  (83), 

Switching  tests  (ZJS), 

Short  drant  current  test  (8.7), 

Transition  impedance  test  (8«8), 

Mechanical  life  test  (8.9),  and 

Dielectric  test  (8J0). 


8«2  »— tlaaT#gte  —  The  following  shall  constitute  the  routine  tests : 

a)  Mechanical  test  (83), 

b)  AuariOiary  dbncuits  insulation  tests  (8.4),  and 

c)  Dielectric  tests  [8.103(a)  and  8.183(d)  only,] 

wopi  *—  inisMMWi  m  gnwwi  10  uw  SBPS  lo  pe  cameo  mn  < 
llo  18: 20W(Ftet  I)-1977*. 

Ptet  I  OttMnl  (>b«  fssMa). 
9 


B3  MbdMudcal  TMt— -IVitfa  the  tap-changer  fully  anembled,  but 
without  the  contacts  energized,  ten  complete  cycles  of  operation  shall  be 
performed  without  failure. 


8.4  AadDHburjr  drcotta  bmdatUm  TmI  —  The  tap-changer  auxiliary 
circuits  ^hall  withstand  without  fiulure  a  power-frequency  test  voltage  df 
2  kV  applied  for  one  minute  between  all  line  terminals  and.  the  frame. 

8.5  TMt  for  Tempemtnn-RiM  of  Gontmcts  —  Tests  shall  be  per- 
formed to  verify  that  the  temperature  rise  above  the  medium  surrouncung 
each  tvpe  of  contact  which  carries  current  continuously  in  service  does  not 
exceea  the  values  given  in  Table  1,  when  the  contacts  have  reached  a  steady 
temperature  after  carrying  the  maximum  rated  through-current. 


TABuii  cxmTAcr TBMpBiuTim^ RBn-Lnfnni 

GoMTAor  MAiaaiAL  Im  Oil 

(1)  (2) 

•C 
Flainooppcr  20 

Silver4aced  copper  20 

Other  materiali  20 


The  temperatures  shall  be  measured  by  thermocouples  or  other  suitable 
means  positibht^l  on  the  surface  of  the  contacts  as  near  the  point  of  contact 
as  is  practicable. 

The  temperature  is  considered  to  be  steady  when  the  difference  of  the 
temperature  between  the  contact  and  the  surrounding  medium  does  not 
change  by  more  than  VC  over  the  last  quarter  of  the  test  period. 

The  temperature  of  the  surrounding  medium  shall  be  measured  at  not 
less  than  25  jkim  below  the  contacts. 

NoTs — The  tiom  lection  of  the  conductor  omryii^g  the  cuntnt  Jnlo  die  tiy^JMBiger  cr 

components  under  leit  disll  be  stated. 

8*6  Switddbm  Toata  —  Switching  tests,  which  include  service  duty  tests 
and  breaking  capacity  tests,  shall  sunulate  the  most  onerous  conditions  for 
which  the  tap-changer  is  rated.  Where  reactor  switching  is  concerned,  the 
most  onerous  condition  shall  be  subject  to  agreement  between  the  manu- 
facturer and  the  purchaser.  Unless  otherwise  agreed,  it  is  assumed  that 
no  reversal  of  power  flow  occurs  in  service. 

Attention  is  drawn  to  Appendix  A  where  the  most  onerous  conditiims  for 
resistor  tr.insition  switching  are  indicated  for  the  minority  of  contact 
arrangements. 

10 


IS  t  8468-1977 

The  twitching  tests  may  be  limited  to  the  diverter  switch  or  selector  switch 
after  proving  that  the  contact  operating  conditions  are  not  a£fected  by  such 
limitation. 

If  the  diverter  switch  or  selector  switch  has  several  sets  of  contacts  which 
operate  in  a  definite  sequence,  it  is  not  permitted  to  test  each  set  of  contact 
separately  from  the  other  unless  it  can  be  proved  that  the  operating  condi- 
tions of  any  one^et  of  contacts  are  not  affected  by  the  operation  of  the  other 
sets  of  contacts. 

Where  resistors  are  used  as  transition  impedances  these  maybe  placed 
outside  the  apparatus  if  necessitated  by  the  construction  of  the  tap-changer 
or  the  test  circuit,  and  they  may  have  a  higher  thermal  capacity  than  those 
which  are  employed  in  service  unless  otherwise  specified. 

The  value  and  type  of  the  transition  impedance  shall  be  stated. 

Contacts,  and  transformer  oil  in  the  case  of  oil-immersed  tap-changers, 
shall  not  be  renewed  during  each  of  the  tests. 

In  the  case  of  three-phase  switches,  it  is  normally  sufficient  to  test  the 
contacts  of  one  phase. 

If  a  particular  tap-changer  has  more  than  one  combination  of  rated 
through-current  and  rated  step  voltage  at  least  two  braking  capacity  tests 
shall  be  performed,  one  at  maximum  rated  through-current  I^  and  its 
relevant  step  voltage  Ui  and  one  at  the  maximum  rated  step  voltage  Um  and 
its  relevant  rated  through-current  I^. 

Interpolation  may  be  facilitated  by  obtaining  the  mid-current  point  of 
the  curve  between  the  extremes  by  calculating  thb  mid-point  X  as : 

The  arrangement  for  testing  shall  be  such  that,  except  where  otherwise 
specified,  neither  the  switched  current,  nor  th6  recovery  voltage,  nor  the 
product  of  these  shall,  in  any  case,  vary  more  than  —5  percent  to  +10 
percent  of  the  calculated  values  appropriate  to  the  SMritching  cycle  (s€$ 
Table  5)  at  the  appropriate  through-current  and  relevant  rated  step  voltage. 

8*6.1  Sirmc§  Duty  Tist  —  This  test  shall  be  performed  in  accordance  with 
8.64.1,  8.6.1^  or  8.6.I.3. 

After  the  tests,  inspection  of  contact  wear  shall  be  done,  the  results  of  this 
test  shall  leave  no  doubts  as  to  the  suitabilitjr  of  the  tap  hanger  for  service. 
Nan  —  Hie  rendti  of  thb  tot  mAy  hit  used  by  the  manufarturcr  to  demonstrate  tfamt 
die  cootacts  med  tor  making  and  breaking  current  are  capable  of  peHbnning,  %irithoat 
tepiacrment  of  the  cootacts,  the  number  onap-change  operations  dedared  by  the  manti- 
faduror  at  the  rated  through-current ^and  at  the  relevant  step  voltage. 

8*6»1«1  Sfrmct  duty  Usi  ai  raUd  sUp  vollagi  —  The  contacts  on  diverter 
iwitchet  and  selector  switches  shall  be  subjected  to  a  number  of  operations 
conreycMMling  to  20  000  tap-change  operations  in  normal  service  whca 
cairyinf*  current  oorreiponding  to  not  less  than  the  maximum  rated 
llifMgh-current  and  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage. 

11 


B  t  Mii.1977 

In  order  to  approximate  to  service  conditions,  selector  switches  shall  have 
the  test  performed  over  not  more  than  eight  tap-change  positions  (exduding 
dead  positions),  these  being  centrally  disposed  about  the  change-over 
selector  if  such  is  incorporated  in  the  tap-changer  design. 

Comparison  of  oscillograms  taken  at  regular  intervals  during  the  test 
shall  show  that  there  is  no  significant  alteration  in  the  characteristics  of  the 
tap-changer  in  such  a  way  as  to  endanger  the  operation  of  the  apparatus. 
Twenty  oscillograms  shall  be  taken  at  the  start  of  the  test,  and  20  after  each 
succeeding  5  000  operations,  making  a  total  of  100  oscillograms. 

NoTB  —  Generally  it  if  tufiicient  to  compare  the  seriei  of  oiciUogniiiis  taken  at  the 
bffinning  and  at  the  end  of  the  test. 

8.6.1.2  Sirma  duty  test  at  reduced  step  voltage  —  Provided  that  the  manu- 
facturer supplies  reasonable  proof  that  the  rate  of  wear  is  not  affected, 
a  test  at  reauced  step  voltage  may  be  performed  under  the  following 
conditions: 

a)  A  service  duty  test  of  20  000  operations  shall  be  performed  at  a 
current  corresponding  to  not  less  than  the  maximum  rated  through- 
current  and  a  reduced  step  voltage.  This  voltage  level  shall  be 
such  that  the  switched  current  is'  not  less  than  that  occurring  during 
operations  at  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage;  furthermore,  current 
chopping  shall  not  occur.  In  order  to  obtain  the  specified  test 
conditions,  the  value  of  the  transition  impedance  shall  be  suitably 
modified. 

b)  Using  the  same  contacts  and  oil,  100  operations  at  the  maximum 
rated  through-current  and  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage  shall  be 
performed,  each  operation  bding  oscillographically  recorded. 
Flnovided  the  oscillograms  taken  durinff  these  operations  indicate 

that  the  arcing  time  does  not  exceed  •«  second  (where  /  is  the 

rated  frequency)  this  service  duty  test  with  the  calculated  twitched 
current  wd  reduced  step  voltage  will  enable  the  mnufiictustr  to 
demonstrate  directly  the  number  of  operatioiis  likdy  to  be  achieved 
without  replacement  of  contacts. 

1*2 

c)  When  the  osciUpgrams  indicate  that  arcing  timci  in  excess  of  -» 

seconds  are  occurring  tfata  fiirther  operations  shall  be  pafotmcd  at 
the  maxunum  rated  throoi^Hciirrent  and  the  reduced  $19  voltage. 
The  number  of  such  additional  operations  shall  be: 

^XJOOOO 

^Aae  Sm^toital  wuahat  of  haltofdei  ofaidng  cwwntf  ia  tfy  100 
opentthms  ftom  (0)  abovCf  wUdi  occw  aAnr  dw  wnft  cnnwl  mso 

12 


ivn 

d)  Comparison  of  the  OBcillog;ram8  taken  under  (b)  above  widi  dioie 
taken  under  timilar  conditions  with  new  contacti  and  clean  tram* 
former  oil  shall  show  whether  there  has  been  any  significant 
alteration  in  the  characterisdcs  of  the  tap^anger  such  as  might 
endanger  the  operation  of  the  apparatus. 

The  test  sequence  specified  above  is  designed  to  rive  substantially 
the  same  contact  erosion  as  would  occur  during  20  000  operations  at 
maximum  rated  through-current  and  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage. 

8.6.1.3  Sima  dudy  Ustfor  aUeiar  smUhes  —  The  tests  may  be  performed 
as  in  8«6«1«1  or  8.6.I.Z. 

When  selector  switches  are  desired  for  asymmetrical  pennant  cvde 
switching,  owing  to  the  load  and  circulating  currents  togetner  with  tneir 
associate  recovery  voltages  being  vectorially  subtractivci  the  most  onerous 
switching  duties  for  the  main  contact  occur  at  fidl-load  and  at  no-load 
(iM  Table  5). 

In  service  the  majority  of  transformers  do  not  normally  operate  at  full- 
load  and>  in  consequence,  there  is  always  arc-erosion  in  the  subtractive 
condition.  Therefore  in  order  to  approximate  more  nearly  to  service 
conditions  the  test  shall  be  performea  with  10  000  operations  at  full-load 
parameters  and  10  000  operations  at  no-load  parameters. 

8.6.2  Br§aking  Capacity  Ttst  —  Forty  operations  shall  be  performed  at  a 
current  corresponding  to  twice  the  maximum  rated  through-current  and 
at  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage. 

The  oscillograms  taken  for  each  operation  shall  indicate  that  in  no  case 
is  the  arcing  time  such  as  to  endanger  the  operation  of  the  apparatus^ 

The  brealung  capacity  test  shall  be  performed,  if  possible,  with  a  transi- 
tion impedance  of  the  same  thermal  ana  ohmic  design  as  that  to  be  employed 
in  service.  If  this  is  not  possible  the  impedance  as  used  in  service  shall  be 
tested  separately  in  accordance  with  8.8«1  but  with  twice  maximum  rated 
through-current  for  one  operation  only. 

.  B.63  SimulaUd  Tist  Circuiis  —  Tht  tests  under  8.6.1.1,  8.6.1.2  and 
8.6«1*3  may  be  performed  with  simulated  circuits  providing  it  is  proved 
that  the  test  conditions  are  substantially  e(][uivalent.  Two  simulated  test 
circuits  which  are  possible  for  use  are  descnbed  in  Appendix  B; 

8.7  Sluirt-Girciiit  Gurraat  Test  —  All  contacts  of  different  design  carry- 
ing current  continuously  shall  be  subjected  to  short-circuit  currents,  each  of 
two  seconds  (rblO  percent)  duration.  In  the  case  of  oil-immersed  tap- 
changers  the  test  shall  be  performed  in  transformer  oil. 

In  the  case  of  three-phase  tap-changers  it  is  sufficient  to  test  the  contacts 
of  one  phase  only  unless  otherwise  specified. 

Three  applications  shall  be  made  with  an  initial  peak  current  of  2*5 
(±5  percent)  times  the  symmetrical  rms  value  of  the  short-circuit  test 
current. 

13 


D  I  8468-1977 

When  there  are  no  facilities  for  point-on-wave  switching  and  it  is  not 
possible  to  obtain  three  short-circuit  applications  with  an  initial  peak 
current  of  2*5  times  the  rms  value*  the  following  test  may  be  used: 

The  ranmetrical  value  of  the  short-circuit  test  current  may  be 
increasea  so  that  the  peak  current  is  obtained  for  the  three  applications 
and  the  test  duration  reduced.  When  using  tfiis  method  the  product 
of  the  square  of  the  increased  rms  current  and  the  shorter  test  duration 
shall  not  be  less  than  the  product  of  the  square  of  the  rated  short- 
circuit  rms  current  and  the  2  seconds  duration. 

The  values  of  the  short-circuit  test  current  to  be  applied  shall  be  as 
specified  in  Table  2. 

NoTB — If  the  iluNrt-circuit  requirements  of  the  transformer  exceed  thmt  given  in  TsUe  2 
for  die  mairimnm  rated  through-current  of  the  tap-chatiger,  unless  omerwise  agreed 
between  the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser,  a  tap-changer  of  the  appropriate  hi^^er 
gMTimum  rated  through-cunent  shall  be  adopted. 


TABLE  2    8HORT-CSI1U2UTT  TEST  CURRENT 


TiBSTGuaaiMT 
RMSValub 

(2) 
kA 

2 

3 

4 

8 

12-5 
16 
20 
25 
31-5 


For  intermediate  values  of  maximum  rated  through-current  up  to  400  A, 
the  test  current  may  be  interpolated  from  the  above  table.  For  values 
above  400  A,  the  test  current  shall  be  10  times  the  maximum  rated  through- 
current. 

The  open-circuit  voltage  for  the  test  shall  be  at  least  50  V. 

14 


Maximum  Raibd 

THKXIOH  GOBBBNI 

(») 

A 

100 

200 

400 

800 

1250 

1600 

2000 

2500 

SISO 

At  the  co^idusion  of  the  test,  the  contacts  shall  not  have  welded  together 
and  shall  not  show  abnormal  signs  of  current  marking  or  burning. 

Gurrent-carrying  parts  shall  not  show  signs  of  permanent  mechanical 
distortion. 

8.8  Transitioii  Impedmoee  Test 

8.8«1  TramiHon  Resistors  —  The  test  shall  be  performed  at  the  maximum 
rated  through-current  and  at  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage. 

The  resistor  shall  be  mounted  as  in  service  or  separately  under  equivalent 
thermal  conditions. 

The  resistor  shall  be  subjected  to  a  number  of  power-impulses  equivalent 
to  one-half  of  one  cycle  of  uninterrupted  operation  (see  2*1  ^IS)  with  the 
driving  mechanism  operating  at  its  normal  speed.  The  final  temperature 
of  the  resistor  shall  be  determined  and  recorded. 

The  temperature  rise  above  the  surrounding  medium  shall  not  exceed 
200''G  for  oil-immersed  tap-changen. 

If  it  is  not  practicable  to  determine  the  temperature  of  the  transition 
resistor  accordmg  to  the  above  then  the  method  given  in  Appendix  G  may 
be  employed. 

Note  —  In  cases  where  the  rated  through-current  or  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage  is 
different  from  the  maximum  rated  through-current  and  the  relevant  rated  step  voltage, 
it  ii  permissible  to  calculate  the  thermal  rating  of  the  resistor  from  the  results  of  the  type 
test. 

8.8.2  Transition  Rsactors  —  Transition  reactors  are  normally  tested 
in  accordance  with  the  specification  for  the  transformer  with  which  the 
tap-changer  is  intended  for  use. 

NoTB  —  Precautions  should  be  taken  in  the  design  of  the  transition  reactors  to  avoid 

hi^  inrush  currents  during  switching. 

8.9  Mechanical  life  Testa 

8.9.1  Mechanieal  Enduranci  Test  —  If  the  tap-changer  is  of  oil-immersed 
design  it  shall  be  assembled  and  filled  with  clean  transformer  oil,  or  immersed 
in  a  test  tank  filled  with  clean  transformer  oil,  and  operated  as  for  *>ormaI 
service  conditions.  The  contacts  shall  not  be  energized  and  the  full  range 
of  tappings  shall  be  utilized  until  200  000  tap-change  operations  have  been 
performed. 

During  the  test  there  shall  be  no  failure  or  undue  wear  of  the  mechanical 
parts. 

Normal  servicing  according  to  the  manufacturer's  handbook  shall  be 
permitted  during  the  test. 

It  shall  be  permitted  to  perform  this  mechanical  endurance  test  sepa- 
rately on  diverter  switches,  selector  switches,  tap  selectors  or  other  com- 
ponents, provided  that  in  each  case  the  operation  duplicates  mechanically 
Its  normal  service  operation. 

15 


IS  I  IM68.1977 

8.9.2  S$quinc$  Test  —  With  tap-changer  assembled  as  in  service,  and  if  of 
oil-immersed  design  in  clean  transformer  oil,  it  shall  be  operated  over  one 
complete  cyde  of  operations.  With  the  contacts  energized  at  the  voltage 
of  the  recording  equipment  the  exact  time  sequence  of  operation  of  the  tap 
selector,  change-over  selector,  diverter  switch  or  selector  switch,  as  appro- 
priate, shall  be  recorded, 

8.9.3  Pressure  and  Vacuum  Tests  —  If  required,  tests  shall  be  performed  to 
establish  the  pressure  and  vacuum  withstand  values  on  the  compartments 
and  bushings  of  the  tap-changer.  The  manufacturer  shall  declare  these 
values. 

8.10  Dielectric  Teats 

8.10.1  General  —  The  dielectric  requirements  of  a  tap-changer  depend  on 
the  transfonner  winding  to  which  it  is  to  be  connected. 

The  transformer  manufacturer  shall  be  responsible  not  only  for  selecting 
a  tap-changer  of  the  appropriate  insultation  level  but  also  for  the  insulation 
level  of  the  connecting  leads  between  the  tap-changer  and  the  windings  of 
the  transformer. 

Apparatus  of  oil-immersed  design  shall  be  filled  with  clean  transformer  oil 
or  immersed  in  a  test  tank  filled  with  clean  transformer  oil  before  the  tests 
are  performed. 

8.10.2  Ctassifieaiion  —  To  permit  selection  of  appropriate  voltage  test  tap- 
changers  shall  be  classified  according  to  Table  3. 


TABLE  3    CLASSES  OF  TAF-GHANGERS 

Glass  Appugation 

I  For  me  at  the  neutral  point  of  windings 

II  For  uie  at  a  position  other  than  the  neutral  point  of  windings 


BA03  Nature  of  Tests  —  The  insulation  level  of  the  tap-changer  shall  be 
proved  by  the  following  power-frequency  and/or  impulse  voltage  withstand 
tests: 

a)  To  earth; 

b)  Between  phases; 

c)  Between  the  first  and  last  contacts  of  the  tap  selector  or  selector 
switch  and»  where  fitted,  of  the  change-over  selector; 

d)  Between  any  two  adjacent  contacts  of  the  tap«cbanger  or  selector 
switch  or  any  other  conucu  relevant  to  the  tap-changer  contact 
configuration;  and 

16 


IS  I  MM  - 1977 

e)  Between  diverter  switch  contacts  in  their  final  open  position. 

Non  1  —  Regarding  item  (a)  above,  for  Gbii  I  tap-diaii||crty  imfnilie  voltage  tcMs 
may  not  always  be  nccewary.  Their  requirement  thall  be  fub|ect  to  agreement  bet«veen 
the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaicr. 

NoTB  2  —  Item  (b)  above  doei  not  apply  to  tins^friphaie  tap-changert. 

Notm  3  —  Partial  diicfaarfe  measurements  and  iwitdiing  impulse  test  are  specified  in 
IS:  2026(Part  III)-1977^  lor  transformers  greater  than  145  kV  class.  Consideration 
should  be  given  to  the  application  of  the  appropriate  tests  to  earth  and  where  applicable 
between  phases  of  the  tap-changer. 

8.10.4  Tesi  VoUagiS 

8.10.4.1  Class  I—  For  test  8.103  (a),  the  test  voltage  shall  preferably 
comply  with  an  appropriate  value  from  Table  4.  For  the  tests  BA0J3{h)  to 
8.103(e)  >  appropriate  withstand  values  shall  be  declared  by  the  manu- 
facturer of  the  tap-changer. 

8.10.4.2  Class  II—  For  tests  8.103(a)  and  8.103(b)  test  voltages  shall 
preferably  comply  with  the  appropriate  values  from  Table  4.  for  tests 
8.103(c)  to  8.103fe)i  appropriate  withstand  values  shall  be  declared  by 
the  manufacturer  of  tfie  tap-changer. 


TABLE  4    TBSTVOLTACaS 

(G&MMf  8.10.4.1  and  8.10.42) 

PowBApFaiQjumoy  Lioicnciiio  Impulsb 

TBtrVoLTAos  Tmt  Voltage 

(1)  (2) 

kVrms  kVpeak 

10  40 

20  60 

28  75 

38  95 

50  125 

70  170 

95  250 

149  325 

185  450 

280  550 

275  650 

325  750 

360  850 

395  950 

460  1050 


8.103  AfipHeoAmofTisi  VoUofss  —  For  the  voltage  tests,  the  tap-changer 
shall  be  assembled  and  dried  out    It  is  not,  however,  necessary  to  include 


^Specification  lor  po«Mr  tfatnfanueist  PM  III  Imulation  levds  and  dielectric  test  On 

17 


IS  t  8468-1977 

leads  for  connecting  the  tap-changer  to  the  windings  of  a  transformer. 
Tests  may  be  performed  on  separate  components  provided  it  can  be  shown 
that  same  dielectric  conditions  apply. 

For  test  8.10.3(a)  and  test  8.10.3(b)  in  the  case  of  Class  II  tap-changers 
the  live  parts  of  each  phase  shall  be  short-circuited  and  connected  either 
to  the  voltage  source  or  to  earin  as  appropriate. 

Where  the  tap-changer  incorporates  external  insulation  to  earth,  this 
external  insulation  shall  be  proved  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  test 
specified  in  IS:  2099-1973*. 

8.10.6  Powrr-Frequmcy  Voltage  Test  -  The  test  sliall  be  performed  with 
a. single-phase  alternating  voltage  in  accordance  with  IS :  2071  (Part  I)- 
1974t  and  IS:  2071  (Part  II)-1974$  at  the  required  value.  The  duration 
of  each  test  application  shall  be  60  seconds. 

8.10.7  Lighting  Impulse  Voltage  Test  —  The  wave  for  the  test  shall  be  the 
standard  impulse  of  1-2  (±30  percent)  50**  (±20  percent)  microseconds  as 
defined  in  Ij5  :  2071(Part  I)-1974t  and  IS  :  2071  (Part  III)-1974§.  Each  test 
shall  comprise  three  voltage  applications  of  positive  polarity  and  three  of 
negative  polarity,  at  the  required  value. 

8.10.8  Measurement  of  Partial  Discharges  —  Under  consideration  {see 
8.10.3,  Note  3). 

8.10.9  Switching  Impulse  Test  —  Under  consideration  (see  8.10.3,  Notr  3). 
8.11  Type-Test  Certificate  -  •  The  certificate  shall  include  the  following: 

a)  Full  details  of  the  test  arrangements  adopted  (for  example,  as- 
sembly arrangement  and  drying  out)  with  explanatory  sketches  as 
necessary. 

b;  Full  detaik  of  all  tests  applied  in  accordance  with  8.3  to  8.10. 

c)  Full  details  of  limiting  devices  for  transient  voltages,  where  appro- 
priate (jm6.1). 


SECTION  3  MOTOR-DRIVE  MECHANISMS 
FOR  ON-LOAD  TAP-GHANOERS 

9.  DESIGN  AND  CONSTRUCTION 

^.1  Unless  otherwise  specified,  coniponent  parts  of  motor-drive  mechanisms 
shall  comply  with  relevant  Indian  otandaros. 

9Jt  Permissible  Vmriation  to  Auxiliary  Supply  —  The  driving  motor 
and  the  electrical  control  of  the  motor-drive  mechanism  shaU  be  designed  to 


tMcU 
fipifipii). 


^Spedficatioii  for  buihingK  for  alternating  voltages  above  1  000  V  {Jni  temmn). 
tMetliodt  of  high  voltage  toting:  Part  I  General  definitiom  and  test  reqykemenU  (Jka 

lM«diodi  of  high  volugc  testing;  Part  II  Test  piooedtires  C/Eril  rmmm). 
{Methods  ofhi^  voltage  testing:  Ptot  III  Measuring  devices. 

18 


opermte  latiifiictorily  within  the  limits  of  85  to  110  percent  of  rated  voltage 
mr  an  ac  voltage  and  between  80  and  110  percent  ibr  a  dc  voltage. 

9S  Stop-bf-Stap  Gontrol  —  The  step-by-step  circuit  shall  be  deugned  in 
.such  a  way  as  to  operate  the  tap-changer  by  one  complete  voltage  step  only 
]jn  the  case  of  signals  which  may  be  continuous  or  immediately  repetitive  as 

well  as  simultaneous  from  separate  sources  within  one  tap-change  operation. 

9.4  Tap  Position  Indicator 

9.4.1  The  position  of  the  tap-changer  sliall  be  indicated  on  the  motor- 
drive  by  means  of  a  mechanically  operated  device.  Tliis  tap  position  shall 
be  vbible  through  an  inspection  wmdow  while  the  motor-arive  cubicle  b 
closed. 

9.4.2  If  required,  an  electrical  remote  position  transmitter  may  be  pro- 
vided for  indicating  the  tap-changer  position  in  the  control  room. 

9.5  T^p-Cluum;o  in  Progroaa  LidicatJott  —  If  required,  a  suiuble  device 
may  be  fitted  to  operate  a  meaa<  of  indicating  at  a  remote  point  that  the 
motor-drive  mechuism  is  performing  a  tap-change  operation. 

9.6  Limiting  Davicea  —  All  motor-drive  mechanisms  shall  be  provided 
with  both  electrical  and  mechanical  limiting  devices.  The  contacts  of  the 
electrical  limiting  device  shall  be  connected  into  the  control  or  motqr 
circuits. 

9.7  Parailal  Gontrol  Dovieoa  -—  Provision  of  the  necessary  devices  is  to 
be  agreed,  the  purchaser  being  responsible  for  ensurini^  that  the  correct 
requirements  are  specified. 

9.8  lUrecCion  of  Rotation  Protoction  —  If  required,  a  device  tor  pre- 
vention of  incorrect  rotation  of  three-phase  motors  may  be  fitted  by  agree- 
mei\t  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser. 

9.9  Ovareorrent  Blocldng  Davico  —  If  reouired  by  the  operational 
condition  of  the  transformer,  this  device  may  be  fitted  by  agreement  be- 
tween the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser. 

9.10  Operation  Conntar  —  An  operation  counter  shall  be  provided. 

9.11  Manual  Operation  of  the  Motor-Drivo  Mackaniam  —  A  re- 
movable crank  shall  be  provided  for  manual  operation  of  the  tap-changer, 
with  blocking  of  the  motor-drive  taking  place  before  actual  engagement  of 
the  crank  with  the  manual  operating  shaft. 

The  direction  of  rotation  sliall  be  provided  adjacent  to  the  hand  crank 
engagement  point  and  the  number  of  crank  rotations  required  for  one  tap- 
change  operation  shall  be  given. 

Nan -~  The  ddign  of  th«  mcchmniwn  ihould  ptniiit  manual  operation  by  one  man 
%vitlloutundae  effort.    It  can  be  aaium«l  that  tliit  oondition  a  mtnlled  if  the 
torque  whkh  nas  to  be  afiplkd  to  cnmk  handle  don  not  exceed  50  Nol 


19 


-1W7 

9.12  MMorOMv^  Chtblcto  — The  motor-drive  cubicle  shall  meet  with 
the  protection  reciuirements  of  IP  44  according  to  IS :  2147-1962*  and  shall 
be  protected  against  condensation  by  suitable  means. 

If  required,  other  degrees  of  protection  specified  in  IS:  2147-1962*  may 
be  agr^d  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  purchaser. 

10.  MARKING 

10.1  Each  motor-drive  mechanism  shall  be  provided  with  a  name-plate  of 
weather-proof  material,  fitted  ih  a  visible  position  showing  the  appropriate 
items  imucated  below.  The  entries  shall  be  indelibly  maned  (for  example 
by  etching,  engraving  or  stamping). 

a)  Number  of  this  Indian  Standard,  Ref :  IS :  8468; 

b)  Manufacturer's  name; 

c)  Manufacturer's  serial  number  and  type; 

d)  Year  ofmanufiicture; 

e)  Rated  voltage  and  rated  frequency  for  the  electrical  motor   {sa 
Note); 

f)  Rated  voltage  and  rated  frequency  for  the  control  equipment  (jst 
Note); 

g)  Number  of  service  tapping  positions;  and 

h)  Direction  of  flow  of  power. 

Note  —  In  the  cafe  of  dlraet  ouffcnt  aipply,  the  jymbol  *-— '  dmild  be  and  in  place  of 
the  indication  of  ^  rated  fttqiiency. 

11.  TESTS 

11.1  Typo  TmU  —  The  following  shall  oodstitute  the  type  tests: 

a)  Mechanical  test  (113), 

b)  Auxiliary  circuits  instdation  test  (IM), 

c)  Mechanical  load  test  (11  Jt), 

d)  Overrun  test  (ll«i),  and 

e)  Protection  of  motor-drive  ctil»de(lL7). 

11.2  RovtfaMTMls— *  The  following  shall  constitute  flie  routine  tests: 

a)  Mechanical  tests  (U.S),  and 

b)  Auxiliary  circuiti  insulation  tests  (1L4). 

11.3  Mochairfml  Teste 

113.1  The  motor-drive  mechanism  in  the  service  condition  or.widi  an 
equivalent  simulated  load  shall  b6  operated  deetrically  bt  ten  cydes  of 
operation  without  failure.  Dnrinff  mis  test  correct  Amctioniag  to  any 
requiremaiti  off,  where  rdevatit^  shall  be  chfffked, 


20 


18  t  8468*1977 

11.3.2  Following  the  test  under  11.3.1,  two  further  cycles  of  operation 
shall  be  performed,  one  at  the  minimum  and  one  at  the  maximum  level  of 
the  ratea  voltage  of  the  auxiliary  supply,  also  without  failure. 

NoTB  —  The  mechanical  tests  may  be  performed  on  the  motor-drive  mechanism 

separately  or  at  under  8.9. 

11.4  AuUiary  Glrciilts  Insulation  Test  —  Auxiliary  circuits,  except  the 
motor  and  such  elements  which  are  to  be  tested  with  lower  test  voltages  ac- 
cording to  the  appropriate  Indian  Standards  shall  withstand  a  power- 
frequency  test  of  2  kV  applied  for  one  minute  between  all  live  terminals  and 
the  frame. 

11.5  Mechanlcml  Load  Tost  —  The  motor-drive  mechanism  output  shaft 
shall  be  loaded  by  the  largest  tap-changer  for  which  it  is  designed  or  by  an 
equivalent  simulated  load,  based  on  service  conditions.  At  such  a  load 
200  000  operations  shall  be  performed  across  the  whole  tapping  range. 

Note  —  Additional  cooling  of  the  motor-drive  is  permiiiible  during  this  test. 

During  this  test  5  000  operations  shall  be  performed  at  the  minimum 
voltage  and  5  000  operations  at  the  maximum  voltage  as  specified  in  9.2. 

The  correct  functioning  to  the  requirements  of  9.4.1,  9.6,  9.10  and  9.11 
shall  be  verified  during  this  test. 

The  test  shall  be  completed  without  failure  of  the  mechanical  parts. 

Normal  servicing  according  to  the  manufacutrer's  handbook  shall  be 
permitted  during  the  test. 

11.6  Overran  Test  —  It  shall  be  demonstrated  that  in  the  event  of  a  failure 
of  the  electrical  limit  switches,  the  mechanical  end  stops  prevent  operation 
beyond  the  end  positions  when  a  motorized  tap-change  is  performed  and  the 
motor-drive  mechanism  shall  not  suffer  eitner  electrical  or  mechanical 
damage. 

11.7  Protection  of  Motor^Drlve  CaUde  —  When  applicable,  the  motor- 
drive  cubicle  shall  be  tested  in  accordance  with  IS :  2147-1962*. 


^Degrees  of  protection  provided  by  endopurci  for  low  voltage  twitchgemr  and  controlfcar 

21 


18  18468-1977 

APPENDIX    A 

{Clause  8.6) 

SUPPLEMENTARY  INFORMATION  ON  SWITCHING  DUTY 

RELATING  TO  TAP-CHANGERS  WITH  RESISTOR 

TRANSITION  ONLY 

A-l.  ADDITIONAL  DEFINITIONS 

A-1.1  Flag-Cycle*  — A  method  of  performing  a  tap-rhange  operation  in 
which  the  through-current  is  diverted  from  the  main  contacts  before  the 
circulating  current  starts  to  flow. 

Note  —  This  cycle  requires  that  the  through-current  connection  is  at  the  mid-point 
of  the  transition  impedance  when  this  is  carrying  the  circulating  currrnt. 


Uf 


4-(E*RI)i 


j(E-Rfr 


E 


(E-RI) 


Fio.  1  Flag  Cycle 


Fio.  2  Symmetrical 
Pennant  Cycle 


Fig.  3  Asymmetrical 
Pennant  Cycle 


*The  derivation  of  the  designations  *flag  cycle*  and  'pennant  cycle*  arises  from  the  appear- 
ance of  the  vector  diagrams  snowing  the  change  in  output  voltage  of  the  transformer  in 
movins  from  one  Upping  to  the  adjacent  one.  In  the  'flag  cyde*  the  change  of  voltage 
compntci  four  steps^  while  in  the  'pennant  cyde'  only  two  steps  occur  {sh  Fig.  1  to  8). 


22 


IS  I  8468-1977 

ApI.2  Sjrmmetrfcal  Pennant  Cycle*  —  A  method  of  performing  a  tap- 
change  operation  in  which  the  circulating  current  starts  to  flow  before  the 
through-current  is  diverted  from  the  main  contacts. 

NoTB  —  This  cycle  requires  that  the  through-current  connection  is  at  the  mid-point 
of  the  transition  impedance  when  this  is  carrying  the  circulating  current* 

A-1.3  Asymmetiicml  Pennant  Cycle*  —  A  method  of  performing  a  tap- 
change  operation  in  which,  in  one  direction  of  movement  of  the  switch,  the 
circulating  current  starts  to  flow  before  the  through-current  is  diverted  from 
the  main  contacts,  while  in  the  other  direction  of  movement  the  through- 
current  is  diverted  before  the  circulating  current  starts  to  flow. 

Note  1  —  This  cycle  requires  that  the  through-current  connection  im  at  one  end  of  the 
transition  impedance  when  this  is  carrying  circulating  current. 

Note  2  —  Tap-changers  employing  the  asymmetrical  pennant  cycle  are  normally 
used  with  load  flow  in  one  direction  only. 

A-2.  DUTY  ON  MAIN  AND  TRANSITION  CONTACTS 

A-2.1  Table  5  shows  typical  contact  arrangements  used  for  flag  and  pennant 
cycles  on  divertcr  switches  and  selector  switches.  Only  one  pair  of  con- 
tacts is  shown  for  each  function  although,  in  practice,  this  may  represent  a 
set  of  contacts. 

A-2.2  Table  5  also  shows  the  number  of  circuit- transfer  operations  per- 
formed, together  with  the  duty  performed,  by  each  pair  of  contacts  for  each 
combination  of  switched  current  and  recovery  voltage  during  a  number  of 
cycles  of  operation  corresponding  to  jV  tap-change  operations. 

A-2.3  In  the  expressions  for  current  and  voltage  in  Table  5,  the  ' +^  and  *  — ' 
signs  indicate  vectorial  addition  and  subtraction,  not  algebraic.  The  duty 
on  the  contacts  is  consequently  affected  by  the  power-factor  of  the  load  on 
the  transformer  which  controls  the  phase  angle  between  the  through-current 
/,  and  the  step-voltage  E.  The  effect  of  the  load  power-factor  on  the  duty 
of  the  various  contacts  is  shown  in  Table  6. 

A-2.4  If  the  transition  impedance  is  divided  into  two  units,  these  are 
assumed  to  be  of  equal  value,  each  equal  to  R. 

A-2.5  The  arrangements  shown  are  by  no  means  exhaustive;  other  possible 
arrangements  exist  and  are  used,  such  as  the  multiple  resistor  cycle  which 
may  be  an  extension  of  either  the  flag  cycle  or  pennant  cycle  principle. 


*The  derivation  of  the  designations  *flag  cycle'  and  'pennant  cycle*  arises  from  the  appear* 
ance  of  the  vector  diagrams  showing  the  chanse  in  output  voltage  of  the  transformer  in  moving 
from  one  tapfiin^  to  the  aiQacent  one.  In  the  *flag  cycle'  the  change  of  voluige  comprises 
four  steps,  while  m  the  'pennant  cycle'  only  itwo  steps  occur  {m  Fig.  1  to  3). 

23 


li 


lii 


ll! 


II 


I 


111 


^ 


i 


11 


liij 

3b  W  N  V 


II 


KK 


& 


i 


•I- 


i 


i 


i 


Mil 

•4  h  4  N 


llilH 

0   JH   0   1   «^   ^ 


iilf 


il 


a 


BiNM.Un 


§ 


5 


5 


Ki  h  19  H 


ll 


I 


I 


)lh 


ll 


"B  1 

«| 

I 

1 
\ 

III' 


25 


IS  :  8468  -  1977 


TABLE  6    EFFECT  OF  LOAD  POWER  FACTOR  ON  CIRCUIT-BREAKING  DUTY 

(Clause  A-2.3) 


Type  of 
Switch 

Operating 
Cycle 

Main  Contacts 

Transition  Contacts 

Con- 
tact 

Effect  of  Load 
Power  Factor 

Con- 
tact 

Effect  of  Load 
Power  Factor 

Divcrtrr 
switch 

Flap: 
cycle 

W 
and 

None 

X 
and 

r 

Maximum  duty 
at  power 
factor  =10 

Symmetrical 
pennant 
cycle 

and 
M 

Maximum  duty 
at  power 
factor-- 10 

K 

and 
L 

None 

Selector 
switch 

Flag 
cycle 

B 

None 

A 

and 
C 

Maximum  duty 
at  power 
factor  =10 

Asymmetrical 
pennant 
cycle 

T 

None  for  ^ 

operations 

Maximum  duty 

at  power 

factor  =  0  for 

N 
^operations 

S 

None 

Note  —  Tap-changers  employing  the  asymmetrical  pennant  cycle  are  normally  used 
with  load  current  flow  in  one  direction  only. 


APPENDIX    B 

{Clause  8.6.3) 

SIMULATED  dRCUTTS  FOR  TESTS 

B-1.  Two  proven  simulated  test  circuits  are  shown  in  Fig.  4  and  5,  Fig.  4 
being  a  transformer  method  and  Fig.  5  a  resistance  method. 

These  figures  are  given  for  information  only  and  the  use  of  different  circuits 
is  not  excluded. 

27 


IS'  8468-1977 


AUTOTRANSFORMER 

(OR  TRANSFORMER)  WITH 

STEP.ADIUSTABLE  VOLTAGES 


DIVERTER  SWITCH 


1.4 

=• 

Mains  contacts 

?,a 

= 

Transition  contacts 

R 

« 

Transition  resistor 

x^ 

t= 

Adjustable  reactor 

^AB    "    r/Bc~^Ac=' Three-phase  supply  voltage 

A       ^    Test  current,  to  be  adjusted  by  means  of  C/,d  and  X^^ 

Uitf    ~    Step-voltage  relevant  to  A 

Note  —  In  order  to  meet  the  requirements  under  8.6.1  and  8.6.2  and  to  take  into  ac- 
count the  reactances  of  the  circuit  and  supply,  the  current  and  voltage  values  occurring 
on  the  four  contacts  shall  be  controlled  and  when  necessary  suitably  adjusted,  for  example 
by  means  of  variations  of  the  Uj,n*  X%  and  R  values  and/or  of  the  mutual  phase  of  the 
voltage  vectors. 

-iFio;-«l  Transformer  Method 
28 


ISt8l68.1»77 


POWER  DIVIDER 


1»  4  ■•  nuiin  contact! 
2«  3  «  transition  contacts 
Ug  «■  single  phase  supply 
volUge 
i{|, . . .» i2i  3B  ohmic  resutors 
fonning  the 
power  divider 


DIVERTER  SWITCH 


Note  —  The  calculated  current  and  voltage  values  occurring  m  the  whole  tap<hange 
operation  on  the  four  contacts  ihaU  be  used  to  calcuUtc  the  oower  divider.  InUie  caie 
under  consideration  (flag  cycle  on  a  4-contacts  diverter  switch)  the  formulae  for  the  most 
onerous  conditions»  are: 


«i 


^-AW-%+1/A 


Vt 


where 


T." 

-I 


and 


e/. 


W-u, 


/^  /•    "•  switched  current  rms  values  of  contacts  1  and  4 
(/j,  t/t  —  recovery  voltage  rms  values  of  conUcU  I  and  2 
Utp  U%  >•  applied  voltage  rms  values  of  contacts  3  and  4 
l^  /«    ■»  making  current  rms  values  of  contacts  3  and  4 
In  order  to  meet  the  requirements  under  %Al  and  %Ml  and  to  take  into  account  the 
impedance  of  the  supply,  the  current  and  voltage  values  occurring  on  the  four  contacts 
shall  be  controlled  and  wnen  necessary  adjusted  by  means  of  small  variations  of  the  i?i 
ohmic  value* 

Fio.  5    Rbssttanqb  Method 

29 


IStMtt.l»77 

APPENDIX    C 

{Clause  8.8) 

METHOD  OF  DETERMINING  THE  EmnVAUNT  TEM- 
PERATURE OF  THE  TRANSmON  RESISTOR  USING 
POWER  PULSE  CURRENTS 

G-1.  Set  up  the  resistor  in  a  tap-changer  or  in  a  thermally  equivalent  situa- 
tion, suitable  arrangements  bemg  made  to  measure  the  temperature  of  the 
resistance  material.  The  thermocouples  or  thermometers  for  measuring 
the  temperature  of  the  cooling  medium  should  be  positioned  not  less  than 
25  mm  below  the  lowest  point  of  the  resistance  material. 

C-2*  Measure  and  record  the  temperatures  of  the  resistance  material  and 
of  the  cooling  medium  at  the  start  of  the  test. 

C^,  The  test  shall  be  performed  with  rms  current  /p,  the  value  of  which 
is  obtained  from: 


ti) 


where 

/i  =  the  current  values; 

/i  =  the  time  during  which  the  current  1%  is  flowing,  both  quantities 
taken  as  the  mean  value  from  the  100  oscillograms  recorded 
at  the  service  duty  test  according  to  8.6.1.1  or  if  relevant  to 
8.6.1.2(b);  and 

A  =  a  coefficient  chosen  to  suit  the  testing  requirements  of  the  re- 
sistor, the  value  adopted  to  be  between  5  and  10  bearing  in 
mind  that  the  heating  phenomenon  shall  rqmain  adiabatic. 

The  resistor  shall  be  sul^ected  to  the  above  current  for  a  number  of  times 
corresponding  to  one  half  of  one  cycle  of  operations.  The  current  appli- 
cation time  shall  be  determined  from: 

U=zk.  £    ti 

C-4.  The  rest  period,  during  which  current  does  not  flow  through  the  re- 
sistor shall  be  equal  to  the  minimum  time  interval  that  can  occur  between 
two  consecutive  operations  of  the  tap-changer. 

C-5.  To  determine  the  peak  temperature,  extrapolation  of  recorded  values 
may  be  necessary. 

30 


BUREAU  OP  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Mmak  Bhsvwi,  9  Sahadur  Shah  Zater  Marg,  NEW  DELH1 1 1 0002 

Talaphonaa:  323  0131 .  323  3375. 323  9402 

Fax:91  11  3234062,91  11  3239399.  91  11  3239382 

Telegrams :  Manaksanstha 

(Common  to  all  Offioes) 

CmntnlLMboMory:  Talaphona 

Rot  No.  20«.  Sili  IV.  SaNbabad  Industrial  Area.  Sahibabad  201010  8-77  00  32 

Central :  Manak  Bhavan.  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  NEW  DELH1 1 10002  323  76  17 

^Eastern :  1/14  OT  Scheme  VII M.  V.I.P.  Road.  Manlctda.  CALCUTTA  700054  337  06  62 

Northern :  SCO  335-336.  Sector  34.A.  CHANDIGARH  160022  60  38  43 

Southern :  C.I.T.  Campus.  IV  Cross  Road.  CHENNAI 6001 13  235  23  1 5 

tWestom':Manakalaya.E9.  Behind  Marol Telephone E)cchange.Andheri (East).  8329295 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branch  Offlemm:: 

'Pushpak*.  Nurmohamed  Shaikh  Marg.  Khanpur.  AHMEDABAD  380001  550 1 3  4iS 

tPeenya  Industrial  Area.  1  st  Stage.  Bangalore-Tumkur  Road.  839  49  55 
BANGALORE  560058 

Gangotri  Complex.  5th  Fkx)r.  Bhadbhada  Road.  T.T.  Nagar.  BHOPAL  462003  55  40  21 

Ptot  No.  62-63.  Unit  VI.  Ganga  Nagar.  BHUBANESHWAR  751001  40  36  27 

Kalaikathir  Buikings.  670  Avlnashi  Road.  COIMBATORE  641037  21  01  41 

Rot  No.  43.  Sector  16  A.  Mathura  Road.  FARIDABAD 121001  8-28  88  01 

SavHri  Complex,  116  G.T.  Road.  GHAZIABAD  201001  8-71  19  96 

53/5  Ward  No.29.  R.G.  Bama  Road.  5th  By-lane.  GUWAHATI 781003  54  1 1  37 

5-8-56C.  L.N.  Gupta  Marg.  Nampally  Statton  Road.  HYDERABAD  500001  20 1 0  83 

E-52.  Chitarariian  Marg.  C-Scheme.  JAIPUR  302001  37  29  25 

1 17/418  B.  Sarvodaya  Nagar.  KANPUR  208005  21  68  76 

Seth  Bhawan,  2nd  Floor,  BeNnd  Leela  Onema,   Naval  Kishore  Road.  23  8923 
LUCKNOW  226001  ' 

NIT  BUikling.  Second  Fk>or.  Gokulpat  Market.  NAGPUR  440010  52  51  71 

PatNputra  Industrial  Estate.  PATNA  800013  26  23  05 

Institution  of  Engineem  (India)  BuiMing  1 332  Shivaji  Nagar.  PUNE  41 1005  32  36  35 

T.a  No.  14/1421.  UhiversHy  P.  O.  P^daym.  IHIRUVANANTHAPURAM  695034  6  21  17 


*Sales  Offioe  Is  at  5  Chowringhee  Approach,  P.O.  Princep  Street,  27  1 0  85 

CALCUTTA  700072 

tSales  Office  is  at  Novelty  Chambers,  Grant  Road,  MUMBAI  400007  309  65  28 

tSales  Offtoe  is  at  F  Bbck,  Unity  BuiMIng,  Narashlmaraja  Square.  222  39  71 

BANGALORE  560002 

Printed  i*  Mntoprifii,  New  Ddhi,  A  :  5736847 


