IS 12448

( Part 9 ) : 1992 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

'

BASICTESTINGPROCEDURESAND MEASURINGMETHODSFOR BLECTROMECHANICALCOMPONENTSFOR ELECTRONICEQUIPMENT
PART 9 CABLE-CLAMPING TESTS, E-XPLOSION HAZARD TESTS, CHEMICAL RESISTANCE TESTS, FIRE HAZARD TESTS, R.F. RESISTANCE TESTS, CAPACITANCE TESTS, SHIELDING AND FILTERING TESTS AND MAGNETIC INTERFERENCE TESTS

UDC

621'38'038

+ 621'31 : 621'317'3

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

dkfarch 1992

Price Crow) a

Electromechanical

Components

for Electronic

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 007

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 9 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the electromechanical components for electronic equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The object of this slandard is to lay down uniform methods of tests for Cable-clamping, Explosion hazard, Chemical resistance, Fire hazard, r.f. resistance, Capacitance and Magnetic interference of Electromechanical components. The standard is based, without any technical change on IEC Pub 512-9 ( 1977 ) `Electromechanical ccmponents for electronic equipment; Basic testing procedures and measuring methods : Part 9 : Cable-clampirg, explosionhazard, chemical resistance, fire hazard, r.f. resistance, capacitance and magnetic interference of electromechanical components', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding oflnumerical values ( revised )`.

IS 12448 ( Part 9 ) : 1992

Indian Standard BASIC TESTING PROCEDURES AND MEASURING METHODS FOR ELECTROMECHANICAL COMPONENTS FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
PART 9 CABLE-CLAMPING TESTS, EXPCOSION HAZARD TESTS, CHEMICAL RESISTANCE TESTS, FIRE HAZARD TESTS, R.F. RESISTANCE TESTS, CAPACITANCE TESTS, SHIELDING AND FILTERING TESTS AND MAGNETIC INTERFERENCE TESTS 1 SCOPE

The specimen shall be prepared and mounted accordance with the detail specification. 3.3 Test Method

in

1.1This standard ( Part 9 ) covers test methods for measuring cable-clamping tests, explosion hazard tests, chemical resistance tests, fire hazard tests, r.f. resistance tests, capacitance tests, and filtering tests and magnetic shielding interference tests.
2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed necessary adjunts to this standard: IS No. ,900O ( Part 191 Set 1 > : 1986 Title Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : Part 19 Test U: Robustness of terminations and integral mounting devices, Section 1 Test Ual: Tensile ( first revision ) Basic testing procedures and measuring methods for eleccomponent tromechanical for electronic equipment: Part 2 General examination, continuity and electrical tests, contact resistance insulation tests and voltage Section 1 stress tests, General requirements TESTS Robustness below are

With the specimen rigidly mounted in such an attitude that the cable/wire bundle is in a horizontal position, a bending moment shall be produced by applying a specified vertical force to the cable/wire bundle at a specified distance from the cable-clamp, This force shall be increased at a rate not to exceed 20 N/s until the specified value is reached. It shall be maintained at that value for 1 min. The force shall then be removed and the cable returned to the horizontal attitude. The specimen is then rotated at 90" increments around the horizontal axis. At each 90" increment, the specified bending moment is reapplied. This test shall be repeated the number stated in the detail specification. 3.4 Fiual Measurements The specimen shall be examined visually in accordance with Test la at the junction of the cable/wire bundle and the clamping device and at the junction of the clamping device and the component or sub-assembly. 3.5 Requirements There shall be no damage bundle, or to the specimen. to the cable/wire of times

12448 ( Part 2/ Set 1): 1988

3 CABLE-CLAMPING

3.0 Test 17a: Cable-Clamp -3.1 General

The object ofthis test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a cableclamping device to withstand mechanical stresses likely to be encountered during normal usage. .3.2 Preparation of the Specimen

The cable/wire bundle shall not be displaced permanently by more than the amount specified in the detail specification. 3.6 Details When this specification, specified:
to be Specified

test the

is required by the detail following details shall be

The specimen shall consist of the specified cable/wire bundle fitted in the normal manner -to its associated component or sub-assembly by means of the cable-clamping device.
1

a) Preparation of the specimen and type of cable/wire bundle to be used and whether contacts have to be connected.

IS 12448 ( Part 9 ) : 1992

b) Mounting of the specimen; c) Force and torque to be applied and point of application; d) Number of applications; e) Requirements for final measurements, and f) Any deviation from the standard test method. 4 TEST 17b: CABLE-CLAMP TO CABLE ROTATION
4.0 General RESISTANCE

b) Mounting of the specimen; cl Number and speed of rotations; 4 Requirements for final measurements; and
Any e> deviation method. from the standard test

5 TEST 17~: CABLE-CLAMP TO CABLE PULL ( TENSILE
5.0 General

RESISTANCE )

The object of this test is to detail a standard method to assess the ability of a cable-clamping device to allow rotary move of the cable/wire bundle without damage to the external surface the cable/wire bundle the cable-clamping device, the component or the sub-system. 4.1 Preparation of the Specimen

The object ~of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a cableclamping device to prevent longitudinal movement of the cable/wire bundle. 5.1 Preparation of the Specimen

The specimen shall consist of the specified cable/wire bundle fitted in the normal manner to its associated component or sub-assembly by means of the cable-clamping device. The specimen shall be prepared and mounted in accordance with the detail specification. The specimen shall not be wired. 5.2 Test Method With the specimen rigidly mounted in such an attitude that the cable/wire bundle is in a vertical position, a specified tensile force shall be applied axially to the free end of the cable/wire bundle. This force shall be increased gradually at a rate not exceeding 20 N/s until the specified value is reached. The maximum value shall be maintained for 1 min. 5.3 Final Measurements The specimen shall be examined visually according to Test at the junction of the cable/ wire bundle and the clamping device and its associated component or sub-assembly. 5.4 Requirements There shall be no damage such as would impair operation and the cable/wire bundle shall be displaced by not more than the amount specified in the detail specification. 5.5 Details tobe Specified When this test is required by the detail specihcation, the following details shall be specified:

The specimen shall consist of the specified cable/wire bundle fitted in the normal manner to its asscciated component or sub-system by means of the cable-clamping device. The specimen shall consist of the specified cable/wire bundle fitted in the normal manner to its associated component or sub-system by means of the cable-clamping device. The specimen shall be prepared and mounted in accordance with the details specification. 4.2 Test Method The free end of the cable/wire bundle shall be deflected~at an angle of 45" to 50" to the axis of the entry to the specimen and rotated 360". The number and the maximum speed of the rotations shall be stated in the detail specification. During the test, the cable/wire bundle shall be subjected to a torque or a pull not greater than the minimum value necessary to maintain the proper alignment of the cable/wire bundle. 4.3 Final Measurement The specimen shall be examined visually in accordance with Test at the junction of the cable/wire bundle and the clamping device and at the junction of the clamping device and the component or sub-assembly. 4.4 Requirements There shall no damage to the cable-wire external surface nor to the specimen. 4.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Preparation of the specimen and type of cable/wire bundle to be used; 2 bundle

4 Preparatiou

of the specimen and type of cable/wire bundle to be used;

b) Mounting of the specimen; 4 Force to be applied: d) Requirements for final measurements; e) Any deviation from the standard
method.

and test

IS 12448 ( Part 9 ) : 1992 6 TEST 17d: CABLE-CLAMP TO CABLE TORSION 6.0 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a cable-clamping device to prevent the rotation of the cable/wire bundle around its axis. 6.1 Preparation of the Specimen RESISTANCE 8 CHEMICAL RESISTANCE TESTS

8.0 Test 19a: Resistance Under consideration.
8.1 Test 1Sb: Resistance

to Fluids

to Ozone

Under consideration 9 FIRE HAZARD TESTS 9.0 Test 20a: Flammability Under consideration. 10 TEST 20b: FIREPROOFNESS Under consideration.

The specimen shall consist of the specified cable/ wire bundle fitted in the normal manner to its associated component or sub-assembly by means of the cable-clamping device. The specimen shall be prepared and mounted accordance with the detail specification. 6.2 Test Method With the specimen rigidly mounted, a torque shall be applied to the cable/wire bundle at a specified distance from the cable-clamping device. This torque shall be increased gradually at a rate not exceeding 0'5 Nm/s until the speciThe maximum value shall fied value is reached. be maintained for 1 min. 6.3 Final Measurements The specimen shall be examined visually according to Test at the junction of the cable/ wire bundle and the clamping device and at the junction of the clamping device and the component or sub-assembly. 6.4 Requirements The cable/wire bundle shall not have slipped or rotated within the clamping device nor shall the clamp have moved in relation to the component or sub-assembly body beyond the limits specified in the detail specification. 6.5 Details to be Specified When this specification, specified: test is required by the detail the following details shall be in

11 R.F. RESISTANCE

TESTS

11.0 Test 21a: R.F. Shunt Resistance 11.1 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to determine the value of r.f. shunt resistance which degrades the Q-factor of an L/C circuit when a component is connected in parallel. This value is expressed in terms of a parallel clamping resistance. 11.2 Preparation of the Specimen

The specimen shall be prepared and mounted according to the detail specification. 11.3 Test Method The r.f. shunt resistance shall be measured with suitable measuring equipment. The measuring point shall be specified in the detail specification. The measuring error shall not exceed &lo%. The test frequency shall be specified in the detail specification. The preferred frequencies are: 1 MHz, 10 MHz, 30 MHz and 100 MHz. 11.4 Requirements The value of r.f. shunt resistance shall be not less than the value specified in the detail specification. 11.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following details shall be specified: a) Preparation specimen; and mounting of the

a) Preparation

of the specimen and type of cable/wire bundle to be used; b) Mounting of the specimen; 4 Details of the test; 4 Value of the torque, direction and point of application; 4 Requirements for final measurements; and f> Any deviation from the standard test method. HAZARD TEST

7 EXPLOSION

7.0 Test 18a: Explosion Hazard

Under consideration. 3

b) Measuring points; c) Measuring frequency; d) Minimum value of r.f. shunt resistance; and e) Any deviation from the standard test method.

IS 12448 ( Part 9 ) : 1992 12 CAPACITANCE TESTS 12.0 Test 22a: Capacitance 12.1 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to determine the capacitance between conductive elements of electromechanical components. 12.2 Preparation of the Specimen The preferred measuring frequencies 1 kHz f 200H2, 1 MHz f 200 kHz 12.4 Requirements The value of capacitance shall not exceed t he values specified by the-detail specification. 12.5 Details to be Specified When the test is required by the detail the _following details shall be specification, specified: a) Preparation of the specimen; b) Mounting of the specimen; c> Contact combinations to be measured; d) Value of the measuring frequency; e) The maximum permitted value(s) of the capacitance(s); and f) Any deviation from the standard test method. 13 SHIELDING AND FILTERING TESTS are:

The specimen shall be prepared and mounted according to the detail specification. 12.3 Test Method Any one of the following may be measured: contact combination

4 between one contact
parts, point; - all - all - all all connected other contacts, metal parts, mounting

and the following to earth at a common

plate; contacts, connected the to

13.0 Test 23a: Coupling Resistance Under consideration. 14 TEST 23b: FILTERING Under consideration. 15 TEST 23~: CROSSTALK Under consideration. 16 MAGNETIC INTERFERENCE TESTS

b) between any two adjacent

following parts all being earth at a common point; - all other contacts, j
-

-

all metal parts, all mounting plates;

any c>

other measuring point or operating condition -as specified by the detail specification.

16.0 Test 24a: Test of Residual Magnetism Under consideration. 17 TEST24b: MAGNETIC INFLUENCE A COMPONENT ON A COMPASS Under consideration. OF

The capacitance shall be measured at a frequency as specified by the detail specification, using a suitable test set, for example, a capacitance bridge which will ensure an accuracy of rt5%.

4

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Brreau of Indian Standard9 Act, I9S6 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to co_pyright be addressed to the Director (Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of lndian Standards should ascertain that they are in latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent following reference :
l

Dot : No. LTD 007 ( 1095 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII-M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 0216 6 32 92 95

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARI~DABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat Press, Delhi,

India

