**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9270 (1979): 1, 4-Diethoxy Benzene [PCD 9: Organic 
Chemicals Alcohols and Allied Products and Dye 
Intermediates] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
1, 4-DIETHOXY BENZENE 



IS: 9270- 1979 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 



UDC 547'5fc5 , 2 T 272 I : b67'28J/ , 2B5 




(£) Copyright 1980 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK llf {A VAN, 9 BAHADUR Ml AH ZAKAR MARG 

NEW DELHI !lt»02 

Gr 2 




Jifptt 1980 



IS : 9270 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
1, 4-DIETHOXY BENZENE 

Dye Intermediates Sectional Committee, PCDC 1 1 

Chairman Representing 

Shri Rajendra Shanker Indian Dyestuff Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Dr S. S. Gupte ( Alternate to 
Shri Rajendra Shanker ) 
Dr S. C. Amin Universal Dyestuff Industries Ltd, Vadodara 

Dr Y. B. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Atre Hickson & Dadajee Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. S. Murty ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. D. Bhardwaj Ajanta Chemical Industries, New Delhi 

Shri Kapil Dev ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. M. Brahme Atic Industries Ltd, Bulsar 

Tshri M. V. Desai Atul Products Ltd, Bulsar 

Dr S. R. G. Sarma { Alternate ) 
Dr S. Kalyanaraman Suhrid Geigy Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri N. G. Amin ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Kamath I.C.I. ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri N. C. Bakshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. A. Kulkarni Amar Dye-ChemXtd, Bombay 

Shri V. K. Menon ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. L. Rathi Sudarshan Chemical Industries Ltd, Pune 

Dr N. D. Ojha ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Rindani Sandoz ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. M. Gandhi ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Sapasivan Ciba-Geigy of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. N. Khopkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Santokh Singh National Chemical Industries Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Kulwant Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Saxena Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Ltjthra ( Alternate ) 
Dr H. A. Shah Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industries, New Delhi 

Shri G. G. Sutaone ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1980 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the laid Act. 



IS: 9270 -1979 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. J. Shah Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Shbi B. M. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Db D. R. Sridhab Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi B. S. Tbivedi ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. V. Stjbbamaniam Colour-Chem Ltd, Bombay 

Db K. S. Vajandab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Mtjkund Turakhia The DyestufF Manufacturers* Association of India, 

Bombay 
Shbi Anil Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. G. Upadhye Synthofine Chemicals of India Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi H. K. Venkataramaiah Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani 

( Maharashtra ) 
Shbi M. S. Saxena, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio-Member ) 



Director ( P&C ) 



Secretary 

Dr R. A. Khan 
Assistant Director ( P&C ), ISI 



IS s 9270 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
1, 4-DIETHOXY BENZENE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 27 July 1979, after the draft finalized by the Dye Intermediates 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Products Division Council. 

0.2 1, 4-Diethoxy benzene ( C10H14O3 ) is an important dye intermediate 
used in the manufacture of dyestuffs. It is also known as hydroquinone 
diethyl ether. It is also used in perfumes, cosmetic preparations, wetting 
agents for paints and lacquers and plastics and in suntan lotions and 
creams. It is represented by the following structural formula: 



ac 2 H 5 




0C 2 H 5 



1, 4-Diethoxy Benzene 

(Molecular Mass 166' 1) 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of 
sampling and test for 1, 4-diethoxy benzene. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 9270 - 1979 

2. REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 Description — The material shall be in the form of very pale cream- 
coloured granules or flakes. 

2.2 The material shall also comply with the requirements given in 
Table 1. 





TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR 


. i. 


4-DIETHOXY BENZENE 


Sl 
No. 

(1) 


Characteristic 
(2) 


Requirement 

(3) 


Method of Test 

( Ree to Cl No. in 

Appendix A ) 

(4) 


i) 

ii) 
iii) 


Moisture content, percent by 

mass, Max 
Crystallizing point, °C, Min 
Ash, percent by mass, Max 




2-0 

69*5 
0-2 


A-l 

A-2 
A-3 



3. PACKING AND MARKING 

3.1 Packing — The material shall be packed in steel drum ( see 
IS : 2552-1970* ) lined with suitable polyethylene film or as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier. Each container shall be 
securely closed. 

3.2 Marking — Each container shall bear legibly and indelibly the 
following information: 

a) Name of the material; 

b) Name of the manufacturer and his recognized trade-mark, if any; 

c) Batch number; and 

d) Gross, net and tare mass. 

3.2.1 The containers may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for 
conformity to that standard as a further safeguard, Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manu- 
facturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



♦Specification for steel drums ( galvanized and ungalvanized ) {first revision ). 



IS : 9270 - 1979 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 Representative samples of the material shall be drawn as prescribed 

in 3 of IS : 5299-1969*. 

4.2 Number of Tests 

4.2.1 Tests for crystallizing point shall be conducted on each of the 
individual samples. 

4.2*2 Tests for the remaining characteristics, namely, moisture and ash 
shall be conducted on the composite sample. 

4.3 Criteria for Conformity 

4.3.1 For Individual Samples — The lot shall be declared as conforming 
to the requirements of crystallizing point, if each of the individual test 
result satisfies the relevant requirements given in Table 1 . 

4.3.2 For Composite Sample — For declaring the conformity of the lot to 
the requirements of the characteristics tested on the composite 'sample 
( see 4.2.2 ) the result for each of the characteristic shall satisfy the 
relevant requirements given in Table 1. 

5. TEST METHODS 

5.1 Tests shall be carried out according to the methods prescribed in 
Appendix A, as indicated in col 4 of Table 1. 

5.2 Quality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals 
and distilled water ( see IS : 1070-1977f ) shall be employed in tests. 

Note — 'Pure chemicals* shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 



♦Methods of sampling and tests for dye intermediates. 

\ Specification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ), 



IS : 9270 - 1979 

APPENDIX A 

( Table 1, and Clause 5.1 ) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 1, 4-DIETHOXY BENZENE 

A-l. DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT 

A-l.l Apparatus — Vacuum oven maintained at a temperature of 45°G 
and residual pressure of 50 to 60 mm of mercury. 

A-1.2 Procedure — Weigh accurately about 30 g of the sample in a petri 
dish. Place it in the vacuum oven and dry overnight. Weigh the dried 
product and calculate the moisture percent from the loss of mass. 

A-1.3 Calculation 

Moisture content, percent by mass = — jr^~ 

where 

m = loss in mass in g of the material upon drying, and 
M = mass in g of the material taken for the test. 

A-l.3.1 The dried sample may be used for the determination of 
crystallizing point. 

A-2. DETERMINATION OF CRYSTALLIZING POINT 

A-2.1 Determine the crystallizing point of the material as prescribed 
in 7 of IS : 5299-1969*. 

A-3. DETERMINATION OF ASH 

A-3.1 Determine the ash content of the material as prescribed in 11.1 of 
IS : 5299-1969*. 



"Methods of sampling and tests for dye intermediates. 

6 



