( Reaffirmed 2001 )

lS t 10776 ( Part 4 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF ELECTRO-ACOUSTICAL CHARACTER-1STICS OF HEARING AIDS
PART 4 HEARING AIDS WITH BONE VIBR'ATOR

Acoustics Sectional Committee, LTDC 5
Chairman

DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist National Physpe&L;%%ory ( CSIR )
Members Representing

Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI SANDEEP AHUJA SHKIK. R. GURCJMURTHY (Alternate ) Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI R. K. BHATIA SHRIT. R. WADHWA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of~Civi1Aviation, New Delhi SHRI K. CHANDRACHUDAN SHRII. S. VEDI( Alternate ) Natize;ii Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New DR A. F. CHHAPGAR SHRIP. K. GHOSH SI-IRISHANKAR ( Alternate ) DR P. N. GUPTA SHRI R. K. JAIN Railway Board, Ministry of Railways Department of Electronics, New Delhi Electronic Component Industries Association ( ELCINA ), New Delhi

SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL KRISHAN LAL SHRI B. S. RUPRAI( Alternate ) Botton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRI J. S. MONGA SHRI M. S. MONGA( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. S. MUKHERJEE SHRISUPRIYAROY( Alternate ) All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore DR ( KUMARI) SHAILAJA NIKAM Central Electronics Engineering Research SHRI K. D. PAVATE Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI M. R. KAP~~R ( AZternate ) Central University, Hyderabad PROPB. S. RAMAKRISHNA ( Continued on page 2 )
@ Copyright 1984

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10776 ( Part 4 ) - 1984
( Continuedfrom page 1)
Members SHRI S. L. REDEY SHRI M. M. JOSHI ( Alternate ) REPRESENTATIVE SHRI M. SANKARALINGAM SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate SHRI A. K. SEN ) Representing Peic;fdectronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay;. and Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Films Division,~Bombay Directorate General of Supplies ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi & Disposals

Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI W. V. B. RAMALJNGAM ( Aiternate j Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) CDR P. K. SINHA LT R. S. DATTA ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERINTENDINO SURVEYOR OF WORKS ( FOOD ) SURVEYOR OF WORKS I/FOOD ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 (Ex-officio Member ) SHRI N. SRJNIVASAN,. Director ( Electromcs ) Secretary SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics Panel for Hearing ), ISI

Aids and Audiometers,

LTDC 5 : P4

DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR New Delhi Members SHRI SYED P. B~SHEBR DR SOHAN SINGH (Alternate) DR A. F. CHHAPGAR DR P. GHO~H SHRI PHIROZE A. PESTON JAMAS SHRI R. N. NARANC~ DR ( KUMAR~ ) SHAIZAJA NIICAM SHRI E. R. RAMACHANDRAN DR P. C. SAOAR Radiocraft

)

of India Pvt Ltd. Bangalore Laboratory ( CSIR ),

Natione;&Physical All

New

India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi Arphi Jncorporated, Bombay Alps International Pvt Ltd, New Delhi All Indja Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay The Association of Otolaryngologists of India, Bombay

IS : 10776 (Part 4 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF ELECTRO-ACOUSTICAL CHARACTERISTICS ~OF HEARING AIDS
PART 4 HEARING AIDS WITH BONE VIBRATOR

0.

FOREWORD

by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 February 1984, af?er the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The majority of hearing aids in use are of air conduction type but a small percentage use a bone vibrator instead of an earphone. The use of a bone vibrator requires a different method of measuring the output from the hearing aid and also makes it impractical to measure amplification directly in terms of acoustic gain. 0.2.1 Amplification in the case of an air conduction hearing aid is expressed as the difference between the output sound pressure level in an acoustic coupler or ear simulator and the input sound pressure level measured in a specified manner. However, with bone conduction hearing aids, the input is in terms of sound pressure level but the output will be in terms of mechanical vibration measured as an alternating force or force level. This document defines a method of expressing the input/output ratio as an acousto-mechanical sensitivity level measured on mechanical coupler. 0.3 By means of information provided in this document the performance of hearing aids with bone vibrator outputs which do not form an integral part of the hearing aid, for example, body worn hearing aids, -may be measured in a similar manner to aids with air conduction outputs.
031 Where the bone vibrator forms an integral part of the hearing aid, or where it is attached in some fixed manner to the. hearing aid ( fog. example, a headband type bone `conduction hearing aid ). performance cannot be measured in the same wav as for body worn aids, due` to the large dimensions of the mechanical coupler having to be in contadt with the specticle qrm. This document recommends a pressure method of controlling the mput sound level to the bearing aid microphone.

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted

3

IS : 10776 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 0.4 The methods described will produce a suitable basis for the exchange of information or for direct comparison of the electro-acoustical characteristics of hearing aids using bone vibrator outputs. These methods are chosen to be practical and reproducible and are based on selected fixed parameters. 0.4.1 The results obtained by the methods specified herein express the performance under the conditions of the test, but will not necessarily agree exactly with the performance of the hearing aid under practical conditions of use. 0.5 The methods of measurement of electro-acoustical hearing aids as being covered by~a series of standards following individual parts: characteristics of consisting of the

Part 1 General measurements for air-conduction hearing aids Part 2 Additional measurements for hearing aids with induction pick-up coil input Part 3 Additional measurements for hearing aids with automatic gain control circuits Part 4 Measurements of characteristics of hearing aids with bone vibrator outputs. 0.6 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Dot: 29 ( C. 0. > 133 `Method of measurement of characteristics of hearing aids with bone vibrators', issued by International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.7 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 4 1 specifies methods of measurement characteristics of hearing aids using bone vibrator outputs. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part 3 /Set 5 I-1966t shall apply, in addition to the following. *Rulesfor rounding off numerical values (revised ). tElectrotechnica1vocabulary: Part 3 Acoustics,Section 5 Speechand h&ring. 4 of the

Is

J

fO776( ,psirt Is,+: 1984.:

2.1 Bohe Vibrator - An electromechanical transducer intended to produce the sensation of hearing by vibrating the cranial bones. 2.2 Mechanical Coupler - A device designed to present a specified mechanical impedance to a vibrator applied with a specified static force, and equipped with a mechano-electric transducer to determine the alternating force level referred to the surface of contact between vibrator and mtchanical coupler. 2.3 Alternating Force Level ( Force Level ) - Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the rms value of the force transmitting the vibration to the reference value of 1 micronewton ( 1 PN ), expressed in decibels.
2.4 Output Force Level ( OFL ) - The alternating force level produced at a specified frequency on a mechanical coupler by the bone vibrator of the

hearing aid under test. The abbreviation
2.5 Output Force Level Frequency

for this term is OFL.
Level Curve ) The

Response ( Force

output force level ( OFL ) produced on the mechanical coupler by the hearing aid expressed as a function of frequency under specified test conditions for constant input sound pressure level. 2.6 Saturation Force Level - The highest obtainable output force level obtainable at a specified frequency, regardless of inp,ut sound pressure level.
2.7 Saturation Force Level Curve -

Saturation

force level expressed as a

function of frequency.
2.8 Maximum Saturation Force Level . force level curve.

The highest value on a saturation

2.9 Output Force Level for Input Sound Pressure Level of 90 dB ( OFLo ) -- The output force level at a specified frequency produced with an input sound pressure level of 90 dB and the hearing aid gain control in the full-on position. The abbreviation for this term is OFL,,. 2.10 Reference Point ( of a Hearing Aid ) -- A point on the hearing aid chosen for the purpose of defining its position, normally the centre of the main sound entry to the aid. 2.11 Ado&to-Mechanical Sensitiviiy - At a speciked frequencg and under specified operating conditions the quotient of the alternating force produced on th,e mechanical coupler by the .hearing aid .+I$ the, .sound
pr&$ure `at the TeferehCe p&t&, the hearbg..&d,. .: I, ~' --..- .-i: - al :---:I-:-\

5

IS : 10776 ( Part 4 ), - 1984 2.12 Aconsto-Mechanical Sansitivitv Level - Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the acoueto-mechanical sensitivity to the reference 1 I-IN expressed in decibels. sensitivity of 20 i*Pa
measurements

NOTB- To calculate

the acousto-mechanical made in this standard the following

formula may be used:

sensitivity

I8vel ( AMSL ) from level to

AMSL = ! OFL expressed in dB ref 1 p Newton ) .- ( Sound pressure the hedring aid microphone in dB ref 20 p Pascal ) AMSL = OFL INPUT SPL

2.13 Reference Test Gain Control`Position

aid gain control coupler ( 15 -f of 60 dB at the appropriate. If permit this, the used.

- The setting of the hearing that provides an output force level on the mechanical 1 ) dB less than OFL,,. for an ~input sound pressure level reference test frequen.,y of 1 600 Hz or 2-500 Hz, when the acousto-mechanic.al sensitivity level available will not full on gain control position of the hearing aid shall be

2.14 Basic Force Level Frequency Response - The output force level frequency response obtained with the gain control in the reference test gain position and with an input SPL of 60 dB. 3. GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MEASUREMENTS

3.1 Provisions of 3, 4 and 5 of Part 4. TEST EQUIPMENT

l* of this standard shall apply.

4.1 Equipment

for the Measurement of Output Force Level - The equipment used for measurement of output force level on the mechanical coupler produced by the hearing aid, shall comply with the following requirements.

4.1 .l For all measurements a mechanical coupler in accordance with `Indian Standard specification on mechanical coupler ( under preparation )' shall be used. 4.1.2 The-outpilt indicator used ?hall give rms indication within a tolerance of f0'5 dB at a signal crest factor of not more than 3.
NATE - lt is WCI!known that the type of output indicator etiployed &a9 influence the teat fosu~s si&ifiWntly if a nb Gnusoidal Vidtage is bung measured Such ~~~~;~itiUsoldal voltages may be pre3ent wMn lnaklf@tnet&irementdwith high jrlput

* *Methods of measllrement of elcctro~achustical characteristics of heating aids: Part 1 benera measurements for Air condu&n hearing aids,

6

Ts : 10776 1 Part 4 ) - 1atM 4.1.3The output force levelcorresponding to hum, vibration, thermal agitation and other noise sources shall be sufficiently low to ensure that the reading shall drop at least 10 dB when the test signal is switched off. For this purpose a high-pass filter not affecting frequencies of 200Hz and above may be employed.
NOTE - Under certain conditions it is necessary to use a selective measuring syrtem in order to ensure that the response of the hearing aid to the signal can be differentiated from unwanted noise. The performance of any selective system used should be stated in the report.

4.1.4The overall accuracy of the electronic measuring system following the mechanical coupler shall be within f 0'5 dB at a specified frequency. 4.1.5 The calibration of the mechanical coupler shall with `Indian Standard specificatlan on mechanical prepuration )`.
be in accordance coupler ( under

NOTE- The calibration of the mechanical coupler should be repeated sufficiently often to ensure that it remains within the permitted limits during measurements.

4.2 Equipment for Automatic Frequency

Recording

4.2.1 The equipment shall be capable of maintaining at the test point all requisite sound pressure levels between 50 and 90 dB within such
tolerances as specified ency on a recorder automatically recorded steady state value over in 4 of Part I* of this standard. The indicated frequchart shall be accurate within & 5 percent. The values shall not differ by more than 1 dB from the the frequency range 200 to 5 000 Hz.

4.2.2 The automatic recording equipment may be either of the continuous sweep type or of the discrete frequency type ( for example microprocessor type ). In the latter case, a sufficient number of test frequencies shall be used to provide well-defined response curves. 5. CONDlTIONS
5.0 Provision

FOR TEST
shall apply in addition to the

of 5 of Part l* of this standard

following. 5.1 Bone VibFatot and Mechanical

Coupler - The bone vibrator and mechanical coupler shall both be brought to the proper operating temperature of 25 r4 2 `CL Deviations of up to J-Sac may be &iwed, if the proper operating temperature cannot bt: achieved, provided that
*Methods of measummebt of .eteetro-acoustical charaeteristies of Part 1 General measurements for air-condktion hearing aids,

hearing aids;

7

IS : 10776.(;P~rt.4..~;.1984.' manufacturer's data for variation of sensitivity of the mechanical coupler -with temperature is used to correct any results. Impedance variations howevet cannot be corrected. The temperature stated. of the mechanical coupler at the time of test shall be

NOTE - Stringent requirements for the temperature of the mechanical coupler are necessary due to considerable variations in both sensitivity and impedance of the coupler with temperature. As the mass of the mechanical coupler is large, long periods of time for example 24 hours may elapse before its temperature stabilizes.

5.2 Locating the Hearing Aid in the Sound Field
5.2.1 Free Field Measurements - This method is only applicable to hearing aids with separate bone vibrators. That portion of the hearing aid containing the microphone shall be placed in the sound field in accordance with-the test conditions specified in Part 1 of this standard. The Mechanical coupler to measure the output from the bone vibrator shall be situated so as not to influence the sound field at the test point. 5.2.2 Pressure Measurements - This method is applicable to any type of bone conduction hearing aid. The sound field at the hearing aid reference as, given in 5.2.2.1 point shall be controlled. For hearing aids with separate bone vibrators that part of the aid containing the microphone shall, where possible, be removed from the vicinity of the mechanical coupler.

Figure 1 is an example of an arrangement for controlling the sound field in the case of a hearing aid with an integral bone vibrator.
NOTE -

radiated

When a controlling microphone is used care should be taken airborne noise froin the bone vibrator affecting that microphone.

to avoid

5.2.2.1 Control of the soundjield a ) By means of a monitoring microphone - To achieve adequately constant SPL at the reference point over the required frequency range the distance between the centre of the diaphragm of the monitoring microphone ( preferably half-inch ) and the reference point of the hearing aid shall be between 5 mm and 10 mm. Hearing aids with directional microphones shall be oriented with direction for maximum sensitivity pointing towards the sound source.

I

IS : 10776 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 b ) WzIh electronic data storage - An alternative method of keeping the sound pressure level cnnstant is to let the pressure calibrated microphone, 5 mm to 10 mm from the reference point of the hearing aid, measure the SPL at discrete frequencies with the model of hearing aid to be tested in its test position. By suitable means, for instance digital equipment or a tape recorder, store and subsequently reproduce the required voltages for constant SPL at the reference point with either the monitoring microphone still in place or a dummy simulating that microphone in the same place in order to fulfil pressure method conditions.
NOTE - Methorls of test that do dummy in place. may give diperent ( b). Different results may also occur aid other than the model under test in not keep the monitoring microphone or a results betbleen the methods given in ( a ) and if the sound field is calibrated with a hearing place.

5.3 Applying

the Bone Vibrator to the Mechanical

Coupler

5.3.1 Locating the Bone Yibrctor on the Mechanical Coupler - The centre of the vibrating surface of the bone vibrator shall coincide with the centre of the mechanical coupler pad. At its centre the vibrating surface shall be perpendicular to the axis of the mechanical coupler.

Figures purposes.

1 and 3 show examples of a spectacle aid mounted for test held in place on the

Figure 2 is an example of a bone vibrator mechanical coupler by its headband.
ROTATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE I12 INCH CONTROL -

HEARING

AID

REFERENCE

FIG. 1

AN EXAMPLEOF A H~~AR~NG kit WITH AN INTEGRAL BONE VIBRATORUNDER TEST

9

fSr10776(Part 4)-1984
BONE VIERATOR

DAMPING

MATERIAL

BASE

OF COUPLER

FOAM RUBBER PAOS:BUlLO OBTAIN 2.0 N STATIC FORCE

UP TO

FIG.

2

AN EXAMPLEOF A BONE VIBRATORWITH HEADBANDMOUNTED IN THE MECHANICAL COUPLER

HINGE

HOOK

SPE AID

COUPLER

_ ._.__

l=Y

1

POINT

Lf$NGE

--UAW

FIG. 3 AN EXAMPLEOF A HEARINGAID WITH AN INTEGRAL BONE VIBRATOR UNDER TEST AND HEARINGAID TEMPLE ATTACHED1~0 HINGE

10

IS : iin'
Figure 4 shows an example of a headband hearing aid, mounted for test purposes.
BOhi VBRATOR ELECTRICAL WIRING

( Part 4 j -i984

type bone conduction

BASE OAMPING

OF

COUPLER MATERIAL

FIG. 4 AN EXAMPLE OFA BONEVIBRATOR WITK HEADBAND MOUNTEDOR THEMECHANICAL COUPLER AND AMPLIFIER WITH MICROPHONE PERMANENTLY ATTACRED TO THEHEADBAND 5.3.2 Static Force The bone vibrator shall be applied to the mechanical coupler with a static force of 2'5 rrt 0'3 N. The application of the bone vibrator to the mechanical coupler shall not add mass to the vibrator. The static force may be measured using a spring balance, care being taken that the force is measured along a line that coincides with the axis of the mechanical coupler.

6. MEASUREMENTS 6.0 Data shall be quoted for that part of the frequency range between 200 and 5 000 Hz over which the output of the hearing aid falls by at least 10 dB when the signal source is switched off. 6.1-Output Force Level Curve for an Input SPL of 90 dB ( OFLga Curve)

( see 2.Y ).
6.191 The purpose of this test is to determine the frequency response of the OFL obtained on the mechanical coupler when using an input SPL of 90 dB and with the gain control in the full-on position. 11

iS : 107$6 4 Part 4 ) - i9d4 6.1.2 Test Procedure
6.1.2.1

Turn the gain control full-on and set other

controls

to desired

positions. 6.1.2.2 Adjust the input SPL to 90 dB at a suitable frequency. 6.1.2.3 Vary the frequency of the sound source over the recommended frequency range from 200 to 5 000 Hz keeping the input SPL constant at 90 dB and record the OFL obtained on the mechanical coupler.
NOTE - As output signal at saturation will contain high levels of distortion products, the method of measurement may influence the level measured. If the output slgnal is measured through a filter centred at the test signal frequency lower levels may result than would be measured using a wide band instrument. It is therefore recommended that only wide band measurements should be made for this purpose. ( see also note below 4.1.3 ).

6.2 Full-on Force Level Frequency

Response

( see 2.5 )

6.2.1 The purpose of this test is to determine the full-on acoustomechanical sensitivity level obtainable from the hearing aid. The OFL on the mechanical coupler is measured at the full-on gain control setting with an input SPL sufficiently low to ensure essentially linear input-output, conditions.

6.2.2 Test Procedure
6.2.2.1 Turn the gain control full on and set each of the other controls to its desired position, preferably to give the widest frequency range.

6.2.2.2 At a suitable frequency adjust the input SPL to~60 dB or, if this does not produce essentially linear input-output conditions to 50 dB SPL. Essentially linear input-output conditions are considered to exist If at all frequencies within the range 200 to 5 000 Hz a change of the input SPL of 10 dB causes a change of the recorded output force level of 10 f 1 dB. The input SPL shall be stated.
NOTE - For hearing aids with certain circuit arrangements, for example, pushPull aids, non-linear input-output characteristics may be observed over a large Portion

of the operating

range.

6.2.2.3 The output force level frequency response with full-on gain is measured by varying the frequency of the sound source over the recommended frequency range 200 to 5 000 Hz keeping the input SPL constant.

6.2.2.4 The full-on acousto-mechanical sensitivity level is plotted a function of frequency and may be reported for a specified frequency. 12

as

IS : 10776 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 6.3 Basic Force Level Frequency Response 6.3.1 Test Procedure ( see 2.14 )

6.3.1.1 Adjust the gain control to the reference Test gain position ( see 2.13 ) and set other controls to desired positions, preferable to give the widest frequency range. 6.3.1.2 Vary the frequency of the sound source over the recommended frequency range 200 to 5 000 Hz keeping the input SPL constant at 60 dB and plot the OFL in the mechanical Loupler as a function of frequency, 6.4 Effect of Tone
Response 6.4.1 The purpose of this test is to show the effect of tone control position on the basic force level frequency response of the hearing aid. Control Position on the Basic Force Level Frequency

6.4.2 Test Procedure
6.4.2.1 Adjust the tone control of the hearing aid to that used in the basic position ( see 6.4 ) and set other controls to desired positions.

6.4.2.2 Adjust ( see 2.13 ).

the gain control

to the reference test

gain position

6.4.2.3 Vary the frequency of the sound source over the frequency range 200 to 5 000 Hz, keeping the input SPL constant at 60 dB. 6.4.2.4 Repeat the test with other remaining tone control~settings.
6.4.2.5 The frequency response at the various tone control settings should be plotted together with the basic frequency response in terms of the OFL on the mechanical coupler a6 a function of frequency. 6.5 Battery Current 6.5.1 The purpose of this test is to determine the battery current.

6.5.2 With the gain control in the reference test gain position measure the battery current at the reference test frequency and with an input SPL of 60 dB. 6.5.3 The direct-current chatactetistics :
a) An accuracy

measuring

system shall

have

the follotoing

-of f 5 percent 13

at the value of current measured, _

IS : 10776~( Part 4 ) - 1984

b) A direct current resistance not exccediug 50/I, whero I is the current being measured, in milliamperes. c) An alternating current impedance not exceding 1 ohm over the frequency range 200 to 5 O:;OHz.
NOTE - One method of realizing item 3 above is to bypass the current meter with a capacitor of at least 8 000 F. The capacitor should not shunt the battery or power supply.

6.6 Non-Linear

Distortion of 6.12 of Part I* of this standard shall apply.

6.6.1 Provision

6.7 Internal Noise from the Hearing Aid
6.7.1 Provision of 6.14 of Part I* of this standard shall apply. Pick-up Coil Input

6.8 Characteristics
6.8J Provisions

of Hearing Aids withlodrxtion

of Part 2t of this standard shall apply.

*Methods of measurement of electro-acouctical characteristics of hearing aids: Part 1 General measurements for air-c ,nduction 1%exing aids. tMethods of measurement of electro-aomstical characteristics of hearing ai+: Part 2 Hearing aids with ioduction pick-up coil input ( t&r prepura~io~ 1:

14

