IS 17907 : 2022 
AIT HA 
Indian Standard 


ara ANA paeta — hie TST 
— A 
Domestic Methanol Cookstove — 
Canister Type — Specification 


ICS 97.040.20 


© BIS 2022 


ART AM et 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM Aaa, 9 IENE STYR AMT, dé fact - 110002 


Nine MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2022 Price Group 11 


Oil Burning Appliances Sectional Committee, MED 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Oil 
Burning Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


India, with a vision of providing clean, cost-effective, and locally available cooking fuel, has launched 
first canister based ‘Methanol Cooking Fuel Program’. This program explores the feasibility of using 
methanol as cooking fuel for household, commercial and institutional cooking applications. It is 
informed that methanol is a much cleaner fuel and use of this fuel can provide a cleaner alternative in 
rural areas for those families which are not covered under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojna (LPG) 
and Government of India estimates that even partial use of methanol would reduce the country’s 
cooking fuel import bill by $100 billion and pollution up to 40 percent. This Indian Standard on 
domestic methanol cookstove-canister Type has been formulated with the objective to provide 
consumers with domestic cookstoves which provide quality workmanship, safety and efficiency. This 
Indian standard also covers the allowable leakage level of methanol fuel used in the cookstoves. 


In view of the relevance of this product, NITI Aayog requested BIS for a National Standard on the 
subject matter. Subsequently, R & D exercise was carried out by research team of Prof P Muthukumar, 
Smt Pratibha Maurya and Shri Lav Kumar Kaushik, from IIT Guwahati.The draft Standard proposed 
by IIT-Guwahati, which after due deliberations with the Oil Burning Appliances Sectional Committee 
MED 26 and its panel has been finalized. 


As per Rule 4 of the Petroleum Rules, 2002, containers exceeding one litre in capacity for petroleum 
Class A and five litre in capacity for petroleum Class B or Class C shall be of the type approved by the 
Chief Controller. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
DOMESTIC METHANOL COOKSTOVE — CANISTER TYPE 
— SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies construction, operation, 
safety requirements and tests for canister based 
domestic cookstoves with metallic bodies intended 
for use with methanol at normal atmospheric 
pressure. 


1.2 This Indian Standard also specify the 
characteristics of methanol to be used as a fuel in 
the Domestic Methanol cook stoves and various 
safety precautions to be followed while operating 
the stove and storing the canister. It also 
highlights the permissible limits of methanol 
vapour during operation/non-operation of the 
stove and storage of the canister. 


1.3 For convenience, this standard has been divided 
into four sections which are as follows: 

a) Section 1 Construction 

b) Section 2 Performance 

c) Section 3 General and 

d) Section 4 Safety precaution. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A, contain the 
provisions which, through their reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the 
time of publication, the editions indicated were 
valid. All standards are subject to revision and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards 
in Annex A. 


SECTION 1 CONSTRUCTION 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the nomenclature 
of the different parts of the canister-based methanol 
domestic cookstove shall be as indicated in Fig.1. 


3.1 Cannister — A canister is around or cylindrical 
container used for storing methanol fuel. Lateral 
surface of the canister is termed as the cassette and 
the cover over top surface as the cassette cover. 


3.2 Cannister Lid — A canister lid is provided to 
close the open top surface of canister to avoid the 
leakage of methanol vapour. 


4 FUEL CAPACITY 


4.1 The canisters shall be made to have a nominal 
capacity of 1.8 + 0.1 litre. The capacity shall be 
measured by filling methanol to the maximum 
capacity of the canister without spillage. There 
shall be no leakage of liquid fuel even if canister 
is tilted to 180° (as fuel is adsorbed on the surface 
of the mineral wool). 


4.2 The canister shall be able to sustain the stable 
flame during its entire combustion, that is, from 
100 percent to 15 percent of the fuel capacity and 
in the entire range of specified power level (0.4 kW 
-1.5 kW). 


5 GENERAL 


5.1 The construction of all the parts of the 
cookstove shall be sound and of high standard of 
workmanship and appropriate finishing. The 
construction shall ensure durability and shall 
comply with the safety requirements. 


5.2 Seating arrangement of the canister should be 
made such that, the gap between the canister’s open 
surface and the canister opening lever should be less 
than 0.5 mm to minimize the leakage of Methanol. 
Preferably an O-ring made up of soft metal or high 
temperature neoprene rubber can be used for 
preventing the leakage of methanol from the gap. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


Canister lid 


Wire mesh 


Mineral wool 


casste cover 


casste 


Canister 


29209, 
23828383 
258080 


S 

SS 2-20, 
292323023390 
S09592526206520 
99503030398 


Lever assembly 


Pan support 


FIG. 1 METHANOL COOKSTOVE, CANISTER TYPE, TYPICAL 


5.3 The overall design and construction of the 
canister based cookstove should be such that 
methanol concentration of below the recommended 
limit 200 in ppm results in its usage in the measured 
in the kitchen size of range of 5 m°-100 m? with an 
air exchange rate of 5-45 per h with cookstove burn 
time of 2-4 h. 


5.4 Press joining process shall be used for 
manufacturing of canister. 


6 MATERIALS 


6.1 The materials shall comply with the specified 
relevant Indian Standard (Annex A) and shall be 
appropriate with the conditions arising in the part of 
the cookstove in which they are used. The 
cookstove shall be free from swarf, grit, and other 
foreign matters. Material used in the manufacture of 
different parts shall be such that they would ensure 
safe handling and good performance of the 
cookstove throughout its reasonable life. 


6.2 Fuel Canister 


6.2.1 Canister cassette and the cassette cover shall 
be made of stainless steel as per IS 6911. Canister 
lid shall be made up either of rubber or any flexible 
material which can withstand up to 100°C 
temperature and shall not allow the leakage of 
methanol vapour. Mineral wool shall be used inside 
the canister for the storage of Methanol fuel as per 
IS 3144. 


6.2.2 Mineral wool inside the canister shall be 
packed in such a way that the normal evaporation 
rate (without combustion) of methanol at 
atmospheric pressure shall be less than 10 g/h. 


6.2.3 Canister shall be removed from the stove after 
cooking (nearly 10 min after the lever is turned off) 
and shall be closed with canister lid. 


6.3 Plastic components which are liable to get 
heated (for example, lever handle etc.) shall be free 
of fissures, distortion, blemishes and discoloration 
and shall not show signs of ageing when tested as 
per Annex B of IS 5116. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


6.4 The material used in the construction of the 
cookstoves shall be resistant to wear and 
deterioration during its normal usage. 


6.5 Holding part/handle of the lever shall be made 
up of thermosetting plastic to avoid the unwanted 
heating of handle when stove is in operation 


7 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


7.1 Common shape of a canister-based methanol 
domestic cookstove is shown in Fig.1. The general 
construction may be of single-canister or double 
canister type. 


7.2 The cookstove shall be made in sizes according 
to its capacity as given in 4.1. The overall 
dimensions of canister, the frame and cookstove 
shall be as agreed between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer. However, the cookstoves so 
manufactured shall satisfy all the performance 
requirements. 


7.3 The minimum sheet thickness of the fuel 
canister and frame shall not be less than 0.6 mm 
when measured at any point. 


8 CONSTRUCTION 


8.1 The frame of the cookstove shall be so made as 
to be firm on its base. The fuel canister shall be 
detachable. Canister shall slide freely inside the 
housing slot given in the stove and shall take its 
position on its own. Accordingly, stopper slots 
shall be provided underneath the stove. 


8.2 The fuel canister inside the stove’s body during 
working operation of the stove shall be firm on its 
base. The stopper slots provided underneath the 
stove shall provide support in operation too. 


8.3 Cookstove shall be capable of being tilted in 
any direction from the vertical position, to an angle 
of at least 15°, without overturning at that 
inclination or on its release after that. 


8.4 The fuel shall not come out of the canister when 
fully filled under atmospheric pressure and tilted to 
180°. Accordingly, the mineral wool packing shall 
be done. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


8.5 Construction of lever shall be in such a manner, 
while switching off the canister, lever should 
completely close the opening part of the canister 
and the flame should turn off immediately. 


9 DESIGN FOR MAINTENANCE 


9.1 The cookstove, including all the components, 
shall be easy to clean and maintain in good working 
order. There shall be easy access to the control and 
accessories for the maintenance and adjustment. 


9.2 The parts of the cookstove shall not be 
disconnected during operation. The canisters shall 
be so spaced that the relative distance between the 
centres and that of the adjoining canisters shall not 
be less than 180 mm. 


9.3 Canisters of same rating, model and make, shall 
be interchangeable or replaceable without affecting 
the overall performance. 


9.4 Parts, which are intended to be removable by 
the user, shall be easy to replace correctly, and 
impossible to assemble incorrectly. 


9.5 All nuts, bolts and fittings having spanner flats 
shall be capable of being removed by suitable 
spanner or be readily accessible to an adjustable 
spanner. 


9.6 While turning the lever of stove in ‘OFF’ 
position, the flame from canister should turn off 
immediately. If not, it is required to operate the 
lever for several times from ON to OFF position 
until the canister fire turn off. In such case, there 
shall be an urgent need of maintenance of (lever 
assembly) stove body for proper working of stove. 


10 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


10.1 The finishing of exposed parts shall be 
durable, without any sharp edges, easy to clean and 
not subject to excessive deterioration in normal 


use. Parts, which will come in contact with the 
foodstuff, shall be capable of being hygienically 
cleaned. All the finishing, on visual examination, 
shall show no defects, such as pin-holes, blisters 
and roughness or exposed areas of metal, which 
give rise to unduly rapid deterioration in use. The 
finished components shall meet the requirements 
covered in 10.2 to 10.4. 


10.2 Vitreous enameled components shall meet the 
requirements as given in Annex E of IS 5116. The 
test shall be carried out on a specimen measuring 
40 mm x 75 mm prepared from the same base metal 
and enamel, as the components, and fired along 
with the components to ensure identical conditions. 


10.2.1 A separate specimen shall be used for each 
test. 


10.3 If the body of the stove is electroplated, the 
top flat surface shall have a coating of a minimum 
of 10 micron of nickel followed by minimum 0.2 
micron of chromium. The coating shall be tested as 
per the requirements given in 10.3.1, 10.3.2 and 
10.3.3. 


10.3.1 The thickness of nickel plating shall be 
determined by BNF jet method or any other 
method, such as coulometric method as specified in 
IS 3203. 


10.3.2 Adhesion Test 


Cut a piece of a plated article. Hold it in a vice and 
apply a coarse file to the cut edges in such a manner 
as to raise the deposit. There shall be no separation 
between the coating and the base metal and the 
coating shall remain adherent to the base metal. 


10.3.3 Corrosion Resistance Test 
The plated article shall be subjected to a 12 h test 


as covered in IS 6910. The rating shall be assigned 
using the methods described in IS 6009. 


10.4 Paints or Similar Finishes for Cookstove 
Body 


Surfaces finished with paints or similar material 
shall conform to the following requirements: 


10.4.1 Resistance to Abrasion 


The painted surface shall be tested for resistance to 
scratching as described below: 


The apparatus required for this test shall be as per 
Fig. 2, with a 1 mm diameter steel ball fixed at the 
end of the counterpoised arm which is kept 
horizontal. 


10.4.2 Method of Test 


Apply the apparatus to the surface under test and 
move the ball after loading with not less than 1.5 
kg with a travel rate of 3 to 4 cm/s relative to the 
surface. If the indicator bulb lights, the surface is 
deemed to have been penetrated. Additionally, for 
metallic paints, a visual examination of the scratch 
is necessary in order to determine whether the film 
has been penetrated. The finish is deemed to have 
failed, if the scratch has jagged edges with width 
greater than 1 mm or penetration of the entire film. 
Clean the ball after each test. The ball shall be 
inspected frequently to verify its diameter i.e. 1 mm 
sphere. 


10.4.3 Resistance to Heating 


When the appliance is operated at its normal 
working pressure for a continuous period of 4hours 
with a pan filled with water placed on the pan 
support, there shall be no appreciable change of 
color of any part of the stove and the finish shall 
not become tacky or show other signs of 
deterioration. This does not apply to parts, which 
come in direct contact with the flame. 


10.5 The external finished surfaces shall be easily 
cleanable. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


11 STOVE LEVER 


11.1 The appliance shall have at least one lever for 
each canister. Handle of the lever shall not have any 
sharp edges. Preferably, the levers operating end 
shall be covered with a thermosetting plastic 
material for easy handling. 


11.2 The ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ status of the stove in 
terms of the lever position shall be clearly and 
durably indicated. In case of multiple canisters, 
indication of the lever and the respective canister 
operated by it shall be clearly demarcated. All 
levers shall close in the same direction. 


11.3 Levers shall not lead into Gas Passages. 
12 PAN SUPPORTS 


12.1 The design of the pan supports shall be such 
that a pan of minimum 100 mm diameter over at 
least one canister without the use of loose rings and 
also such that a minimum 125 mm diameter vessel 
remains stable over each pan support. Prongs of the 
support shall have suitable taper to accommodate 
round bottom pans. 


12.1.1 Loose pan support shall be so designed that 
it is not possible to place them firmly in other than 
proper position. 


12.1.2 The material of the pan support shall be 
metallic preferably with high corrosion resistance. 


13 STRENGTH AND RIGIDITY OF BODY OF 
THE COOKSTOVE 


When tested as specified in Annex B, the vertical 
resultant deflection of the top surface measured at 
the centre along the length of the body, shall not 
exceed 2 mm and the distance between the opposite 
sides (lengthwise and width wise) shall not change 
by more than 5 mm. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


COUNTER 

BALANCE 
SADDLE TO SLIDE TO BE FIXED TO BARE METAL OF 
FREELY IN GUIDE CHANNEL COMPONENT OM TEST 


LOCK Li N 


15 INSULATING N |) 
15 INSULATING H 
chue IE i Sj 


I 16 

i s CIRCUIT DIAGRAM 
SOLDERED TO SMALL ig SECTION AA 
LENCTH OF TUBE 


MINIMUM STROKE OF 
imm BALL 65mm 


30 R125 


FIG. 2 PAINT SCRATCH TEST APPARATUS 


SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE 
14 GENERAL CONDITIONS OF TEST 


14.1 During the tests, the initial adjustment of 
cookstove shall not be altered unless specifically 
required in the test procedure. The cookstove shall 
be adjusted and operated in accordance with the 
instructions given on or issued with the cookstove. 
Before any test is made, the cookstove shall be 
operated at its full working capacity for a sufficient 
period to remove any temporary protective coating, 
which might interfere with observations. The 
methanol canister shall be examined for leaks 
before and after test. The performance test results 
shall not be valid unless the system is sound. The 
cookstove shall be at room temperature at the start 
of each test unless or otherwise stated. 


14.2 The room in which tests are conducted shall 
be adequately ventilated but free from perceptible 
draughts. 


14.3 Except where otherwise stated, the cookstove 
shall satisfy the performance requirements using 
methanol. Wherever the combustion characteristics 
of canisters are concerned, each canister shall be 
tested separately and in all possible combinations 
with other canisters. This procedure shall be used 
for cookstove with up to four canisters. For 
cookstove with larger number of canisters, the test 
procedure becomes impossibly long and discretion 
shall be exercised to eliminate tests on 
combinations of widely separated canisters. 
Canisters which are fitted in cookstove of open 
construction are unlikely to interfere with the 
combustion of each other. 


15 FUEL CONSUMPTION 


15.1 The range of fuel consumption shall range 
between 180 and 290 g/h. 


15.2 The maximum amount of residual methanol 
left in the canister shall be less than 200 g (or 15 % 
of the initial charge) for the capacity of 1.42 kg (1.8 
litre). It shall be the sole responsibility of 
manufacturer to collect the used canisters, and 
recycle or safely dispose off them. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


15.3 Each cookstove shall give a fuel consumption 
in g/h within +10 percent of the manufacturer’s 
specified value when tested in accordance with 
Annex C. 


16 THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


When tested in accordance with the method 
described in Annex C, the thermal efficiency of the 
cookstove shall be not less than 58 percent 
considering a purity of the fuel within a range of 96 
to 99 percent and packing density (porosity) of the 
glass wool inside the canister shall be evaluated 
from the mass of the glass wool and the volume of 
the canister. 


16.1 Thermal efficiency may be declared, if it is 
more than 62 percent or more for the cookstove. 


17 SURFACE TEMPERATURE 


Temperature of any part of the cookstove that may 
be necessary to touch during its operation as well 
as the maximum canister surface temperature 
attained during three hours’ continuous operation 
of the cookstove shall not exceed 60°C, when 
measured in accordance with method prescribed in 
Annex D. Temperature of the mineral wool surface 
(where the combustion of methanol vapour and air 
takes place) immediately after switching off 
canister should lie in the range of 40 °C -50 °C. 


18 COMBUSTION EFFICIENCY 


When tested in accordance with the details laid 
down in Annex E, the Carbon monoxide (CO) to 
Carbon dioxide (CO;) ratio of the exhaust gases of 
each canister, while burning with flame shall not 
exceed 0.02. 


19 RESISTANCE TO DRAUGHT 


There shall be no extinction of the flame on the 
canister while operating at atmospheric pressure 
when the cookstove is placed in a normal (not 
localized) current of air with a velocity of 2 m/s, as 
measured with a rotating vane anemometer. The 
location of the cookstove relative to neighboring 
walls and the direction of the draught shall be 
varied to correspond to likely conditions of 
appliance installation. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


20 FUEL CREEP 


When operated under normal conditions, there 
shall be no spreading of fuel over any part of the 
cookstove so as to cause undesirable odour or any 
increase in flame size. 


21 SAMPLING 


If required, sampling and acceptance criteria for 
methanol cookstoves may be as agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 


SECTION 3 GENERAL 
22 INSTRUCTIONS 


Instructions for the safe use of the cookstove shall 
be supplied with the cookstove in Hindi, English 
and other regional languages along with pictorial 
representations. The instruction for safe use shall 
include the following: 


a) Prior to lighting the cookstove, ensure that 
all the components are undamaged and 
properly assembled in accordance with the 
design; 

b) Strict prohibition of filling/ refilling of 
methanol in the canister by the user; 

c) The filling/ refilling of methanol in the 
canister shall be done only by the 
designated agency / dealers (frequency of 
refilling cannot be defined, as it is solely 
depending on the usage). 


d) Maximum methanol consumption rate in 
g/b; 
e) Expected thermal efficiency; 


f) Methanol filled capacity in litre; 

g) Do not place the canister near flammable 
items; 

h) Do not carry or move a cookstove when it 
is in burning condition; 


j) Do not use a cookstove as a heating 
appliance; 

k) Do not breathe in fuel vapours, it may be 
injurious to health; 


m) Do not consume the fuel, it may be fatal; 


n) Canister lever shall be always in closed 
position when the stove is not in operation; 


p) Remove the canister from the stove 
immediately after 10 min of switching off 
the stove; 


q) Canister should be covered with lid when 
it is kept/stored outside or when not in use; 


r) The instructions and warnings shall 
include an illustration of the assembled 
appliance or how it shall be assembled; 

s) Place the appliance on a reasonably level 
and stable surface; and 


t) Appliance should be used in an adequately 
ventilated area to ensure satisfactory 
removal of smoke and fumes due to 
combustion and to allow circulation of air. 


23 MARKING 


23.1 The following information should be legibly 
and indelibly marked in red on each stove body: 


a) The user must strictly adhere to Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for safe usage 
of cookstove; 

b) Manufacturer’s name and/or initials or 
registered trade-mark; 

c) Any special instructions for the safe use of 
the cookstove; 

d) Country of origin; 

e) On and off marking on the lever; 

f) Expected thermal efficiency; and 

g) Remove the canister from the stove 
immediately after 10 min from turning off 
the stove and cover it with lid. 


23.2 Each canister shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked with the following: 


a) Capacity of methanol canister; 

b) Methanol consumption rate in g/h with a 
tolerance of + 10 percent (stickers may be 
used); 

c) Rating of the canisters in kJ/h (with 
commercial methanol); 

d) The words “USE LIQUID METHANOL 
ONLY” on canister; 

e) Do not do unauthorized filling; 

f) Close the canister with lid while not in use. 


23.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the 
Rules and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
product(s) may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


24 PACKING 


The Methanol cookstoves shall be packed as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier, taking 
care of safety requirements as such during handling 
and transit to protect against damages. 


SECTION 4 SAFETY PRECAUTION 
25 SAFETY 


25.1 Safety Instruction to be Followed When 
Cookstove is in Operation 


a) Do not breathe vapours (in case the flame 
goes off, during lightening of the stove 
avoid breathing of methanol vapour.); 


IS 17907 : 2022 


b) The cookstove shall be placed on even 
surface; 


c) The cookstove shall be operated in well 
ventilated space; 


d) The standard kitchen volume should be 
between 5-100 m?; 


e) The standard air exchange rate in the 
kitchen 5-45 per h; 


f) Maximum permitted continuous operation 
hours is 4 h. 


25.1.1 First-Aid Measure in Case of Inhalation of 
Methanol Vapour: 


a) Move the person away for the availability 
of fresh air and keep him/her comfortable 
for breathing; 

b) If required administer oxygen, in case 
victim is not breathing provide artificial 
respiration and get medical attention. 


25.1.2 First-Aid Measure After Direct Eye 
Exposure to Methanol Vapour 


Immediately rinse with water for at least 15 min. 
Remove contact lenses, if any. Continue rinsing the 
eyes with water. Immediately consult a poison 
center or doctor/physician; 


25.1.3 First-Aid Measure in Case of Ingestion of 
Methanol Vapour 


Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by 
medical personnel. If vomiting occurs, keep head 
low so that vomit does not enter lungs. Never give 
anything by mouth to an unconscious person. Get 
medical attention immediately. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


25.2 Safety Instructions to be Followed While 
Taking out the Canister from the Stove’s Body 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


Canister shall be left for minimum 10 min 
inside the body of the stove after switching 
off the stove i.e. closing the lever in ‘OFF’ 
position. The canister shall be removed 
only after the stipulated period; 

In case if the stove is not switched off by 
operating the lever in ‘OFF’ position. 
Operate the lever of stove body from ‘ON’ 
to ‘OFF’ position several times until the 
flame from the canister turn off; 

If the lever is still not able to turn off the 
flame, it is required to remove the canister 
from stove body by using protective gloves 
and turn off the flame by putting wet 
woolen clothes on the canister opening; 
Avoid direct eye contact from canister’s 
opening while taking it out from the body; 
Keep the canister (fresh/used) within the 
closed cover and store in a well-ventilated 
place; 

Small spills may be remediated with sand 
or earth and the area may be flushed with 
water; 

Large spills shall not be disposed by means 
of just evaporation, they shall be diluted 
with water and kept in a glass bottle and 
later on disposed in a well ventilated and 
isolated area; and 

Large spills shall not be disposed in ponds 
as it may be harmful for aquatic life. 


25.2.1 First-Aid Measures After Skin Contact 


a) 


b) 


c) 
d) 


Wash affected area with plenty of water for 
at least 15 min; 


Remove contaminated clothing and shoes; 
Wash clothing before reuse; 


Get medical attention if any symptoms 
occur. 


10 


25.2.2 First-Aid Measures After Eye Contact 


a) 
b) 


c) 


Check for and remove contact lenses; 


Immediately flush eyes with gentle but 
large stream of water for at least 15 min, 
lifting lower and upper eyelids 


occasionally; 


Get medical attention. 


25.2.3 First-Aid Measures in General 


a) 


b) 


c) 


General Advice: In the case of accident or 
if you feel unwell, seek medical advice 
immediately (show the label where 
possible); 

Ensure that medical personnel are aware 
of the material(s) involved, and take 


precautions to protect themselves; 


Show this safety data sheet to the doctor in 
attendance. 


25.3 Safety Instruction to be Followed for 
Storing/Disposal of the Canister 


When the stove is used for daily cooking, losing 
fuel from the canister between uses or overnight is 


not a concern. As long as the stove’s canister lever 
is closed and the stove is kept out of the sun or hot 


locations, any loss of fuel will be negligible. The 


following instructions shall be followed for 
storing/disposal of the canister: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Handle empty canister with care because 
residual vapours are flammable; 

Keep the canister (fresh / used) within the 
closed cover and store in a well-ventilated 
place; 

Keep canister hot 


surfaces, sparks, open flames and other 


away from heat, 


ignition sources; 


d) Do not store the canister with incompatible 
products such as strong oxidizers i.e. 
barium, perchlorate, bromine, chlorine, 
Chloroform, Sodium methoxide. Diethyl 

Acetyl 

hypochlorite etc. 


Sodium 
such as 


bromide, 
or metals 


zinc, 


Aluminium, Magnesium, and Potassium. 

e) Keep/store away from direct sunlight, 
extremely high or low temperatures and 
incompatible material; 

f) The canister shall not be racked at height 
to avoid any sudden fall; 

g) Disposal of used canister is manufacturer’s 
responsibility; 

h) After every use of stove detach the canister 
from stove and close the cap/lid of the 
canister (for storing canister over long 
periods of time). 


26 FIREFIGHTING MEASURES 
26.1 Extinguishing Media 


Use suitable fire extinguishing media i.e. dry 
chemical powder, alcohol resistant foam, carbon 
dioxide (CO2), water spray and fog. Water may be 
ineffective because it may not cool the methanol 
below its flash point. 


26.2 Fire Fighting Instruction 


Do not breathe fumes from fires or vapour from 
decomposition. Use water spray or fog for cooling 
exposed containers. 


27 EXPOSURE LIMITS VALUES OR 
THRESHOLD LIMIT VALUE 


The Threshold Limit Value (TLV) of methanol is 
200 ppm and Immediately Dangerous to Life or 
Health (IDLH) value is 6000 ppm. The leakage of 
methanol from closed canister during non-burning 
condition, when it is closed with lid, shall be less 
than 6 g in 24 h, in order to avoid the crossing, the 


11 


IS 17907 : 2022 


TLV of methanol which is 200 ppm for safe 
operation. The exposure limit shall be evaluated as 
per WHO guidelines i.e. for the kitchen size in the 
range of 5-100 m° with the standard air exchange 
rate in the kitchen 5-45 per h. 


NOTE — The exposure limit shall be evaluated as 
per WHO, Air Quality Guidelines: 
Household Fuel Combustion, World Health 
Organization (2014) 1-172 


Indoor 


27.1 Exposure to Gaseous Emission on 


Combustion 


27.1.1 When tested in accordance with the method 
described in Annex E, the emission level of CO and 
NOx shall not be more than the levels tabled below: 


*CO 
*NOx 


< 200 ppm 
<5 ppm 


27.1.2 The Carbon monoxide (CO) to Carbon 
dioxide (CO2) ratio of the exhaust gases of each 
canister, while burning with blue flame, shall not 
exceed 0.02. 


27.2 Exposure to Methanol Vapour 


Methanol vapour concentrations shall be measured 
using (Refer Annexure F-1 & Annexure F-2) direct 
reading gas detection tubes such as colorimetric 
detection tubes, or with electronic instruments such 
as portable gas monitors. Gas monitors shall 
provide continuous readings of methanol 
concentrations, and alarms can also be set at 
specified concentrations. TWA (Time Weighted 
Average) personal exposure concentrations shall 
also be measured using an air sampling pump with 
silica gel sorbent tubes. The amount of methanol 
vapour in confined space with single unit of stove 
(consisting of single or multiple canisters as the 
case may be) with unsealed cassette / cassettes shall 
be less than 200 ppm. The purity level of Methanol 
for this safe limit (200 ppm) shall be within a range 


of 96 to 99 percent. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


NOTE — Currently, the OSHA (Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration) PEL 
(Permissible Exposure Limit) and the American 
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists 
(ACGIH) Threshold Limit Value (TLV) for 
methanol are set at 200 ppm*. Both values are 
based on an 8 hour TWA (Time Weighted 


The ACGIH 
exposure limit for methanol is 250 ppm, and it 


Average) exposure. short-term 
contains a skin notation. The National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has also 
set a 10 hour TWA recommended exposure limit 
at 200 ppm. 


*Short Term Exposure Limit (STEL) < 250 ppm 
Occupational Exposure Limits *Time Weighted Average (TWA) 
< 200 ppm 
Continuous exposure 
*Permissible Exposure Limits < 200 ppm 


NOTE — *American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 2001. Methanol — Documentation for the 


Threshold Limit Value. 


27.3 Standard Instructions related to Toxicity to 
be Mentioned in the Canister/Cookstove by 
manufacturer as the Product is for Domestic 
use: 


First Aid 
procedures are to be mentioned on the Canister in 
line with OSHA 


Hazard Categories List (Yes/No) 


Hazard Category, Exposure limit, 


12 


Hazardous Chemical: Yes 
Immediate Hazard: Yes 
Delayed Hazard: Yes 
Fire Hazard: Yes 
Pressure Hazard: No 


Exposure Limits: ACGIH: TWA: 200 ppm STEL: 
250 ppm BEL: 15 mg/l OSHA: PEL: 200 ppm 260 
mg/m? 


IS No. 


517: 2020 


6911:2017 


1070:1992 


5116: 2020 


3144:1992 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


IS 17907 : 2022 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Specification for methanol 
(methyl alcohol) (third revision) 
Stainless Steel Plate, Sheet and 


Strip specification (second 
revision) 
Reagent grade water — 


Specification (third revision) 
Domestic and commercial 
equipment for use with LPG — 
General requirements (fourth 
revision) 

Mineral wool thermal insulation 
Method of test 


(second revision) 


materials — 


13 


IS No. 


3203:1982 


6910:1985 


6009:1970 


4905:2015 


Title 


Methods for testing local thickness 


of electroplated coatings (first 
revision) 
Method of testing corrosion 


resistance of electroplated and 
anodized Aluminum coatings by 
acetic acid salt spray test (first 
revision) 

Method for evaluation of results of 
accelerated corrosion tests 
Methods for random sampling 


IS 17907 : 2022 


ANNEXB 
(Clause 13) 


STRENGTH AND RIGIDITY TEST 


B-1 PROCEDURE 


B-1.1 The rubber support (grommet) if any, shall 
be removed and replaced with identical metal 
supports. The pan support and canister shall be 
removed and the distance between the sides of the 
cookstove body being tested shall be measured. A 
reference reading of the top surface ofthe body and 
the center of the width shall be taken. A load of 250 
N (25 kg) per canister shall be applied at the top 
surface subject to a minimum load of 500 N (50 kg) 
for a single canister stove. The load shall be applied 


without impact to a strip of steel having 20 mm 
thickness, 100 mm width along the length of the 
appliance (see Fig. 3). This strip shall be placed in 
the center of the top surface of the cookstove and 
its length shall be parallel to the front. The load 
shall be maintained for 5 min after which the 
measurement for deflection at top surface of body 
(at the center of the width just in front of the strip) 
shall be taken with the load in position. 


FIG. 3 STRENGTH TEST 


14 


IS 17907 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 15 and 16) 


TEST FOR THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


C-1 THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


Thermal efficiency of a cookstove may be defined 
as ratio of the heat actually utilized to the heat 
theoretically produced by complete combustion of 
a given quantity of fuel (which is based on the low 
calorific value of the fuel). 


C-2 CONDITIONS FOR CARRYING OUT 
THERMAL EFFICIENCY TEST 


C-2.1 Test Room Conditions 


The air of the test room shall be free from draught 
likely to affect the performance of the cookstove. 
The room temperature shall be maintained in the 
range of 25 °C to 30 °C. 


At the start of the test, the cookstove and the 


methanol in its canister shall be at room 


temperature. 
C-2.2 Methanol 


The methanol to be used in conducting the test shall 
conform to IS 517. 


C-2.3 Setting of the Cookstove 


to be 
shall be fitted with a canister of 


The cookstove whose efficiency is 
determined 
corresponding designation. Prior to the test, the 
cookstove shall be checked and examined to ensure 
that all components are undamaged and properly 
the 
instructions. The cookstove shall be lighted and 
allowed to burn for 5 min at normal atmospheric 


assembled according to manufacturer's 


pressure during which a stable flame shall be 


15 


obtained. Now a vessel containing water shall be 
placed on the cookstove. 


In the manner prescribed above, the cookstove 
shall be operated for a period of approximately two 
hours during which it shall be observed for any 
abnormal performance or leakage (this test should 
be done in draught-free room). 


C-3 METHOD OF TEST 
C-3.1 Normal Evaporation Test 


Mineral wool packing should be done in such a way 
thatthe normal evaporation rate of methanol should 
be in the range of 10 to 15 g/h, when the canister is 
open to atmosphere without burning. 


C-3.2 Fuel Consumption Test 
to be 


determined, canister shall be filled upto 100% of its 
nominal capacity. The cookstove shall be lighted 


The cookstove, whose efficiency is 


with one burner at a time and brought to working 
within five min. After burning for 5 min, the lighted 
cookstove shall be weighed on a sensitive balance 
with an accuracy of one gram and the initial weight 
shall be noted. The cookstove shall be allowed to 
burn for one hour with an aluminium pan having 
At the end of one hour, 
weight ofthe burning cookstove shall be noted after 


sufficient water in it. 


removing the aluminium pan. The difference in the 
initial and final weights of the burning cookstove 
shall give the methanol consumption rate in gram 
per hour. A suitable pan for the cookstove under 
test shall be in accordance with Table 1. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


C-3.3 A cylindrical flat-bottomed aluminium pan 
provided with an aluminium lid shall be used for 
this purpose. The lid shall have two holes, one for 
inserting the cork for holding a thermocouple and 
the other for the stirrer (made of aluminium wire) 
required for stirring the water. 


C-3.4 Thermal Efficiency Test 


Canister selected for thermal efficiency test shall be 
The methanol 
cookstove shall be allowed to run for 5 min to 
obtain the steady flame height. Then, the stove 
along with two filled canisters shall be placed on 
the weighing balance of accuracy + 1 g for 


fully charged with methanol. 


measuring the initial weight of the stove. After 
measuring the weight, the stove shall be placed on 
the even surface. The aluminum pan filled with the 
required amount of water (4 kg) along with the lid 
and the stirrer are kept on the stove. Initial 
temperature of the water shall be noted. The initial 
temperature of water shall be kept within +2°C 
from the actual room temperature. Water is heated 
and once the water temperature reaches 80°C, for 
uniformity in temperature, stirring shall be started 
and continued until the end of the test when the 


temperature of the water reaches to 90 + 0.5°C. As 
soon as the temperature of the water reaches 90 
+0.5°C, the stove shall be switched off and the pan 
along with the lid and the stirrer is taken out of the 
stove. The final weight of the stove along with two 
canisters is measured. The difference between the 
initial and the final weights of the cookstove along 
with two canister gives the fuel consumption. The 
pan shall be covered with a lid fitted with a 
calibrated T-type thermocouple probe inserted into 
the cork in such a way that the probe of the 
thermocouple is immersed completely in the water 
of the vessel. The thermometer shall be digital, with 
T type thermocouple probe suitable for immersion 
in liquids with an accuracy of + 0.5 °C. The free 
end of the stirrer shall come out of the lid. 


NOTES 


1) The water stirred gently during heating. 

2) Distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be used 
for test. 

3) The pan shall be cylindrical with flat 
bottom. 

4) The finish of the pan bottom from inside 
shall always be bright. 


Table 1 Aluminium Vessels for Thermal Efficiency Test 
(Clause C-3.2 and C-3.4) 


SI No. Consumption | Pan Diameter Pan height Total pan Mass of water 
Rate g/h (external), mm | (external), mm | mass with lid, in pan, kg 
+5% +5% g + 10% 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 180-290 230 120 701 4 


16 


IS 17907 
C-4 CALCULATION 
Thermal efficiency of the cookstove shall be calculated as follows: 


Heat gained by vessel = M + C,(T2 — T;), kJ 

Heat utilized for heating water =m * Cy (Tz — T1), kJ 

Total heat utilized = (M*C,+m*C,)(T2 — T1), KJ 
Heat produced by fuel =W + CV, kJ 


Total Heat utilized 


Thermal efficienc zer nr 
y Heat produced by fuel 


= (M+*Cp+m*Cy )(T2—T}) 


W+CV x109 


Where: 


2 Mass of the vessel with lid and stirrer, kg; 
= Mass of water in pan, kg; 

= Fuel consumed, kg; 

= Specific heat of aluminum, kJ/kg-K; 
Specific heat of water, kJ/kg-K; 

= Initial temperature of water in pan; °C; 

= Final temperature of water in pan; °C; 


See 
Il 


= Low calorific value of fuel, KJ/kg. 


NOTES 
1. Specific heat of aluminum is 0.895 kJ/kg-K. 
2. Low calorific value of methanol should be measured at actual condition using bomb calorimeter. 


C-5 SHUTTING OFF THE COOKSTOVE 
TEST C-6 DURABILITY TEST 


: 2022 


Fill the canister to its full capacity and light the Ignite the cookstove and adjust the flame to its 
burner and adjust the flame to the highest level. highest level. Allow each canister inside the stove 
Place the pot filled with 3 litre of water on the body to burn at this rate for 4 h. After this period, 
cooking surface of the cookstove. After burning the allow the canister to cool down to room 


cookstove for 1 h, turn the lever to the “OFF” temperature. Repeat this procedure for 5 times. 


position and simultaneously start a stopwatch. Leave the canister for 1 h to cool down, thereafter, 
After 5second, turn the flame regulator to the “ON” inspect the cookstove and its components for any 


position and check that the flame has been damages. 
extinguished. 


17 


IS 17907 : 2022 


ANNEXD 
(Clause 17) 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF SURFACE TEMPERATURE 


D-1 PREPARATION OF COOKSTOVE 


The cookstove shall be tested with the fully filled 
canister. The cookstove shall be lit and run at the 
full output (at normal atmospheric pressure) for one 
hour with the vessel containing water placed over 
it before measuring the temperature. 


D-2 PROCEDURE 


D-2.1 The temperature of all parts of the cookstove 
which may be needed to be touched during its 
operation shall be measured by using a calibrated T 
type thermocouple or RTD having accuracy + 
0.5°C. The temperature of each such part shall be 
measured thrice for every 30 min to get three 


18 


While 
thermocouple/RTD’s 


concordant readings. 


type 
measuring bead should be in perfect contact with 


measuring the 
temperature, T 


the specific part for sufficient period of time, until 
maximum temperature is reached. 


D-2.2 During the operation of the cookstove under 
D-2.1, the maximum temperature of canister shall 
also be recorded. The final reading shall be taken at 
the end of three hours of running or operation of 
cookstove. 


D-2.3 The temperature of mineral wool surface 
temperature shall be measured by calibrated T type 
thermocouple of having accuracy + 0.5 °C 
immediately after switching off the canister. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


ANNEXE 
(Clauses 18 & 27.1) 


TEST FOR COMBUSTION EFFICIENCY 


E-1 EQUIPMENT 


E-1.1 The cookstove shall be tested with its fuel 
canister fully filled with methanol. Before starting 
the test, apan of the type and size as described in 
C-3.2 and containing water sufficient for the test 
shall be placed over the canister. In addition, a 
collecting hood (see Fig. 4) suitable for cookstove 


under examination shall be used. 


E-1.1.1 The hood shall be so designed that, while 
not interfering in any way with the normal 
combustion of the canister it collects a fairly high 
proportion of the flue gases. Also, it shall be such 
that the sample collected represents the whole of 
combustion gases and not those from one particular 
point. When using hood, the damper provided shall 
be set, or an additional flue pipe added, so that 
spillage of the flue gases around the skirt is 
minimized. 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


E-2.1 With the hood in position over the cookstove 
under investigation, the cookstove shall be lit and 


19 


run for few minutes till a stable flame is achieved. 
Then, a sufficient number of samples shall be 
collected. 


E-2.2 The flue gas shall be analyzed by using any 
of the recognized methods. For carbon monoxide, 
it is recommended that co-indicator of prescribed 
accuracy or iodine pentoxide method or catalytic 
method, for example, Drager method, the Katz 
method or infra-red analysis method may be used. 
Carbon dioxide may be tested by using Orsat 
apparatus, or Haldane apparatus, or by the infra-red 
analysis. 


E-2.3 The carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide 
content of the product of combustion shall be 
determined by the methods capable of an accuracy 
of 0.001 percent and 0.5 percent of the volume of 
the sample respectively. 


IS 17907 : 


2022 


DAMPER REGULATOR 
WITH FRICTION SPRING 


#8 SAMPLING TUBE 


STEAM VENT 


ANNULAR RING 


@10 TUBES 


SKIRT 


€. 
Fa 
8 


500 APRROX 


8510 


All dimensions specified are optional. All dimensions are in millimeters. 


FIG. 4 HOOD FOR METHANOL COOKSTOVE 


20 


ANNEX F-1 
(Clause 27.2) 


IS 17907 : 2022 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF METHANOL VAPOUR CONCENTRATION 
(WITH GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY TECHNIQUE) 


F-1.1 METHOD NUMBER 


2000* 


NOTE — Test method has been derived from NIOSH 


2000. 


F-1.2 VALIDATED ANALYTE 


Methyl alcohol 


F-1.3 REAGENTS AND EQUIPMENT 


REAGENTS: 


a) 
b) 
c) 


h) 


Methanol, chromatographic grade. 
Water, distilled and pre-purified. 
Isopropanol (IPA), chromatographic 
grade. 

Helium, purified. 

Hydrogen, pre-purified. 

Air, filtered. 

Desorbing solution, 5% isopropanol in 
95% distilled water. 

Calibration stock solution, 2ug/ul. Add 
25.3uL methanol to 10 ml of desorbing 
solution. 


EQUIPMENT 


a) 


Sampler: silica gel tube, 7 cm long, 4 mm 
ID, containing two sections of 20/40 mesh 
silica gel (front = 100 mg, back = 50 mg) 
separated by a 2-mm urethane foam plug. 
A silylated glass wool plug precedes the 
front section. A 4 mm foam plug follows 


21 


b) 


8) 
h) 


the back 
commercially available. 
Personal sampling pump, 0.02 to 0.2 l/min, 


section. Samplers are 


with flexible connecting tubing. 
Gas chromatograph, flame 
detection, integrator, and Rtx-35 capillary 


ionization 


column, or equivalent. 

Ultrasonic bath. 

Vials, auto sampler, with PTFE-lined caps. 
Micro liter syringes, 10-uL and other sizes 
as needed, readable to 0.1 yl. 

Flasks, volumetric, various sizes. 

Pipets, various sizes. 


F-1.4 SAMPLING PROCEDURE 


Collect air sample by drawing workplace air 
through sampler (silica gel, 100/50 mg). Extract 


sample by desorption with water/isopropanol 


(95:5), and analyze it by gas chromatography (GC) 
using a flame Ionization detector. 


F-1.4.1 Sampling 


Calibrate each personal sampling pump 
with a representative sampler in line. 
Break the ends of sampler immediately 
before sampling. Attach sampler to 
personal sampling pump with flexible 
tubing. 

Collect the sample at an accurately known 
flow rate between 0.02 and 0.2 l/min for 
total sample size of 1 to 5 I. 

Cap the sampler with plastic caps and pack 
securely for shipment. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


The following condition is requiring for sampling 


of methanol: 

Sampler Solid sorbent tube 
(silica gel, 100/50 mg) 

Flow rate 0.02 to 0.2 l/min 

Vol- Min 11< 200 ppm 

Vol- Max 51 >200 ppm 

Shipment pack securely for shipment; store 
at 5°C 

Sample stability at least 30 day at 5°C 

Blank Nitrogen gas, or zero air 


F-1.4.2 Sample Preparation 


a) Place front (include glass wool plug) and 


back sorbent sections of the sampler tube 


in separate vials. Discard foam plugs. 
b) Add 1 ml of water/IPA (95/5) to each vial 


and 


attach crimp caps. 


c) Place vials in an ultrasonic bath for 30 to 


60 min to aid desorption. 


F-1.4.3 Calibration and Quality Control 


1. Calibrate daily with at least three 
working standards over the range of 
interest. Three standards should cover 
the range from LOD to LOQ. 


a) 


Add known amounts of calibration 
stock solution to water/isopraponol 
(95/5) in 10 ml volumetric flasks and 
dilute to the mark. 


22 


b) Analyse together with samples and 
blanks. 

c) Prepare calibration graph (peak area 
or height vs. ug methanol). 


Determine desorption efficiency (DE) at 
least once, for each lot of silica gel tubes 
used for sampling in the calibration 
range. Prepare three samplers at each of 
six levels plus three media blanks. 


a) Remove and discard back sorbent 
sections of samplers and media 
blanks. 

b) Inject a known amount of 
calibration stock solution directly 
into the front sorbent bed of each 
silica gel tube. 

c) Allow the tubes to air-equilibrate 
for several min, then cap the ends of 
the tubes and allow to stand 
overnight. 

d) Desorb the samples and analyze 
together with working standards 
and blanks. 

e) Prepare a graph of DE vs. pg 
analyte recovered. 


Analyze three quality control blind 
spikes and three analyst spikes to ensure 
that the calibration graph and DE graphs 
are in control. 


F-1.5 MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE 


Technique Gas Chromatography, FID 
Analyte Methanol 
Desorption 1 ml water/isopropanol (95:5) 
Injection volume 1 ul 
Temperature- 250°C 
Injection 
Temperature- 300°C. 
Detector 
Temperature 50 to 90 C (8°C/min) 
Column (Split Ratio 10:1) 
Carrier gas He, 2.6 ml/min 
Column Capillary, 30 m x 0.53 mm ID; 
3um film 
35% diphenyl-65% dimethyl 
polysilozane, 
RtxTM-35 or equivalent 
Calibration Standard solutions of methanol 
in water/isopropanol (95:5) 
Range 2.2 to 6000 ug per sample 
Estimated load 0.7 ug per sample 
Precision 0.030 


F- 1.5.1 Set gas chromatograph according to the 
above mentioned conditions. Inject a 1-uL sample 
aliquot manually using solvent flush technique or 
with an auto-sampler and measure peak areas. 


NOTE — If peak area is above the linear range 
of the working standards, dilute with water/IPA 


23 


IS 17907 : 2022 


(95/5), reanalyse and apply the appropriate 
dilution factor in the calculations. 


F-1.6 CALCULATIONS 


F-1.6.1 Determine the mass, ug (corrected for DE), 
for methanol found in the sample front (Wr) and 
back (Wp) sorbent sections, and in the average 
media blank front (Br) and back (B»)sorbent 
sections. 


NOTE —If W,>W/;/10, report breakthrough and 
possible sample loss. 


F-1.6.2 Calculate concentration, C (mg/m*), of 
methanol in the air volume samples, V (L) 


Mt — B; — By 
2 V 


F-1.7 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS 


Methanol is flammable and dangerous, it has risk 
of fire and explosion. It is moderately toxic on 
ingestion and inhalation. Isopropanol is flammable 
and is a fire risk. Wear appropriate protective 
clothing and work with these compounds in a well 
ventilated hood. 


IS 17907 : 2022 


ANNEX F-2 
(Clause 27.2) 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF METHANOL VAPOUR CONCENTRATION 
(WITH GAS CHROMATOGRAPHY TECHNIQUE) 


F-2.1 METHOD NUMBER 
5001* 


NOTE — Test method has been derived from NIOSH 
5001. 


F-2.2 SAMPLING PROCEDURE 
F-2.2.1 Sample Collection 


All safety practices shall be followed during 
collection of samples. Attach sampling equipment 
to the worker in a manner that will not interfere 
with work performance and safety. Collect air 
samples by drawing workplace air through two 
Anasorb 747 sorbent tubes connected in series. 
Extract samples with 60/40 (v/v) N,N-dimethyl 
(DMF/CS2) 
analyze by gas chromatography (GC) using a flame 
ionization detector (FID). 


formamide/carbon disulfide and 


F-2.2.2 Recommended 
sampling rate 


sampling time and 


a) 100 min at 50 ml/min (5 1) if relative 
humidity is > 50% at 25 °C 

b) 60 min at 50 ml/min (3 1) if relative 
humidity is < 50% at 25 °C 


F-2.2.3 Apparatus 


1. Two single section 8 mm x 110 mm glass 
sampling tubes packed with Anasorb 747 
sorbent are connected in series with a 1- 
inch length of 1⁄4 -inch inner diameter 


24 


silicone tubing. The front tube contains 
400 mg and the back tube contains 200 mg 
of Anasorb 747. The sorbent is held in 
place with glass wool on the inlet side and 
a foam plug on_ the 
Commercially prepared tube sets may be 


outlet side. 
purchased from SKC Inc. (catalog no. 226- 
82). 


2. A sampling tube holder, such as SKC Inc. 
Tube Cover D (catalog no. 224-29D), is 
used to protect the worker from the sharp 
ends of the glass sampling tubes. 


3. A personal sampling pump calibrated 
within +5% of the recommended flow rate 
is used with a representative sampling 
device in-line. 


F-2.2.4 Reagents 
None required 
F-2.2.5 Measurement Technique 


1. Immediately before sampling, break off 
the ends of the 400 mg and 200 mg flame- 
sealed tubes to provide an opening 
approximately half the internal diameter of 
the tube. Connect the outlet end of the 400- 
mg tube to the inlet end of the 200 mg tube 
with a 1 inch length of % inch i.d. silicone 
tubing. Place tubes into a sampling tube 
holder to minimize the hazard to the 
worker from the broken ends of the tubes. 
All tubes should be from the same lot. 


Attach the tube holder (with the adsorbent 
tubes) to the sampling pump so that the 
adsorbent tube is in the worker’s breathing 
the 
sampling pump, tube holder, and tubing so 


zone during sampling. Position 
they do not impede work performance or 
safety. The air being sampled should not 
pass through any hose or tubing before 


entering the sampling tube. 


Sample at 50 ml/min for 100 min (5 1) 
when the relative humidity is above 50%, 
and for 60 min (3 1) when the relative 
humidity is below 50%. The recommended 
air sample volume for the given sample 
must be reduced at lower relative humidity 
because sampler capacity is reduced. Fifty- 
percent relative humidity at 25 °C (11.5 mg 
of water per liter of air) was selected as the 
point at which the recommended air 
volume is reduced, as this will provide a 
sufficient margin of safety against sampler 
saturation. It is anticipated that most 
samples will be collected at relative 
humidity greater than 50% at 25 °C. 


After sampling for the appropriate time, 
separate the two samplers and seal each 
tube with plastic end-caps. Seal each 
sample end-to-end with a Form OSHA-21 
as soon as possible. 


Submit at least one blank sample with each 
set of samples. Handle the blank sample in 
the same manner as the other samples 
except that no air is drawn from it. 

Record volume (liters), 
sampling time (min) and sampling rate 


sample air 


(ml/min) for each sample, along with any 
potential interference on the Form OSHA- 
91A. 


25 


IS 17907 : 2022 


7. Submit the samples to the laboratory for 
analysis as soon as possible after sampling. 
If delay is unavoidable, store the samples 
in a refrigerator as a precaution. 


F-2.3 ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 


F-2.3.1 Apparatus 


a) Mechanical vial rotator 

b) One-litre amber glass solvent dispenser 
capable of dispensing 2.0 ml 

c) Class A volumetric flask (2 and 500 ml) 

d) Amber glass vials with PTFE-lined screw 
caps (2 and 4ml) 

e) GC instrument with FID 


F-2.3.2 Reagents 
Methyl alcohol (>99% purity, analytical grade) 
F-2.3.3 Reagent Preparation 


Extraction solvent (60/40 (v/v) DMF/CS2 with 1 
octanol): To a 500 ml volumetric flask add 300 ml 
of N,N dimethyl form amide, 1 ml of 1-octanol, 
then carbon disulfide to the mark indicated. 
Immediately mix the solution and transfer to an 
amber glass solvent dispenser. The 1-octanol is 
added as an internal standard (ISTD). 


F-2.3.4 Standard Preparation 


Prepare calibration standards by injecting micro 
liter amounts of the neat chemical into various 2 ml 
volumetric flasks containing approximately 1 ml of 
the extraction solvent which contains the ISTD. Fill 
to the mark with extraction solvent, mix, and 
transfer to 2 ml amber glass auto-sampler vials. 
Multiple analytes in one calibration standard can 
significantly dilute the final concentration of the 
ISTD when it is pre-mixed with the extraction 
solvent. To minimize this effect on the calibration, 


IS 17907 : 2022 


correct the ISTD concentration for each standard 
when calibrating. 


F-2.3.5 Sample Preparation 


1. Remove the plastic end-caps from the 400- 
mg and 200-mg sample tubes. Transfer the 
respective 400 and 200 mg Anasorb 747 
sections into separate 4-ml vials. Discard 
glass tubes, foam, and glass wool plugs. 


2. Add 2.0 ml 
containing ISTD 


of extraction solvent 


to each vial and 


immediately seal with PTFE-lined caps. 
3. Extract the samples by rotating for 1 h. 


4. Transfer the extraction solution in each 
4ml vial to a 2ml amber glass auto-sampler 
vial and seal with PTFE-lined caps. 


F-2.3.6 Analysis 


Analyze sample using a GC-FID instrument and 
the analytical conditions described below. Use an 
ISTD calibration method. For analyte construct a 
least-square linear regression curve by plotting 
ISTD corrected responses of standard injections 
versus micrograms of analyte per sample. A 
weighted least-square linear regression, using a 1/x 
weight, can also be used. Confirm the presence of 
analytes when an OSHA Permissible Exposure 
Limit (PEL) value has been exceeded, as described 
in F-3.8. 
GC Conditions: 
Column: Agilent J&W DB-WAX 
capillary column, 60 m x 0.32 


mm ID, 0.5 um film, or 
equivalent 


26 


Carrier 


Septum purge 
Injection 


Inlet temperature 


Oven temperature 


Restek Topaz 4.0 mm ID 
Precision Inlet Liner w/wool 
(Restek catalog no. 23305, or 
equivalent) 

hydrogen, 2 ml/min, constant 
flow mode 

hydrogen, 3.0 ml/min 

1.0 ul, split injection (150:1 
ratio) 

235 °C 


40 °C (hold 4 min), ramp to 70 
°C at 5 °C/min (hold 0 min), 
ramp to 205 °C at 15 °C/min 
(hold 0 min), ramp to 240 °C at 
35 °C/min (hold 0 min) 


Run time 20 min 
Retention time 7.88 min 
Detector 240 °C 
temperature 

Hydrogen flow 40 ml/min 
Air flow 450 ml/min 
Nitrogen make up 45 ml/min 
flow 


F-2.3.7 Calculations 


Calculate the micrograms recovered per sample 
(m) for each analyte. The back sorbent section is 
analyzed primarily to determine the extent of 
sampler saturation. If any analyte is found on the 
back section, itis added to the amount found on the 
front section. If more than 20% of the total amount 
is found on the back section, report that the sampler 
may have been saturated. Correct m for each 
sample by subtracting the mass of analyte (if any) 
found on the sample blank. The analyte air 
concentration, C is calculated in mass per volume 
units (mg/m?) using Equation 1, where V is the 
volume of air sampled (L), and Eis the extraction 
efficiency expressed in decimal format. 


.... Equation 1 


The air concentration (Cypm) in terms of parts of 
analytevapour per million parts of air (ppm) is 
obtained using Equation 2, where C is the air 
concentration with mass per volume units (mg/m?) 
calculated in Equation 1, Vyis the molar volume of 
an ideal gas or vapour at 25 °C and 760 torr (24.46 
L/mol), and Mis the analyte molar mass (g/mol). 


Vac 


oe .... Equation 2 
ppm M 


F-2.3.8 Qualitative Analysis 


When necessary, the identity of an analyte peak can 
be confirmed by gas chromatography — mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS) using the analytical 
conditions described below. Confirm the presence 
of an analyte by matching the retention time and 
fragmentation pattern of a standard at a similar 
concentration. 


27 


GC Conditions: 


Column 


Inlet liner 


Carrier 


Septum purge 
Injection 


Inlet temperature 
Oven temperature 


Run time 
Retention time 
Mode 
Acquistion mode 
Solvent delay 
Timed events 
EMV mode 
Temperature 


IS 17907 : 2022 


Agilent J&W DB-WAX 
capillary column, 60 m x 
0.32mm ID, 0.5 um film, or 
equivalent 

Restek Topaz 40 mm ID 
Precision Inlet Liner w/wool 
(Restek catalog no. 23305, or 
equivalent) 

helium, 1.6 ml/min, constant 
flow mode 

helium, 3.0 ml/min 

1.0 ul, split injection (150:1 
ratio) 

239°C 

40 °C (hold 4.15 min), ramp to 
70 °C at 4.7 °C/min (hold 0 
min), ramp to 205 °C at 13 
°C/min (hold 0 min), ramp to 
240 °C at 35 °C/min (hold 0 
min) 

21.9 min 

7.75 min 

Electron ionization (EI) 

scan, m/z 20 — 150 

6 min 

17.8 — 18.20 min MS Off 

Gain factor 

250 °C (source), 200 °C 
(quadrupole assembly), 250 °C 
(transfer line) 


IS 17907 : 2022 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Oil Burning Appliances Sectional Committee, MED 26 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Bombay Light and Stove Merchants Association, 
Mumbai 
CSIR-Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 
Centre of Technology for Sustainable Development, 
Faridabad 


Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training 
and Empowerment, Tamil Nadu 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 

Ministry of Defence, Kanpur 

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 
(Quality Assurance Wing), New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 


Indian Oil Corporation (R & D Centre), Faridabad 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 


Office of Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


28 


Representatives 


DR GD THAKRE (Chairman) 


SHRI RAHUL GARG 


SHRI CHITHRA VISHWANATH (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH D BAKHAI 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR ARYA 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR S P DUBEY 
SHRI R K PAULASTYA (Alternate) 


DR P DURAISINGAM 
SHRI M V KUMBHALKAR 
SHRI R K BORUAH (Alternate-/) 
SHRI S J KOLARKAR (Alternate-2) 
SHRI A K RAI 
SHRI MUTHU KUMAR 


SHRI PRATIBHA MAURYA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. MAHAPATRA 
DR S SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A K BERA 
SHRI P R DEODHAR (Alternate-1) 


SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate-2) 


SHRI SUSANTA KUMAR SOM 


Ms MAITREYEE TALAPATRA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, New Delhi 


Premier Industrial Corporation, Coimbatore 


R K Products, Madurai 


The Scindia Kerosene Wick Stove Manufacturers 
Association, Madurai 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


IS 17907 : 2022 


Representatives 


SHRI SUNIL BAHL 
SHRI RAMESHWAR K SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI R SHYAM SUNDER 
SHRI R SIVA KUMAR(Alternate) 


SHRI K C KASSI 


SHRI T CHIDAMBARAM 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA 
SCIENTIST E AND HEAD (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Shri Aman Dhanawat 
Scientist B (MED), BIS 


29 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 26(18115). 
Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central: 601/A Konnectus Tower-I, 6" Floor 2323 7617 
DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110 002 

Eastern: 8! Floor, Plot No. 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V 236 7012, 2320 9474 
Salt Lake, Kolata 700091 

Northern: Plot No. 4A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 265 0206, 265 0290 
Chandigarh 160 019 

Southern: C I T Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani 2254 1442, 2254 1216 
Chennai 600 113 

Western: Plot No. E-9, Road No. 8, MIDC, Andheri (East) 28218093 
Mumbai 400 093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD, BENGALURU, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, CHANDIGARH, CHENNAI, 
COIMBATORE, DEHRADUN, DELHI, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HIMACHAL 
PRADESH, HUBLI HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, JAMMU & KASHMIR, JAMSHEDPUR, KOCHI, KOLKATA, 
LUCKNOW, MADURAI, MUMBAI, NAGPUR, NOIDA, PANIPAT, PATNA, PUNE, RAIPUR, RAJKOT, 
SURAT, VISHAKHAPATNAM. 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


