Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


Sra ma atest ch feast F 
foam ares 
( aT FRAT ) 


Criteria for Design of Solid 
Gravity Dams 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.16 


© BIS 2019 


ada AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
d HAF Wa, 9 Fees am I, ae ferct-110002 
Velie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2019 Price Group 4 


Dams and Spillways Sectional Committee, WRD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Dams and 
Spillways Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Designs are made more rational by fully utilizing the available data from analytical procedures, laboratory, field 
investigations and measurements of the behaviour of structures in service. It is essential that all design loads are 
carefully chosen to represent, as accurately as possible the actual loads that will act on the structure and that all the 
resistive forces used in design represent as accurate an evaluation as possible. It is, in addition, necessary that 
dams be frequently inspected (as in all cases, uncertainties exist regarding such factors as loads, resistive forces or 
characteristics of the foundation) and adequate observations and measurements be made of the structural behaviour 
of the dam and the foundation to ensure that the structure is safe. 


As no criteria may be applicable under all conditions, the criteria laid down in this standard are preceded by a 
discussion of the underlying considerations to explain the basis for the criterion to any special condition or to the 
appropriateness of any deviation. This also helps in the frequent examination of design practices essential to 
ensure that they remain consistent with the best existing knowledge and concepts, by allowing revisions needed in 
the light of fresh data. At any time, the criteria are meant to be supplemented with the latest available knowledge. 


This standard was first published in 1972 and was revised in 1984. 


Since then more dams have been designed and constructed in the country and more experience has been gained. 
The standard is, therefore revised to reflect the latest practices. Important change made in the standard after 
incorporating necessary corrections include the following: 


a) The requirements for freeboard for solid gravity dams has been removed from this standard and shall be 
given in IS 10635. 


b) Anew clause for Foundation Strength Criteria 6.10.4 has been included. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results ofa test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6512 : 2019 


Indian Standard 
CRITERIA FOR DESIGN OF SOLID GRAVITY DAMS 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down criteria for design of solid 
gravity dams made of masonry or concrete or both. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on these 
standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

1893 : 1984 Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures (fourth 
revision) 

7746 : 1991 Code of practice for in-situ shear 
test on rock (first revision) 

8605 : 1977 Code of practice for construction 
of masonry in dams 

10635 : 2014 Freeboard requirements in 


dams — Guidelines 


3 REQUIREMENTS FOR STABILITY 


The design shall satisfy the following requirements of 
stability: 


a) The dams shall be safe against sliding on any 
plane or combination of planes within the dam, 
at the foundation or within the foundation; 


b) The dam shall be safe against overturning at 
any plane within the dam, at the base, or at 
any plane below the base; and 

c) The safe unit stresses in the concrete or 
masonry of the dam or in the foundation 
material shall not be exceeded. 


4 FORCES CONSIDERED IN THE ANALYSIS 
OF STABILITY 


4.1 The following forces may be considered as affecting 
the design: 


a) Dead load, 
b) Reservoir and tailwater loads, 


c) Uplift pressure, 

d) Earthquake forces, 

e) Earth and silt pressures, 
f) Ice pressure, 

g) Wind pressure, 

h) Wave pressure, and 

j) Thermal loads 


4.2 The forces to be resisted by a gravity dam fall into 
two categories as given below: 


a) Forces, such as weight of the dam and water 
pressure, which can be directly calculated 
from the unit weights of the materials and 
properties of fluid pressures; and 

b) Forces, such as uplift, earthquake loads, silt 
pressure and, ice pressure, which can only be 
assumed on the basis of assumption of varying 
degree of reliability. 

NOTE — It is in the estimating of the second category of forces 


that special care has to be taken and reliance placed on available 
data, experience, and judgments. 


4.3 For consideration of stability the following 
assumptions are made: 


a) That the dam is composed of individual 
transverse vertical elements each of which 
carries its load to the foundation without 
transfer of load from or to adjacent elements 
(see 8.1.3). 


NOTE — However, in the stability analysis of a gravity 
dam, it becomes frequently necessary to make an 
analysis of the whole block, wherever special features 
of foundation and large openings so indicate. 


b) That the vertical stress varies linearly from 
upstream face to downstream face on any 
horizontal section. 


5 LOAD COMBINATIONS 


5.1 Criteria 


Gravity dam design should be based on the most adverse 
load combination A, B, C, D, E, F or G given below 
using the safety factors prescribed. Depending on the 
scope and details of the various project components, site 
conditions and construction one or more of the following 
loading combinations may not be applicable ‘ipso-facto’ 
and may need suitable modifications : 


IS 6512 : 2019 


a) Load Combination A (Construction 
Condition) — Dam completed but no water 
in reservoir and no tailwater. 

b) Load combination B (Normal operation 
condition) — Full reservoir elevation, normal 
dry weather tailwater, normal uplift ; ice and 
silt (if applicable); 

c) Load combination C (Flood discharge 
condition) — Reservoir at maximum flood 
pool elevation, all gates open, tailwater at 
flood elevation, normal uplift, and silt (if 
applicable); 

d) Load combination D — Combination A, with 
earthquake; 

e) Load combination E — Combination B, with 
earthquake but no ice; 

f) Load combination F — Combination C, but 
with extreme uplift (drains in-operative); and 

g) Load Combination G — Combination E, but 
with extreme uplift (drains inoperative). 


6 DESIGN CRITERIA 


6.1 Dead Load 
6.1.1 General 


The dead load to be considered comprises the weight 
of the concrete or masonry or both plus the weight of 
appurtenances such as piers, gates and bridges. The 
unit weight of concrete and masonry varies considerably 
depending upon the various materials that make them. 
It is essential to make certain that the assumed unit 
weight for concrete/masonry or both can be obtained 
with the available aggregates/stones. 


6.1.2 Criteria for Design 


6.1.2.1 The magnitude of dead load is considered as 
the mass of concrete or masonry or both plus that of 
the appurtenances, such as gates and bridges. 


6.1.2.2 For preliminary designs, the unit mass of 
concrete and masonry may be taken as 2 400 kg/m? 
and 2 300 kg/m? , respectively. For final designs the 
unit mass shall be based on actual test data. 


6.2 Reservoir and Tailwater Loads 
6.2.1 General 


Although the weight of water varies slightly with 
temperature, the variation is usually ignored. In case 
of low overflow dams, the dynamic effect of the velocity 
of approach may be significant and will deserve 
consideration. The mass of the water flowing over the 
top of the spillway is not considered in the analysis 
since the water usually approaches spouting velocity 
and exerts little pressure on the spillway crest. If gates 
or other control features are used on the crest they are 


treated as part of the dam so far as application of water 
pressure is concerned. 


6.2.2 Criteria for Design 


The mass of water is taken as 1 000 kg/m’. Linear 
distribution of the static water pressure acting normal 
to the face of the dam is assumed. Tailwater pressure 
adjusted for any retrogression should be taken at full 
value for non-overflow sections and at a reduced value 
for overflow sections depending on the type of energy 
dissipation arrangement adopted and anticipated water 
surface profile downstream. The full value of 
corresponding tailwater should, however, be used in 
the case of uplift. 


6.3 Uplift Pressure 


6.3.1 Uplift forces occur as internal pressures in 
pores, cracks and seams within the body of the dam, 
at the contact between the dam and its foundation and 
within the foundation. It is recognized that there are 
two constituent elements in uplift pressure; the area 
factor or the percentage of the area on which uplift 
acts and the intensity factor or the ratio which the 
actual intensity of uplift pressure bears to the intensity 
gradient extending from head water to tailwater at 
various points. 


6.3.1.1 Effective downstream drainage, whether natural 
or artificial, will generally limit the uplift at the toe of 
the dam to tailwater pressure. Formed drains in the body 
of the dam and drainage holes drilled subsequent to 
grouting in the foundation, where maintained in good 
repair, are effective in giving a partial relief to the uplift 
pressure intensities under and in the body of the dam. 
The degree of effectiveness of the system will depend 
upon the character of the foundation and the 
dependability of the effective maintenance of the 
drainage system. In case observations of the behaviour 
of the dam will indicate the uplift pressure actually 
acting on the structure and when the uplift pressure are 
seen to approach or exceed design pressures, prompt 
remedial measures should necessarily be taken to 
reduce the uplift pressures to values below the design 
pressures. 


6.3.2 Criteria for Design 


The following criteria are recommended for calculating 
uplift forces: 


a) Uplift pressure distribution in the body of the 
dam shall be assumed, in case of both 
preliminary and final designs, to have an 
intensity which at the line of the formed drains 
exceeds the tailwater head by one-third the 
differential between reservoir level and 
tailwater level. The pressure gradient shall 
then be extended linearly to heads 


corresponding to reservoir level and tailwater 

level. The uplift shall be assumed to act over 

100 percent of the area. 
b) Uplift pressure distribution at the contact plane 
between the dam and its foundation, and within 
the foundation shall be assumed for preliminary 
designs to have an intensity which at the line 
of drains/drainage holes exceeds the tailwater 
head by one third the differential between the 
reservoir and tailwater heads. The pressure 
gradient shall then be extended linearly to heads 
corresponding to reservoir level and tailwater 
level. For final designs, the uplift criteria in case 
of dams founded on compact and unfissured 
rock shall be as specified above. In case of 
highly jointed and fractured foundation, 
however, the pressure distribution may be 
required to be based on special methods of 
analysis taking into consideration the 
foundation condition after the treatment 
proposed. The uplift shall be assumed to act 
over 100 percent of the area (see Fig. 1). 
For loading conditions F and G (see 5.1) the 
uplift shall be taken as varying linearly from 
the appropriate reservoir water pressure at the 
upstream face to the appropriate tailwater 
pressure at the downstream face. The uplift is 
assumed to act over 100 percent of the area 
(see Fig. 2). 


c) 


V HEAD WATER 


y— FOUNDATION 
Z GALLERY 
h 
VW TAIL WATER 


| “UNE OF DRAINS 


~- GROUT CURTAIN 
DRAINS — 


LINE OF 


Fic. 1 NORMAL UPLIFT PRESSURE DIAGRAM 


IS 6512 : 2019 


d) No reduction in uplift is assumed at the 
downstream toe of spillways on account of the 
reduced water surface elevation (relative to 
normal tailwater elevation) that may be 
expected immediately downstream of the 
structures. 

e) It is assumed that uplift pressures are not 

affected by earthquakes. 


6.4 Earthquake Forces 


The criteria for seismic design shall be in accordance 
with IS 1893. 


6.5 Earth and Silt Pressures 
6.5.1 General 


Gravity dams are subjected to earth pressures on the 
downstream and upstream faces where the foundation 
trench is to be backfilled. Except in the abutment 
sections in specific cases and in the junctions of the 
dam with an earth or rockfill embankment, earth 
pressures usually have a minor effect on the stability 
of the structure and may be ignored. 


6.5.1.1 The present procedure is to treat silt as a 
saturated cohesion less soil having full uplift and whose 
value of internal friction is not materially changed on 
account of submergence. 


6.5.1.2 Experiments indicate that silt pressure and 
water pressure exist together in a submerged fill and 


Y HEAD WATER 


V7 TAIL WATER 


wH 


Fic. 2 EXTREME UPLIFT PRESSURE DIAGRAM 


IS 6512 : 2019 


that the silt pressure on the dam is reduced in the 
proportion that the weight of the fill is reduced by 
submergence. 


6.5.2 Criteria for Design 


The following criteria are recommended for calculating 
forces due to silt: 


a) Horizontal ‘silt and water pressure’ is assumed 
to be equivalent to that of a fluid with a density 
of 1 360 kg/m’, and 

b) Vertical ‘silt and water pressure’ is determined 
as if silt and water together have a density of 
1 925 kg/m’. 


6.6 Ice Pressure 


6.6.1 The problem of ice pressure in the design of dam 
is not encountered in India except, perhaps, in a few 
localities. 


6.6.1.1 Ice expands and contracts with changes in 
temperature. In a reservoir completely frozen over, a 
drop in the air temperature or in the level of the reservoir 
water may cause the opening up of cracks which 
subsequently fill with water and frozen solid. When 
the next rise in temperature occurs, the ice expands 
and, if restrained, it exerts pressure on the dam. In some 
cases the ice exerts pressure on the dam when the water 
level rises. For ice sheets of wide extent this pressure 
is moderate but in smaller ice sheets the pressure may 
be of the same order of magnitude as in the case of 
extreme temperature variation. 


6.6.1.2 Ice is plastic and flows under sustained 
pressure. The duration of rise in temperature is, 
therefore, as important as the magnitude of the rise in 
temperature in the determination of the pressure exerted 
by ice on the dam. Wind drag also contributes to the 
pressure exerted by ice to some extent. Wind drag is 
dependent on the size and shape of the exposed area, 
the roughness of the surface area and the direction of 
wind. 


6.6.1.3 Existing design information on ice pressure is 
inadequate and somewhat approximate. Good 
analytical procedures exist for computing ice pressures, 
but the accuracy of results is dependent upon certain 
physical data which have not been adequately 
determined. These data should come from field and 
laboratory. 


6.6.1.4 Till specific reliable procedures become 
available for the assessment of ice pressure it may be 
provided for at the rate of 250 kPa applied to the face 
of dam over the anticipated area of contact of ice with 
the face of dam. 


6.7 Wind Pressure 


Wind pressure does exist but is seldom a significant 
factor in the design of a dam. Wind loads may, therefore, 
be ignored. 


6.8 Wave Pressure 


6.8.1 In addition to the static water loads the upper 
portions of dams are subject to the impact of waves. 
Wave pressure against massive dams of appreciable 
height is usually of little consequence. The force and 
dimensions of wave depend mainly on the extent and 
configuration of the water surface, the velocity of wind 
and the depth of reservoir water. The height of wave is 
generally more important in the determination of the free 
board requirements of dams to prevent overtopping by 
wave splash. An empirical method based upon research 
studies on specific cases has been recommended by T. 
Saville for computation of wave height. It takes into 
account the effect of the shape of reservoir and also wind 
velocity over water surface rather than on land by 
applying necessary correction. It gives the value of 
different wave heights and the percentage of waves 
exceeding these heights so that design wave height for 
required exceedance can be selected. 


6.8.2 Criteria for Design 


The following formulae are made use of in determining 
wave height, wave pressure and wave force: 


a) Fordetermining the height of wave the method 
recommended by T. Saville should be adopted. 
b) The maximum unit pressure p,,, in kPa, occurs 
at 0.125 h,, above the still water level and is 
given by the equation: 
D, = 24h, 
where h, = height of wave, in m. 

c) The wave pressure diagrams can be 
approximately represented by the triangle 
1-2-3 in Fig. 3. The total wave force P, (in kN) 
is given by the area of the triangle, or 


P,=20 h? 


d) The point of application of the wave force is 
at a height of 0.375 h above the still water 
level. 

6.8.3 Freeboard requirements shall be as laid down in 
IS 10635. 


6.8.3.1 The wave height and wind set up should be 
calculated according to the method recommended by 
T. Saville. 


6.8.3.2 Wind velocity of 120 km/h over water in case 
of normal pool condition and of 80 km/h over water in 
case of maximum reservoir condition should generally 


IS 6512 : 2019 


OBSTRUCTED 
Z CREST 
l \o APPROX 
\\*, ~ PRESSURE LINE 
KA UNOBSTRUCTED 
asd CRESTA, 
1 AN \ 
thw A E 
r - hw Y 


rs 


<— STILL WATER 
\, LEVEL 


Fic. 3 Wave Data 


be assumed for calculation of wave height if 
meteorological data is not available. When maximum 
wind velocity is known, the same shall be used for full 
reservoir level (FRL) condition and 2/3 times that for 
MWL condition. 


6.9 Thermal Loads 


Measures for temperature control of concrete in solid 
gravity dams are adopted during construction. Yet it is 
noticed that stresses in the dam are affected due to 
temperature variation in the dam on the basis of data 
recorded from the thermometer embedded in the body 
of the dam. The cyclic variation of air temperature and 
the solar radiation on the downstream side and the 
reservoir temperature on the upstream side also effect 
the stresses in the dam. Even the deflection of the dam 
is maximum in the morning and it goes on reducing to 
a minimum value in the evening. The magnitude of 
deflection is also affected depending on whether the 
spillway is running or not. It is generally less when 
spillway is working than when it is not working. While 
considering the thermal load, temperature gradients are 
assumed depending on location, orientation, 
surrounding topography, etc. 


6.10 Reaction of Foundations 


The determination by statics of the reaction of the 
foundation of dam is covered in various texts. In 
general, the resultant of all horizontal and vertical 
forces including uplift should be balanced by an equal 
and opposite reaction at the foundation consisting of 
the total vertical reaction and the total horizontal shear 


and friction at the base and the resisting shear and 
friction of the passive wedge, if any. For the dam to 
be in static equilibrium the location of this force is 
such that the summation of moments is equal to zero. 
The distribution of the vertical reaction is assumed as 
trapezoidal for convenience only, with a knowledge 
that the elastic and plastic properties of both the 
foundation material and the concrete do affect the 
actual distribution. 


6.10.1 The problem of determining the actual 
distribution is complicated by the horizontal reaction, 
internal stress relations and other theoretical 
considerations. Moreover, variation of foundation 
materials with depth, cracks and fissures which affect 
the resistance of the foundation also make the problem 
more complex. 


6.10.2 For overflow sections, the base width is generally 
determined by projecting the spillway slope to the 
foundation line and all concrete downstream from this 
line is disregarded. If a vertical longitudinal joint is 
not provided at this point, the mass of concrete 
downstream from the theoretical toe must be 
investigated for internal stresses. 


6.10.3 Internal stresses and foundation pressures 
should be computed both with and without uplift to 
determine the worst condition. 


6.10.4 Foundation Strength Criteria 


Following factors of safety in respect of maximum 
allowable compressive stress in foundation for different 
loading condition shall be ensured: 


IS 6512 : 2019 


Loading Condition Factor of Safety 


B 4 
A,C 27 
D, E, F, G 1.3 


6.11 Resistance Against Overturning 


Before a gravity dam overturns bodily, other types of 
failures may occur, such as cracking of the upstream 
material due to tension, increase in uplift, crushing of 
toe material and sliding. A gravity dam is, therefore, 
considered safe against overturning if the criteria of 
no tension on the upstream face, the resistance against 
sliding as well as the quality and strength of concrete/ 
masonry of the dam and its foundation are satisfied 
assuming the dam and foundation as a continuous 
body. 


6.12 Sliding Resistance 
6.12.1 General 


Many of the loads on the dam are horizontal or have 
horizontal components which are resisted by frictional 
or shearing forces along horizontal or nearly horizontal 
planes in the body of the dam, on the foundation or on 
horizontal or nearly horizontal seams in the foundation. 
The stability of a dam against sliding is evaluated by 
comparing the minimum total available resistance along 
the critical path of sliding (that is, along that plane or 
combination of planes which mobilizes the least 
resistance to sliding) to the total magnitude of the forces 
tending to induce sliding. 


6.12.1.1 Sliding resistance is a function of the 
cohesion inherent in the materials and at their contact 
and angle of internal friction of the material at the 
surface of sliding. The junction plane between the 
dam and rock is rarely smooth. In fact, special efforts 
are made to avoid this condition. There may, 
however, be some lower plane in the foundation 
where sliding is resisted by friction alone especially 
if the rock is markedly stratified and horizontality 
bedded. 


6.12.2 Criteria for Design 


The factor of safety against sliding may be 
calculated as indicated in 6.12.2.1 on the basis of 
partial factor of safety in respect of friction (Fẹ 
and partial factor of safety in respect of cohesion 
(F, ) as given in Table 1. 


6.12.2.1 The factor of safety against sliding shall be 
computed from the following equation and shall not be 
less than 1.0. 


(W -U)tang | cA 


F= 5 A 
P 
where 

F = factor of safety against sliding. 

W = total mass of the dam, 

U = total uplift force, 

tan@= coefficient of internal friction of the 
material, 

ra = cohesion of the material at the plane 
considered, 

A = area under consideration for cohesion, 

Fy = partial factor of safety in respect of 
friction, 

F, = partial factor of safety in respect of 
cohesion, and 

P = total horizontal force. 


6.12.2.2 The value of cohesion and internal friction 
may be estimated for the purpose of preliminary 
designs on the basis of available data on similar or 
comparable materials. For final designs, however, 
the value of cohesion and internal friction shall be 
determined by actual laboratory and field tests 
(see IS 7746 ). 


6.13 Quality and Strength of Concrete/Masonry 
6.13.1 General 


The strength of concrete/masonry shall exceed the stresses 


Table 1 Partial Factors of Safety Against Sliding 
(Clause 6.12.2) 


SI Loading Condition Fy For Dams and the Contact Plane with Fe 
No. Foundation For Foundation 
Thoroughly Investigated Others 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) A, B, C 1.5 3.6 4.0 4.5 
ii) D,E 1.2 2.4 27 3.0 
iii) F, G 1.0 1.2 1.35 1.5 


anticipated in the structure by a safe margin. The maximum 
compressive stresses occur at the heel or toe and on planes 
normal to the faces of the dam. The strength of concrete 
and masonry varies with age, the kind of cement and other 
ingredients and their proportions in the work can be 
determined only by experiment. 


6.13.2 Criteria for Design 
6.13.2.1 General 


Mix proportions are determined from the results of 
laboratory tests made with the materials that will be used 
in the structures. The proportions are selected to produce 
concrete/masonry of sufficient strength to meet the design 
requirements multiplied by an appropriate safety factor. 
In addition to meeting the requirements of strength 
described in 6.13.2.2 and 6.13.2.3, the concrete/masonry/ 
mortar should be adequate in regard to placing 
characteristics, weathering resistance, impermeability 
and resistance to alkali-aggregate attack. 


6.13.2.2 Compressive Strength 


The compressive strength of concrete and masonry shall 
conform to the following requirements: 


a) Concrete — Concrete strength is determined 
by compressing to failure 150 mm cubes. The 
strength of concrete should satisfy early load 
and construction requirements and at the age 
of one year it should be four times the 
maximum computed stress in the dam or 
14 N/mm’, whichever is more. The allowable 
working stress in any part of the structure shall 
not also exceed 7 N/mm’. 

b) Masonry — The compressive strength of 
masonry is determined by compressing to 
failure 75cm cubes of the masonry 
fabricated and cured at temperatures 
approximating to those expected in the 
structures (or 45 x 90 cm cylinders cored 
out of the structures or blocks made for the 
purpose). This strength should satisfy early 
load and construction requirements and at 
one year it should be five times the 
maximum computed stress on the dam or 
12.5 N/mm’, whichever is more. 


NOTE — For the purpose of quality control, correlation between 
the strength of mortar and that of masonry may be established 
in suitable smaller size specimens. 


6.13.2.3 Tensile strength 


a) No tensile stress shall be permitted at the 
upstream face of the dam for load combination 
B (see 5.1). Nominal tensile stresses, however, 
may be permitted in other load combinations 
and their permissible value shall not exceed 
the values given in Table 2. 


IS 6512 : 2019 


b) No tensile stress should be permitted at the 
downstream face of the dam for load 
combination A. However nominal tensile 
stress permitted in load combination D should 
not exceed the value given for condition E in 
Table 2. 


Table 2 Values of Permissible Tensile Stress in 
Concrete and Masonry 
(Clause 6.13.2.3) 


SI Load Combination Permissible Tensile Stress 

ay Concrete Masonry 
a) (2) (3) (4) 

i) C 0.01 f- 0.005 f 
ii) E 0.02 fc 001K 
iii) F 0.02 fc 0.01 
iv) G 0.04 f- 0.02 fc 


Where fè is the cube compressive strength of concrete/mortar for 
masonry 


7 CONFIGURATION OF DAM AND FOUNDATION 


The shape of a dam and curvature in its layout are 
pertinent with regard to the stability and more 
favourable stress conditions. Wherever possible, dam 
and foundation designs take advantage of the favourable 
conditions accruing from curved shapes, gradual 
transitions and fillets. 


S-ECONTRACFION JOINTS 


8.1 Longitudinal and Transverse Contraction Joints 


A contraction joint is a formed vertical or inclined 
surface between masses of concrete/masonry placed at 
different times. They divide the dam into convenient 
sized monoliths to permit convenient and systematic 
construction and to prevent the formation of haphazard 
ragged cracks owing to volume changes that cannot be 
prevented. 


8.1.1 Longitudinal Contraction Joints 


One of the measures used to control cracks parallel to 
the length of the dam in the case of relatively high dams 
is to subdivide the monolith into several blocks by 
longitudinal contraction joints and subsequently grout 
these joints to ensure monolithic action. The spacing 
of the joints is largely dictated by convenience of 
construction and the foundation conditions. A spacing 
of 20-30 m is generally adopted. There is also now a 
school of thought which believes that longitudinal joints 
need to be at very close spacing (about 15 m) if they 
are to achieve their purpose. 


8.1.1.1 However, it is recognized that the practice of 
dividing a monolith into two or more blocks by 
introducing joints parallel to the axis is basically unsound 
unless a high degree of perfection is accomplished in 
ensuring monolithicity by provision of suitable shear keys 


IS 6512 : 2019 


and successfully grouting at the appropriate time. It is 
now being increasingly accepted that a better alternative 
is to achieve necessary temperature control by pre- 
cooling of the concrete supplemented, where necessary, 
by post-cooling and avoid longitudinal contraction joints 
altogether, even in the case of high dams. 


8.1.2 Transverse Contraction Joints 


The spacing of transverse contraction joints shall be 
such as to suit the methods of construction, materials 
of the dam, the foundation conditions and the 
convenience of the location of control gates, outlet, etc. 
A spacing of 15 to 25 m may be adopted for concrete 
dams; larger spacing may be adopted for masonry dams. 
The general requirement is that each joint extends 
entirely through the structure. 


8.1.3 Grouting Transverse Contraction Joints 


The characteristics of a dam and its profile determine 
the magnitude of the load transferred horizontally 
through the joints to the abutments. If the stream bed is 
wide and flat, the vertical cantilever blocks from the 
centre of the dam towards end canyon walls are 


approximately of the same length. Under load each will 
deflect downstream by very nearly the same amount and 
the load transferred horizontally across the joints 
(provided it is capable of transferring the load) to the 
abutments will, therefore, be negligible except near the 
abutment. In a narrow canyon with steep sloping walls, 
each cantilever block from the centre of the dam towards 
the canyon wall will be shorter than the preceding one. 
In this case the load will cause each succeeding blocks 
to deflect less than the preceding one and more than the 
succeeding one. If grouted the intervening cantilever 
block will be affected by adjacent ones. This interaction 
between blocks causes torsional moments, or twist in 
the blocks, which materially affect the way in which the 
loads are distributed to the foundation and abutments. 
If the joints are keyed and grouted, part of the load will 
be transferred horizontally to the abutments by both 
bending and shear in the horizontal beam elements. If 
the joints are keyed but ungrouted, the load will be 
transferred horizontally to the abutments by shear across 
the keys. If the joints are neither keyed nor grouted, the 
entire load on the dam is transferred to the foundation 
independently by each block. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 09 (0646). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


