( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS : 6332 - 1984

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FLOORS AND ROOFS USING PRECAST DOUBLY-CURVED SHELL UNITS (
Building

First Revision
Practices Sectional
Chairman

)

Construction

Committee,

BDC

13

C-4/38, Members
SHRI

C. P. MALIK Safdarjung Developm'ent New Delhi 110016
SHRI

Area

Representing Public Works Department, Pradesh, Lucknow Government of Uttar

P. D. A~A~WAL

SIIRI R. K. MATHUR ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI D . R . BATLIVALA Housing and Urban Development Corporation SHRI B. K. CHA~RABORTY Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. M. GOEL ( Alternat: ) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil CHIEF ENGINEER ( BLD~S ) Nadu ENGINEER SUPERINTENDING ( SPECIAL BUILDINQ CIRCLE ) ( Alternote ) CHIEF ENQINEER-CUI~-ADDITIONAL Public Works Department, Government of Rajasthan SECRETARY ( BR ) EXECUTIVE ENQINEER ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF ENUINEER ( TRAINING ) EKQINEER SUPERINTENDING SHRI K Tn&.rAo& Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi SHRI A. V. GOPALKRISHNA ( Alternate ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization DIRECTOR, ARCHITECTURE (Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow JOINT DIRECTOR, ARCHITECTURE ( Alternate ) ( Continnued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1985 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the oublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 6332 - 1984
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SERI S. S. GILL Refiesen

ting

Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Builders' Association of India, Bombay Y&RI M. KARTIKAYAN Sam R. L. KUMAR Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI V. G. PATWARDHAN ( Alternate ) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI M. Z. KTJRIEN SHRI G. K. MAJUYDAR Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SHRI H. S. PASRICHA ( Alternate ) SHRI R. C. MANUAL Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee SHRI J. S. SHARUA ( Alternate ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI B. V. B. PAI SRRI P. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. PANDARE State Bank of India, Bombay Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun SHRI K. S. PRUTHI SHRI S. G. RANADIVE Indtan Institute of Architects, Bombay SERI RUBSMY SHROFF ( Alternate) `Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance REPRESENTATIVE Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN Dmx& DIRECTOL~( Alternat ) National Buildings Construction Corporation SHRI-SUSRIL KUMAX Ltd, New Delhi Public Works & Housing Department, Bombay SHRI S. R. TAMBE The Institution of Engineers ( lndia ), Calcutta SHRI B. T. UNWALLA Min$r; ;;feF$pping & Transport ( Roads Wing ), SHRI G. VEKEATESULU e SHRI M. V. SASTRY ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI G. RAXAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI A. K. SAINI Assistant Direcfor ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Floor and Roof Construction Subcommittee,
Convener
SERI

BDC 13 : 11

D. R. BATLIVALA Members

Bhabha Atomic

Research

Centre, Bombay

SHRI S. C. CHAERABARTI

Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee SHRI N. C. MAJUMUAR ( Alternate ) Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, SHRI S. K. CHAERABARTY Calcutta ( Continued on page 18 )

2

IS:6332 -1984

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FLOORS AND ROOFS USING PRECAST DOUBLYXURVED SHELL UNITS

( First Revision)
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 May 1984, after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

D.2 Precast doubly-curved shells have been in use for the past few years as roofing and flooring elements. These shell units are effectively used for replacing the solid RCC slabs. They may be used in conjuction with precast joists or battens or planks or as waffle shells by providing `in situ ribs in two directions. This type of construction has many advantages over the conventional RCC slabs being lighter in weight and saves reinforcing steel and concrete. It is also suited for use as workshop floors It eliminates the and loading platforms carrying heavy uniform loads. use of shuttering fully and scaffolding partially. The sizes of the shells are chosen depending upon handling facility available. 0.3 This standard was first published in 1971. The present revision incorporates the modifications, necessary as a result of experience gained during the use of this standard. The important changes incorporated cover thickness of edge beam, and details of erection of masonry mould for precasting. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been rendered by the Structural Engineering Research Centre, Madras who have supplied valuable technical information. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with

3

IS : 6332 - 1984 The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960". value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the details of construction built with precast funicular shells. 1.1-l A brief outline 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. of floors and roofs

for the design of precast shell is also given.

2.1 Bearing - The surface on which the precast shells or the precast planks rest for their support. 2.2 Dry Filling - Unbonded materials used for filling and levelling up haunches. These-may be in the form of sand, coal ash, brickbats or any other approved materials. 2.3 Edge Beam to stiffen the shell. The beams provided along with periphery of the shell built in masonry and

2.4 Fixed Casting Platform - A level platform finished smooth with mortar or cement rendering.

2.5 Funicular Shells - This is a thin doubly-curved shell of a shape which is purely in compression in most of the parts of the shell except near the edge beams. The shape of the shell gives purely compressive stresses under uniform loads and its shape is defined by the equation :

where z = height of the shell ordinate,
w =

uniform load per unit area of plan projection,

and

N = allowable compressive stress.

when X,_Y are ordinates.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

4

2.6 IIaunches the top level units.

of

The area in cross-section
the finished floor and

of the floor or roof between the exterior surface of the shell cast in situ along with ribs planks, battens, beams or

2.7 In-Situ Flange - The structural concrete of the intergrid shell or on top of the precast open web joists.

2.8 In-Situ Ribs - The portion between two shell units formed by placing the precast units apart to form the web of the joist or the intergrid shell. 2.9 Intergrid Shell -- Floors or roofs formed with precast shell units placed to form webs in both directions and filled to a level above the crown of the shell giving flat finished top surface. The ribs in both directions will have the same level and height. 2.10 Movable Casting Platform - A level plywood or steel to support the sagging fabric shells. platform built in timber used for precasting the concrete or

2.11 Precast Battens or Beams - Precast reinforced prestressed concrete beams either in the form of inverted rectangular sections used for carrying the precast shells. 2.12 Precast Planks - Precast reinforced 100 mm thickness with requisite reinforcement shells.

` T ' or ` I ' or

concrete members of GO to to carry the loads from the line and the

2.13 Rise - The vertical distance between the springing crown of the shell measured on the inner face of the shell. 2.14 Sagging to cast itself.

Fabric - The woven fabric used as the mould for the shell The fabric may be in the form of cloth, canvas, or hessian.

2.15 Shell Size - This shall be the outside to outside dimensions of the sides of the shell in case of rectangular and square shells. In case of circular or other shapes of shells, dimensions shall be across the diagonals outside to outside. 2.16 Web Thickness -- The thickness between two precast shell units. 3. NECESSARY INFORMATION of the web of in situ concrete laid

3.1 For the efficient design and construction of doubly-curved shell units for floors and roofs, detailed information with regard to the following is necessary : a) Total area to be covered by the scheme; b) Individual room size or column grids;

5

Its : 6332 - 1984
c) Supporting elements, namely, walls and their dimensions arrangements; d) Level at which e) Treatment parapets; f) of junctions framed structure and restrictions, or load bearing if any, to their

the floor or roof should be finished; of the in the floor roof and with roof with regard etc; and the walls or

Provision to be made purpose of drainage;

to slope for the

g) Provisions h) Openings

for fixing of services,

ceiling,

to be left in the floor or roof.

3.2 All the information as in 3.1 is to-be made available to those who are Necessary responsible for the design and construction of the scheme. drawings and detailed instructions for the work~shall be given. 3.3 Arrangements may also be made for proper exchange of information between the designer, builder and user at all stages of construction of the project. 4. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS for floors or roofs may be

4.1 General - The doubly-curved shell units used in one of the following patterns :

4

Precast shell units supported on prefabricated beams or battens made in reinforced concrete, prestressed concrete, steel or timber. When concrete beams or battens are used, they may bc designed either to carry the entire load without props or as proped tensioned flanges with in situ concrete poured between the haunches to form compression flange later. In this pattern of construction, the supporting elements and the shell units will be at different levels in the two directions. A typical detail of the scheme is shown in Fig. 1. Precast shell units kept supported on staging to form waffles in two directions. The haunches with reinforcement placed between the shell units are concreted up with structural concrete and made to a level of 20 to 50 mm ( depending upon span) above the crown of the shell. The scheme finished in this pattern will have ribs in both directions in the room or column grid and they will be at the same level. Recess in the rib may be given to effect discountinuity in the ceiling pattern for the purposes of architectural treatment. A typical detail of the scheme is shown in Fig. 2. 6

b)

IN SITU CONCRETE

DRY 7 Y

FILLING r

SHELL /-

WATERPROOFING TO SLOPE t-200 `,i : :"`a TO " 4007 .*.;s ....,, :a . . . . . ., .`. `.`, ::.,.:.;.

LRCC PRECA' ST PLANK STIRRUPS PROJECTING

WITH

120

TO

200

-c----_-cl

All dimensions PIG.

in millimetres.

1 TYPICALDETAILSOF PRECASTSHELLUNITS ANDPRECASTPLANKS
RECESS 5mm PRECAST SHELL

WE 6

THICKNESS

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG.2 AN INTERGRID SHELL

IS : 6332 - 1984 4.2 The following Indian Standards shall be referred for designing supporting elements, concrete mix, etc: Reinforced Structural Structural Loading Composite construction concrete steel timber design IS : 456-1978' IS : 1343-1980t IS : BOO-1962$ IS : 883-19705 IS : 875-196411 IS : 3935-19667 the

Prestressed concrete

4.2.1 The minimum thickness of the shell shall be 25 mm and the sizes of shell shall be of modular dimensions. 4.2.2 The thickness of the webs in the precast supporting elements or rib in the intergrid pattern of shell shall be a minimum of 70 mm. 4.2.3 Unless otherwise specified, the precast shells shall be made of concrete grade M-15. The maximum size of the aggregate for the concrete shall not exceed 8 mm or l/3 of the thickness of shell, whichever The workability of the mix is to be assured as small thicknesses is more. are being cast. 4.2.4 The minimum reinforcement in the edge beams of the shells shall be one 6 mm diameter mild steel bar. 4.2.5 The minimum reinforcement in the governed by the provisions in IS : 456-1978*. in situ concrete shall be

4.2.6 The minimum thickness of edge beam shall be 25 mm in normal condition and 35 mm in corrosive atmosphere. A typical detail of edge
beam in corrosive atmosphere has been shown in Fig. 3.

5. PRECASTING

a
out by any

5.1 Precasting

of the doubly-curved shell units may be carried one of the methods given in 5.1.1, 5.1.2 and 5J.3.

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). fCode of practice for prestressed concrete ( jrst revision ). $Code of practice for use of structural steel in general building construction ( revised ). @ode of practice for design of structural timber in building ( third revision ). [ICode of practice for structural safety of buildings: Loading standards ( revised ). flCode of practice for composite construction.

ISr6332-

1984

FIG. 5.1.1

3 DETAILS OF EDGE BEAM IN CORROSIVE ATMOSPHERE Fabric Mould shell unit ( see example given in Fig. 4 )

Sagging

a) Frame for casting the shall be fabricated. b) A level platform

in masonry

or timber

shall be built up.

c) A square frame with hessian, canvas or cloth stretched and tucked to it shall be placed over a masonry platform so that the inside surface of the frame snugly fits into the outside of the platform. The fabric is thus fully supported from sagging. A frame equal Concrete to the shell thickness shall be set up on the platform. of the specific mix shall be poured inside the frame and comThe mould shall next be lifted off the platform and pacted. supported at 4 corners. The hessian sags and the shell gets itself cast ( see Note ). Ensure that shell is finished smooth as for ceiling finish. The reinford) The mould for the edge beam shall be next set up. cement cage shall be placed in position and the edge beam concreted.

9

25-itP-25

75x

6

FLAT7

110-q tt j--l00

REINFORCEMENT

25x

6

ANGLE

SECTION Shell Masonry platform

XX Casting 5 6 7 8

SECTION Edge Bdam

YV Casting 1200 mm inside 1 100 mm out to out

: Main frame 1 200 x 1 200 mm out to out 3 Hessian, tucked to headless nails 4 Shell frame 1 150 x 1 150 mm inside

Blocks from support Edge beam mould outer 1 200 Edge beam mould inner 1 100 with fillets as shown Headless nails

x x

All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG.~ EXAMPLE OF A FRAME FOR CASTING A SHELL UNIT

1s : 6332- 1984
e) The f) edge beams shall be demoulded and 3 hours after casting. cured in the normal way 24

The shell should be inverted hours after casting.

NOTE - The extent of sag and tension in the fabric may be regulated within the prescribed limits by two to three trial,castings.

5.1.2

Masonry Mould

a) The surface of the shell cast by itself adopting the method given in 5.1.1 is defined by the equation given in Table 1 for various plan shapes. For any desired raise of the shell of rectangular or square plan the ordinates on various points can also be calculated using approximate formula:

<=
where 5 = zm,, = vertical

-$$--(as-9)

(P-yr)

ordinate central

at point X, y; rise which may be ( L = shell size );

maximum

a = b = X, y =

4 length

of the shell; which is platform other

4 width of the shell; and the co-ordinates of the grid point from the origin, taken as the centre of the shell unit. obtained shall be set off from and finished smooth. shall be coated with a level

The ordinates thus and the surface concreted

b) The finished surface releasing agents. c) Outer mould

oil, grease

or any

for the edge beams

shah be set up.

d) The designed reinforcement for the edge beam shall be placed between the outer edge beam mould and the masonry platform built up. e) Concrete of the specified mix shall be laid in the edge beam and The thickness over the shell mould equal over the shell mould. to the designed thickness of the shell shall be controlled by thickness gauges. The shell is thus cast in the erect position. -Ensure that finished concrete is rough enough to bond with screed concrete. f) The edge beam mould should be released 3 hours after casting.

11

fS : 6332 -

i98d

6)

The shell should be lifted off the mould using levers at the four corners 24 to 48 hours after casting. Longer time up to 72 hours may be necessary in cold climates ( below 25�C ) as also when pozzolana cement is used. In using levers ensure that the `levers are operated only on oneside at a time and never at the end at diagonals. The shell should be kept stacked and cured in the normal The stacking of the shells may be done one above the supported at four corners only, in piles of 8 to 10 shells. way. other

3

Shell units up to I.5 m in size may be handled manually. Shells heavier than this will need the help of hoisting equipment and appliances. For small size shells where handling is done manually, provision of lifting hooks are not necessary. process may be normally adopted when the size of the shell exceeds 1.5 m and where reinforcement is provided in the body of the shell. of the shell may be calculated using the equations given in 5.1.2.

5.1.3Mechanized Process a) The mechanized b) Surface c> The

ordinates thus obtained shall be laid out to form a steel, The mouM for the shell and the inner timber, or plastic mould. surface of the edge beam may be fabricated as a monolithic block.

d) A level platform

e>

600 to 1 000 mm above the ground level shall be made in timber or RCC with openings equal to the size of internal dimensions of the shell unit. Four to five openings may be provided in platform. The fabricated mould shall be mounted on a trolley with jacking arrangements for lifting and lowering the mould to the level of the casting platform. below the opening and the mould raised to the appropriate levels. The outer edge beam mould shall then be positioned over the casting platform. The designed reinforcement in the edge beam and in the shells, if any, are then placed. Concrete of the specified mix shall be laid in the edge beam and over the shell mould. The thickness over the shell mould shall be controlled by thickness gauges. The shell is thus cast in the erect position. Outer edge beam mould may be released 3 hours after casting. Twenty-four to forty-eight hours after casting the shell, the mould may be loweled and the cast shell is left on the platform for a further period of 24 to 48 hours.

f) The trolley may be positioned

d

12

IS: 63329 1984
TABLE 1 EQUATION OF SHELL SURFACE FOR VARIOUS PLAN SHAPES

( Clause 5.1.2 )

EQUATIONTOTHE

SURFACE

16 wa2 cc Z=JVxa c n = 1, 3. 6 .. .. . . cos nxx .?a

z=Ew_a2

-~-&_(-1,n+ "wT3 n = 1, 3,5 . . . . . .
cos n"x_ 2a

a

Y

x

4.

ZE4+(X2+y2-a2)
Y

5.

`=$[$(X2+_Ya)-&
Y and 5.1.2.

(x2-3xy2)-_$aa

Ia

NOTE - The explanation to the symbols given in this table is the same as in 2.5

13

IS:6332
j)

- s984
The mould may then be moved to the next opening in the casting platform and set for the casting of the next shell. The shells thus cast may be lifted off the casting platform after 48 to 96 hours after casting. at corners stacked and of the shell within the cured in the normal

k) Lifting hooks shall be provided edge beam thickness. m) The shell may way. then be kept

6. CONSTRUCTION

6.1 The construction units shall be carried
6.1.1

of the floor or roof using the doubly-curved out in accordance with 6.1.1 to 6.1.3.

shell

Precast Battens and Precast Shell Units
shall be finished elements either as load bearing walls or beams to the bearing level of the precast elements.

a) The supporting

b) The precast concrete supporting elements or timber or steel joists shall then be placed at the appropriate levels with proper mortar pad bearing over the walls or beams. c) The battens design. or joists should be proped at points mentioned the battens in the or joists

d) The shell units shall then be placed with proper mortar pad bearing.

spanning

e) The shells thus positioned leave space between edge beam equal to web thicknesses to be concreted along the length of battens or joists. In the other direction, between two shell units, only dry mortar packing be provided. f) The necessary reinforcement in the compression continuity over supports shall now be placed. flange and for

g) The in situ compression flange for the battens or joists are then poured to the designed level and width. The haunches and uneven surface now left may be filled with dry filling to the level of the crown of the shell. This dry filling may be replaced by lean concrete, if desired. h) j) On attaining strength shall be removed. The floor proofing. or roof for the

in situ compression
to receive finishes

flange,

props

is now ready

and water-

14

I$ : 6332 - 1984 6.1.2 Precast Shells in Intergrid Pattern - When floor or roof in intergrid pattern, the procedure as follows:
precast shells are used in to be followed shall be for the shall be bottom levelled of the to the

a) Erect staging and place shuttering planks ribs at the spacing of edge beam of shells, b) The staging and designed level. the shuttering planks

C) If

recess is provided in the ribs for architectural reasons, strips of planks or plywood shall be nailed along the ribs in two directions over the shuttering planks for the ribs.

The precast shell units shall then be positioned in the grid pattern. The reinforcement designed for the ribs shall be tied and placed The distribution reinforcement and torsion with proper covers. bars are also laid over the shells and tied up to the rib reinforcement. The necessary triangular stirrups in webs are also tied up. Concrete of the specified mix shall then be poured in the ribs and over the shells to the designed level. Compaction of the concrete shall be done with vibrators.

f)
8)

The surface of the shell units at the top shall be made as rough as possible, while precasting them, to ensure perfect bonding between the in sz"~ concrete and the shell units. After the normal curing, staging and shuttering planks may be removed. The floor or roof is now ready to receive the finishes and waterproofing.

6.1.3 When the shell units are used in intergrid pattern on spans above 12 m, the depth of the ribs may demand their being cast in two stages. This is because the casting of edge beams of the shells along with the shell units might lead to fabrication problems as casting of thin edge beams of In such cases over 250 mm depth for the shell units may be difficult. regular side shuttering shall be provided for the ribs up to a level from In whic,h the shell edge beams will make up the total depth of the rib. the process described in 6.1.2, the edge beam of the shells themselves form the side shuttering for the ribs.
6.1.4 Oeenings

6.1.4.1 It is not desirable to puncture openings in the precast shell However, if position of openings are known in advance, necessary units. Such openings provision may be made in the shell units while precasting. may be made in the shell with proper stiffening by adding reinforcement around the opening. 15

!S :&xi2

- 1984

6.1.4.2 When the openings are to be made in intergrid shell pattern, procedure as in 6.1.4.1 may be followed. If large number of openings are required within one grid, this grid may be replaced by solid rienforced concrete instead of the precast shells, with suitable openings duly strengthened by adding reinforcement.
6.1.5 Waterfiroojng

6.1.5.1 Waterproofing treatments as provided for in reinforced concrete slabs may be provided for the floors or roofs built with doublycurved shell units ( see IS : 1346-1976* and IS : 4365-19671_ ). Special care should be taken for the treatment of junctions with walls. 6.1,6 Thermal Insulation - The thermal insulation normally provided for reinforced concrete slabs may also be provided for floors or roofs built with doubly-curved shell units. 6.1.7 Floor Finishes - Floor finishes, such as granolithic concrete flooring, mosaic tiles or terrazo floors may be laid directly over the floors built with doubly-curved shell units. 6.1.7.1 In finishing the ceiling of the floor or roof using doublycurved shells, the joints between precast elements shall be neatly finished Small air holes on the surface of the shell with cement paste or mortar, units shall also be finished with lime or cement paste before painting. No raking of surface shall be done to receive plaster on the inside of the shell or its edge beam. 7. INSPECTION 7.1 The inspection shall. be done to avoid any bad construction which may result in one or more of the defects given in Table 2 in the floors or roofs.

*Code of practice for waterproofing of roofs with bitumen felts ( second revi,~ion ). +Code of practice for application of bitumen mastic for waterproofing of roofs. 16

IS : 6332 - 1984
TABLE 2 DEFECTS IN FLOORS AND ROqFS

(Clause 7.1 ) SL No. (1) i)
STAGE

PARTICULARS OB INSPECTION (3) The compacting of concrete and position of reinforcemet to be inspected. Stretching of the sagging fabric should be such that the sag in all the shells in one lot has a tolerance of not more than f 3 mm. The lifting or inversion of shells should be done carefully. They should always be kept in such a way that their four corners are at the same level. Staging and props provided should not sag. More so, in the case of the scheme using precast battens of joists.

TYPE or LIKELY FAILURES (4) Cracking, lack of finish

(2) Precasting

ii)

Stagingandprops

The interaction between compression and tension flange will be defective if the battens or joists sag during concreting of the flanges. Bad concrete and ceiling finishes. bad

iii)

Bearing of the joists and shell units

The shells and joists should be positioned in perfect level and made watertight to prevent leakage of cement slurry from in situ concrete.

17

IS I6332 - 1984
( Continuedfrom page 2 ) Representing Public Works Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur Government of

Members CHIEF ENGINEER( B & R )

SHRI H. N. SAXENA ( Alternalc) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER SOUTHERN ( GENERAL ), RAILWAYS Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI K. DEVARAJAN New Delhi MAJ A. K. KADIAN ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI V. S. ENCUNEER Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI R. L. KUXAR Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. K. MAJUUDAR SHRI H. S. PASRICHA (Alternate ) .Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI B. V. B. PAI SHRI I'. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI R. RAJAPPA StructMu~r~3ngmeermg Research Centre ( CSIR ), DR M. RAMAIAH
SHRI Z. GEORGE (Alternate) SENIOR DEPUTY CHIEF ENQINEER Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras ( BLDQS) EXECUTIVEENOINEER( PLANNING ) ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI SA~RI KANT ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDlNo E N a I N E E R Public Works Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad SU(R~E:O'~) OF WORKS, MADRAS Central Public Works Department, New Delhi C~NTRE C~ncw

18

