lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 53:2005

Indian Standard CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT -- GUIDANCE ON THE USE OF AN ORGANIZATION'S QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN PRODUCT CERTIFICATION -- GUIDELINES

ICS 03.120.20

@ BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK .!ep:emtwr 2007

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 t3AHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group

9

National Mirror Committee

of CASCO,

IRD 1

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with lSO/lEC Guide 53 : 2005 `Conformity assessment -- Guidance on the use of an organization's quality management system in product certification' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the National Mirror Committee of CASCO and approval of the Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards under Rule 8 (3C) of B/S /?u/es. The text of lSO/lEC Guide has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards, practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

the current

lS/lSO/lEC Guide

53:2005

Contents

Page

Introduction

........................................................................................................................................................ii 1

1
2 3 4 4.1 4.2 5

Scope ...............................................................m ............................m ......m .................................................. Nonnative references

........................................................................................................................... 1

Terms and definitions ........................................................................................................................... 1 Steps in the scheme ............................................................................................................................. 2 Deciding on the scheme ....................................................................................................................... 2 Functions in the implementation of a product certification scheme ............................................... 2 Selection ................................................................................................................................................ Determination 2

6 7
8 9

........................................................................................................................................ 3 ......................................................................................................................... 4

Review and attestation Surveillance

........................................................................................................................................... 5 ................................................................................................................................ 5

Mark of confomiW

Annex A (informative) Example of a data form for a product certification scheme that uses very few requirements of a quality management system ......................................................................... 6 Annex B (informative) Example of a data form for a product cetilfication scheme that uses many requirements of a quality management system ............................................................................... 10 Bibliography ..................................................................................................................................................... 21

I

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

Introduction
Product certification schemes incorporating an organization's quality management system can be beneficial for both the organization and the certification body in determining the conformity of products to specified requirements and in assuring that products continue to conform to those requirements. In these types of schemes, product certification is based on both the assessment of conformity of an organization's quality management system to specified requirements, and the assessment of conformity of the product to specified product requirements. Certification bodies can conduct both types of assessment for product certification schemes that are covered by this Guide, Product certification schemes can take many forms, including those that do not utilize an organization's quality management system. There is no inference in this Guide that one form of product certification scheme is superior to another, Furthermore, when a certification body has several forms of product certification schemes available for a class of product, the organization has the right to choose the scheme under which it wishes to apply for certification.
NOTE In some countries, technical regulations predetermine the available

type(s) of product certification scheme to

be used. This Guide is based on the understanding schemes are familiar with that interested parties using it to develop product certification

-- --

the principles and practices covered by the ISO 9000 family of International

Standards,

the more general certification and surveillance provisions established for product certification systems in lSO/lEC Guide 67, and the specific product requirements.

ii

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

Indian Standard CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT -- GUIDANCE ON THE USE OF AN ORGANIZATION'S QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN PRODUCT CERTIFICATION -- GUIDELINES

1

Scope

1.1 This Guide outlines a general approach by which certification bodies can develop and apply product certification schemes utilizing requirements of an organization's quality management system. The provisions given in this Guide are not requirements for the accreditation of a product certification body and do not substitute the requirements of lSO/lEC Guide 65.
1,2 The 5GheMeS contained in this Guide are for product certification only and in all cases involve the following principles: a) assessment of an organization's quality management products conforming to specified requirements; testing, inspection requirements; or comparable verification system and its capability to consistently supply

b)

of the product's conformity

to scheme criteria and specified

c)

application of a suitable surveillance scheme to ensure continual products supplied by the organization; control of the mark of conformity andlor logo of the certification

conformity

to specified requirements

of

d)

body.

t.3 Within product certification schemes, it is possible for certification bodies to verify conformity with the specified requirements through a variety of ways, including the assessment of an applicant's quality management system. Whatever the form of scheme that is developed, the certification body retains the authority to certify or not. A cerWication body can at its discretion specify scheme criteria in addition to those described in this Guide.

2

Normative

references

The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. ISO 9000:2000, Quality management Conformity systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary

lSO/lEC 17000:2004,

assessment

-- Vocabulary and general principles

3

Terms

and definitions
of this document, the terms and definitions given in 1S0 9000, lSO/lEC 17000 and the

For the purposes following apply.

1

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

3.1 assessor (certification) competent person assigned by a product certification assessment team, an assessment of an organization

body to perform,

alone or as part of an

4
4.1

Steps

in the scheme
on the scheme

Deciding

In order to achieve the needed assurance within the product certification scheme, the scheme criteria should incorporate quality management system requirements, as established in ISO 9001 or a similar quality management system standard,
NOTE

The quality management system requirements can be based on ISO 9001, one of its sector applications (e.g. lSOiTS 16949 and lSO/TS 29001), or a similar quality management system standard,

The product certification body should give consideration to the risks and cost involved in the application of a fXVdUGt certification scheme when it decides the extent of the requirements of the quality management system to be incorporated into the scheme criteria. If the level of risks is high, the certification body should consider management system requirements into the scheme criteria. 4.2 Functions in the implementation of a product incorporating a greater number of quality

certification

scheme
functions:

All forms of product certification a) b) c)
d)

schemes within the scope of this Guide include the following

selection; determination; review and attestation; surveillance.

These functions are consistent with the requirements established in lSO/lEC Guide 65, The product NOTE certification schemes that certification bodies develop by using this Guide are given in lSO/lEC Guide 67. A description of the functions described above appears in lSO/lEC 17000.

Llauses 5 to 8 describe activities, for each of the above functions, management system as part of the product certification scheme.

related to utilizing an organization's

quality

5

Selection
the certification (see Clause 6). body should gather information to determine the extent of

5.1 During this function, conformity with requirements

5.2 When the organization has implemented a quality management system, the certification body should conduct a document review in order to establish the readiness and capability of the organization, and the degree to which the system has been established. 5.3 To facilitate the assessment, the applicant may need to provide pertinent information in a scheme data form. Two examples of such forms, one fairly simple and one more complex with regard to the number of quality management system requirements involved in the scheme, are shown in Annexes A and B.

2

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

5.4 Depending on the nature of the scheme and the degree to which the scheme utilizes an organization's quality management system, the certification body should ensure that the organization has a minimum level of experience in the application of its quality management system before the organization submits an application for product certification. 5.5 The certification body may take into account the organization's certification provided that the certification covers a)
b)

current

quality

management

system

the scope of products being considered, the sites where the activities take place. Consideration

and

NOTE

Iecognised, through relevant International

certification is mutually could also be given to the extent that the quality management it originating from a certification body that is accredited and/or peer assessed in accordance with Standards (e.g. lSO/lEC 17021 and/or lSO/iEC 17040).

5.6 The certification needed, and determine

body should evaluate whether the application

the information provided, request additional can proceed to the determination function. organization

information

as

5.7 The certification body should arrange a date for a visit to the applicant's an assessment team that includes persons competent in
a) the applicable pr@uGt requirements,

and should form

b)
c) d) e)

appropriate conformity

test andlor inspection assessment procedures,

procedures

and techniques,

the quality management audit methodologies

system requirements

included in the scheme, and

as recommended

in ISO 19011.

NOTE

For additional information on audit activities and personal attributes, and knowledge and skills of auditors,

reference can be made to [S0 19011.

6

Determination

6.1 The matters to be investigated by the assessment team at the organization's facilities will vary widely depending upon the specific quality management system requirements that have been included within the relevant product certification scheme. Normally, however, the assessment team should take the following actions: a) b) determine that all information provided in the application is correct and complete;

check to ensure that the organization has the necessary equipment, staff and facilities for carrying out the tasks assigned to it for its participation in the product certification scheme: ask the organization to demonstrate its capability to monitor and measure the product so as to assure conformity with the specific product requirements used in the scheme; this may involve verification of test results or inspection reports by the certification body; ensure that the organization performs those quality management system processes that are to be carried out by the organization as part of the product certification scheme, and that the organization has the necessary planned arrangements to ensure that the quality management system processes will continue to be effectively implemented and maintained.

c)

d)

6.2 Following the assessment of the quality management system by the certification body's assessment team, a report on the team's observations should be prepared. This report should be submitted, together with

3

lS/lSO/l

EC Guide

53:2005

the completed application, to the responsible persons or group in the certification body who will decide whether and under what conditions the applicant may be approved. Such conditions may relate to establishing confidence that the applicant's quality management system can result in products being consistently produced or supplied to specified requirements. 6.3 An organization should only be approved for additional product categories when the certification body has confirmed that the product complies with specified requirements and when it has completed another assessment of the quality management systems directed to the new product category(s), as applicable. 6.4 if required by the relevant product certification scheme, all the organization's facilities involved in the product design process, whether part of the organization or not, should be covered in the determination function by the certification body. 6.5 The certification body should give consideration to the amount of assessment time when the organization's quality management system is certified by an accredited or peer assessed quality management system certification body.
NOTE recognised. Consideration could also be given to the extent to which the quality management certification is mutually This can be through it originating from a certification body that is accredited and/or peer assessed in

accordance with relevant International Standards (e.g. lSO/lEC 17021 and/or ISO 17040).

7
7,1

Review
The

and attestation
way in which the accepted quality management in the relevant product certification scheme.

specific

system is utilized will depend

upon the

specific requirements

The certification process should be completed as described in the scheme and the acceptability of the organization's quality management system at all sites covered by the product certification should be included in the certification documents. 7.2 As a first example, a simple procedure may be based only upon acceptance of tes? data generated by the organization's laboratory; i.e. only those requirements related to the organization's testing facilities and practices are involved in the assessment (see Annex A). In such a case, an assessor of the certification body should visit the laboratory in order a) b) c) to witness all types of tests or inspections, including sampling, or or

to witness some types of tests or inspections, to review the organization's

test results or inspection reports and, if found to be in order, to accept them.

NOTE For testing and calibration laboratories, lSO/lEC 17025 contains both management systems requirements and the requirements for technical competence. In operating a product cerMication scheme in accordance with this Guide, it is only the assessment of the quality management system requirements that are relevant. lSO/l EC 17025 is not int~nded to be used as the basis for certification of quality management of laboratories.

7.3 As a second example (see Annex B), following a determination function which involves assessment of a large number of processes of an organization's quality management system and of all other requirements of the product certification scheme, the organization is permitted to apply the certification body's mark to certain categories of products under an ongoing surveillance function.
7.4

The examples given in Annexes A and B are illustrative of schemes that utilize very few requirements (Annex A) and many requirements (Annex B) of a quality management system. In addition to these examples, there are many different combinations of possible requirements that a certification body may decide to employ
in order to meet different needs. scheme that is based on this Guide does not

NOTE Providing a product certification within a product certification mean that the relevant quality management system is also certified.

4

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

8

Surveillance
that a certified product continues to meet
s~ecified requirements for an

This function is to provide assurance
ongoing Details period of time. may vary

of the surveillance

depending

on the needs

of the type

of scheme.

However,

the followlng

general principles a)

always apply.

In carrying out surveillance at the organization's facility, an assessor of the certification body should ensure that all quality management system requirements prescribed in the scheme are being fulfilled, and that the product covered by the scheme continues to comply with the specified requirements. Normally this should also include witnessing some selected tests or inspections, verification of records and examination of products to determine conformity with requirements. During surveillance, consideration should be given to the scheme criteria as they relate to new or modified products within the approved product category. When it has been determined that changes have occurred that could affect the application of the mark to new or modified products, the assessor should refer to the person or group of persons who have overall responsibility for the certification decision at the certification body. The minimum frequency of surveillance visits should be stated in the scheme. Surveillance should take place at all locations covered by the scheme. For example, if products are manufactured at or supplied

b)

c)

from different locations from that at which the products are designed, tested and inspected, and all these
activities are part of the scheme, surveillance should cover all relevant locations (see also 6.4).

9

Mark of conformity
are contained in lSO/lEC 17030.

Requirements for the issuing and use of third-party marks of conformity Further guidance can be found in lSO/lEC Guide 23 and ISO Guide 27.

5

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

Annex A (informative) Example of a data form for a product certification scheme that uses very few requirements of a quality management system

A.1
This

Introductory

note (not part of the scheme

data form)

is an example of a certification body's scheme data form for an organization which requests certification under a scheme that has been developed to use the organization's testing laboratory for generating some or all of the test data required to indicate conformity with the applicable requirements, The example is based on the requirements of ISO 9001,

In the example,

the

organization's

quality

management

system

requirements

to

be

assessed

by

the

certification body under this scheme are related to
control of monitoring and measuring

devices

(e.g. 1S0 9001:2000,

7.6), and

monitoring

and measurement

of the product (e.g. ISO 9001:2000, system assessment or instructions,
involved,

8,2.4)

The organization's --
--

quality management

involves such items as

the laboratory operational
limits of accuracy

procedures

of all measuring

and test equipment

the environmental -� -- the environmental

conditions conditions

under which the calibrations

are performed,

under which the testing is performed, and test, measurement and testing devices,

the methods of measurement

--- the availability of appropriate -- -- --

the adequacy of energy supplies to perform the required testing, the organization's demonstration body. equipment calibration programme, and with specified requirements of the certification

of the ability to conduct tests in accordance

During the selection function, the certification a) confirming with the organization with the certification body; evaluating the organization's continually maintained;

body may consider representative and deputy will be, for all dealings

who their designated

b)

knowledge

of the applicable

requirements

and how this knowledge

is to be

c)

checking the competence of all personnel accordance with the requirements.
pertaining to all of the above items

who test products,

including

their skills to perform

tests in

Information

is sought

via the scheme

data form

(see Example

A.2)

6

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

A.2
File:

Scheme data form (specimen)

Organization: 1

Introduction

and instructions body with information about which bear the

This form is intended to provide the certification a)

the organization's quality management system for assuring that all the products certification body's mark are in conformity with the applicable requirements, and the competence and responsibilities of the organization's staff responsible for implementing

b)

the scheme. the answer

For each of the following questions, the certification body requires documentation to confirm wherever appropriate. A copy of the documentation will be kept on file by the certification body. This form is to be completed by the organization. documentation prior to a visit to the organization for each new or additional facility location. The completed form, the documentation used as the basis of the assessment.

It should be returned to the certification body with suppofing by certification body assessors. A form should be completed

and the organization's

conformity

assessment

programme

will be

In order to retain certification under this scheme, the organization should inform the certification body promptly in writing of any changes in organization, personnel, information or other details reported in this form. The certification body's personnel will periodically review the information contained in this form during subsequent visits to the facility to determine and record any changes that may have occurred. If there is not enough space on the form for the infocrnation requested, a note should be made in the appropriate space: e.g. "see appendix ... dated ......". The required material should be identified, dated and attached. When completed, certification body. this form and its contents become confidential and will be handled as such by the

1 Location and responsible

persons

Test or inspection facility (address in full):

a) Person in this facility with responsibili~ for handling matters related to assessing prcduds under this scheme:
Name Postion: Lccation: Telephone: E-mail: Fax

7

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

This person should have the written authority to represent the organization, enforce the certification body's requirements and make necessary changes in produtilon test facilities and procedures when required by the certification body's standards and related

documents
Does thw authority ex!st? To whom does this person report? (name and position) b) Name of alternative person with the same responsibilities as under 1 a): 2 Production pin-full)" Address (in full): 1 Person at produdlon (or supply) facility with responsibility for product realization evaluated under this scheme 1 Name I (or supply) facility Yes IJ No.;

1

1

I

["

Petition:
Telephone:

I E-mail Fax.

I
1 system system in accordance with the requirements of ISO 9001 or an equivalent Yes(! No.

[3 Quali ty management

3.1 Has the organization implemented a quality management quality management system standard?

Where applicable, specify the equivalent quality management system standard 3.2 Is the quality management system certified by an accredited certification body? Yes 3 No,;

3.3 Does the scope of the quality management system certification rover the production (or supply) processes in the category of produd Yes [] No E for which product certification is requested? 3.4 Are all the sites in charge of production (or supply) of the product covered by the quality management If yes, please attach a copy of the current certificate(s) and, if available, a copy of the last audit report 4 Personnel Append the quality management system documentation that spedies the responsibility and authority of all personnel responsible for testing or inspecting products for conformity to requirements, and for writing product monitoring and measurement records. Append the documentation of the required competence for these personnel and the records of their education, training, experience and skills.
I

system certificate(s)?Yes

!l N

I

8

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

5 Control of monitoring

and meaauring

devices

Criteria: The quality management system shall be effectMe in controlling the monitoring and measurement dewces used to verify the conformity of the product, in accordance with either 7.6 of ISO 9001:2000, or an equivalent quality management system standard (which should be identified). 5.1 What measuring and test equipment is used to carry out tests? I List with serial numbers and the measured quantity, as applicable, and provide accuracies for each item. 5.2 How frequently are measuring and test devices calibrated? List each item, 5.3 How is the calibration status of measuring and test equipment identified? 5.4 whk2h standard devices are used for calibration? 5.5 Are permanent calibration remrds maintained for each relevant measuring and test device? 5.6 Are written calibration procedures available? Yesl No,:

I

I
Yes P NOIJ

I

I
i

5.7 Who assumes responsibility for issue?
5.8 Deschbe how the standard devices are traced to international or national standards. 6 Test procedures 6.1 Do documented procedures exist for all products tested? 6.2 Who assumes responsibility for issuance? 6.3 Are the procedures available to all test personnel? 6.4 Are the personnel competent to understand the procedure and tp perform all required testing? List names of relevant personnel who are competent to conduct the tests. 6.5 Is there a documented procedure for control including the review and approval of test methods in accordance with changes in the relevant requirements? Yes;; No; Provide details. 6.6 Are the records available of the results of test or inspection of product assessed under this scheme? If not, why not? Provide details, Yes ~ 1 Nor. Yes L1 No L) Yes [7 No I.] Yeso No iI i

9

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 53:2005

Annex B (informative) Example of a data form for a product certification scheme that uses many requirements of a quality management system

B.1

Introductory

note (not part of the scheme

data form)

This is an example of a certification body's scheme data form for an organization (electrical organization in this case) that requests certification under a scheme that has been developed to make use of a large number of quality management system requirements. The requirements involved in this scheme include the following: planning of product realization, customer-related processes, design and development, purchasing, production and service provision, monitoring and measurement of product, control of monitoring and measuring devices, control of nonconforming product, corrective action, preventive action, document control and record control.
The example is based on the requirements of ISO 9001.

10

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

B.2
F!le

Scheme

data form

(specimen)

Orgamzatlon

I
and instructions body with information about

Introduction

This form is intended to provide the certification a)

the organization's quality management system for assuring that the products which bear the certification body's mark are in conformity with the applicable requirements, and the competence and responsibilities of the organization's staff responsible for implementing the scheme,

b)

For each of the following questions, the certification body requires documentation or records, such as procedures, charts, drawings, test records and inspection reports, as proof of capability to implement the scheme, A copy of this documentation will be kept on file by the certification body. This form should be completed by the organization. It should be returned to the certification body with supporthg documentation prior to a `visit to the organization by certification body assessors. A form should be completed for each new or additional facility location. The completed form, the documentation basis of the assessment. and the organization's conformity control scheme will be used as the

In order to retain certification under this scheme, the organization should inform the certification body promptly in writing of any changes in organization, personnel, information or other detail reported in this form. The cerMication body's personnel will periodically review the information contained in this form during subsequent visits to the facility to evaluate their acceptability and determine and record any changes that may have occurred. If there is not enough space on the form for the information requested, a note should be made in the appropriate space; e.g. "see appendix .... dated .....". The required material should be identified, dated, signed and attached. When completed, certification body. this form and its contents become confidential and will be handled as such by the

The organization should agree to establish the documents requirements are fulfilled,

required in this data form to ensure that the product

At least two persons should be appointed to be responsible for the operation of this scheme implemented by the organization; i.e. a person with primary responsibility and at least one alternative person to act in his/her absence. Only these persons may authorize the application of the certification body's mark.

11

lS/lSO/lEC Guide

53:2005

1 Location and responsible

persons

11 Supply facility (address in full):

1 2Pemonat

supply facili~with

res~nsibillty

forhandling

matiers ~tiaining

toproducts assessed under this scheme

Telephone:

Fax To whom does this person report? (name and position) 1.3 Alternate Name P Osltlon Location: Telephone: responsible person:

I

Fax To whom does this person report? (name and position) 1 4Provlde anorganization chafishowing therelationship of these persons tothe organization. 1 If this application is for a facility depending on another location within the organization for planning the product realization and/or design and development, provide theinformation requiredin 1.2 and 1.3 forthelocstion of control.

12

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 53:2005

Responsibility .1 Theindlviduals

and authority ldent!fied inl.2and l,3should have documented responslblllty andauthorlty totakethe followlngact!ons

) Require correction of nonconformibes before the application of the certification mark. Do they have this authority? Do they exercise this authority? 1)Require changes peRalning totherequirements Do they have this authority? Do they exercise this authority? lnthesFclfications, drawings, procurement, etc YeslNo: Yes Yes[i
INOII

No!-

Yes, : Noi:

:) Arrange for and verify the removal of the certification mark from products which do not comply with the certification body's equirements or from prcducts which have not been covered by the scheme. Do they have this authority? Do they exercise this authority? Z 2 Criteria concerning competen~. T'he individuals identified in 1.2 and 1.3 shall be competent to perform their duties. What experience :ra(nmg do they have? and related on-the-job forma Yes: Yesll No: No'

2,3 The individuals identified in 1.2 and 1.3 should have the authority and responsibility for ensuring the following. a) The cerMcatlon mark is applied only to those products for which authorization has been given by the Cetilficetion body m writing Yesn NO I

Do they have this authority and responsibility? b) The latest dccuments of the certification body pertaining to the applicable requirements worked to. Do they have this authority and responsibdity? s) The products that bear the certification mark comply with the apphceble requirements before shipment. Do they have this authority and responsibility? 5) The applicable requirements of the following sections are implemented and being followed at the facility. Do they have this authority and responsibility? Provide the documentation, signed by a responsible executive, in which the authority and responsibility are given. 3 Quality management system with therequirements oflS09001,

are available at the facility and are hem{

Yes-

No!

Yes'-

NOI-

Yes~.

Noc

31 Hastheorganization implemented aquality management system inaccordance quality management system standard? Where applicable, specify the equivalent quality management system standard.

oranequlvalenl Yesu No:

If yes, please provide a copy of the quality manual and/or quality management system documentation. 3.2 Is the quahty management system certified by an accredited certification body?

Yesil

Nor

33 Does the scope of the certification cover the activities of production and/or supply of the categoty of product for which certification i!
requested? Yesi No'.

13

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 53:2005

4 Are all the sites in charge of production and/or supply of the product covered by the certificate(s)? yes, please attach a mpy of the current certificate(s) and, if available, a copy of the last audit report

Yes

1-1

No I

5 The quality management system documentation should contain details of
I organization structure, responsibihty and authority,

I inspection and test plans,
I documented

procedures,

) requwed external documents (e.g technical standards and statuto~ and regulato~ requirements applicable to the product), ) specific documents established by the organization (e.g. specifications, drawings, work instrutilons, and forms necessa~ for effective nplementatlon of the quality management system and the control of production or supply and conformity assessment of the product), nd records. )oes the quality management system documentation provide this information? Personnel \PPndthe d~umenta~ono fthequaliUm anagements ystemthats kcifiest heresponsitilitya ndauthorityo fall personnel responsibk x product design, calibration of measuring devices, verification of inmming products, testing or inspechg products to requirement: Ind for writing product monitoring and measurement records. `lease attach the decumentatim !xgerienc@ and skills. i Planning of product realization Mena: The quality management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified). i.1 Istheresult i.2Arethere ofplanning of product realization documented? exclusions from the requirements within 7.3, 7.4, 7.5.2 and 7.5.40f lS09001:2000 inthequality management of 7.1 of 1S09001:2000 or an equivalent qualit! of the required competence for these personnel and the records of their education, training Yes.] NO I-

Yesfl

No;

system? Yes~] No~

f yes, describe the exclusion and its justification, i Customer-related processes of 7.2 of 1S09001:2000 or an equivalent quali~

>riteria: The quality management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified). 5.1 lsareviw mnductd ptiorto theorganization' sammitment

tosupply aproduct tothecustomer

to ensure that

product requirements aredefined, order requirements difiring hastheatility tiomthose previously expressed areresolved, and

-- mntrador �

theorganization

tomeetthe

defined r~uirements? Yesn No[

&2 Are records of this review maintained? 6.3 Are records of customers' complaints maintained?

Yes G No [ Yes n No [

14

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

Design and development Inly fw organizations responsible for product design and development) `itena: The quality management system shall comply with the requirements anagement system standard (which should be identified), 1 Iseachproduct design verified? of 7.3 of 1S09001:2000 or an equivalent qualip

Yesn

No[

2 Do records of these verifications exist?

Yea D No[

3 Is e~h

product design reviewed in order to theresulW ofdesign tomeetrequirmenk, and propcse necessary ~!ons? and

evaluate theatili~of identify anyprobiems

Yesi"' No"
4 Do records of these reviews exist? Yes' No'

5 Where are the product design, verification design and review design carried cut?
6 There shall be evidence that prototype prcducts comply with all relevant requirements before they are released for production. Then lall be a statement, available to the cxxtification body, on file at the location o the records at the facilities provide this evidence? Purchasing r!teria: The quality management system shall com~y with the raquirmnents lmnagernent system standard (whkh should be identified). of 7,4 of 1S09001:2000 or an equivalent quali~ Yes. No[

1 A record of all verified compcments containing the following information sh~ be maintained: ) a description of the canpenent, ) the name of the supplie~ ) the catalogue or model designation sufficient to provide specific identification; ) the electrical rating; ) a record of the standards, bulletins, notius the results of the tests. I this record maintained? Inwhat form? Forhow long? .. . .. . .. . . .. .. .. .. . . . . . . Yes u No i and other requirements used to determine conformity; e.g. switch, relay;

Where isit available?

15

lS/iSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

1 Production

and service

provision or an equivalent quality

%teria: The quality management system shall comply with the requirements of 7.5 of 1S09001:2000 management system standard (whiehshould be identified), ifthere isnoexcluded suhlause with justifiestion. 1.1 Does the product identification apply? f not, please explain. 32 How is the monitoring and measurement 3.3 Does the product traceability apply? product status identified?

Yes Q No !J

Yesr

NO II

94 Does the customer provide any property that is to be incorporated in the final product?
If yes, please list them. 9.5 Isa process validation carried out? If yes, please indicate which process and the validation criteria. 10 Control of monitoring and measuring devices of 7.6 of ISO 9001:2000

Yes r; NO I J

Yes c No ["!

Criteria The quality management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified).

or an equivalent

quality

10,1 What monitoring and meesuring equipment is used? List each relevant type by full deacriptiofi, i.e. measured quantity and serial numbers. 10.2 At what intervals is each measuring device calibrated? 103 Are written calibration procedures available for each type of measuring device? 104%w is the calibration status of measuring devices identiied? Yes !2 No u Yes [ I No Yes II No c

10.5 Are calibration records maintained for each measuring device? 10.6 Is each measuring device marked to show when it was last calibrated'? 10.7 What standards are used for calibration? Itemize by model and serial numbe~ indicate when last calibrated and when nexi due for calibration. 10,8 Desrxibe hew the standards are traced to international or national standards. 10.9 Describe how required environmental conditions that are specfied for monitoring and measurement are controlled.

i]

16

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide 53:2005

1 Monitoring

and measurement

of product of 8.2.4 of 1S09001:2000 or an equivalent qualit

mteria: The quality management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified). IOTE Theproduct inspedion ortestactivities areincluded inlS09001

asmonitofing

andmeasurement

of product.

1.1 A documented monitoring and measurement plan shall be developed which describes all of the production monitoring an measurement necessary to ensure that each product under this product certification scheme complies with the requirements befofi ehvery Thlsplan shaIlinclude details ofitsimplementation as follm: l) details of verification mntrols leasuremen~ as applied to incoming materials and components, in-production and final product monitoring an

I) a system for recording the results of production line monitoring and measurement :) details of the methods used for control of nonconforming products 1)details of all required monitoring and measurement of product ias such an inspection and test plan been documented? `lease attacih a wpy of this plan, ll.2Allst of thecharactefistiG to Winspe@ed and/or tested andtherelated a-ptan= criteria shall beavailable vhere inspetilon and/or tests are performed to verify conformance requirements by the certification bcdy. s such information available at these Io.x+tions? 11.3 Criteria concerning monitoring and measurement klonitonng and measurement minimum: -- -- -- -- -- -- -- product records shall indude as ateachlocatio Yeso No

Yesn

No

records that demonstrate the conformance of the final product to the requirements

identification of the product monitoring and measurement monitoring and measurement criteria of acceptance nonconformifies; date of monitoring and/or measurement person(s) authorizing release of product. Yes o No u Yes u No u . . . .. . performed; results

Are such records maintained? Do they contain the information described? Where arethey maintained? .. . .. . . . . .

17

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 53:2005

11.4 Criteria concerning product records The following retards shall be maintained for each product under this product certification scheme: a)acopy of the nameplate, nameplate drawing ormarker dectrical rating; that shows the certification mark, iderttification number of the product and

D) environmental conditions and results of monitoring and measurement requirements;

performed on the prototype product to verify conformity to

c)photo?irraphs shotin9 external and internal views of the Product and its components along with sur%cient description, such drawings and/or text, to provide a rec.ofd of the imtially evaluated designs found to comply with the applicable product requirements; d) schematic drawings of primary and seconda~ circuits and relevant test data to demonstl

e) list of primary circuit components, including a description or drawing of the component conformity to the applicable requirements. f) hst of secondary circuit components that are -- -- -- in safety circuits, or not in Class 2 circuits, or
in critical circuits (such as interlock circuits, patient

circuite in elwtro-medical equipment).
Yes;' N

Are such records maintained? Do they contain the information described? Who has the authority and responsibility to maintain these records? Name: .... ...... .................................................... .................... .. . .............

Yes L. N

Where arethey

located? .. .............. ...... .......................... ........ ................................ ,,,...,,,,.,,... product of 8,3 of LSO 9001:2000 or an equivalent qu;

12 Control of nonconforming

Criteria: The quality management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified).

121 The organization shall establish a documented procedure for control of nonconforming products. Has such a procedure been implemented? Yes c h

12.2 Components and final prcducts that have been reworked or repaired to comply with the requirements shall be re-verified. Is this done?
YeS [3 NO ~J

12.3 Products which bear the certification body's certification mark and which do not comply with the requirements or have not been covered by the product certhication scheme shall have the certification mark removed before they are shipped from the facility,

Is this done?

Yes n No c

18

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

13 Corrective
Criteria:

action of 8.52 of ISO 9001:2000 or an equivalent qualit

The quality management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified)

131 The organization shall establish a documented procedure for corrective action. Has such a procedure been Implemented? 13.2 The product nonconformlties shall be investigated to determme the cause. Is this done? 13.3 After the cause of nonconformity has been determined, appropriate action shall be taken to avoid repetition, Is this done? 13.4 Provide an example of a record of corrective action. 14 Preventive action of 8.5.3 of lS09001:20000r an equivalent qualit Yes!] No I Yes:] No I

Yes:-, No,

Criteria' The quahty management system shall comply with the requirements management ayatem standard (whiGh should be identified) 141 Theorganlzation shall establish aprtiure for preventive action

Has such a procedure been implemented? 142 Any potential nonconfonmities of the product should be investigated to deterrnme the cause. Has this been carried out7

Yesn

No I

Yesr~ No!

14.3 When the cause of a potential nonconformist y has been determined, appropriate action should be taken to prevent repetition. Has this been c+wried out7 Yesa No

i
144 Provide an example of a record of preventive action 15 Control of documents Criteria' The qualty management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified). 15.1 Theorganizat!on shall establish apr~dure forcontrol ofdWuments. Yesb No of 4.2.3 of IS09001:2000 or an equivalent qualif

Has such a procedure been implemented? Please attach the procedure. 16 Control of records Criteria: The quality management system shall comply with the requirements management system standard (which should be identified). 16,1 The organization shall establish a procedure for record control. Has such a procedure been implemented? Please attach the procedure of 4.2.4 of 1S09001:2000

or an equivalent qualil

Yes ~ No

19

lS/lSO/lEC

Guide

53:2005

7 Summary late:

of general details

kganization's name (in full) tddress (in full)" 71 Production (supply )lceation . name (m full),

.

.,,

.

.

Iddress(m full): 72 Design, test and insp~lon Jame(m full) ...,..,. \ddress (in full)
17,3

,. facility (If applicable):

,.

,,,.,,.,.,...,..

Representative responsible for handling matters relating to the certification body. .

?epresentatwe's name: `osltion .ocation.

174 Category of product manufactured at manufacturing location:

20

lS/lSO/lEC Guide 53:2005

Bibliography

[1]
[2]

ISO 9001:2000,

Qua/ity

management

systems -- Requirements for the application of

lSO/TS 16949:2002, Qua/ity management systems -- Particular requirements /S0 9001:2000 for automotive production and relevant service part organizations ISO 19011:2002, Guidelines for quality and/or environmenfa/ management

[3] [4]

systems auditing quality

Petroleum, petrochemical and natural gas industries -- Sector-specific lSO/TS 29001:2003, management systems -- Requirements for product and service supply organizations lSO/lEC 17021, Conformity management systems lSO/lEC 17025:1999, 1S0/1EC 17030:2003, conformity assessment -- Requirements for bodies providing

[5]

audit and certification

of

[6] [7]

Genera/ requirements Conformity

for the competence -- General

of testing and calibration requirements for

/aboratoties marks of

assessment

third-party

[8]

lSO/lEC 17040:2005, Conformity assessment conformity assessment bodies and accreditation 1S0/1EC Guide systems
23:1982,

-- General bodies conformity

requirements

for peer

assessment

of

[9]

Methods

of indicating

with standards

for third-party

certification

[10] ISO

Guide 27:1983, Guidelines for corrective misuse of its mark of conformity

action to be taken by a certification

body in the event of

[11] ISOIIEC Guide 65:1996, General requirements for bodies operating product certification systems
[12]

IS0/1 EC Guide

67:2004,

Conformity

assessment

-- Fundamentals

of product certification

21

Bureau

of Indian

Standards of /ndian marking Stancfards Act, 1986 to promote and quality certification of goods

institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country.

BIS is a statutory

Copyright

in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments also reviewed indicates that for revision. amendments Additions',

are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. ,Standards are periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly

This Indian Standard

has been developed Amendments

from Dot: No. IRD 1 (016). Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

Amendment

No.

.----..

----. --.

-- BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Website 7-e/ephones: 23230131, 23233375, 23239402
Regional Offices:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

www.bis.org.

in Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499, 23378626, 23378561 23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216, 22542519, 22541442 22542315

Central :

Manak Bhavan, 9 13ahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VI! M, V. I.F). Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern :

{

Northern : SCO 335-336,

Southern : C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113 {

Western : Manakalaya, E9 Ml DC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093
Branches;

$28329295,28327858 ~ 28327891,28327892

Al-iMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD.
PARWANOO.

BANGALORE. i3H0PAL. BHU13ANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIF'UR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR.
PATNA. PUNE, RA\lKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Ptmted at Prabhat Offset

Press

New Delhi-2

