Waa HAF IS 16890 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


arte — anam ch Te 
Math Rus — are 


Textiles — Protective Clothing for 
Firefighters — Specification 


ICS 13.340.10 


© BIS 2018 


ARA AA A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"rH HAT, 9 Terme AHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2018 Price Group 6 


Textiles Protective Clothing Sectional Committee, TXD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Textiles 
Protective Clothing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The role of firefighters is very extensive in our society. Firefighters not only play a pivotal role to rescue human 
lives during fire accident but also save properties from extensive damage by extinguishing hazardous fires. It is 
one of the most life threatening occupations that require intensive physical work in hazardous environment. For 
fighting fire accident more effectively and saving their precious life, it is needed to provide suitable personal 
protective equipment (PPE). The fire fighting suit is one of the important parts of PPE. 


Fire fighter suit mostly comprises following three components: 


a) Outer shell — The outer shell resists ignition upon being exposed to thermal radiation or very short 
periods of direct flame contact. It also provides safety to the wearer from chemical hazards. 
b) Inner shell — The inner shell is generally composed of moisture barrier and a thermal barrier. 
1) Moisture barrier — Moisture barriers may totally prevent the passage of moisture, whether liquid or 
vapour. 
2) Thermal barrier — The thermal barrier is a layer of insulating material which retards heat flow 
through the garment. 
c) Inner liner — It is light weight flame retardant fabric. 


This standard covers the general clothing design, the minimum performance levels of the materials used, and the 
methods of test for determining these performance levels. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 11613 : 1999 ‘Protective 
clothing for firefighters — Laboratory test methods and performance requirements’ and EN 469 : 2005 ‘Protective 
clothing for firefighters — Performance requirements for protective clothing for firefighting’ on the subject. 


The Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards referred in this standard and 
has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 


International Title 
Standard 
ISO 811 : 1981 Textile fabrics — Determination of resistance to water penetration — Hydrostatic pressure 
test 


ISO 3175-1: 2010 Textiles — Professional care, drycleaning and wetcleaning of fabrics and Garments ` Part 2 
Procedure for testing performance when cleaning and finishing using tetrachloroethene 

ISO 4920 : 2012 Textile fabrics — Determination of resistance to surface wetting (spray test) 

ISO 5077 : 2007 Textiles — Determination of dimensional change in washing and drying 

ISO 11092: 2014 Textiles — Physiological effects — Measurement of thermal and water-vapour resistance 
under steady-state conditions (sweating guarded-hotplate test) 

ISO 17493 : 2016 Clothing and equipment for protection against heat — Test method for convective heat 
resistance using a hot air circulating oven 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16890 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — PROTECTIVE CLOTHING FOR 
FIREFIGHTERS — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies test methods and minimum 
requirements for protective clothing to be worn during 
firefighting and associated activities where there is a 
risk of heat and/or flame and covers the general clothing 
design, the minimum performance levels of the 
materials used, and the methods of test for determining 
these performance levels. 


This standard does not cover special clothing for use 
in other high risk situations such as specialized 
firefighting, or clothing for use in long term firefighting 
operations in high ambient temperature, for example 
brush, wildland, or forest firefighting. It does not cover 
protection for the head, hands and feet or protection 
against other hazards, for example biological, radiation 
and electrical hazards. These aspects may be dealt with 
in other standards. 
NOTE — Additional personal protective equipment to protect 
the head, hands, and feet should be worn with clothing specified 
in this standard and in majority of situations breathing apparatus 
is also required to be worn. Firefighters should be trained in 
the use and care of protective clothing covered by this standard 
including an understanding of its limitations and of the other 


items of personal protective equipment that may be required 
depending on the risks encountered. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subjected to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purposes of this standard, the following terms, 
definitions and symbols shall apply: 

3.1 Terms and Definitions 


3.1.1 Cargo Pockets — Pockets located on the 
protective garment exterior. 


3.1.2 Char — Formation of a brittle residue when 
material is exposed to thermal energy. 


3.1.3 Collar Lining — That part of the collar fabric 
composite that is next to the skin when the collar is 
closed in the raised position. 


3.1.4 Composite — Layer or layers that provide 
protection required of outer shell, moisture barrier, and 
thermal barrier. 


3.1.5 Closure System — Method of fastening openings 
in the garment including combinations of more than 
one method of achieving a secure closure, for example 
a slide fastener covered by an overlap fastened down 
with a touch and close fastener. 


NOTE — This term does not cover seams. 


3.1.6 Component Assembly — Material combination 
found in a multilayer garment arranged in the order of 
the finished garment construction and including any 
inner liner. 


3.1.7 Drip — To run or fall in drops or blobs. 


3.1.8 Firefighters’ Protective Clothing — Specific 
garments providing protection for the firefighter’s upper 
and lower torso, neck, arms, and legs, but excluding 
the head, hands, and feet. 


3.1.9 Garment — Single item of clothing which may 
consist of single or multiple layers. 


3.1.10 Hardware — Non-fabric components of 
protective clothing including those made of metal or 
plastic material. 


NOTE — Examples include fasteners, rank markings, buttons, 
etc. 


3.1.11 Innermost Lining — Lining found on the 
innermost face of a component assembly. 


3.1.12 Integral Melting — Liquefaction of a material 
when exposed to heat to the extent of causing a hole in 
its structure, either by shrinking and/or dripping away 
under specified test conditions. 


3.1.13 Interface Area — Area of the body not protected 
by a protective garment, helmet, gloves, footwear, or 
self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) facepiece; 
the area where the protective garments and the helmet, 
gloves, footwear, or SCBA facepiece meet, that is the 
protective coat/helmet/SCBA facepiece area, the 
protective coat/glove area, and the protective trouser/ 
footwear area. 


3.1.14 Interface Component — Item(s) designed to 
provide limited protection to interface areas. 


3.1.15 Interlining — Layer found between the 


IS 16890 : 2018 


outermost layer and the innermost lining in a multilayer 
garment, not next to the wearer”s skin. 


3.1.16 Manufacturer — Entity that assumes the liability 
and provides the warranty for the compliant product. 


3.1.17 Material Combination — Material produced 
from a series of separate layers, intimately combined 
prior to the garment manufacturing stage. 


Example — A quilted fabric. 


3.1.18 Melt — To change from solid to liquid form, or 
become consumed by action of heat. 


3.1.19 Moisture Barrier — That portion of the 
protective garment designed to prevent the transfer of 
liquid water from the environment to the thermal barrier. 


3.1.20 Multilayer Clothing Assembly — Series of layers 
of garments arranged in the order as worn. 


NOTE — It may contain multilayer materials, material 
combinations or separate layers of clothing material in single 
layers. 


3.1.21 Outer Material — Outermost material of which 
the protective clothing is made. 


3.1.22 Outer Shell — Outside facing portion of the 
composite with the exception of trim, hardware, 
reinforcing material, and wristlet material. 


3.1.23 Protective Clothing — Protective garments, 
configured as a coat and trousers or as a coverall, and 
interface components that are designed to provide 
protection to the firefighter’s body. 


3.1.24 Protective Coat — Protective garment designed 
and configured to protection to upper torso and arms, 
excluding the hands and head. 


3.1.25 Protective Coverall — Protective garment 
designed and configured to provide protection to the 
torso, arms, and legs, excluding the head, hands, and 
feet. 


3.1.26 Protective Garment — Single item of clothing 
which may consist of single or multiple layers, for 
example protective coat, protective trouser, or 
protective coverall. 


3.1.27 Protective Hood — Interface component that 
provides limited protection to the protective coat/ 
helmet/SCBA facepiece interface area. 


3.1.28 Protective Trouser — Provides protection to 
lower torso and legs excluding the feet. 


3.1.29 Protective Uniform Garment — Garment 
designed and configured to be both the thermal barrier 
or portion of the thermal barrier ofa protective garment, 
and a station/work uniform. 


3.1.30 Protective Wristlet — Interface component that 


provides limited protection to the protective garment/ 
glove interface area. 


3.1.31 Removable Inner Liner — Inner garment 
designed to be attached or to be worn separately under 
anouter garment in order to provide thermal insulation. 


3.1.32 Seam — Junction of two edges of material which 
are permanently attached in the garment by sewing or 
any other method. 


3.1.32.1 Major A seams — Outer-shell seam assemblies 
where rupture could reduce the protection ofthe garment 
by exposing the moisture barrier, thermal barrier, the 
wearer's station/work uniform, other clothing, or skin. 


3.1.32.2 Major B seams — Moisture barrier or thermal 
barrier seam assemblies where rupture could reduce 
the protection ofthe garment by exposing the next layer 
ofthe garment, the wearer's station/work uniform, other 
clothing, or skin. 


3.1.32.3 Minor seams — Remaining seam assemblies 
that are not classified as major A or major B seams. 


3.1.33 Thermal Barrier — That portion of the 
composite designed to provide thermal protection. 


3.1.34 Trim — Retroreflective and fluorescent material 
attached to the outer shell for visibility enhancement; 
retroreflective materials enhance night-time visibility, 
and fluorescent materials improve daytime visibility. 


3.1.35 Undergarment — Garment which is worn under 
an outer garment. 


3.1.36 Winter Liner — Optional composite layer 
designed to provide added insulation against cold. 


4 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 General 


This clause specifies test methods and minimum 
requirements for protective clothing to be worn during 
firefighting and associated activities where there is a 
risk of heat and/or flame. 


It covers the general clothing design, the minimum 
performance requirements of the materials used, and 
the methods of test for determining these performance 
requirements. 


4.2 Design Requirements 
4.2.1 Configuration 


The firefighters’ protective clothing shall provide 
protection for the firefighter's upper and lower torso, 
neck, arms, and legs, but excluding the head, hands, 
and feet. It shall consist of: 


a) asingle outer garment; or 


b) an outer two piece suit consisting of a jacket 
and a pair of trousers with a minimum overlap 
of 30 cm; or 

c) aseries of outer and undergarments designed 
to be worn together. 


4.2.2 Restriction of Movement 


The clothing shall be designed to minimize restrictions 
of movement. It shall be compatible with other 
protective equipment which may be necessary, for 
example boots, helmet, gloves and breathing apparatus. 
Details for checking the basic ergonomic features of 
protective clothing by doing practical performance tests 
are given in Annex B. 


4.2.3 Multilayer Clothing Assemblies 


Where multilayer clothing assemblies are used to 
achieve the specified requirements, the layers shall be 
either permanently attached or the various garments 
shall be clearly labelled that they must always be used 
in combination. Multilayer assembly shall consists of 
the following three layers; 


a) Outer layer — Mass shall not be more than 
220 g/m?. 

b) Moisture barrier — Mass shall not be more 
than 140 g/m?. 

c) Thermal layer — Thermal layer may be a 
single layer or two layers quilted together and 
the mass shall not be more than 350 g/m?. 


4.2.4 Seams 


Seams shall be constructed to give the minimum loss 
in strength and protection and to maintain the integrity 
ofthe garment. Seam breaking strength, when tested in 
accordance with IS/ISO 13935-2, shall have minimum 
seam breaking force of 250 N. 


4.2.5 Hardware 


Hardware penetrating the outer material shall not be 
exposed on the innermost surface of the component 
assembly. The hardware when tested in accordance with 
the method given in ISO 17493 at a test temperature of 
180 + 5°C, shall not melt, drip, separate, or ignite, and 
shall not shrink more than 5 percent. 


4.2.6 Closure Systems 


Closure systems shall be constructed so as to fulfil the 
performance requirements of the garment. Closure 
system when tested in accordance with the method 
given in ISO 17493 at a test temperature of 180 + 5?C, 
shall not melt, drip, separate, or ignite, and shall not 
shrink more than 5 percent. The closure system shall 
be of positive fastener type. Closure systems shall be 
protected by means of the component assembly, for 
example by overlapping or underlining storm flap that 


IS 16890 : 2018 


provides secure and complete moisture and thermal 
protection. Where buttonholes are used, the maximum 
interval distance shall be 150 mm and if zippers are 
used, the slide fastener shall be designed to lock when 
completely closed. 


4.2.7 Retroreflective Elements 


The clothing shall have retroreflective elements/ 
combined performance materials to the user”s 
requirements provided that they do not affect the 
performance of the clothing. Visibility requirements 
shall conform to the requirements specified in Annex C. 


4.2.8 Sleeve Ends 


The ends of the sleeves shall be designed to protect the 
wrist and to prevent the entry of burning debris. They 
shall not hinder the donning of the garment and shall 
be compatible with the wearing of protective gloves. 


4.2.9 Clothing Mass 


The clothing shall be as light as possible while still 
maintaining the required performance levels. 


4.2.10 Ease of Cleaning 


The clothing shall be designed to promote ease of 
cleaning. 


4.2.11 Labels 


Any labels or trim shall not adversely affect the 
performance of the garment. 


4.12 Size Designations 


The size of each protective clothing shall be designation 
by height and chest or bust girth as two control 
dimensions, in cm. The height and the girth ranges for 
different size designations shall be as given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Height and Girth Ranges of Body 


Measurements 
(Clause 4.12) 

SI Size Chest or Bust Height 

No. Designations Girth cm 

cm 

(D Q) (3) (4) 
i) S 80-88 152-158 
ii) M 88-96 158-164 
iii) L 96-104 164-176 
iv) XL 104-112 176-182 
v) XXL 112-120 182-188 
vi) XXXL 120-124 188-194 


5 SAMPLING AND PRE-TREATMENT 


5.1 Samples 


Samples shall be taken so as to be representative ofthe 
materials and garment construction employed. 
Sampling and criteria for conformity shall be as given 
in Annex D. 


IS 16890 : 2018 


5.2 Number and Size of Specimens 


The number and size of specimens for the different tests 
shall be in accordance with the respective standards. 
All tests shall be carried out on materials as received 
unless otherwise specified (see 5.4). 


5.3 Exposure Surface 


In all surface tests, the outermost surface shall be 
exposed, except for flame spread testing of the 
innermost lining (see 6.1.2) and testing of water vapour 
permeability (see 6.11 and 6.12) when the innermost 
surface is exposed. 


5.4 Pre-treatment 


Before testing to the basic safety requirements (6.1 
to 6.3), the test materials shall be washed five times in 
a front loading horizontal drum machine with 1 g/l IEC 
reference detergent (Annex B of IS 15370) in hard 
water (hardness of water 160 + 20 mg/l expressed as 
calcium carbonate) and dried in accordance with the 
procedures of IS 15370. Washing shall be carried out 
by procedure 2A at (60 + 3) °C and drying by procedure 
E (tumble drying) unless otherwise specified in the care 
labelling. Drying shall be in accordance with the 
procedures specified in IS 15370. A total of five 
washing and drying cycles shall be used. Materials 
which are labelled as dry cleanable only shall be dry 
cleaned five times in accordance with ISO 3175-2. 


6 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Flame Resistance 


6.1.1 Flame spread shall be tested in accordance with 
IS 15758 (Part 4), using the procedures for face ignition 
and bottom ignition, after the pre-treatment specified 
in 5.4 and the following requirements shall be satisfied: 


a) Nospecimen shall give flaming to top or either 
side edge; 

b) No specimen shall give hole formation in any 
layer; 

c) No specimen shall give flaming or molten 
debris; 

d) The mean value of afterflame time shall be 
< 2 s; and 

e) The mean value of the afterglow time shall 
be X2 s. 


6.1.2 The component assembly of the outer garment 
shall be tested by applying the flame to the outer surface 
of the garment. If the outer garment has a lining 
material, the component assembly of the outer garment 
shall also be tested with the flame applied to the 
innermost lining of the outer garment. If the clothing 
assembly consists of several separate garments and the 


undergarment may be exposed to flame, the component 
assembly of this undergarment shall also be tested 
applying the flame to the outer surface of this inner 
garment. Ifthe clothing assembly incorporates wristlet 
material, this shall be tested separately applying the 
flame to the outer surface of the wristlet material. 


6.1.3 For seams, 3 specimens containing a structural 
seam shall be tested separately by applying the flame 
to the seam portion of the component assembly with 
the seam oriented vertically in accordance with 
IS 15758 (Part 4), using the procedures for face ignition 
and shall pass the requirement specified in 6.1.1 and 
the seam shall not open. 


6.2 Heat Transfer (Flame Exposure) 


The component assembly or multilayer clothing 
assembly when tested in accordance with IS 15758 
(Part 1) after the pre-treatment specified in 5.4 shall 
give a mean heat transmission index (Jo) of Joan 2 13 
and a mean (Lo 24 19,5) 2 4. 


6.3 Heat Transfer (Radiant Exposure) 


The component assembly or multilayer clothing 
assembly when tested in accordance with method B of 
IS 15758 (Part 2) at a heat flux density of 40 kW/m’, 
after the pre-treatment specified in 5.4, shall give a 
mean £, > 22 s, a mean (£,—f,) > 6 s, and a mean 
transmission factor < 60 percent. 


6.4 Residual Strength of Material when Exposed 
to Radiant Heat 


One machine and one cross machine specimen of the 
outer material shall be tested in accordance with 
IS 1969 (Part 1) before and after pre-treatment of the 
complete assembly by method A of IS 15758 (Part 2) 
at a heat flux density of 10 kW/m?. Each specimen shall 
have a tensile strength 2 450 N. 


6.5 Heat Resistance 


Each material used in the clothing assembly when tested 
in accordance with the method given in ISO 17493 at a 
test temperature of 180 + 5?C, shall not melt, drip, separate, 
or ignite, and shall not shrink more than 5 percent. 


6.6 Tensile Strength 


The outer material when tested in accordance with 
IS 1969 (Part 1) shall give a breaking load in both 
machine and cross direction 2 450 N. 


6.7 Tear Strength 


The outer material when tested in accordance with 
method specified in IS 6489 (Part 2) shall give a tear 
strength in both machine and cross direction 2 25 N. 


6.8 Surface Wetting 


The outer material when tested in accordance with 
ISO 4920 shall give a spray rating of = 4. 


6.9 Cleaning-shrinkage Resistance 


The materials of the outer garment assembly when 
tested in accordance with ISO 5077 using the cleansing 
pre-treatment specified in 5.4 shall give a dimensional 
change < 3 percent in both the machine and cross 
machine directions. 


6.10 Liquid-chemical Penetration Resistance 


The component assembly or multilayer clothing 
assembly when tested in accordance with 


IS 15758 (Part 3) shall give more than 80 percent run- 
off and no penetration to the innermost surface using 
the following liquids: 
a) 40 percent sodium hydroxide (NaOH) at 20°C; 
b) 36 percent hydrochloric acid (HCI) at 20°C; 
c) 30 percent sulfuric acid (H,SO,) at 20°C; and 
d) White spirit. 
NOTE — Fabrics shall be conditioned for 24 h at (20 + 2)°C 


and (65 + 5) percent RH before testing. All tests shall be carried 
out with a pouring time of 10 s and at a temperature of 20°C. 


6.11 Water-penetration Resistance 


Specimens of clothing assembly and its seams, when 
tested in accordance with ISO 811 at 7 kPa fora period 
of 5 min after the pre-treatment specified in 5.4, shall 
not show appearance of water drops. 


Manufacturer's name and address 

Country of manufacture 

Manufacturer's garment identification number 
Model No. 

Size 

Date of manufacture 

Batch/Lot No. 

Care labelling symbols as specified in IS 14452 
Garment material(s) 


Pictogram as given in Fig. 2 


THIS FIRE FIGHTING PROTECTIVE GARMENT MEETS THE 
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS INDIAN STANDARD 


These protective clothing are not designed for use as fire entry suit 


"DO NOT REMOVE THIS LABEL" 


IS 16890 : 2018 


6.12 Water-vapour Resistance 


Specimens of clothing assembly and its seams, when 
tested in accordance with ISO 11092 after the pre- 
treatment specified in 5.4, shall have maximum water 
vapour resistance of 30 m? Pa/W. 


NOTE — High water vapour resistance can lead to a higher 
risk of steam burns. 


7 MARKING 


7.1 Label 


Each separable layer of each protective garment shall have 
a label permanently and conspicuously attached to each 
layer upon which at least the information given in Fig. 1 
Is printed in letters at least 1.5 mm high. At least one label 
shall be conspicuously located inside the garment in all 
possible configurations of garment utilization. 


7.2 Label Legibility 


All garment labels shall be clearly legible to the eye 
both before and after being subjected to the pre- 
treatment specified in 5.4. Garment labels not meeting 
specimen size requirements for the procedure specified 
in 5.4 shall be sewn to a support fabric of required size. 


7.3 Manufacturers? Information 


7.3.1 The manufacturer's information shall contain the 
following: 


a) Name, address and contact details of the 
manufacturer; 


b) Model name and article number of the 


Fic. 1 LABEL 


IS 16890 : 2018 


c) 


d) 


e) 
f) 


protective clothing which has been certified 
to this standard; 

Indian Standard to which certified alongwith 
pictogram as given in Fig. 2; 


Fic. 2 PicroGRAM ISO 7000-2418 
Size information of the manufacturer for this 
protective clothing, that is, S — XXXL; 

Care labeling symbols as specified in 

IS 14452; and 

Declaration: 

1) The manufacturer shall include a note in 
the information that in order to comply 
with the requirements of this standard, the 
upper and lower body including the neck, 
arms to the wrists and legs to the ankles, 
are protected and covered by the clothing 
described in this standard, but other parts 
of the body are not and need essential 
means in order to be fully protected. 


2) These protective clothing have been 
designed to give a specified level of 
protection for use in fire fighting 
operations and associated activities, in 


conjunction with other accessories like 
protective helmet, protective fire fighting 
boot, protective hood and fire fighting 
protective gloves. 


3) These protective clothing are not 
designed for use as fire entry suit. 


7.3.2 Instructions and Information 


Protective clothing manufacturers shall also provide 
the following instructions and information with each 
garment: 

a) Cleaning and instructions; 

b) Maintenance criteria; 

c) Methods of repair; and 

d) Warranty information. 


7.3.3 Training Materials 
Protective clothing manufacturers shall furnish training 
materials that address, but are not limited to: 

a) Safety considerations; 

b) Storage conditions; 

c) De-contamination procedures; and 

d) Retirement considerations. 


7.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The protective clothing may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


7.4.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of the conditions under which a license for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


IS 16890 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1969 (Part 1) : Textiles —Tensile properties of (Part 1) : 2007 Method of determining of heat 
2009 fabrics — Determination of transmission on exposure to flame 


maximum force and elongation at 
maximum force: Part 1 Strip 
method (third revision) 


6489 (Part 2) : Textiles — Tear properties of 


Assessment of material assemblies 
when exposed to source of radiant 
heat 

Test method for resistance of 


(Part 2) : 2007 


(Part 3) : 2007 


2011 fabrics: Part 2 Determination of material to penetration by liquids 
tear force of trouser shaped test (Part 4) : 2007 Test method for limited flame 
specimens (single tear method) spread 
(second revision) 15809 : 2008 High visibility warning clothes — 
14452 : 2014 Textiles — Care labelling code Specification 

using symbols IS/ISO 13935-2: Textiles — Seam tensile 
15370 : 2005 Textiles — Domestic washing and 1999 properties of fabrics and made-up 

drying procedures for textile textile articles: Part 2 

testing Determination of maximum force 
15758 Textiles — Protective clothing: to seam rupture using the grab 

method 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2.2) 
CHECKING OF BASIC ERGONOMIC FEATURES OF PROTECTIVE CLOTHING —PRACTICAL 
PERFORMANCE TESTS 


B-1 This Annex informs how some basic ergonomic 
features can be checked for many types of protective 
clothing in a pragmatic way. This Annex is not intended 
to replace ergonomic testing required by the user for 
the individual assessment of protective clothing at a 
specific workplace. In general carrying out ergonomic 
assessments can help to improve protective clothing 
and detect major deficiencies. 


B-2 In principle, one or more experienced assessors 
should examine the protective clothing after reading 
the information supplied from the manufacturer. The 
test clothing ofa suitable size should be put on together 
with such normal clothing as is intended to be worn, 
and some ergonomic features relating to the practical 
performance of the protective clothing should be 
checked (for example if no movement restrictions are 
caused). Some of the relevant questions that might be 
asked are set out below and it is desirable that responses 
given should be positive. 


NOTE — An assessor may have difficulties deciding whether 
the product is acceptable or unacceptable. It is recommended 
that the product should be compared with similar items on the 
market. If it is significantly worse ergonomically, without 
redeeming features such as enhanced protection, it can be 
regarded as unnecessarily uncomfortable. Care will need to be 
taken if there are no directly comparable products. Care will 
also have to be taken when protection against mortal danger is 
intended and ‘the state of the art’ does not allow comfortable 
conditions for users, nor perhaps conditions free of harm caused 
by the protective clothing. Carrying out (subjective) ergonomic 
assessments will more often result in recommendations for 
changes to improve protective clothing, than in finding the 
clothing does not comply with the standard. 


Question 1: Is the protective clothing free from any 
sharp or hard edges, rough surfaces or other items on 
the inner or outer surface of the clothing that are likely 
to cause harm to the user? 


Protective clothing should be inspected manually and 
visually to ensure that that no harmful points exist; for 
example, no protruding wire ends or other items that 
could seriously harm a person. 


IS 16890 : 2018 

Question 2: Is it possible to put on and take off the 
protective clothing without difficulty? 

The following points should be considered: 


The ease of putting on and removing the clothing with 
or without assistance as is appropriate for the type of 
clothing; 


The clothing is not too tight for comfort and deep 
breathing is not restricted and there is nowhere any 
blood flow restriction; and 


Clothing design features at, for example, armholes and 
crotch are appropriately proportioned and positioned. 


Question 3: Can the closures, adjusters and restraint 
systems be operated without difficulty? 


The following points should be considered: 
The adequacy of the range of adjustments available; 
The ease and security of closures and adjusters; and 


The closures, adjusters and restraint systems should 
withstand the forces they are likely to be exposed to 
during body movements. 


Question 4: Can the following movements be carried 
out without difficulty? 


Standing, sitting, walking, kneeling, crawling and stair 
climbing; 
Raising both hands above the head; and 


Bending over and picking up a small object, for 
example, a pencil. 


The following points should be considered: 


The arms and legs of the clothing are not so long that 
they interfere with hand and foot movements; 


The clothing is not so loose it flaps about or moves 
independently and inconveniently; 


Any point at which unexpected and unintended gaps 


open up between or within components of the clothing; 
and Any unreasonable restriction of movements. 


Question 5: Does the protective clothing cover the 
body area to be protected during movements? 


The following points should be considered: 


Coverage of specific protection zones of the intended 
body area by protective material or special 
constructions; and 


The coverage is maintained during movements as 
extreme as it is anticipated a user would make. 


Question 6: Is the protective clothing compatible with 
other items of PPE? 


The following points should be considered: 


Protective clothing normally worn as part of an 
ensemble should be compatible with representative 
examples of the rest of the ensemble; 


Putting on and removing other items of PPE, for 
example, gloves, boots should be possible without 
difficulty. 


B-3 Grounds for concluding that a product is 
unacceptable: 


The following are obvious reasons for concluding that 
a protective clothing product is unacceptable and not 
fit for use: 


a) Subject it should fit can not wear it. 


b) It does not stay closed or it will not stay in 
place. 


c) It compromises a vital function, such as 
breathing. 

d) Simple tasks to be performed wearing it are 
impossible. 

e) The subject refuses to continue this assessment 
due to pain. 

f) It prevents the wearing of other essential PPE. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.2.7) 
REQUIREMENTS FOR VISIBILITY 


C-1 MINIMUM AREA OF 
MATERIALS 


VISIBLE 


C-1.1 Separate performance retroreflective material 
shall be attached to the outermost surface of the 


protective clothing with a minimum area of not less 
than 0.13 m? and give all round visibility by encircling 
the arms, legs and torso regions of garment (s). 


C-1.2 If non-reflective fluorescent or combined 


performance material is used, the minimum area of 
fluorescent material shall be not less than 0.2 m?. 


C-2 PHOTOMETRIC REQUIREMENTS 


C-2.1 The minimum coefficient of retroreflection for 
new retroreflective material or combined performance 
material shall conform to the requirements specified 
in 5.4.1 of IS 15809. 


C-3 The retroreflective/combined performance 
materials, in order not to affect the performance of the 
protective clothing, shall comply with the following 
test requirements. 


IS 16890 : 2018 


C-3.1 Heat Resistance 


The retroreflective/combined performance materials 
when tested in accordance with the method given in 
ISO 17493 at a test temperature of 180 + 5°C, shall not 
melt, drip, separate, or ignite, and shall not shrink more 
than 5 percent. 


C-3.2 Flame Spread 


All materials used for visibility when tested in 
accordance with IS 15758 (Part 4), in combination with 
outer layer to make it possible to take samples of the 
specified dimensions, using the procedures for face 
ignition, shall not allow hole formation in the material. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 5.1) 
SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


D-1 LOT 


For the purpose of conformance inspection and test 
sampling, a lot is defined as all the completed 
protective clothing of the same type, with same 
assemblies, produced in one facility, using the same 
production processes and materials, and being offered 
for delivery at one time to buyer against a dispatch 
note. 


NOTE — Protective clothing of different sizes may be grouped 
in one lot. 


D-2 For assessing the conformity of the lot to the 
requirements of this standard, the samples as given in 
col 3 of Table 2 shall be drawn at random from the 
lot. 


D-2.1 A protective clothing shall be considered 


Table 2 Sample Size 
(Clause D-2) 


SI Number of Sample Size Permissible 

No. Protective Clothing (No. of Protective No. of 
in the Lot Clothing) Defectives 

09) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Up to 90 3 0 

ii) 91-150 3 0 
iii) 151-280 5 0 
iv) 281-500 5 0 

v) 501 and above 5 0 


defective, if it does not meet any of the requirements 
specified in this standard. 


D-3 The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of this standard, if no defective protective 
clothing is found. 


IS 16890 : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Textiles Protective Clothing Sectional Committee, TXD 32 


Organization 


Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


E.I. DU Pont India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Aeronav Limited, New Delhi 
Alok Industries Limited, Mumbai 
Arvind Limited, Dist, Gandhinagar 


Border Security Force, New Delhi 
Central Reserve Police Force, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire Explosive and Environment Safety, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Defence Bioengineering & Electromedical Laboratory, Bengaluru 


Defence Materials and Stores Research & Development 
Establishment, Kanpur 


Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Institute of Jute 
Technology, Kolkata 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, New Delhi 


DSM Dyneema Limited, Mumbai 


Fire Adviser, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Fire Retardant Association of India, New Delhi 


Foremost Technico Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Kusumgar Corporates Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


NBC Egpt Wing, Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


RDSO, Lucknow 


Reliance Industries Limited, New Delhi 


RSWM Ltd, Noida 
SASMIRA, Mumbai 


10 


Representative(s) 


Dr ArınDam Basu (Chairman) 
Dr M. S. Parmar (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ JHAVER 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP HORA 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NARENDRA KAJALE 
Suri SarYAPRIYA Dasu (Alternate) 


SHRI HANSRAJ 
SHRI RANDHIR KUMAR JHA 


Dr R. P. SINGH 
Suri MAHIPAL MEENA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJA BHATTACHARJEE 


Dr T. M. KOTRESH 
Dn R. Inbu SHEKAR (Alternate) 


Dr ANURAG SRIVASTAVA 
Dr K. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL GARG 
Suri Numm KENTAL (Alternate) 


Pror (Dr) A. K. SAMANTA 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri HARSH WARDHAN SHARMA 
Suri RAKESH GAIKWAD (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI 
Suri P. V. MURALI MOHAN 


SHRI VINAY KHANNA 
Suri PRAKASH KHANNA (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. KOTHARI 


Dr Anup RAKSHIT 
Suri Basant Lonia (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT PARAB 
SHRI SUNDAR KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri YOGESH K. KUSUMGAR 
Dn M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Suri B. G. SHINDE 
Lr Cor R. S. JHINKWAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri Asay PANDIT 
Suri M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri Vuav GARG (Alternate) 


Suri VIJAY YADAV 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


Organization 


Sure Safety India Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 


System 5S Private Limited, Chennai 


Teijin India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Textiles Committee, New Delhi 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 
TUV Rheinland India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 16890 : 2018 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SUSHIL BEHL 
Suri NisHiTH Dann (Alternate) 


Suri SUDHIR TAKKER 
SHRIMATI BHAVNA S. R. TAKKAR (Alternate) 


Suri PRIYARPAN SRIVASTAVA 
Suri Ravi Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI PARVEJ AHMED 
Suri V. K. R. Macuirasu (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI L. M. CHANDRAKALA 
SHRI CHARAN SINGH 


Suri AWADH KISHORE, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 32 (11422). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


