NAT HIAF IS 16945 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ate cht Aa & fea 
atta ufaztere uster 


Fire Resistance Test for 
Glass Walls 


ICS 13.220.50; 91.060.10 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2018 Price Group 8 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Glass, 
Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Fire-resistive glass provides defence against the spread of flames and smokes and, protect by blocking the transfer 
of radiant and conductive heat. This glass includes traditional wired glass, glass ceramics and specially tempered 
glass. They are typically suitable where building codes require an assembly designated “fire resistant” to enclose 
a space. Examples include wall applications such as stairwells, exit access corridors, or other fire barriers dividing 
interior construction. 
Considering the widespread use of this glass in building, the committee felt necessary to formulate this standard to 
assess the performance with regards to fire resistance of the glass for use in buildings. The test prescribed in this 
standard is intended to measure the ability of a representative specimen of load bearing and non-load bearing glass 
walls to resist the spread of fire from one side to another. It is also applicable to other non-load bearing internal 
and external non-load bearing walls with glazing. 
In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: 

EN 1363-1 : 2012 Fire resistance tests — Part 1: General requirements 

EN 1363-2 : 1999 Fire resistance tests — Part 2: Alternative and additional procedures 

EN 1364-3 : 2014 Fire resistance tests for non-load bearing walls — Part 3: Curtain walls 


ISO 834-12:2012 Fire resistance tests — Elements of building construction — Part 12: Specific 
requirements for separating elements evaluated on less than full scale furnaces 
The composition of the technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 
In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, calculated or observed, 


is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised )’. 


IS 16945 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


FIRE RESISTANCE TEST FOR 
GLASS WALLS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes a method of test for determining 
the fire resistance criteria for both load bearing and 
non-load bearing glass walls. It is applicable to other 
non-load bearing internal and external walls (almost 
wholly glazed). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of and necessary adjuncts to this standard. At the 
time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 


TS No. Title 


IS 1382 : 1981 Glossary of terms relating to glass 
and glassware ( first revision) 


IS 7358 : 1984 Specification for thermocouples 


(first revision) 


IS 17004: 2018 Testing methods for processed 


glass 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 1382 and the following shall apply. 
3.1 Actual Material Properties 


Properties of a material determined from representative 
samples taken from the test specimen for the fire test 
according to the requirements of the specific product 
standard. 


3.2 Aspect Ratio 
The ratio of height of a pane to its width. 


3.3 Associated Construction 


Form of construction other than glass wall as required 
to support test specimen during fire resistance test, 
for example, the aerated concrete slabs on top of a 
beam. 


3.4 Characteristic Material Properties 


Materials used for design purposes have an identified set 
of properties called characteristic material properties. 


3.5 Deflection 

Movement associated with structural and/or thermal 
actions. 

3.6 Discrete Area(s) 

A portion(s) of the total surface of the construction, 
excluding framing/joints etc., which may be expected 
to have different fire insulation performance. 

3.7 Element of Building Construction 

A defined construction component, for example, a wall, 
partition, floor, roof, beam or column. 

3.8 Exposed Face 

The side of the test construction that is exposed to the 
heating conditions of test. 

3.9 External Exposure 

Exposure to fire originating from external elements like 
buildings in vicinity, vehicles etc. 

3.10 External Non-load Bearing Wall 

A wall forming the external envelope of a building 
which may be exposed to an internal or external fire. 
3.11 Extreme Fibre Stress 

Stress developed in the extreme fibres of a material 
when subjected to bending. 

3.12 Fire Resistant Glazing 


A glazing system consisting of one or more transparent 
or translucent panes with a suitable method of 
mounting, with, for example, frames, seals, fixing 
materials etc. capable of satisfying the appropriate fire 
resistance criteria. 


3.13 Glazed Elements 


Building elements with one or more (light transmissive) 
glass panes, which are installed in a frame with fixings 
and seals. 


3.14 Glowing 

The emittance of light without flaming associated with 
combustion of a material. 

3.15 Heat Flux 


The quantity of heat energy per unit area incident on 
the target of the measuring device. It includes heat 
transferred by convection as well as radiation. 


IS 16945 : 2018 


3.16 Insulated Glazing 


Fire resistance glazing which satisfies both the integrity 
and insulation criteria for the anticipated fire resistance 
duration. 


3.17 Insulated Non-load Bearing Wall 


A wall, with or without glazing, which satisfies both 
integrity and insulation criteria for the anticipated fire 
resistance duration. 


3.18 Insulation 


The ability of a test specimen of a separating element 
of building construction to restrict temperature rise of 
the unexposed face to below prescribed levels when 
exposed to fire on one side. 


3.19 Integrity 

The ability of a test specimen of a separating element of 
building construction to prevent the passage of flames 
and hot gases through it and to prevent the occurrence 
of flames on the unexposed side, when exposed to fire 
on one side. 

3.20 Internal Non-load Bearing Wall 

A wall, (with or without glazing), which provides fire 
separation. It may be exposed to a fire from either side. 
3.21 Internal Exposure 

Exposure to fire originating from within an area of 
occupancy, such as a room or floor of a building. 

3.22 Internal Thermocouple 

Thermocouple used to measure the temperatures of the 
individual components or parts of a specimen within its 
construction. 

3.23 Internal Temperature 

Temperature of the individual components or parts of a 
specimen within its construction. 

3.24 Load Bearing Capacity 


The ability of a test specimen of a load bearing element 
to support its test load, without exceeding prescribed 
criteria with respect to both the extent and rate of 
deflection. 


3.25 Load Bearing Element 

An element that is intended for use in supporting an 
external load in a building and maintaining this support 
in the event of a fire. 

3.26 Load Bearing Wall 

A wall which may be subjected to external loads other 
than its self weight. 

3.27 Mullion 


A vertical framing member supporting and separating 
two adjacent panes of glass or panels. 


3.28 Neutral Pressure Plane 

The elevation at which pressure inside the furnace is 
equal to the outside. 

3.29 Non-load Bearing Wall 

A wall designed not to be subject to any load other than 
its self-weight. 

3.30 Notional Floor Level 

The assumed floor level relative to the position of the 
building elements in service. 

3.31 Pane 

A single piece of glass. 


3.32 Plinth 


A form of standard supporting construction that reduces 
the height of the opening of the furnace by raising the 
support base used to accommodate the test specimen. 


3.33 Restraint 


The constraint (induced by thermal and/or mechanical 
actions) provided by the condition at the ends, edges or 
supports of a test specimen to expansion and rotation. 
Examples of different types of restraint are: 


a) longitudinal, 
b) rotational, and 
c) lateral. 


3.34 Separating Element 


An element of building construction to reduce the 
passage of hot and/or cold gases or smoke from one 
side of the element to the other without causing failure 
of the performance criteria. 


3.35 Smoke Leakage 


The ability of an element of construction to effectively 
reduce the passage of hot and/or cold gases or smoke 
from one side of the element to the other. 


3.36 Sponsor 


The party which intends to do a fire test for its product 
in an authorized testing laboratory. 


3.37 Standard Supporting Construction 


Form of construction used to close off the furnace and 
to support the glass wall being evaluated and which 
has a quantifiable influence on both the thermal heat 
transfer between the construction and the test specimen 
and provides known resistance to thermal distortion. 


3.38 Supporting Construction 


The construction that may be required for the testing of 
some building elements into which the test specimen 
is assembled, for example, the wall into which a door 
is fitted. 


3.39 Sustained Flaming 


Continuous flaming for a period of time greater than 
10 s. 


3.40 Test Construction 

The complete assembly of the test specimen together 
with its supporting construction. 

3.41 Test Frame 


The frame for the purpose of mounting the test 
construction on the furnace. 


3.42 Test Load 
The load applied to the test specimen. 


3.43 Test Specimen 


Glass wall which is to be installed in a standard or 
associated supporting construction to allow it to be 
evaluated. 


3.44 Transom 


Ahorizontal framing member separating and supporting 
two adjacent panes of glass or panels. 


3.45 Uninsulated Non-load Bearing Wall 


A wall which satisfies the integrity and where required 
the radiation criteria for the anticipated fire resistance 
period, but which is not intended to provide insulation. 
Such a non-loadbearing wall may consist entirely of 
uninsulated fire resistant glazing. 


3.46 Uninsulated Glazing 


Fire resistant glazing which satisfies integrity and 
where required, radiation criteria for the anticipated fire 
resistance period but which is not intended to provide 
insulation. 


4 APPARATUS 


4.1 Furnace 


4.1.1 The furnace shall be designed to employ liquid or 
gaseous fuels and shall be capable of: 


a) Heating of vertical or horizontal separating 
elements on one face; 


b) Heating of columns on all sides; 


c) Heating of walls on more than one side, where 
appropriate; and 


d) Heating of beams on three sides, as appropriate. 


4.1.2 The furnace linings shall consist of materials with 
densities less than 1 000 kg/m*. Such lining materials 
shall have a minimum thickness of 50 mm and shall 
constitute at least 70 percent of the internally exposed 
surface of the furnace. The furnace shall be capable 
of providing standard fire exposure conditions with 
respect to thermal exposure and pressure. 


IS 16945 : 2018 


NOTE — Furnaces may be designed so that assemblies of more 
than one element can be tested simultaneously, provided all 
the requirements for each individual element can be complied 
with. 


4.2 Loading Equipment 


The loading equipment shall be capable of applying 
the load as determined in accordance with 10.2 on the 
test specimen. The load may be applied hydraulically, 
mechanically or by the use of weights. 


4.2.1 The loading equipment shall be able to simulate 
conditions for the application uniform loading, point 
loading, concentric loading, axial loading or eccentric 
loading as appropriate for the test construction. The 
loading equipment shall be capable of maintaining the 
test load at a constant rate (+ 5 percent of the required 
value), without changing its distribution and resulting 
in deflection of the test specimen at prescribed rate till 
maximum deflection or failure of load bearing capacity 
occurs as defined in 11.1 or for the duration of the test, 
whichever occurs sooner. 


4.2.2 The loading equipment shall not significantly 
influence the heat transfer through the test specimen 
nor impede the use of the thermocouple insulating 
pads. It shall not interfere with the measurement of 
surface temperature and/or deflection and shall permit 
general observation of the unexposed face. 


4.2.3 The total area of the contact points between the 
loading equipment and the test specimen surface shall 
not exceed 10 percent of the total area of the surface of 
a horizontal test specimen. 


4.3 Test Frames 


Special test frames or other means shall be employed 
to reproduce the boundary and support conditions 
appropriate for the test constructions as required 
by 7.2. Different types of test constructions require 
test frames of different stiffness. The performance 
of the test frames shall be evaluated by applying an 
expansion force within the frame at mid-width between 
two opposite members and measuring the increase in 
the internal dimension. The increase shall not exceed 
5 mm with an applied force of 25 KN. This evaluation 
shall be conducted in both the directions of the frame. 


4.4 Measuring and Control Equipments 


These are required to monitor the test construction, 
the laboratory and the furnace environment and the 
behavior of the test sample during the test. 


4.4.1 Instrumentations 


4.4.1.1 Furnace thermocouples 


The furnace thermocouples shall be plate thermometers 
which comprise an assembly of a folded steel 
plate, the thermocouple fixed to it and containing 
insulation material. The plate shall be constructed from 


IS 16945 : 2018 


(150+ 1) mm long x (100+ 1) mm wide x (0.7+0.1) mm 
thick nickel alloy sheet strips. The measuring junction 
shall consist of nickel chromium/nickel aluminium 
(type K) wire, contained within mineral insulation in 
a heat resisting steel alloy sheath of nominal diameter 
1 mm, the hot junctions being electrically insulated 
from the sheath. The thermocouple hot junction shall 
be fixed to the geometric centre of the plate by a small 
steel strip. The steel strip can be welded to the plate 
or may be screwed to it to facilitate replacement of 
the thermocouple. The strip shall be approximately 
18 mm x 6 mm if it is spot welded to the plate and, 
nominally 25 mm x 6 mm if it is to be screwed to 
the plate. The screw shall be 2 mm in diameter. The 
assembly of plate and thermocouple shall be fitted 
with a pad of inorganic insulation material nominally 
(97 + 1) mm x (97 + 1) mm x (10 + 1) mm, density 
280 + 30 kg/m’. Before the plate thermometers are 
first used, the complete plate thermometer shall be aged 
by immersing in a pre-heated oven at 1 000°C for 1 h. 


4.4.1.2 Fixed specimen thermocouples 


It is consisting of either type T or type K thermocouple 
wires (see IS 7358) with a maximum diameter of 
0.5 mm, brazed to a 12 mm diameter, 0.2 mm thick 
copper disc. Each thermocouple shall be provided with 
a 30 mm square, 2 + 0.5 mm thick pad of insulation 
material. This insulation material shall have dry 
density of 900 + 90 kg/m’, a thermal conductivity of 
0.13 W/m-K + 10 percent at 100°C, and shall be of 
a material capable of withstanding temperatures of 
400°C without any change in mechanical or physical 
properties. The insulation pads shall be slotted or 
provided with holes to accommodate the thermocouple 
wires. 


The wires from the thermocouples shall be connected 
either directly or via compensating leads to an 
appropriate temperature indicator. 


4.4.1.3 Roving surface thermocouples 


It is a measurement junction consisting of either type 
T or type K (see IS 7358) thermocouple wires with 
a diameter of 1.0 mm, brazed to a 12 mm diameter, 
0.5 mm thick copper disc. The wires shall be bent 
normal to the rear face of the copper disc to allow 
them to be inserted into separate holes in a porcelain 
insulator. The porcelain insulator shall have a diameter 
of 6 mm to 10 mm and shall contain two holes of 
approximate 2 mm diameter. The distance between the 
rear face of the copper disc and the end of the insulator 
shall be 6 + 1 mm. 


The wires of the thermocouple shall be connected 
either directly or via compensating leads to appropriate 
temperature indicator. 


NOTE — During the test, it is possible that the surface 
temperature of certain areas may surpass the permissible 
maximum temperature limit. This can be observed in the form 
of colour change in those areas due to hot spots. In such a 


situation, to assess the temperature of these spots the roving 
thermocouple is required. 


4.4.1.4 Specimen internal thermocouples 


Required for measuring internal temperatures. 


4.4.1.5 Deformation measuring devices 


It is used for measuring deformation of the test 
specimen having a range sufficient to take account of 
any deformation due to the initial application of test 
load, any creep experienced under the test load prior 
to the heating period, and any deformation that occurs 
during the heating period. The measurement shall be 
made to an accuracy of + 1 mm. 


The location for fixing of deformation measurement 
devices shall be such that no part of such devices shall 
have any interference with the mechanical or thermal 
behavior of the test specimen and they shall not be 
subjected to temperature effects which would result in 
loss of accuracy. 


The deformation measuring devices shall be capable 
of indicating and recording the same remotely. The 
deformation indicated by the devices shall be displayed 
continuously or updated at intervals not exceeding 
15 s. The deformation shall be logged at 1 min intervals 
from the commencement of the heating period, for the 
calculation of the rate of deformation of the specimen. 


4.4.1.6 Radiometer 


It shall be capable of measuring irradiance in the range 
of 0 to at least 50 kW/m. The time constant shall not 
be more than 3 s. The instrument shall normally be 
calibrated with vertical target and the sensitivity shall 
not change by more than 1 percent when the instrument 
is used with the horizontal target. The target receiving 
radiation shall be circular, flat, not more than 100 mm 
diameter, and coated with durable matt black finish. The 
target shall be within a water or air cooled body whose 
front face shall be flat and coincide with the plane of 
the receiving face of the target. Radiation shall not 
pass through any window before reaching the target. 
The instrument shall be robust, easy to install and use, 
insensitive to draughts and stable. The instrument shall 
have an accuracy of within + 3 percent and repeatability 
within + 5 percent. 


The output from the radiometer shall be measured in 
appropriate millivolt. 


4.4.2 Cotton Pad 


It is used for monitoring the permeability and consists 
of new, undyed and soft cotton fibres, without any 
admixtures of man-made fibres. It shall be 100 mm 
square and 20 mm thick and shall have a mass of 3 to 
4 g. It shall be dried in an oven at 105 + 5°C for at 
least 30 min and then stored in a desiccator to cool 
before use. It shall be placed, immediately prior to use, 
in a wire holder. 


4.4.3 Gap Gauges 


It is used for monitoring of impermeability. They shall 
be made of steel rod of diameters 6 + 0.5 mm and 
25 + 0.5 mm. They shall be provided with handles that 
are of sufficient length to ensure operator safety and at 
the same time ensure the accuracy and care which is 
needed in determination of point of failure. 


Minimum length of the gap gauge shall be ¢ + 25 mm, 
where ¢ is the thickness of the specimen. 
4.4.4 Devices for Recording 
a) Furnace temperature, 
b) Furnace pressure, and 
c) Specimen interior temperature. 
4.4.5 Other Ancillary Devices 
a) Fixed and roving furnace temperature devices, 
b) Radiation measuring devices, and 
c) Timing devices. 


IS 16945 : 2018 


5 TEST CONDITIONS 


5.1 Heating Conditions 


The fire exposure curves for external non-load bearing 
wall shall be plotted from the formulae given in 5.1.1. 


It is not applicable to: 


a) Curtain walls (external non-load bearing walls 
suspended in front of the floor slab); and 

b) Non-load bearing walls, 
assemblies. 


containing door 


5.1.1 Temperature/Time Conditions 


a) For internal exposure — The temperature/time 
conditions shall be as expressed by the following 
equation: 


T = 345 log,,(8¢+ 1) + 20 
Where, 


T=Mean furnace temperature, in degree C; 
and 


t = Time up to a maximum of 360 min. 


Table 1 Temperature Values as per Standard Temperature-time Curve 


SL. No. Time ¢ (min) Furnace Temperature Time ¢ (min) Furnace Temperature T (°C) 
T (°C) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 0 20 90 1 006 
ii) 5 576 120 1 049 
iii) 10 678 150 1 082 
iv) 15 738 180 1110 
v) 20 781 210 1 133 
vi) 30 842 240 1 153 
vil) 45 902 300 1 186 
viii) 60 945 360 1214 


1400 T T 


1200 


1000 


œ 
[=] 
=] 


D 
[=] 
=] 


Temperature (°C) 


400° 


OO Presse reeees 


0 l j | 
100 150 


200 250 300 350 400 


Time (mins) 


Fic. 1 STANDARD TEMPERATURE — TIME CURVE 


5 


IS 16945 : 2018 


b) For external exposure — The temperature/time 
conditions shall be expressed by the following 
equation: 


T = 660 (1 — 0.687e®?* — 0.313e%*) + 20 
where, 


T= Mean furnace temperature, in degree C; 
and 


t = Time up to a maximum of 360 min. 
5.1.2 Tolerances 


5.1.2.1 The percentage deviation (p) in the area of the 
mean furnace temperature/time curve from the standard 
temperature/time curve plotted as per 5.1.1 is given by 


SAD ig 


P 
Where, 


A= Area under the mean furnace temperature/ 
time curve observed during test; and 


B=Area under the specified temperature/time 
curve. 


5.1.2.2 For the purpose of computing the percentage 
deviation ( p), the areas under the respective temperature/ 
time curves shall be computed at a maximum of the 
following time intervals: 


a) 0 min to 10 min, at 1 min intervals; 
b) 10 min to 30 min, at 2 min intervals; 
c) 30 min to 120 min, at 5 min intervals; and 


d) 120 min to 360 min, at 10 min intervals. Any 
deviation shall be within the following limits: 


1) Less than 15 percent to the end of the first 
10 min of the heating period or to the end 
of the test if duration of the test is less than 
10 min. 


2) Less than 10 percent from 10 min to the end of 
the first 30 min of the heating period or to the 
end of the heating period if the duration of the 
test is greater than 10 min but less than 30 min. 


3) Less than 5 percent from 30 min to the end of 
the heating period. 


5.1.3 Uniformity of Temperature Distribution 


5.1.3.1 At any time after the first 10 min of the heating 
period, the temperature rise indicated by any of the 
thermocouples shall not differ from the corresponding 
temperature rise given by the standard temperature/ 
time curve by more than 100°C. 


5.1.3.2 For test construction where either test 
specimen or any associated construction incorporating 
combustible materials that produce flaming within the 
furnace and cause localized heating or cooling of one 
or more of the furnace thermocouple hot junctions, the 


temperature rise recorded by those thermocouples so 
affected shall not exceed corresponding temperature 
rise given by the standard temperature/time curve by 
more than 200°C. 


5.2 Pressure Conditions 


After the first 5 min of the heating period and for the 
remainder of the test duration, a positive pressure 
relative to the laboratory shall be established within 
the furnace. This pressure shall be controlled to satisfy 
the requirements for respective elements as prescribed 
below. 


5.2.1 Separating Elements 


The test construction shall be subjected to a pressure 
condition such that a linear pressure gradient of 
8.5 Pa per 1 000 mm height exists. This pressure is 
measured relative to a neutral pressure axis at a height 
of approximately 1 000 mm above the notional floor 
level. The pressure at any position on the vertical test 
construction and on the underside of a horizontal test 
construction shall be determined with respect to the 
positional height of the element relative to the notional 
floor level. The pressure condition shall be controlled 
to within + 2 Pa. Notwithstanding the above, the 
pressure at the top of a vertical test construction and 
at the underside of a horizontal test construction 
shall not exceed a maximum value of 20 Pa 
at any time. 


5.2.2 Non-Separating Elements 


Non-separating test elements shall be subjected to 
similar pressure conditions as appropriate to separating 
elements with the same orientation, that is, beams as 
per floors, columns as per walls. 


5.3 Ambient Conditions Within the Laboratory 


5.3.1 The ambient air temperature, as measured 
by thermometer in the general vicinity of the test 
construction shall be within 5°C to 35°C immediately 
prior to the heating period. 


5.3.2 For measurements of the unexposed face 
temperature rise in separating elements, the following 
additional requirements shall apply: 


a) Thirty min prior to the commencement of the test, 
the mean unexposed face temperature as indicated 
by the thermocouples shall be within 5°C of the 
ambient temperature and shall not be less than an 
actual temperature of 5°C. 


b) During the course of heating period the ambient 
temperature shall not increase above its initial 
value by more than 5°C up to the time of insulation 
failure. 


c) Measurements shall be made in essentially draught 
free conditions. 


5.3.3 For tests on separating elements where the 
unexposed face temperature is only determined for 
other reasons, for example, for determining the time 
at which to discontinue the use of the cotton pad, the 
conditions listed in a) and c) of 5.3.2 shall be complied 
with but the temperature rise in b) is permitted to 
increase by 15°C. 


5.4 Loss of Accuracy 


Where the mean furnace temperature, pressure 
conditions and ambient conditions in the laboratory go 
beyond the levels as prescribed above, the actual test 
results achieved may still be accepted as valid. 


6 TEST SPECIMEN 


6.1 Size 


If the dimension (height or width) of the construction is 
3 m or smaller, then the test specimen shall be tested to 
full size. If the dimension of the construction is higher 
than 3 m, then the test specimen shall be tested for 
dimension of at least 3 m. 


6.2 Number 


6.2.1 For separating elements that are only required to 
be fire resistant from one side, that face that will be 
subject to fire shall be oriented as the fire side. For 
separating elements that are required to be fire resistant 
from both the sides, two specimens shall be tested 
separately (one from each side) unless the separating 
element is fully symmetrical and the required fire 
exposure conditions for both the directions are identical 
or it can be established that a particular face of the 
test specimen presents a more onerous condition for 
passing the test. 


6.2.2 If testing is carried out from only one side, 
whether due to the fact that the separating element is 
symmetrical or because it is only required to resist fire 
from one side, this shall be stated in the test report. 


6.3 Design 


6.3.1 The test specimen shall be either: 


a) Fully representative of the construction intended 
for use in practice, including any surface finishes 
and fittings which are essential part thereof and 
may influence its behavior in the test; or 


b) Be designed to obtain the widest applicability of 
the test result to other similar constructions. 


The design feature which influence fire performance 
that shall be included to give the widest application can 
be derived from the field of direct application (see 13). 


6.3.2 If the objective ofa fire test is to obtain information 
on a specific system for particular end use, then the 
applicable specific construction shall be used for the test 


IS 16945 : 2018 


specimen. However, if the intention is to obtain data for 
a wider application similar to other constructions, then 
a single test may justify the inclusion of certain design 
features in the test specimen. 


6.3.3 The test specimen shall not contain mixtures of 
different types of construction, for example, brick or 
blocks in a wall unless this is full representative of the 
construction in practice. Where the test specimen can 
incorporate at least two full width panels, the free edge 
shall be adjacent to a full size panel on the exposed 
face. When it is not possible to incorporate two full size 
panels into the test specimen, the single full size panel 
shall be located in the centre of the specimen, with 
smaller panels of equal width on each side. The smaller 
panels shall not be less than 500 mm wide. Where the 
smaller panels would be less than 500 mm wide, only 
one shall be used next to the free edge of the specimen. 


6.3.4 The fire resistance of a glazed system is a function 
of the nature of the glass, the size and aspect ratio of 
the panes, the characteristics of the framing members, 
the method of retention and provisions for expansion. 
Guidance on the design of glazed specimens is given 
hereunder: 


6.3.4.1 A non-load bearing wall may contain a discrete 
glazed panel, a substantial number of such panels or it 
may consist almost entirely of glazed units. These may 
be small framed units or large panes with substantial 
frames attached to masonry or similar surrounds. Under 
fire conditions the separating element is expected to 
provide satisfactory fire barrier and this requirement 
applies to glazed and unglazed parts of the system. 


6.3.5 The following features can only be incorporated 
in similar constructions provided they were included in 
the test specimen. 


a) Non glazed panels; 


b) Junction(s) between a transom and a mullion 
(‘+ joints’); 

c) Junction(s) of mullions terminating at a transom 
(‘T’ joints); 

d) Junction(s) between transom(s) and mullion(s) 
where mullion(s) is/are full height and interrupt(s) 
transoms; 


e) Special jointing systems between glazed 
elements or between glazed elements and other 
constructions; and 

f) Other constructional features to be evaluated, for 
example, structures present for safety or security 
reasons such as crowd barriers, grills, etc. 

For framed systems, the largest glass pane shall be 
located next to the mullion on the free edge. 

For butt-jointed systems, the design of the test specimen 
shall include at least 2 vertical joints. 


IS 16945 : 2018 


6.4 Construction 


The method of construction and erection shall be 
representative of the use of the element in practice 
and the standard of workmanship shall be as normally 
provided in buildings. This shall include the same way 
of accessing the test specimen, for example, suspended 
ceilings (normally from below). 


a) The sponsor shall ensure that the quality of 
construction of the test specimen is representative 
of the product in practice. 


b) The laboratory shall monitor the erection of 
the test specimen in order to include details of 
methodology and workmanship in the test report. 


6.5 Verification 


6.5.1 The sponsor shall provide a detailed specification 
and description (for example, constructional details, 
drawings, schedule and dimensions of major 
components, procedure for mounting, fixing and 
assembling including those for items of building 
hardware) to a level and sufficiently in advance of 
performing the test. This should enable the laboratory 
to conduct a detailed examination of the test specimen 
to verify its conformity with the information provided. 
As far as possible, any area of discrepancy shall be 
resolved prior to the starting of the test. 


6.5.2 In some instances, the method of construction 
prevents a detailed survey of the test specimen without 
having to permanently damage it or it is considered 
that it will subsequently be impossible to evaluate 
construction details from a post test examination. In 
such cases the laboratory shall judiciously exercise one 
of the following two options as given below, to decide 
which of test specimen shall be submitted to the test 
and which one shall be used to verify the construction: 


a) the laboratory shall oversee the fabrication of the 
test specimen; or 


b) request sponsor to supply an additional test 
specimen or part of the test specimen which 
cannot be verified (for example, for testing of door 
or a door leaf etc.) 


6.5.3 However, where appropriate, the actual material 
properties shall be determined. 


6.5.4 In some instances, it may not be possible to verify 
the conformity of all aspects of the construction of the 
test specimen prior to the test and adequate evidence 
may not be available after test. When it is necessary to 
rely on information provided by the sponsor, then this 
shall be clearly stated in the test report. The laboratory 
shall nevertheless ensure that it fully appreciates the 
design of the test specimen and be able to accurately 
record the constructional details in the test report. 
Record additional procedures if applied for specimen 
verification in the test methods for specific products. 


6.5.5 The process of verification may be carried out by 
a third party. However the responsibility shall remain 
with the laboratory. 


7 INSTALLATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


The test specimen shall be installed, as far as possible, 
in a manner representative of its use in practice and 
as prescribed by sponsor. The test specimen shall be 
mounted as near as possible to the exposed vertical 
plane of the test frame or supporting construction 
as appropriate, unless a different position is used in 
practice. The whole area of the test construction shall 
be exposed to the heating conditions. 


7.1 Standard Supporting Construction 


7.1.1 The choice of standard supporting construction 
shall reflect the intended normal use of the test 
specimen. If the size of the test specimen is smaller than 
the opening in the test frame then it shall be installed 
in the test frame using one of the following procedures: 


a) Where the height of the test specimen is smaller 
than the height of the test frame opening, then 
a plinth shall be provided to reduce the opening 
to the required height. The plinth shall possess 
sufficient stability for the test specimen and shall 
be selected from one rigid standard supporting 
construction. 


b 


wm 


Where the width of the test specimen is smaller, a 
standard supporting construction shall be provided 
on the vertical sides of the opening selected from 
either the rigid or flexible standard supporting 
constructions as prescribed below: 


1) High density rigid construction — This kind of 
construction consists of either of blockwork, 
masonry or homogenous concrete wall with an 
overall density > 850 kg/m? and has a thickness 
appropriate for the expected fire resistance 
period. 


2) Low density rigid construction — This 
kind of construction consists of an aerated 
concrete block wall with an overall density 
of 650 + 200 kg/m? and has a thickness 
appropriate for the expected fire resistance 
period. 


3) Mortar — For blockwork (incorporating 
aerated concrete) or masonry wall supporting 
constructions given above, the individual 
masonry units shall be bonded together with 
a mortar appropriate for the expected fire 
resistance period. 


4 


NS 


Flexible construction — The lightweight 
plasterboard faced steel stud partition should 
constructed according to its relevant details for 
the intended fire resistance period as required 
by the sponsor. 


7.2 Non-standard Supporting Construction 


If the test specimen is mounted in a supporting 
construction not given in 7.1, then the result will only 
be valid for non-load bearing walls mounted in the 
construction as tested. 


8 CONDITIONING 


8.1 Test Specimen 


8.1.1 Before initiation of the test, the strength 
and moisture content of the test specimen shall be 
approximate to those expected in normal service. The 
test specimen shall preferably not be tested unless it 
has reached an equilibrium resulting from storage in 
an ambient atmosphere of 50 percent relative humidity 
at 27 + 2°C. If the test specimen is conditioned in 
a different way, it shall be clearly stated in the test 
report. 


8.1.2 Concrete and masonry elements or specimens 
containing concrete parts shall not be tested until they 
have been conditioned for 28 days. 


8.1.3 Massive constructions, for example, large 
concrete elements, which may contain large amounts 
of moisture, may take a very long time to dry out. 
Such specimens may be tested when relative humidity 
at relevant positions of the test specimen has reached 
75 percent. If the level of 75 percent relative humidity 
cannot be reached within a reasonable time, moisture 
content at the time of testing shall be measured and 
reported. 


8.2 Supporting Constructions 


When a test specimen is mounted with a supporting 
construction for example, a non-loadbearing wall 
mounted in a concrete or masonry wall supporting 
construction, full conditioning of the support 
construction may not be necessary. However, it needs to 
be demonstrated that there will be no influences on the 
behavior of the specimen caused by excessive moisture 
for example, lack of strength, spalling, moisture 
induced deformation, temperature influences etc. 


9 APPLICATION OF INSTRUMENTATIONS 
9.1 For temperature 


9.1.1 Furnace Thermocouples 


Position the furnace thermocouples, one for each 1.5 m? 
or part thereof of the exposed surface area (nominal area 
measured in the plane of the specimen). For specimen 
with exposed surface area less than 6 m’, at least four 
furnace thermocouples shall be used. Distribute the 
thermocouples uniformly ensuring that none of the 
thermocouples are closer than 500 mm from the 
furnace walls. The thermocouple hot junctions shall be 
at 100 + 10 mm from the surface of the test specimen 


IS 16945 : 2018 


at the start of the heating period. If the exposed surface 
is irregular, thermocouple shall be placed 100 + 10 mm 
away from the median depth of the wall, provided the 
junction is not closer than 50 mm from any part of the 
exposed surface. For partitions that incorporate glazing, 
place one thermocouple directly in front of the glazing 
for every 20 percent of the specimen area covered by 
glazing. 


NOTE — When the area of glass is less than 20 percent of the 
specimen area, no thermocouples need to be placed in front of 
the glazed area as prescribed above. 


9.1.2 Unexposed Face Thermocouples 
9.1.2.1 General 


No unexposed surface thermocouples are required 
where no evaluation of the test specimen against the 
insulation criteria is required. Surface thermocouples 
of the type described in 4.4.1.1 shall be attached to 
the unexposed face to measure the average and the 
maximum temperature rise where evaluation against the 
insulation criteria is required. Thermocouples should 
be preferably attached to the surface of the specimen 
by the use of heat resisting adhesive covered by an 
insulation pad. There should be no adhesive between 
the copper disc of the thermocouple and the specimen 
or between the copper disc and the pad. 


All thermocouples used for determination of average 
unexposed face temperature shall not be placed 
within 50 mm of features like thermal bridges, joints, 
junctions, through connections and fixings such as 
bolts, and screws etc. 


All thermocouples for determination of maximum 
unexposed face temperature shall not be placed closer 
than 20 mm to any discontinuity in the element. 


9.1.2.2 Average temperature rise 


For the purpose of measuring the average temperature 
rise, one thermocouple shall be provided at every 1.5 m? 
area of the specimen. A minimum of two thermocouples 
shall be provided for each pane at the centre of two 
quarters along the diagonal line. 


9.1.2.3 Maximum temperature rise 


Additional thermocouples shall also be placed to the 
framing members and panes to ensure compliance of 
the maximum temperature rise criterion as follows: 
a) On the top horizontal framing member at mid 
width of the specimen; 
b) On the top horizontal framing member in line with 
a mullion; 
c) At the junction of a mullion and transom; 
d) On the vertical framing member on fixed edge at 
mid height of the specimen; 
e) At mid-height of the free edge, 150 mm away 
from the edge; 


IS 16945 : 2018 


f) At mid-width ofa transom (in the positive pressure 
zone); 


g) At mid-height ofa mullion (in the positive pressure 
zone); 


h) At mid-height of the pane with largest area, 
20 mm away from the vertical framing member or 
the joint. If the largest pane is not the tallest pane, 
then another thermocouple shall be placed at the 
mid height of the tallest pane, 20 mm away from 
the vertical framing member or the joint; 


wa 


At mid-width of the pane with largest area, 20 mm 
away from the horizontal framing member and 
from the joint at the top edge. If the largest pane 
is not the widest pane then another thermocouple 
shall be placed at mid-width of the widest pane, 
20 mm away from the horizontal framing member 
and from the joint at the top edge; and 


j 


k 


a 


At top corners of the pane with the largest area, 
and, as well as in the top corners of the highest 
placed pane with the largest area, if they are not 
the same panes. 


9.2 For Pressure 


The pressure sensor inside the furnace shall be 
placed such that it shall neither be subject to direct 
impingement of convection currents from the flames 
nor be in the path of the exhaust gases. It shall be 
installed in such a manner that the pressure can be 
measured and monitored during test in order to attain 
the conditions prescribed in 5.2. The position of the 
tubes shall be horizontal both in the furnace and as they 
exit through the furnace wall, such that the pressure is 
relative to the same positional height from the inside to 
the outside of the furnace. Any vertical section of the 
tube to the measuring instrument shall be maintained at 
ambient temperature. 


9.2.1 At Furnaces 


One pressure sensor shall be provided to record and 
control furnace pressure. 


9.2.1.1 For vertical elements 


Asecond sensor may be used to provide information on 
the vertical pressure gradient within the furnace. This 
sensor, if required, shall be located at least 1 m above 
or below the position of the first sensor. 


9.3 For Deflection 


Instrumentation for the measurement of deflection of 
the test specimen shall be located to provide data in 
terms of the amount and rate of deflection during, and 
after the fire test. 


9.4 For Radiation 


Heat flux meters shall comply with 4.4.1.6. The target 
of the instrument facing the test specimen shall not be 
shielded by a window or subjected to a gas purge, that 
is, it shall be subject to convection as well as radiation. 


10 


10 METHODS OF TESTS 


10.1 Restraint Application 


Depending upon its design, relevant restraint may be 
provided by constructing the specimen inside a rigid 
frame. This method shall be used for partitions and for 
certain types of floors, as appropriate. In such case, any 
gaps between the edges of the test specimen and the 
frame shall be filled with non- compressible material. 


10.2 Load Application 


For load bearing elements, the test load shall be applied 
at least 15 min before the commencement of the test. 
The load shall be applied at such a rate that no dynamic 
effects are incurred. All the resulting deflections shall 
be measured. If the test specimen consists of materials 
which incur apparent deflections at applied load level, 
the applied load shall be maintained until the deflections 
are stabilized prior to the commencement of fire test. 
Following their application and during the course of the 
test, the loads shall be kept constant. When deflection 
of the specimen takes place, the loading system shall 
respond quickly to maintain a constant value of load. 


10.3 Commencement of Test 


10.3.1 At least 5 min prior to the commencement 
of the test, the initial temperatures recorded by all 
thermocouples shall be checked to ensure consistency 
and to evaluate the datum values of the thermocouples. 
Similar datum values shall be obtained where 
appropriate (for deflection etc.), and the initial condition 
of the test specimen shall be noted. 


10.3.2 The initial average temperature of the internal 
thermocouples, if required, and the unexposed surface 
temperature of the specimen shall be 30 + 10°C. 
Unexposed surface temperature of the specimen shall 
not differ from the initial ambient temperature by 
more than 5°C. The initial temperature of the furnace 
thermocouples shall be less than 50°C. 


10.3.3 The commencement of the test shall be 
considered when the programme to follow the heating 
curve has been initiated (igniting the burners). 


10.3.4 The elapsed time shall be measured from the 
commencement of the test and all manual and automatic 
systems for measurement and observation shall begin 
or shall be in operation. 


10.4 Measurement and Observations 


From commencement of the test the following 
measurements and observations shall be recorded as 
required. 


10.4.1 Temperatures 


Temperatures of all the thermocouples (except roving 
thermocouple) shall be measured and recorded at 
intervals of maximum 1 min for the duration of 


the heating period. Also when using the roving 
thermocouple near a discontinuity, for example, 
between adjacent panels in a wall, the centre of the 
disc shall not be placed closer than 20 mm to the 
discontinuity. 


A roving thermocouple shall be used for any suspected 
hot spot if it develops during the test. If a temperature 
of 150°C is not achieved within 20 s, the application 
of roving thermocouple may be discontinued. The 
restrictions on the use of the roving thermocouple are 
the same as those for fixed thermocouples. The roving 
thermocouple shall be used only for evaluation of the 
test specimen for maximum temperature criterion. 


10.4.2 Furnace Pressure 


The furnace pressure shall be measured and recorded 
continuously or at intervals of maximum 1 min. 


10.4.3 Deflection 


The relevant deflections of the test specimen shall be 
measured and recorded throughout the test. 


10.4.3.1 Load bearing test specimens 


In the case of loadbearing test specimens, measurements 
shall be made prior to and during the application of the 
test load as well as at 1 min intervals during heating 
period. 


For vertical load bearing elements, axial deflection 
which represents an increased height of the test 
specimen shall be expressed ‘positive deflection’. 
Deflection which results in a decrease in the height 
of the test specimen below its original height shall be 
expressed ‘negative deflection’. 


10.4.3.2 Additional deflection measurements (load 
bearing and non-load bearing test specimen) 


Wherever required, specific measurements of 
deflection shall be made at locations and at a frequency 
so as to represent a history of the movement of the test 
specimen. The relevant information regarding location 
and frequency of measurement of particular element 
under test shall be obtained prior to performing fire test. 
Through judicious approach, frequency of measurement 
around the time of integrity failure may be increased to 
generate information on extended application. 


10.4.4 Integrity 


The integrity of separating elements shall be evaluated 
throughout the test by cotton wool pads, gap gauges and 
monitoring the test specimen for evidence of sustained 
flaming. 


10.4.4.1 Procedure A (by cotton pad) 


10.4.4.1.1 Method 


A cotton pad (see 4.4.2) shall be mounted on a frame 
and placed on the surface of the test specimen, for a 
maximum period of 30 s, or until ignition (defined as 


11 


IS 16945 : 2018 


glowing or flaming) of the cotton pad occurs. Charring 
of the cotton pad without flaming or glowing shall be 
ignored. Small adjustments in position may be made so 
as to achieve the maximum effect from the hot gases. 


For irregular surfaces of the test specimen in the area 
of the opening, care shall be taken to ensure that there 
is at least 30 mm clearance between the cotton pad 
and any part of the test specimen surface during the 
measurements. 


The operator may undertake cotton pad tests to evaluate 
the integrity of the test specimens. Such screening 
may involve selective short duration applications of 
the cotton pad to areas of potential failure and/or the 
movement of a single pad over and around such areas. 
Charring of the pad may provide an indication of 
imminent failure. But a new pad shall be employed for 
integrity failure conformity. 


10.4.4.1.2 Results 


The time of ignition, and the location at which ignition 
occurred, shall be recorded. 


10.4.4.2 Procedure B (by gap gauges) 


10.4.4.2.1 Method 


In this method, gap gauges (see 4.4.3) are used. Size 
of the opening at joints in the surface of the test 
specimen shall be evaluated at intervals which will be 
determined by the apparent rate of the deterioration of 
test specimen. Two gap gauges shall be employed, in 
turn, and without undue force to evaluate whether: 


a) On insertion, the gap gauge of 6 mm diameter is 
able to pass through the gap and can be moved a 
distance of 150 mm along the gap. 


b) The gap gauge of 25 mm diameter is able to pass 
through the gap. 


Any small interruption to the insertion of the 
gauge which would have little or no effect upon the 
transmission of hot gases through the opening shall not 
be taken into account, for example, a small fastening 
across the construction joint that has opened up due to 
distortion. 


10.4.4.2.2 Results 


The period of test at which gap developed at joints 
during fire test will permit the insertion of the gap 
gauge through it shall be recorded. The occurrence and 
duration of flaming on the unexposed surface, together 
with the location of the flaming shall be recorded. 


10.4.5 Load and Restraints 


For load bearing elements, the time at which the test 
specimen is unable to support the test load shall be 
recorded. Any variation in measured forces and/or 
moments necessary to maintain an applied restraint 
condition shall also be recorded. 


IS 16945 : 2018 


10.4.6 Radiation 


The radiation shall be measured in a plane parallel to 
the unexposed face of the test specimen at a distance 
of 1 m from it. There is no need to measure radiation 
from a surface with a temperature below 300°C 
because the radiation emitted from such a surface is 
low. Measurement shall be taken at appropriate places 
and throughout the test at intervals not exceeding 
1 min. 


10.4.6.1 Apparatus 


Heat flux meter as prescribed in 9.4. 


NOTE — Heat flux comprises of both convective and radiative 
heat transfer (see 3.14). However, convective heat transfer is 
usually negligible compared to radiation. Therefore, heat flux 
may be reported as radiation. 


10.4.6.2 Positioning 


Each heat flux meter shall be positioned 1 m away 
from the unexposed face of the test specimen. At 
the beginning of the test, the target of each heat flux 
meter shall be placed parallel (+ 5°) to the plane of 
the unexposed surface of the test specimen. There 
shall be no significant radiating surfaces other than 
the specimen within the field of view. The flux meter 
shall not be shielded or masked to restrict the field of 
view. 


10.4.6.3 Measurements 


10.4.6.3.1 It shall be taken at the following locations: 


a) Opposite the geometric centre of the specimen. 
This is referred to as the average radiation level; 


b) Point at which the maximum heat flux can be 
expected. For specimen symmetrical about its 
centre and a uniform radiator, this point will 
coincide with position a). 


10.4.6.3.2 In other cases, the measurements shall be 
taken as follows: 


a) Identify all areas (in excess of 1 m°) where it is 
anticipated that the temperature will exceed 300°C. 
Measure the radiation opposite the notional centre 
of each such area; 

b) Two or more identical adjacent parts of the 

specimen having the same height or width, 

separated by less than 0.1 m, may be tested jointly 
together as single radiation surface; and 


Cc 


wa 


If the area or sub areas of the test specimen where 
the temperature is expected to remain below 
300°C is less than 10 percent of the total areas 
or sub-area, then that area, or sub area, can be 
treated as a single radiating surface. This allows 
for breaks as glazing bars. 

Measurements taken at each of the location described 
above shall be recorded throughout the test at intervals 
of maximum | min. 


12 


10.4.6.4 Reporting of results 


At all specific measurement locations, the actual time 
at which the measured radiation exceeds the values 
of 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 kW/m’? shall be reported. A 
clear statement should be made indicating whether the 
observations recorded are on the basis of average or 
maximum levels. 


10.4.7 Impact Energy and its Measurement 


The fire resistance of specific classes of walls can 
be influenced by impacts arising from the failure 
of other components or objects exposed to fire. 
Resistance to human impact test, as prescribed 
in 6.4 of IS 17004 (if required) can be applied 
to load bearing or non-load bearing fire resisting 
walls. 


10.4.8 General Behavior 


Observations shall be made of the general behavior of 
the test specimen during the course of the test. Also 
record other effects such as smoke emission, cracking, 
melting, softening, spalling or charring etc. of the 
materials of the test specimen. 


10.5 Termination of the Test 


10.5.1 The test may be terminated for one of the 
following reasons: 


a) Safety of personnel or impending damage to 
equipment; 

b) Test specimen met the prescribed criteria; and 

c) Request of sponsor. 


To obtain additional data for direct and/or extended 
application, the test may be continued inspite of 
condition prescribed at b). 


10.5.2 When a test has been terminated prior to failure 
of the test specimen, the reason for termination of test 
shall be clearly stated. The result shall be given as the 
time of termination of the test and the specimen shall be 
classified accordingly. 


11 PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 


11.1 Load Bearing Capacity 


This is the time lapsed in minutes, for which the test 
specimen continues to maintain its ability to support 
the test load during the test. Support of the test load 
is determined by both the amount and the rate of 
deflection calculated from the measurements taken in 
10.4.3.1. The rate of deflection criteria is not applied till 
a deflection of L/10 has been exceeded since relatively 
rapid deflection can occur until stable conditions are 
reached. 


a) For flexural loaded elements 
Limiting deflection D = L?/400d mm; and 


Limiting rate of deflection, dD/dt = 
L7/9 000 d mm/min. 
where, 


L=clear span of the test specimen, in mm; and 


d=distance from extreme fibre of the cold 
design compression zone to the extreme 
fibre of the cold design tension zone of the 
structural section, in mm. 


b 


wm 


For vertically loaded elements Limiting vertical 
contraction (negative elongation), C = h/100 mm; 
and 


Limiting rate of vertical contraction (negative 
elongation), dC/dt = 3h/1 000 mm/min 


where, 
h = initial height, in mm. 


11.2 Integrity 


These are the times in completed minutes for which 
the test specimen continues to maintain its separating 
function during the test without either: 


a) Causing the ignition of a cotton pad applied in 
accordance with 10.4.4.1; 


b) Permitting the penetration of a gap gauge as 
specified in 10.4.4.2; or 


c) Resulting in sustained flaming. 


If a specimen is tested for insulation (EI), the integrity 
value is determined by whichever of the three criteria 
(a, b and c) fails first. 


If a specimen is tested for integrity alone (E) (or) 
integrity and radiation control (EW), but not insulation 
(ED), the integrity value is determined by whichever of 
criteria (b, c) fails first. 
NOTE — Cotton pad test is used to determine integrity failure 
only in insulation test. 


11.3 Radiation 


These are the times in completed minutes for which the 
total radiation value as measured by the radiometer is 
less than 15 kW/m’. 


11.4 Insulation 


11.4.1 This is the time in completed minutes for 
which the test specimen continues to maintain its 
separating function during the test without developing 
temperatures on the unexposed surface which either: 


a) Increase the average temperature above the initial 
average temperature, by more than 140°C; and 


b) Increase at any location (including the roving 
thermocouple) above the initial temperature, by 
more than 180°C. 


11.4.2 The initial average temperature shall be 
the average unexposed surface temperature at the 
commencement of the test. 


13 


IS 16945 : 2018 


11.4.3 Some elements of construction have different 
limits of unexposed face temperature rise from those 
given above. These limits may apply to all or part of the 
specimen being evaluated. 


11.4.4 Details of the limits of temperature rise and 
location of areas that are permitted to rise higher are 
given in specific test method. 


11.4.5 Where a specimen incorporates discrete areas 
of different thermal insulation, these shall be evaluated 
separately according to the specific test method for 
both average and maximum temperature rise criteria. 


11.5 Consequential Effects of Failing Certain 
Performance Criteria 


11.5.1 Insulation and Integrity versus Load Bearing 
Capacity 

The performance criteria “insulation” and “integrity” 
shall automatically be assumed not to be satisfied when 
“load bearing capacity” criterion ceases to be satisfied. 


11.5.2 Insulation versus Integrity 


The performance criteria “insulation” shall 
automatically be assumed not to be satisfied when the 
“integrity” criterion ceases to be satisfied. 


12 TEST REPORTS 


12.1 Full Test Report 

The test report shall contain the following information: 
a) The name and address of the testing laboratory; 
b) The name and address of the sponsor; 
c) The date of the test; 
d) The unique reference number of the test; 


e) The name of the manufacturer (if known) 
of the test specimen and of the products and 
components used in the construction, together 
with identification marks and trade names; 


The construction details of the test specimen, 
including description and drawings and principal 
details of the components. The description 
and the drawings which are included in the test 
report shall, as far as practicable, be based on the 
information provided by the sponsor and verified 
by the survey of the test specimen. When full 
and detailed drawings are not produced by the 
laboratory to be included in the report, then the 
sponsor’s drawing(s) of the test specimen shall be 
authenticated by the test laboratory and at least 
one copy of the drawing(s) shall be included in 
the test report. Reference shall be given in the 
report that the drawings are those provided by the 
sponsor; 


The relevant properties of materials and 
components that have a bearing on the fire 


g) 


IS 16945 : 2018 


performance of the test specimen. Where it is 
impracticable to measure some of these properties, 
this shall be reported; 


The method of assembly and installation of the 
test specimen; 


h) 


)) 
k) 


Details of pre-testing conditions of the specimen; 


A statement concerning the  laboratory’s 
involvement in the selection of the test specimen; 
m) For load bearing elements, the load applied to 
the test specimen, the basis for its calculation 
as provided by the sponsor and the method of 
loading; 

n) The support and restraint conditions employed 
and the rationale for their selection; 


For asymmetrical, separating elements, the 
direction in which the specimen was tested and 
the reason for this choice; 


p) 


Information concerning the location of all the 
thermocouples fixed to the specimen, pressure 
measurement and deflection measurement 
devices. Drawings shall be included which clearly 
illustrate the positions of the various devices and 
identify them relative to the data provided; 


q) 


The ambient temperature of the laboratory at the 
commencement of the test; 


The pressure conditions within the furnace related 
to the position of the test construction; 


Temperature/time curves of the furnace heating 
conditions; 


The reasons validating the test in the event of 
the tolerances on the temperature/time curve, 
pressure conditions or ambient laboratory being 
inadvertently exceeded; 


The result slated in terms of the elapsed time, in 
completed minutes, between the commencement 
of heating and the time of failure with respect to 
the relevant criteria including: 


w) 


i) The rate of deflection when this is the criterion 
used to assess load bearing capacity, including 
the value of d used in calculating the limiting 
rate of deflection for flexural members; 


The maximum deflection and the time and 
position at which it occurred, supported by 
adequate graphical data; 


ii) 


iii) The mode of failure with respect to all integrity 
criteria; 

The position(s) at which the maximum 
temperature rise was measured should this be 


the cause of insulation failure; and 


iv) 


Any alternative and additional tests, for 
example, radiation. 


v) 


y) Tabular and/or graphical of the output from 
all pressure measurement devices, deflection 
measurement devices, unexposed face 


14 


thermocouples and where applicable, internal 

thermocouples; 
NOTE — The report only needs to include a selection of 
the measured data sufficient to provide a history of the 
performance of the test specimen. For example, it is not 
necessary to tabulate the temperature of every thermocouple 
fixed to a beam at 1 minute intervals for the whole duration 
of the 90 min test. However, it is recommended that all the 
measurements be included at around the time of failure of all 
the criteria being considered. Before and after this period the 
interval at which measured data needs to be included in the 
report may be longer, for example 5 to 10 min. 

z) A description of the any significant behavior of the 
test specimen; 


aa) The field of direct application of the results for the 
specimen being evaluated; and 


ab) The following statements: 


i) “This report details the method of construction, 
the test conditions and the results obtained when 
the specific element of construction described 
herein was tested following the procedure 
outlined in IS 16945. Any significant deviation 
with respect to size, construction details, loads, 
stresses, and edge or end conditions other than 
those allowed under the field of application in 
the relevant test method is not covered by this 
report. 


Because of the nature of fire resistant testing 
and the constituent difficulty in quantifying the 
uncertainty of measurement of fire resistance, 
it is not possible to provide a stated degree of 
accuracy of the result. 


12.2 Short Form Test Report 


In addition to the full test report, an abbreviated version 
shall be provided, at the specific request of the sponsor, 
they shall include all the items listed in 12.1, however 


items f), g), h), j), m), n), q), t), w), y), and z) may be 
shortened. 


12.3 Expression of Test Results in the Test Report 


12.3.1 An example of the method of expressing the 
test results is given below for a load bearing separating 
element, where the integrity and insulation criteria were 
exceed and the test was discontinued at the request of 
the sponsor before failure of load bearing capacity of 
the test specimen: 


a) “Loadbearing capacity : 128 min no failure (the 
test having been discontinued at the request of the 
sponsor) 


b) Integrity — sustained flaming : 128 min no failure 
(the test having been discontinued at the request of 
the sponsor) 


1) Gap Gauge : 124 min 
2) Cotton Pad : 120 min 
3) Insulation : 110 min” 


12.3.2 A typical example of the method for expressing 
the results is given below for a non-load bearing 
element: 


a) Integrity sustained flaming : 132 min no failure 
(the test having been discontinued at the request 
of the sponsor) 


1) Gap Gauge : 132 min 

2) Cotton Pad : 132 min 

3) Insulation area 1 : 20 min 
b) Radiation : 66 min 


13 FIELD OF DIRECT APPLICATION OF TEST 
RESULTS 


13.1 General 


The results of the fire test are directly applicable to 
similar constructions where one or more of the changes 
listed below are made. The resulting construction shall 
continue to comply with appropriate design code for its 
stiffness and stability. 

a) Decrease in height; 

b) Increase in thickness of the wall; 

c) Increase in thickness of component materials; 


d) Decrease in linear dimensions of boards or panels 
but not thickness; 

e) Decrease in stud spacing; 

f) Decrease in distance of fixing centres; 

g) Increase in the number of horizontal joints if the 


test specimen has a joint not more than 500 mm 
from the top edge; 


h) The use of surface fittings and fixtures when the 
test specimen has the fixture or fitting not more 
than 500 mm from the top edge; and 


j) Horizontal or vertical joints, of the type tested. 


13.2 Extension of Width 


The width of an identical construction may be 
increased if the specimen was tested at a minimum 
of 3 m width with one vertical edge without restraint 
(free edge). 


IS 16945 : 2018 


13.3 Extension of Height 


The height of constructions tested at a minimum of 
3 m, may be increased to 4 m under the following 
conditions: 


a) If the maximum lateral deflection of the test 
specimen does not exceed 100 mm; and 


b) The expansion allowances are increased pro-rata. 
13.4 Supporting Constructions 


13.4.1 Standard Supporting Constructions 


The result of a fire test on a non-load bearing wall 
tested in one of the standard supporting constructions 
or the test frame will also apply to any other supporting 
construction within the same type which has a greater 
fire resistance. 


13.4.2 Non-Standard Supporting Constructions 


The result of a fire test on a non-load bearing wall tested 
in a non-standard supporting construction is applicable 
only to that particular construction. 


13.5 Field of Direct Application - Limits of Permitted 
Size Variations 


13.5.1 When the test specimen achieves overrun time A, 
the dimensions of the glass panes (width and/or height) 
can be increased upto 1.1 times of its tested dimension. 
However, the resultant area of the glass pane shall not 
be more than 1.1 times of the maximum tested area. 


13.5.2 When the test specimen achieves overrun time B, 
the dimensions of the glass panes (width and/or height) 
can increased upto 1.2 times of its tested dimension. 
However, the resultant area of the glass pane shall not 
be more than 1.21 times of the maximum tested area. 


13.5.3 For test specimens which are tested for integrity 
and radiation, the following provisions will apply 
additionally: 


a) the average temperature of the unexposed face 


(both glazed and non-glazed area) remain below 
300°C, or 


b) the heat radiation measured from the complete and 
fully glazed element did not exceed 12.3 kW/m’. 


Table 2 Field of Direct Application Limits of Permitted Size Variations 
(Clause 13.5) 


SI. No. Intended Classification Overrun Time A Overrun Time B 
(min) (min) (min) 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) <20 Not applicable 23 
ii) 30, 45 and 60 >3and<6 26 
iii) >90 > 5 percent and < 10 percent of the > 10 percent of the intended 


intended classification period 


classification period 


IS 16945 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


Organization 


CSIR — Central Glass and Ceramic Research 
Institute, Kolkata 


Asahi India Glass Limited 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Borosil Glass Works Ltd 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Glass and Ceramic Research 
Institute, Kolkata 


Centre for the Development of Glass Industry 

Confederation Construction Products and 
Services (CCPS) 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Materials) 


Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 


Director General of Supplies and Disposals 


Federation of Safety Glass 


Glazing Society of India 


Govt College of Engineering and Ceramic 
Technology 


Hindustan Glass Works Ltd 


Hindustan National Glass Industries Ltd 
Indian Institute of Packaging 


Indian Meteorological Department 


IIT, BHU, Varanasi 
NCERT, New Delhi 
National Physical Laboratory 


Representative(s) 


Dr K. MURALEEDHARAN (Chairman) 


SHRI PRAVEEN SAINI 
SHRI Navin Rat (Alternate) 


Dr (Smt.) MADHUMITA GOSWAMI 
DR PURNANANDA NANDI (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIKANT GANGAN 
SHRI SATISH CHITRIV (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TIWARI 
Dr AMIT Rat (Alternate) 


DR NAVJEEV SAXENA 
SHRI AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr K. ANNAPURNA 
SHRI SITENDU MANDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV CHINMALLI 
SHRI DEVENDRA SAH (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SHASHI KANT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR 
Suri H. C. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suet T. S. G. NARAYANNEN 
SHRI NAND LaL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. PANDEY 


SHRI SHARANJIT SINGH 
SHRI GURMEET SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. N. GOHUL DEEPAK 
SHRI MATHIVANAN M. /SHRI SUBIN CALVIN GEO 
(Alternate) 


DR RITUPARNA SEN 
Dr (Ms.) KABERI Das (Alternate) 


SHRI VARUN GUPTA 
SHRI K. ARVIN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. SHARMA 


Dr N. C. SAHA 
SHRI BIDHAN Das (Alternate) 


SHRI S. KRISHNAIAH 
Suri P. N. MOHANAN (Alternate) 


Dr DEVENDRA KUMAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr SUKHVIR SINGH 
DRR. K. GARG (Alternate) 


16 


Organization 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME) 


SAB India Pvt. Ltd., Benguluru 
Saint-Gobain India Pvt. Ltd. 


Schott Glass India Pvt. Ltd 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research 
Tensil Glass Works 

The All India Glass Manufacturers Federation 
United Breweries Group 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16945 : 2018 


Representative(s) 
Dr S. K. KULSHRESTHA 
Suri D. V. S. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. BHARTI 

SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI UNNIKRISHNAN A. R. 

SHRI MURALI. N. (Alternate) 
SHRI ANAND BAKSHI 

SHRI HANSRAJ GOuD (Alternate) 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 

SHRI SHAMBU THAKUR (Alternate) 
SHRI A. N. S. KUMAR 

SHRI A. G. NATARAJAN (Alternate) 
SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 

SHRIVINITKAPUR/ SHRIGOPALGANATRA (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. RASTOGI 
SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 

SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI U. K. Das, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)| 


Member secretary 


SHRI SACHIN S. MENON 
Scientist ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


Terminology, Code of Practice, Methods of Sampling and Tests Subcommittee, CHD 10:1 


Organization 


Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, 
Kolkata 


Asahi India Glass Ltd. 
Borosil Glass Works Ltd. 
Federation of Safety Glass 


Glazing Society of India 
Gujarat Guardian Ltd. 


HNG Float Glass Ltd. 
Saint Gobain India pvt. Ltd 


The All India Glass Manufacturers Federation 


Representative(s) 


Dr K. ANNAPURNA (Convener) 


SHRI PRAVEEN SAINI 
SHRI SHRIKANT GANGAN 


SHRI BALAJI KONIDALA 
SHRI FARHAT Kamit (Alternate) 


SHRI G. N. GOHUL DEEPAK 
SHRI MATHIVANAN M (Alternate) 


SHRI HIMANSHU VISHNOI 
SHRI PRAVEEN TREHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. JAIN 


SHRI MURALI. N. 
SHRI RAJAT RADHAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI VINIT KAPUR (Alternate) 


17 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 10 (11192). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


