(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS:11033 -1984

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATlON FOR ANIMALI~RAWNP~TATOD~GGER, RIDGERTYPE
Harvesting and Threshing Equipment Sectional Committee,
Universny,

APTX

51

Chairman DR S. R. VE;`HMA Members DR L. N. SEUKLA (Alternate to Dr S. R. Verma ) SHRI BEUPENDRA SEW CHANDRA MOHAN SHRI G. S. RIVAL ( Alternala ) SHRI K. S. Dxv SHRI N. K. Dn.4~u SHRI M. R. DLWAN ( AItem& j

Repesentirrg Punjab Agricultural Ludhiana

National Agricultural Cooperative Federation of India Ltd, Delhi Punjab Tractors Limited, Ropar Standard Agricultural Ludhiana Cnginccring

Marketing

Company,

SILHI J. PHA~AD ( A21trnata) Vishiv Karma Folmdry ( Rcgd ), Phillaur SHRI N. D. DHIMAN SHRI V. K. DI~IMAN ( Altcrnatc1 , Northern Region Farm Machinery Training DIRECT~I~ & Testing Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Hissar Smixon TESY ENGINEER ( Altcrnntc ) Department of Agriculturr, Government of Uttar Smu R. C. Goes Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI c. s. SlIARiWA( Alternate ) Department of Agricu'lturc, Government of SHRI J. P. GUPTA Punjab, Chandigarh SHBI HAIZBEAJAN SINGET (Alternate ) State Farms Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi' SHBI R. K. GUPTA SHRI M. L. GARG ( Alternate ) capacity ( Village Kanganwal, In personal SHRI J. S. HARA P. 0. Jogia~la, Distf Ludhiann) Union Forgings, Ludhiana SHRI INDERJIT Srwon SHRI PA~AMJIT SINCH ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2) INDIAN 0 Copgrighl 1984 STANDARDS INSTITUTION
E

Central Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Budni (MP)

This publication is protected under the Zndian Copyr:gllt Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11033 -1984

i\4embcrs SHRI JAOOIIUI CHAWlCit
SHRI V.P.S.KAIHYAP

Representing Union Tractor Workshop, New Delhi Department of Agriculture, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh Mohan La1 Sukhadia University, Udaipur Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering , ICAR ), Bhopal
( Alternate )

Ds I;. N. NAQ DR T. P. OJH.4
UR R. S. DNVNANI Dn J. S. PANWAR

Indian Agricultural New Delhi Jyoti Limited,

Research Inrtitute

( ICAR

),

Vadodarn Corporation Ltd.

SHRI

Sent M. M. Kolrl.r ( Altcm~~c M. R. .~HLAVA l<AO

Haryana Agro-Industries Chandigarh
j

Vicon Limited,

Bangalore

SHRI M. L. KEISHNA MURTHY ( Alternate ) Escorts Limited, Faridabad Skiilt~Rr~na~rm SINQH SRRI N. L. K. MALHOTBA ( Alternate ) SHRI GURMIT SINCJH SEIXMBEY Jodhsingh Sehmbey & Song, Goraya

SRI~I SANJI~XV Kuma~ Da K. N. S~NQ~L

(

i'i~terrlatc )

PH~F BHAQWAN SHRI v. K. SINGIL

Govind Ballahh Pant University Txhnology, Pantnagar Delhi ) Trading

of Agriculture Company,

&

SINQH

(Mlerrrclle )

SHRI R. B. L. SRIVASTAVA SHRI S. N.
SlrIV.4SrTAVA

SEIRI T. PUBNANANDAX,

Director

( Agri & Food )

State Agro-Industrial Corporation Ltd, Lucknow of Agriculture ( Department of Ministry Agriculture St Cooperation ), New Delhi Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$cio Mmhr ) U. P.

ESPI ( New Delhi

New

Sscrrtnrv Assistant Director
SHRI K. ANRARASU

( Agri & Food ), ISI

IS : 11033- 1984

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ANIMAL DRAWN POTATO DIGGER, RIDGER TYPE
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD
lndian Standards b>* the Harvesting been appro\-et1 by

Indian Standard was adopted by the Institution on 20 July 1984, after the draft finalized and Threshing Equipment Sectional Committtee had the Agricultural and `Food Products Division Council.

0.2 Potato is one of the important cash crops of our country and for digging potatoes in the fields, animal drawn diggers are widely used. A need, therefore, was felt to prepare an Indian Standard on the subject to and the users in production and purchase of guide the manufacturers quality potato diggers. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance the Central Potato Research Station, Jalandhar. has been obtained from

0.4 Potato diggers are generally of ridaer and sweep types. This standard covers the requirements of the ridr,er type only. The standard on sweep type would be prepared at a later stage. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-l%O*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should he the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard other requirements
`Rules

specifies material, constructional perfornlance for ridger type animal drawn potato digger.
values

and

for rounding off numerical

( mired `.

3

IS : 11033 - 1984 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.OiFor the purpose ( see Fig. 1 ).
HANDLE

of this standard,

the following

definitions

shall apply

GRIP

\u =\/
1
SOLE PLATE ---% 1 /RUG

MOULO

BOARD CLEARANCE

/HARE

POINT

;

B ANGLEOd
PENEIRAIION

jVER,ICAk

SUCTION

FIG. I

POTATO DIGGER, RIDGER TYPE

4

16:110332.1 Angle of Cut-The included angle formed by point of share and wings of share ( see of in Fig. 1 ). the

1984

lines joining

2.2 Angle of Penetration or Lift Angle - The angle of inclination of share in the direction of travel when share is fitted in its working position ( see P in Fig. 1 ). 2.3 Beam bottom. 2.4 Potato the soil. -A rigid member which connects the yoke to the plough

Digger

-

An implement

to raise

potatoes

to the surface

of

2.5 Digger Bottom and sole plate which 2.6 Frog -The attached. 2.7 Handle -

- An assembly comprising the share, are zutached together with frog. other components of digger

mould

board

part to which

bottom

are

The part(s)

for controlling

and manoeuvring breaks

the digger. up the soil is

2.8 Mouldboard Wing and shall be of slat type.

The part which lifts and

2.9 Mouldboard Brace(s) - The adjustable or fixed part (s) which attached to the back of the mouldboards to provide them support.
Nora of digging. The adjustment brace(s) also help in controlling

th<aeffective width

2.10 Share - The below the surface.

part

which The

penetrates rear edge

into of

the soil and the share

makes which

cut joins

2.10.1 Cleavage Edge mouldboard and share. 2.10.2 Cutting Edge -

The front edge of the share which

cuts the soil.

2.10.3 ls'dge Clearance - The maximum clearance between the cutting edge and the straight line joining the point of share and wing of share. 2.10.4 Point of Share facilitates the penetration detachable. 2.10.5 share. Wing of Share `The leading end of of share into the soil. The rear end of the cutting edge which This may be integral or the cutting edge of the

5

IS : 11033 - 1984 2.11 Working Width - The horizontal distance ends of the mouldboards, expressed in mm.
Nom -- In case of mouldboards fitted with adjustable and minimum width shall br indicated.

between
brace( s

the

outside

) the maximum
providing shoe. point to

2.12 Sole Plate - The part which slides against the bottom stability to it during operations. This is also known as sliding 2.13 Throat Clearance - The of share and lo\vcr side of beam. 2.14 Standard the beam. 2.15 Vertical and horizontal in the working 2.16 Handle or Shauk The perpendicular
part

distance

bet\veen

connecting

the digger

bottom

Suction - The maximum clearance under the land side surface when the digger is resting on a horizontal surface position. Hook A hook attached to the handle for tying rope.

3. MATERIAL 3.1 The material of construction of share body, share and land side shall be chilled cast iron ( see nlso 4.1 ) or steel conforming to Grade 75 C6 of The chemical composition of Grade 75 C6 is IS : 1570 ( Part 2 )-1979*. as under: a) Carbon b) Maganese c) Sulphur d) Phosphorus 3.1.1 Any other material having than this may also be used. 0.70 to 0'80 percent 0.50 to 0.90 percent 0.05 percent, 0.05 percent, characteristics

Max Max
to or better

equivalent

3.2 The material of construction for components other than those specified in 3.1 shall be cast iron preferably conforming to Grade FG 200 of IS : 210-1978.t or mild steel, preferably conforming to IS : 226-1975$ or IS : 1977-1975s. Well-seasoned hard timber ( see IS : 399-196411 ) may also be used for beam, handle and handle grip.
*Schedules for wrought steels for general engineering purpose : Part 2 Carbon steels ( unalloyed stevls ) (JirSt fcvision ). tspkfication for grey iron castings ( second rruisian ). fSpecification for structural steel ( standard quality ) ( JFflhrrrGzkz ). $Specification for structural steel ( ordinary quality ). /]Classification for commercial timber and their zonal distribution ( re&cd j. fi

IS : 11033 - 1984

:3.3 The components along with their material `declared by the manufacturer.
4. HARDNESS

of construction

shall be

4.1 Cast iron used for different components, other than share body, share and land side, shall have the hardness in range of 160 to 220 HB ( J/X IS : 1789-1961" ). 4.2 The chilled
cast iron parts shall have hardness in range of 360 to 400 HB ( when tested in accordance with IS : 1789-196 I * ) up to a distance of 50 mm from cutting edge; depth of chilling shall be not less than 1.5 mm. 4.3 The steel share including detachable share point and sole plate knife shall have hardness in range of 350 to 450 HB when tested in accordance with IS : 1500-1968f up to a distance of 50 mm from the cutting edge. 5. DIMENSIONS

5.1 The working 600 mm.
NOTE -The the mouldboard requirement. 5.2

width of the digger

shall be adjustable

between

450

to

adjustment of the diverging wings or curved bars attached to far separation and c~xposure of potatoes may be varied as per

The vertical

suction

shall be declared

by the manufacturer. position, the throat clearance

5.3 When the digger is set at its working shall be in the range of 250 to 500 mm.

5.4 When the digger is set at its working position, the vertical distance The between the ground and the centre of the grip shall be adjustable.
distance shall lie between 900 and 1 100 mm. or oval in cross section. The The length of 25 and 30 mm. The angle between the grip and 5.5 The handle grip shall be circular ,diameter or minor axis shall be between the grip shall be not less than 125 mm. the handle shall be from 100" to 105".

5.6 The cutting edge of the share shall be bevelled to a distance between 5 and 10 mm. The thickness of the cutting edge should be
*Method for Brine11 hardness test for grey cast iron, tMethod for Brine11 hardness test for steel (Jirst r&ion

).

7

IS:11033

- 1984
in edge thickness in a share shall be

from O-5 to 2 mm. The variation not more than f 0.05 mm.

5.7 The angle of cut and angle of penetration shall be 5" to 15' and 15" The variation from the declared angle shall be not to 30" respectively. more than f 3" subject to the angle remaining within the specified limit. 6. PERFORMANCE

6.1 When tested in accordance with the method the digger shall satisfy the following:
a) Exposure b) Total of tubers 70 percent,

given

in Appendix

A,

Min, and
percent,

damage

to the tubers -5

MUX.

NOTE- This requirement shall be tested as type test.
7. OTHER replacement. 7.2 The fasteners coming in contact with soil should have coarse thread. The head of the fasteners, coming in contact with soil, shall be flush with As far as possible bolt of 10 mm size should be the working surface. used for all fastenings to facilitate the use of minimum number of tools. Each bolt should have spring or flat washer of appropriate size for better contact. 7.3 The digger shall be symmetrical central axis of the digger bottom. 7.4 The mass of the digger more than 20 kg. on both sides along the longitudinal

REQUIREMENTS
should perferably be detachable for ease of

7.1 All the components

includin g beam

( if provided

) shall

be not

7.5 When the digger is set at its working position and is placed on a plane surface, its bearing points ( point of share and wing of share and heel of land side, if present ) should touch the ground and the digger shall be well-balanced. 8.

WORKMANSHIP

AND

FINISH

8.1 The components of the digger should be free from pits, burrs, cracks and other visual defects. The casting shall be free from blow holes. Welded joints shall not be porous.
8

IS : 11033 - 1984 8.2 The surface of the parts of the digger shall be evenly dressed and shall have a protective coating which will prevent surface deterioration in transit and storage. 9. MARKING AND PACKING on non-wearing surface

9.1 Marking - Each digger shall be marked with the following particulars: a) Manufacturer's b) Size.

name and recognized trade-mark,

if any; and

9.1.1 The digger may also be marked with the IS1 Certification

Mark.

use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of NOTE -The the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence to that standard as a further safeguard. for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9.2 Packing -The purchaser and the parts in transit. 10. SAMPLING

digger shall be packed as agreed to between the The packing shall ensure safety of the supplier. ACCEPTANCE

FOR LOT

10.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, the sampling of the digger for lot acceptance shall be done in accordance with 3 of IS : 7201-1974*.

APPENDIX
( METHOD A-l. A-l.1 A-l.2 -__ PROCEDURE Select the field ready for harvesting Hitch the digger with the animal(s).
of sampling of agricultural machinery

A

Clause 6.1 )
TEST OF DIGGER

OF PERFORMANCE

potatoes.

*Method

and tractors.

9

A-l.3 Operate the digger for a preliminary run for a few rows and adjust the width and depth. The blade shall be run below the tuber zone. A-l.4 After preliminary run, operate the digger for 20 rows of minimum From each row, obtain the following 20 m length to expose the tubers. for a distance of 10 m in the middle of rows: a) Potatoes exposed ( collected by picking exposed potatoes ) b) Total potatoes ( by digging all potatoes ) manually, means if necessary cut, and picking or scaled

c) Damaged potatoes ( damaged potatoes ) A-2. CALCULATION

broached

a) Exposure percentage by mass = loo x mass.. of potatoes exposed ( collected from all rows ) mass of total potatoes ( collected from all rows ) b) Damaged
s

percentage by mass mass of damaged potatoes ( collected from all rows ) 100 )( --. __mass of total potatoes ( collected froG'GX%Z)

10

