( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS:2858-

1984

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ROOFING WITH MANGALORE TILES

( First Revision )
Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, BDC 13
Chairman C-4/38, Members SHRI P. D. AQARWAL SHR~ C. P. MALE Safdarjung Development New Delhi-118016 Area,

Refiresenting

Public Works Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI R. K. MAT&R ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Cmtre, Bombay Snap D. R. BATLIVALA SHRI B. K. CHAKRABORTY Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. M. GOFL ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, CHIEF ENGI~~ZZ ( BLDCJS ) Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras STP~LI-~~TF~I~~`O ENGINEER ( SPECIAL B~ILDI~-o CIRCLE ) ( Alternote ) CHIEF E~~INEER-CI:M-A~~L Public Works Department, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur SEOI~ETARY( BR ) EXECUTIVE:ENUINEER ( Alternatti ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF ENGINEER (.TRAININO ) SUPERINTENDING ENQINEZR sir, I i `J$;;f9;z_;N( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, 1 . E New Delhi SII~I A. V. GOPIL~IIISHNA ( dlternate ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization Dmxc~oa, ARCHITECTURE ( Ministary of Railways ), Lucknow JOINT DIRECTOR, ARC~TECTuna ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, SHILI S. S. GILL Chandigarh Builders' Association of India, Bombay Sum M. KARTI~AYAN Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI R. L. KUMAR SI~RI V. G. PATWARUHAN ( Alternate) ( Continuedon @ge 2 ) @ Copyright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian CopVright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 2858 - 1984

Members
SHRI

Represcntin~

Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay M. 2. KURIEN Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. K. MAJUMDAR SHHI H. S. PASRICAA ( Altcrnale ) `Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI R. C. MANUAL Roorkee SHRI B. S. SHARMA ( Altrrnatc ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SRRI B. V. B. PA1 SRRI P. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) State Bank of India, Bombay SHRI P. K. PANDARE Forest Research Institute and College, Dehra Dun SHRI K. S. PRUTHI Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SERI S. G. RANADIV~ SHRI RUMJ~Y SHROFF ( Alternate ) Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministy of Finance, REPRESENTATIVE New Delhi Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi R~PRFISENTATIVE Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR New Delhi Public Works & Housing Department, Bombay SHRI S. R. TAMBE The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI B. T. UNWALLA Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Roads Wing ), S HRI G. VENKATESULU New Delhi SHRI M. V. SASTRY ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oJficio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI A. K. SAINI Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Floor

and

Roof

Construction

Subcommittee,

BDC 13 : 11

Convener
SIXRI D. R. BATLIVALA

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay

Members
SHRI S. C. CHAKRABARTI

Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee SHRI N. C. MAJUMDAR ( Altentatc ) Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, SHRI S. K. CHAERABARTY Calcutta Public Works Department, Government of Rajasthan, CHIEF ENCJINEER ( B&R ) Jaipur SHRI H. N. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI K. DEVARAJAN New Delhi MAJ A. K. KADIAN ( Alternate ) ( Contind on lxrgs 18 )

2

IS:2858 -1984

Indian Standard
: CODJi OF PRACTICE FOR ROOFING WITH MANGALORE TILES (

First Revision )
FO REWORD

0.

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 September 1984, after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Mangalore tiles are machine made burnt&lay tiles widely used for roofing work in this country. Its design incorporates corrugation for drainage and also an efficient interlocking system between the tiles enabling them when laid to form a leak-proof layer. Depending upon the degree of protection needed from the roof, Mangalore tiles may be laid as such or with an under-layer of flat tiles or ceiling tiles, etc. A specific advantage of a tiled roof is the case of maintenance since any broken tiles can be easily replaced without much disturbance to the roofing as a whole. The design of the Mangalore tile takes into account this aspect and the tile as laid on the roof will be able to carry the weight of a man it is called upon to support during such repair. Though originally produced in areas near Mangalore, this tile is now manufactured and used in many parts of this country. For efficient performance of Mangalore tiled roof there are several design and constructional details one should take care of during laying the roof. This code is intended to provide guidance with regard to all these details.

,

0.3 This standard wa.s pubhshed in 1964. The revision has been undertaken to incorporate the necessary modifications as a result of experience gained during the use of this standard. The modifications include additional requirements for ventilating tiles and in requirements for fixing of valley gutter. 0.4 The Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has taken into consideration the views of producers, consumers and technologists and has related the standard to the manufacturing and trade practices followed in the country in this field. Due weightage has also been given to the need for international co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. 3

ts 1`2858- 1984 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded `off value-should be the same as that of the specified value in the standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers roofing with Mangalore may include the following types of work: pattern tiles which

.

4 b) cl

Mangalore

tiles laid directly over reepers ( see Fig. 1 );

Mangalore tiles laid with or without mortar on flat tiles, which are laid over reepers ( see Fig. 2 ); and Mangalore tiles laid on ceiling tiles which are laid ( see Fig. 3 ). over reepers

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose apply. of this standard, the following definitions shall

2.1.1 Barge Board - In the case of a gable roof where there is no gable parapet and the roof projects beyond the gable, the barge boards are planks running down from the ridge to the eaves covering the outer most rafters. 2.1.2 Ceiling Tile - A machine pressed tile used under the Mangalore tile so as to provide a surface flush with the underside of the reepers ( see IS : 1464-1973t ). 2.1.3 Collars - The structural members side of the ridge so as to serve as connecting 2.1.4 roof.
Dormer -

fixed horizontally on either ties for the common rafters.

A vertical

window

or opening framed in a sloping

2.1.5 Downpipe - Pipe which collects rain water from the roof, from the roof gutters, or from both and conveys it to a drain, sump or other point of discharge. 2.1.6
Eaues -

The lower edge of an inclined roof ( see Fig. 4 ).

*Rules for roundingoff numerical values ( revised ). TSpecificationfor clay ridge and ceiling tiles (&t revision ). 4

MANGALORE

TILE

`7.

GALVANIZED WIRE FOR TYING DOWN TILES TO THE REEPER ,-EDGE BEDDING IN MORTAR TILE

MANGALORE

ENLARGED
GAUGE HEAD

DETAIL
yEy/

AT A

Y,

LAP

GALVANIZED MS FLAT1

MANGALORE

TILE

r'

WOOD;,`"'

OR REEPERS

TILTING

FILLET REEPER

LEAVES

GUTTER

ENLARGED

SECTION
(OF

THROUGH
TILE)

TYING LUG

MANGALORE

FIG. 1

DETAIL OF MANGALORETILES LAID ON REEPERS

ES a 2858 - 1984
+iANGALORE
MWIAK

TILES
LArliK

RETAINING FILLETS To BE USED WHEN PITCH IS MORE THAN 3d 7 MANGALORE TILES

'

REEPER WOODEN

OR BATTEN DODEN REEPERS -5cm MIN THCK RAFTER

RAFTER

fiNLA&ED

DETAIL AT A

.
OR FATTENS MORTAR LAYER

/

---FLAT

TILES

FIG. 2

DETAIL OF MANGALORE TILES EMBEALDED IN MORTAR OVER FLAT TILES
MANGALORE TILES

CElLlNG

TILES

\-BATTEN REEPER

OR

WOObEN

RAFTER

f

1

WALL

PLATE

ENLARGED
FIG. 3 6

DETAll

AT A

MANGALORE TILE LAID OVER CEILING TILES

IS;: 2858x

GARI F PARAPF T-T

_..___

-A

`i-

GALVANIZED MS FLAT Fob TYtNG DOWN TlLES

MORTAR
BANDS

BARGE BOARDS

FIG. 4 2.1.7 Eaues Board of common rafters.

NOMENCLATURE OF A PITCHED ROOF A thin plank at the eaves covering the lower ends

2.1.8 Edge Bedding - The beddmg of the ridge tile at its two longitudinal edges over mortar layers supported on the two courses of roofing tiles occuring on either side. material, usually 2.1.9 Flashing `- A strip of impervious to exclude water from the junction between a roof covering part of the structure. 2.1.10 Flat Tile - A hand made or machine pressed laid in one or more courses as an under-layer for roofing. 2.1.11 Gable - The tringular roof ( see Fig. 4 ). 2.1.12 Gauge of Tile - The which is covered by the tile. 2.1.13 Gutter upper metal, used and another clay tiIe

burnt

part of a wall at the end of a ridge distance along the roof slope

effective

Any form of roof water channel. by the intersection of two inclined

2.1.14 Hip - A salient angle formed roof surfaces ( see Fig. 4 ). 7

IS : 2858 - 1984 2.1.15 Lap - The distance by which one tile overlaps and adjacent tile. When measured from course over course, this will be termed as `head lap', and when measured edge over edge of the tile, this will be termed as `side lap'. 2.1.16 Mangalore Pattern Tile ming to IS : 654-1972X. A machine pressed roofing tile conforof the

2.1.17 Pitch - The angle of inclination with the horizontal rafters or other surface on which tiles are laid. 2.1.18 Pitched Roof the horizontal. 2.1.19 Rafters

A roof the pitch of which is greater than 10" to

.

2.1.19.1 Common rafters - The structural members which form the principal framework for the slopes of the roof, and support the reepers or boardi'ng which carry the roof covering. 2.1.19.2 Hip rafters - The structural members intersection of two roof surfaces forming a hip. of the roof at the

2.1.19.3 .`/ack rafter - The rafters that are shorter than the common rafters running from a hip to the eaves or from a ridge to the valley, and cut against the hip and ridge. 2.1.19.4 Valley rafters - The structural members intersection of the two roof surfaces forming a valley. 2.1.20 Reepers or Battens - Horizontal on which tiles are supported. ,2.1.21 Ridi e - The horizontal inclined in opposite directions. of the roof at the

timber members of small section

intersection of two rising roof surfaces to

2.i.22 Ri&e Piece - The timber member underneath the ridge, which the ends of common rafters are jointed ( see Fig. 1 ). 2.1.23 angular
Ridge

pressed clay roofing tile usually Tile - A machine shaped used at the ridges and hips of roofs, and with its size corresponding to the size of the roofing tile ( see also 5.3 and IS : 14641973-t ). 2.1.24 Roof Parapet - The part of the structure building rising above the eave level of the roof.

of the

side walls of the

*Specification for clay roofing tiles, Mangalore pattern ( second revision ). tSpecification for clay ridge and ceiling tiles (first reuiion ).

8

IS : 2858 - 1984
2.1.25 Tilting Fillet - A fillet or reeper fixed side so as to provide an extra rise to the lower and bring its slope in conformity with the Sometimes the top edge of the eaves board may the function of the tilting fillet. over the rafter on shorter most course of the tile general pitch of the roof. itself be made to serve

2.1.26 Underctiuer - A layer of flat tiles, ceiling tiles, bituminus felt, wooden boards, or corrugated sheets provided between the rafters and the Mangalore tile layer so as to improve functional performance of the roof. 2.1.27 inclined Valley - Th e re-entrant angle roof surfaces ( see Fig. 4 ). formed by the intersection of two

2.1.28 Verge - The edge of vertical tiling cheeks ( see Fig. 4 ).

edge of a roof surface finished at a gable, or the at window reveals, ends of walls and dormer wall and the load

2.1.29 M7all Plate - A structural member resting on the supporting the rafters with the specific object of distributing evenly over the wall. 3. NECESSARY

INFORMATION
design and construction of the work, to the following is necessary: area to be covered; elements and restrictions, if any, to their detailed informa-

3.1 For efficient tion with regard
a) Surface

b) Type of supporting arrangement; c) Treatmetit of junctions

with walls; for drainage; and

.

d) Provision e) Provision

for slope and other requirements for fixing ridge tiles.

3.2 All information shall be made available to those who are responsible Necessary drawings and instructions for preparatory for laying the roof. work shall be given. 3.3 Arrangement shall be made for proper exchange of information between those engaged in laying and all others whose work will affect or will be affected.

4. DESIGN
essential

CONSIDERATIONS Resistance
of a tiled

4.1 Weather

function

-

In addition to other normal functions, the roof covering will be to drain away rain 9

IS : 2858 - 1984 water ,and effectively prevent its ingress into the structure below. The interlocking of the tiles as well as the laying technique shall ensure that the roof shall also have an the joints are leak-proof; furthermore effective roof drainage system which will quickly drain off the rain water. For this purpose, in addition to the drainage channels formed by the corrugations of the Mangalore tiles, a proper layout of roof gutters and downpipes for the roof surface as a whole will be necessary. Provision of an undercover for the roof will not only add insulation and waterproofing but will also prevent debris and insects falling from the roof. 4.1.1 Protection of Verges Against Wind - The verges of roof shall be protected against lifting by wind by provision of either bargeboard and filletting arrangements or' a bending wall over the gable wall. Other constructional features regarding laying of tiles for protection at eaves shall be as in 9.1.1. 4.2 Lap and Pitch - Generally the pitch of the common rafter or surface on which Mangalore tiles are laid shall not be less than 24" and not greater than 45". Where abnormal conditions may be expected, such as in elevated sites or in areas of heavy rainfall, this minimum pitch may not ensure full protection to weather and pitch shall be suitably increased in which case each tile shall be screwed or tied down to the roofwork below. If necessary, additional protective measures such as the provision of an undercover of a layer of roofing felt, or a course of flat tiles with a mortar layer for bedding of Mangalore tiles or a ceiling boarding nailed In the design of roofs with to rafters shall be adopted under the roof. low pitches, it shall be borne in mind that each tile is tilted up at its lower edge by the tile below and that the pitch of the tile is less than that of the common rafter. The tiles shall be laid with both head lap and side lap as fixed by the design of the tile. If the head lap is not fixed by the design of the tile, it shall not be less than `75 mm ( see Fig. 1 ). 4.3 Reepers - The spacing of rafters shall not normally unless the reepers are otherwise designed against sagging sideration the species of timber used and the load covering size of reepers, unless otherwise designed, shall normally for Mangalore tiles laid over flat tiles over reepers and Mangalore tiles over reepers or over ceiling tiles Iaid on exceed 600 mm taking into conover them. The be 50 x `25 mm 50 x 15 mm for reepers.

4.3.1 Where ceiling boarding is adopted, the boarding shall not be less than 12 mm thick, and shall be tongued and grooved, and it shall be nailed to the rafters first so as to form a continuous surface from ridge to eave, and the reepers nailed over them. Alternatively, the ceiling boarding may be fixed direct to purlins. The size of the reepers shall ., IO

IS : 2858 - 1984

not be less than 25 x 25 mm fixed at suitable distances apart to suit The maximum spacing of the rafters shall not exceed the tile spacing. 750 mm. 4.4 Aspects of Dimensional Coordination - In the design of pitched roof coverings the span of the roof and other details shall facilitate the minimum cutting of tiles during laying. Knowing the `gauge' of the tile, and the play that is permitted by the interlock between tiles and allowing suitable extra distances required near the .eave and the ridge or hip, it is possible to adjust the length of the common rafter and other relevant dimensions of the roof to correspond to exact multiples of the gauge length of tile, and this will avoid use of cut tiles near the ridge. Generally a ridge tile corresponding to a pattern of roofing tile will have a length which covers exactly twice the effective width of the roofing tile. 4.5 Strength and Stability - While considering the strength and stability of the roof framework supporting Mangalore tiled roof, the following dead loads shall be taken into account:
Description of Roof Rise/Span Dead Mass of Roof Covering kg/m2

`Mangalore tiles embedded mortar over flat tiles

in

a to -$ 4 to $ a to &

110 80 90

Mangalore tiles with flat tiles without mortar for embedment Mangalore tiles alone

4.6 Roof Drainage - No gutter or rainwater pipe shall discharge water from one roof to another unless the discharge is from a small area For detailed information relating to the disposal of such as a `dormer'. rain water from roofs, reference shall be made to IS : 2527-1984*. If a valley gutter is formed by means of sheet metal, the sheet shall be taken at least a distance of 300 mm under the roof on either side of the gutter. Near a wall the sheet metal constituting the valley gutter shall be taken at least 75 mm into the wail and set with cement mortar. 4.7 Use of Glass Tiles - Glass tiles, usually of the same shape as the Mangalore tiles may be fixed in the same manner as other tiles at suitable spacing according to the requirements of roof lighting. Glass tiles of special types shall be laid in accordance with the instructions of the manufacrurers of these tiles.
*Code ( ruviscd ) . of

practice for fixing rain-water 11

gutters

and downpipes for roof drainage

IS : 2858 - 1984 5. MATERIALS 5.0 The materials to 5.1 to 5.5. used in roofing with in Mangalore bedding tiles ridge shall tiles as conform well as.

- The mortar 5.1 Mortar Mangalore tiles shall be:

for use

Either composite mortar 1 : 2 : 9 ( one part cement conforming to IS : 269-1976* or IS : 1489-19767 or IS : 455-1976$, two parts lime conforming to IS : 712-1973s and 9 parts sand ) or lime to IS : 712-19739 and mortar 1 : 3 ( one part lime conforming three parts sand ). Water used for making mortar shall. conform to 4.3 of IS : 456-197811. Water used for making ous materials. 5.2 5.3 Mangalore Ridge Tiles Tiles mortar These shall be clean and free conform from deleteri-

shall

to IS : 654-197271.

These

shall conform tiles for

to IS : 1464-1973**. use with Mangalore tiles Ishal

5.4 Ceiling Tiles - Ceiling conform to IS : 1464-1973**.

5.5 Flat Tiles - Flat tiles for use with Mangalore of the dimensions equal to the gauge of the Mangalore 5.6 Glass Mangalore Tiles tiles. These shall preferably be

tiles shall have one tile. same shape: as

of the

5.7 Ventilating Tiles - Tiles equal in size to one plain Mangalore tile or two tiles laid side by side after allowing for overlapping. These may be used to provide top ventilation in a room. Ventilating tiles shalk be provided wherever required at the rate of two ventilating tiles for every 10 rnz area of finished roof surface. A typical view of ventilating tiles has been shown in Fig. 5. 5.8 Nails for Fixing Reepers - Nails used for fixing reepers or rafters shall be plain head nails of size 2.50 mm or 2.24 mm conforming to IS : 723-197Ytt. The nails shall be galvanized. 5.9 Sheet Metal for Valley Gutters - This metal and of thickness not less than 1.25 mm. shall be of galvanized

*Specification for ordinary and low heat Portland cement ( third revision ). +Specification for Portland pozzolana cement ( second revision ). $3pecification for Portland slag cement ( third revision ), �Specification for building limes ( second revision ). l/Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). !JSpecification for clay roofing tiles, Mangalore pattern ( second revision ). **Specification for clay ridge and ceiling tiles (Jirst revision ). t+Specification for mild steel wire nails ( second revision).

12

IS : 2858 - 1984

FIG. 5

TYPICAL VIEW OF VENTILATINGTILE

5.10 Reepers - Reepers shall be of any species of structural timber given in 1s : 88311970* and the size shall be in accordance with the design but shall in no case be less than the size as specified in 4.3. Reepers shall be treated for protection against decay and termites in accordance with IS : 401-19827.
5.11 Wire for Tying Down the Tile -

and shall conform to IS : 280-1978:. 6. PROGRAMMING THE WORK

The wire shall be galvanized

6.1 Before taking up the work of roof covering, the roof framework shall have been completed and the reepers nailed into position ready for supporting the roof covering.
*Code of practice for use of structural timber in building ( material, design ) ( third revision ) . tCode of practice for preservation of timber ( t&rdrGuirion ). fSpecification for mild steel wire for general purposes ( fhird revision ). grading and

13

IS : 2858 - 1984 7. PREPARATORY 7.X For WORK

Flat Tiles - before use in the roofing, the flat tiles shall first be prepared by immersing in water for two hours and air-dying before laying. The underside of the flat tiles, may also, if so specified, be dipped in whitewash mixed to a creamy consistency and the tiles then dried. 7.2 For
are to be tiles shall

Mangalore tiles Mangalore Tiles - Wherever embedded in a mortar layer over flat tiles, the Mangalore first be soaked in water for at least two hours before laying. 8. FIXING

OF REEPERS

8.1 The reepers

shall be fixed over the rafters at the specified or designed The nails shall penetrate at least 2 cm into the spacing and nailed. They shall extend at least over a length of three spans between rafters. The reepers shall be nailed to the rafters by means of plain the rafters. headed nails ( see 5.8 ). Their length shall be extended only by means of butt joint. The joint shall occur only over the rafters. The joints of no two adjacent rows of reepers shall come over the same rafter. At the eaves a tilting fillet shall be fixed, if necessary ( see Fig. 1 ). 8.2 Where with 4.3.1. 9. LAYING ceiling boards are used reapers shall be fixed in accordance

OF MANGALORE

TILES

9.1 The

tiles shall be laid from the eaves towards the ridge properly interlocked according to the design of the tile. The tile shall be laid reepers or over an undercover ( see 9.1.1 either directly over the and 9.1.2 ). The tiles shall be laid breaking joint, that is, the left channel of the upper tile shall lie in the right channel of that below and shall fit properly one to another, the catches resting fully against battens. The hips and ridges of the roof shall be covered with ridge tiles which shall be edge-bedded in mortar ( see 5.1 ) as illustrated in Fig. 1. The mortar in edge bedding may be further finished with plaster or paint to match with the colour of the tiles. If the courses of roof tiles adjacent to the hip or to the ridge do not finish exactly underneath the ridge tiles, either purpose-made tiles or tiles cut to suitable shapes may be used. While finishing joints gaps in the troughs of the roof tiles giving ridge or hip, if large enough, shall be neatly packed watertight using small pieces of chips of broken tiles and mortar. At eaves the lower most course of the tiles shall overhang the tilting fillet by a distance sufficient to ensure that the water drained off from the roof discharges clear off the eaves into the gutter. 14

IS : 2858 - 1984 9.1.1 Protective Measures Against Wind - A suitable arrangement shall be made to secure the ends of lower most course of tiles to the roof structure for preventing the tiles from being blown up by wind. Al teast the bottom most layer of tiles, and preferably more number of layers above it, shall be tied to the reepers or other roof elements by means of galvanized wire. The tiles at the eaves shall also be protected against lifting by means of a galvanized steel flat of size 40 x 3 mm fixed to the roof as in Fig. 4. Mortar bands 200 to 250 mm wide 60 to 65 mm deep may also be provided over the tiled roof at a spacing of 2'5 to 3 m for additional protection against wind. The mortar bends shall run along the roof slope.

9.1.2 Laying Mangalorc Tiles Over a Flat Tile Undercover - The Hat tiles shall first be prepared by immersing in water for two hours and dried before laying. The underside of flat tiles shall also be dipped in whitewash mixed to creamy consistency and dried. The flat tile shall then be laid over the reeper. The mortar layer shall be spread over the flat tile to a thickness of not less than 25 mm. The Mangalore tile shall also be soaked for two hours before laying in the roof. When the mortar layer is spread, the soaked Mangalore tiles shall be laid SO as to be fully embedded in the mortar over the flat tiles ( see Fig. 2 ). Where the pitch of the roof is more than 30", additional fillets shall be fixed to the reepers at a spacing of about one metre centres, so that the flat tiles laid between them are retained in position ( see Fig. 2 ). The Mangalore tiles may also be fixed over flat tiles without mortar bedding if the work is so specified. 9.1.3 Laying Mangalore Tiles Over Ceiling Tiles - Where ceiling tiles is to be laid as under cover the ceiling tiles over the reepers, and the Mangalore tiles shall be laid over appropriate interlocking between the tiles in the two layers ( a layer of shall be laid them with see Fig. 3 ).

.

9.2 Alignment - The finished slope of the roof shall be uniform ridge eaves. The eaves-line and the ridge-line shall, be perfectly straight, horizontal and parallel to each other. 9.3 Junction Between Ridges and Hips - The joints between hip and ridge tiles shall be grouted so as to be leak-proof. A metal saddle not less than 45 cm2 area may preferably be used underneath such junctions as additional protection against leakage. 9.4 Work at Valleys - Since valley is a particularly vulnerable part of the roof as its pitch is several degrees less than that of the general roof surface and it has to provide a channel for the water running down into it from two slopes on either side, special care shall be taken that a clear and an unobstructed channel is formed. Undercover ( see 9.1.1 and 9.1.2 ) shall be provided for the courses of tiles adjacent to the valley. The valley gutters shall be of galvanized steel sheet of minimum 1.25 mm 15

IS : 2858 - 1984
thickness and I.2 m wide. A 300 mm overlap shall be given at joints, if any, down the slope. The valley gutters shall be laid over the reepers and not nailed on to them from underneath. Two additional reepers of section 50 x 25 mm shall be fixed over the metal sheets, 150 mm away from the central line of the valley on either side, so as to retain the tiles On either side and mortar against falling into the gutter of the valley. of the valley, the roof shall be plastered with mortar to a thickness of 12 mm so that rain water from the gutter is prevented from percolating through the tiles or the undercover to the underside of the roof ( see Fig. 6 ).

VALLEY

BOAR RAFTER GALVANIZED STEEL SHEET

VALLEY

FIG. 6

FIXING OF VALLEY GUTTER

10. FINISHING SKYLIGHTS

EDGES

AROUND

CHIMNEY

STACKS

AND

10.1 In the case of chimney stacks and other similar features, full tiles In addition, shall be used around them and taken into the masonry. metal or bitumen flashing shall be used to cover the intersection between the top edge of the tiling and any projection through the roof. The flashing shall be turned against the projection and dressed down over the tile. The flashing shall be well tucked into either the joints in masonry or grooves in concrete as the case may be and shall be wedged and pointed. be treated for waterproofing in accordance with the relevant Indian Standards for waterproofing. Wherever special features like roof gutters and flashings are not provided between the junctions of the roof and wall, the tiles shall be let into the wall to a depth of not less than 50 mm and a drip moulding shall be provided at about 100 mm height above the roof surface, and joints between the roof and the wall shall be grouted with a waterproofing mortar or such other materials ( see Fig. 7 ). 16

11. TREATMENT OF JUNCTIONS WITH WALL 11.1 Junctions of the roof with walls shall preferably

IS:2858=i984
rORlP

MOUCDING
MANGACORE TILES

-RAIN WATER GUTTER i-CEMENT MORTAR

7.5 c
MIN

v//l

WALL

PLATE

PIG. 7 DETAIL AT THEJUNCTION OF THE ROOF WITH WALL ( WHERE TILES THEMSELVES ARE USED FOR ROOF DRAINAGE ) 12. INSPECTION 12.1 Inspection shall be done to avoid unsatisfactory may result in one or more of the following defects: Stnge Particulars of Insj)ertion construction which

Type of Failure that May Occur if ( 2 ) is not Satisfactory (3) Sagging ing or crack-

(1) I.aying of reepers

No joint betwee!`)the reepers shall occur except over the joist. At eaves the tilting fillet shall be fixed to the correct height. u'here Mangalore tiles are laid over flat tiles, their joints shall not, as far as possible, occur over the joints of the tiles. Where Mangalore tiles are laid as such over reepers, or over ceiling tiles, interlocking of tiles shall be ensured. 17

Laying tiles

of

Unsightly fall of roof surface near the eaves

IS : 2858 - 1984
( Continued from page 2 ) Members
DEPUTY

Refirewhy

ENGINEER Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New Delhi RAIL Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay "snnr R: L: KUXAR Institution of Survevors. New Delhi SHFLI G. K. MA.JU%IDAR Hindustan Prefab Lid, New Delhi SHXI H. S. PASRICHA ( &terna&) SIIRI B. v. B. PA1 Concrete Association of India, Bombay SXRI P. SRIN~VASAN( Alternate ) SHBI R. R.4JAPPA Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay DR M. RAM~IA~ Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), MadraS SHRI Z. GF.O~OE ( Alternate ) SENIOR DEPUTY CHIEF EIGIPublic Works Department, Government of Tamil NEEIZ ( BLDCS ) Nadu, Madras EXECUTIVE E N G I N li: F: IE SHRr K P;~n;;;~Jaj/leraate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi S&r S.&X KANT ( Alternate ) SUPERINC~NUINGE N o I N E E IL Public Works Department, Government of Antlhra Pradesh, Hyderabad (B&R) SURVEYOR OF WORKS, h'f_41~.4s Central Public Works Department, New Delhi
CENTRE CIBCLF:

CHIEF ,,`$+EEE;$)SS;;ERN

18

