( Reaffirmed 2001 )

fs t 9isi

l

1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED TZiVDA
Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee,
Chairman Da P. K. KYMAL Consultant

AFDC 23
New Delhi

Representing on Food and Nutrition,

Mem hers AGRICULTURAL M a n K E T I N o Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry ADVISER TO THE GOVERN&TENT of Agriculture, Faridabad ) OF INDIA DEPUTY AQRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISER ( Alternate ) Bajaj Consultants, New Delhi SHRI S. R. BAJAJ Department of Agriculture, SHRI BALJEET SINQE Government of Haryana FIXERI NARAIN DASS DUDEJA ( Alternate ) Central Fruit Products Advisory Committee SHRI M. BHATIA ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry SHRI D. S. CHADHA of Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi Technical Standardization Committee ( FoodCHAIRMAN ' stuffs ) ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture, Government of MIest SHRI B. P. CHAKLADAR Bengal All India Cold Storages Association, New Delhi SI~RI CHARANJI~ SIN~H SHRI S. I<. MITTAL (Bltnnate ) Directorate of Supplies & Transport, Army HeadCOL S. K. CHlB quarters, New Delhi LT-COL K. N. AOJ~ARYA( Alternate 1 Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi DR B. CHOUDHURY DR J. C. ANAND ( Alternate ) Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of AgriSHRI S. D. DEWAN culture ), New Delhi Inspection Export Council ( Ministry of SHRI 0. P. DEAMIJA Commerce ), Calcutta JOINT DIRECTOR OF AGCICULTURE Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil Nadu ( COMMERCIALCROPS ) JOITTTDIRECTOR OF AORICULTURE ( INSPECTION, GENERAL AND ADMNISTRATION ) ( Alternate ) ( Confinucd on pape 2 ) @ INDIAN CopVright 1981 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

fS : 9791- 1981
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Representing National Co-operative Development Corporation, New Delhi of Agriculture, Government of Department Maharashtra

Members SHRI B. c. Dr R. L. MATHuR

NAUPAL

DEPUTY DIREOTOR OF AGRIOULTURE I HORTICULTURE ( Alternate ) ' All India Food Preservers' Association, New Delhi DR A. G. NAIK-KURADE SHRI M. S. KORLI ( Alternate ) The Metal Box Comoanv SHRI K. R. NAXA~IM~AN _ , of India Limited, Calcutta DR S. C. CHAKRAVARTY ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute DR M. V. PATWARDHAN ( CSIR ), Mysore SHRI V. B. DALAL ( Alternate) Development Council for Food Processing IndusSHRI S. RAMASWAMY tries ( Directorate General of Technical Development ), New Delhi Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR K. S. RANDHAWA DR G. S. NIJJA~ ( Alternate) Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay SHRI V. REaUaATHAN SHRI S. M. NEMBHANI (Alternate) Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of DR T. R. SHAR~~A Defence ), Mysore SHRI K. S. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) Export Promotion Cell, Ministry of Agriculture, SHRI S. S. SIDI~U New Delhi Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New SHRI J. P. SINaH Delhi DR R. N. SINan ( Alternate ) Processed Foods Export Promotion Council, New SRRI P. S. SRINIVASAN Delhi; and Ministry of Commerce SBRI B. K. I~ENC~AR ( Alternate ) Directorate of Fruit Utilization, Government of DR S. S. TEAOTIA Uttar Pradesh. Lucknow DR S. K. BOSE ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&i0 Member ) SERI T. PURNANAN~AM, Director ( Agri & Food 1

Secretary Deputy SARI V. S. MATEUR Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

( Continued on page 15 )

2

IS : 9791 - 1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
0.

FOR CANNED TINDA

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 26 February 1981, after the draft finalized by the Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Canned TINDA is the product prepared from mature TINDA of suitable variety. The TINDA are peeled and packed in brine. They are processed in an appropriate manner before and after being sealed in a container so as to prevent spoilage. 0.3 There is ample scope for development of trade in canned TINDA both for export and for internal consumption. It is necessary to ensure the quality of the product if the demand is to be maintained and further developed. In order to ensure proper quality-control it is necessary to formulate Indian Standard Specification for this product. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954; the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 and the Fruit Products Order, 1955. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under these, wherever applicable. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places ratained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements Vulgaris, Var., jstulosus ) canned in brine.
2. TERMINOLOGY of

TINDA

( Citrullus

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply.
*Rules for roundingoff numerical values ( r&sed ).

3

1s I9791- wtlt
as water capacity of the container. 2.1 Fill of Container - Expressed The water capacity of the container is the volume of distilled water at 20�C which the sealed container holds when completely filled. obtained after cutting 2.2 Drained Mass - The mass of the product open the can and draining the product ( see 7 of IS : 2860-1964* ). of freedom from extraneous 2.3 Absence of Defects - The degree material including stalk, hardseeds and loose skin, peeling defects and also freedom from damage due to mechanical injury. 2.3.1 Blemished Unit - A unit that is blemished with some injury such as wormhole, insect damage, physiological disorder or other abnormality such as sun burn, scale or enzyme activity on the surface, readily visible Uneven distribution of pigment to the naked eye to a noticeable degree. and change in colour normally associated with processing shall not be considered as defects. 2.3.2 Disinteorated Unit form or from which portions 2.4 Can Round A unit that has have separated. lost the normal shape or

open top sanitary

cans conforming

to IS : 9396-1979t.

3. STYLES 3.1 TNDA used for canning shall be properly peeled and halved or quartered. The longest dimension of the pieces shall be 4 to 7 cm. Naive and quarters shall not be packed together in a can. 4. GRADES 4.1 Canned, TZNDA shall be of two grades, namely Grade 1 and Grade 2.

5. REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Hygienic Requirements - The material shall be prepared and handled under strict hygienic conditions by persons free from contagious and infectious diseases and only in premises maintained in a thoroughly clean and hygienic conditions and having adequate and safe water supply. All workers shall use clean, white and washed clothing ( see precautions shall be taken to prevent IS : 6542-1972$ ). N ecessary incidental contamination of the product from soiled equipment or from personnel suffering from injuries. 5.1.1 All equipment coming in contact with raw material or products in the course of manufacture shall be kept clean. An ample supply of iSpecification for round open top sanitary cans. $Code for llygienic conditions for fruit and vegetable canning units. 4
*iMethods of sampling and test for processing fruits and vegetables.

18: 9791

n

111

steam and water hose, brushes and other equipment necessary for proper cleaning of machinery and equipment shall be available. The equipment may be sterilized by immersion in, or swabbing with hypochlorite or other suitable chlorine solution having available chlorine at least 50 mg/kg. 5.2 General - The TIflDA selected for canning shall be of good quality, of proper stage of maturity and shall have the characteristic colour, flavour and texture of TINDA.
5.3

Freedom From Preservatives, Artificial Colouring Matter and Flavouring Agents - The material shall be free from preservatives, artificial flavouring agents or colouring matter. 5.4 Requirements of Covering Brine - The covering brine shall be `The only substance that may be added to the covering brine is clear. common salt ( sodium chloride ) from 1 to 2 percent with or without a small quantity of sucrose and citric or tartaric acid or other permitted acidulants not exceeding 0.1 percent of the packing medium. 5.5 Requirements for the Finished Product - The contents can on opening shall display the following characteristics: of the

4

Grade 1 - The material shall possess a good, characteristic and practically uniform colour; shall be practically uniform in size; shall be practically free from defects; shall be practically free from disintegration; shall possess a characteristic, good texture and flavour; and shall be of such quality with respect to clarity of covering liquor as to score not less than 95 points. Grade 2 - The material shall possess a characteristic and reasonably uniform colour; shall be reasonably uniform in size; shall be reasonably free from defects; shall be reasonably free from disintegration; shall possess a characteristic reasonably good texture and flavour; and shall be of such quality with respect to clarity of covering liquor as to score not less than 75 points.

b)

C>Scoring
5.5.1 Colour

shall be done according to the method prescribed in Appendix A and the maximum and minimum number of points to be scored by different factors shall be as given in Table 1.

uniform Grade I - The units shall possess a good, practically colour characteristic of TINDA, practically free from any discoiouration. Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processsing shall not be considered as defects. 5

IS ::9791 - 1981 Grade 2 - The units shall possess a good reasonably uniform colour, characteristic of TINDA and be reasonably free from discolouration. Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with processing shall not be considered as defects.'
TABLE 1 NUMBER OF POINTS TO BE SCORED

[ Clause 5.5 (c) ] SL No. (1) i) ii) iii) iv) Colour Texture and uniformity of size Taste and flavour Absence of defects FACTORS MAXIMUM POINTS (3) 20 25 20 35 MINIMUM POINTS ~---__h_-_--7 Grade 1 Grade 2 (4) 15 19 15 26 (5) 13 16 13 23

(2)

5.5.2

Texture and Uniformib of Size good a) Grade 1 - The canned TINDA shall possess a practically texture which means that the units shall be firm and tender. The size of the units shall be practically within the stipulated limits. The canned TINDA shall possess a reasonably good Grade 2 b) texture which means that the units shall be firm and tender. The size of the units shall be reasonably within the stipulated limits. T&e and Flauour The units shall possess the characteristic taste of TINDA. a> G&de IThe units shall be completely devoid of any objectionable or off taste or objectionable smell and odour. taste ofTZNDA. b) Grade 2 - The units shall possess the characteristic The units shall be devoid of any objectionable or off taste or objectionable smell or odour.

5.5.3

5.5.4 Absence of Defects free from defects which a) Grade 1 - The units shall be practically means that there shall not be present any extraneous material including stalk or loose skin and there shall be present not more than one blemished unit or one disintegrated unit in each can. There shall be present not more than 0.5 percent seeds on The covering brine shall be practically clear, drained mass. practically free from cloudiness and suspended matter and shall be practically free from discolouration. 6

IS : 9791-1981

b)

free from defects which Grade 2 - The units shall be reasonably means that there shall not be present any extraneous material like stalk or loose skin and there shall not be more than two blemished units and two disintegrated units. There shall not be more than one percent detached seeds on drained mass. The covering brine shall be thus, reasonably clear and reasonably free from cloudiness and suspended matter and shall be reasonably free from discolouration. material shall also conform to the requirement prescribed TV.
TABLE 2 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNED TlNDA

5.5.5 The
in Table

SL No.

CHARACTERISTIC

REQUIREMENT

METHOD OB TEST, REF TO ~~~~~_~h__~~_~~ Cl No. of Appendix of IS : 7732IS : 28601964* 19751_ (4) 5 7 (5) -

(1) i) ii) iii) Vacuum

(2)
in the can in mm, Min Fill of the container, by mass, Min percent

(3) 175 90
GO

Drained mass of the contents of the can, as percentage of the net mass, Mln Arsenic, Copper, Zinc, mg/kg, mg/kg, Max Max requirements Max Max Max MQX Lead, mgjkg, mg/kg,

iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) x)

0.5 1.0 5.0 5.0 250 15 To satisfy the requirements of the test

13 14 15 16 17 18

B -

Tin, mg/kg, Iron, mg/kg,

Microbiological

*Methods of sampling and test for processed $Specification for apple juice.

fruits and vegetables.

6. PACKING

AND MARKING

6.1 Packing - The material shall be packed in cans made of electrolytic tinplate. The cans shall be plain or internally lacquered and hermetically sealed. The side seam, shall be externally side stripped with a suitable lacquered. The lacquer used internally shall be non-toxic and conforming 7

fSr9791-

1981

The can exterior shall be free from dents, rust, to IS : 5818-1970*. perforation and seam distortions. The cans shall not show leaking, panelling or swell. The interior of the plain cans may show visible black discolourations. Normal feathering shall not be considered as a defect. 6.1.1 The can shall conform to IS : 9396-19797.

6.1.2 Packaging - The cans shall be packed in wooden packing cases ( see IS : 1503-1979: ) or corrugated board boxes [see IS : 2771 ( Part I )19775 or IS : 7149-197311 ] or as, agreed to between the vendor and the purchaser.
6.2

Marking 6.2.1 Each can shall be marked with the following particulars: and grade of the material with the

a) Name, packing medium brand name, if any;

b) Name and address of the manufacturer; c) Net mass of the contents of the can in grams; d) Date of manufacture manufacture; or code number indicating the date of

e) Manufacturer's licence number; and f ) List of ingredients in descending order in proportion used.
NOTE - Any other marking required under Fruits Products Order, Weights and Measures ( Packaged Commodities ) Regulations, 1977. 1955 and

6.2.2 Each information:

packing

case

shall

also be marked

with the following

a) Name of the product; b) Gross mass; c) Name and address of the manufacturer; d) Number of cans x mass of each can; e) Date of manufacture manufacture; and f ) Manufacturer's
*Specification $Specification SSpecification SSpecification reuision ) . (/Specification

or code

number

indicating

the date of

licence number.

for lacqueres and decorative finishes for food cans. for round open top sanitary cans. for wooden packing cases ( second revision ). for fibre board boxes: Part I Corrugated fibreboard for fibreboard boxes for canned sea foods for export.

boxes

(first

8

IS : 9791.1981

6.3 The container

may also be marked with the IS1 Certification

Mark.

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the. Indian Standards Institution.

7. SAMPLING 7.1 Representative samples of the material shall be drawn and tested for conformity to this standard by the method prescribed in 3 of IS : 28601964*. 8. TESTS 8.1 The samples of canned TINDA shall be tested for ascertaining conformity of the material to the requirements of the specification by the method prescribed in Appendix A and relevant clauses as given in co1 4 and 5 of Table 2.

APPENDIX A [ Clause 5.5 (c) ]
DETERMINATION
A-l. A-l.1 APPARATUS White Porcelain Bowls -

OF THE GRADE

OF THE PRODUCT

can under examination. A-1.2
Stainless

Big enough to hold the contents of the Table spoons ( See IS : 990- 19647 ).

Steel Spoons

A-2. PROCEDURE A-2.1 Panel of Judges - Scoring of the product shall be done by a panel of three to five judges. All the judges constituting a panel shall be The conversant with the factors governing the quality of the product. cans shall be opened and the contents poured separately into white porcelain bowls. Each judge shall independently examine the contents from each of the cans and assign scores for different characteristics.
*Methods of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables. tspecification for spoons, stainless steel ( revised ).

9

IS : 97911 A-2.1.1

1981 The judges shall consider and uniformity the following characteristics: absence

Colour, texture of defects.

of size, taste and Bavour and

A-2.2 System of Scoring - The variations within the factor are so described that the scores may be ascertained for each factor and expressed numerically. The relative importance of each factor has been expressed numerically on a scale of 100. Each judge shall give a score for the individual factors, by the method described in Table 3 and record his observations in the Score Sheet for individual judge. A-2.2.1 The scores as number of points given on the Score Sheet by the judges for the contents of each can for the four factors shall be recorded in a tabular from in the Score Card and the average score calculated for each factor with overall average for each can entered in the appropriate columns of the score card after complying with the conditions specified in A-2.3.1 and A-2.3.2. A-2.3 Ascertaining the Grade

A-2.3.1 Agreement Among 3'udges - To ascertain the consistency of judgement among the judges, the total score assigned by each of them for the contents of the same can shall be calculated by adding up the score for the various individual characteristics. If the difference between the maximum and the minimum of the total score so obtained does not exceed ( X + 5 ), where K is the number of judges, the scoring shall be deemed as consistent for the can under consideration. If the difference exceeds ( X + 5 ), the most outlying score, that is, the one which is farthest from its immediate neighbour ( the scores being arranged in one order ), shall be discarded and the consistency among the remaining judges shall be examined. A-2.3.2 When the consistency is thus established ( A-2.3.1 ), the overall average scores given by the judges, whose scoring has been found to be consistent, shall be calculated for each can. The average score for each of the individual characteristics shall also be calculated by taking into account the corresponding scores as given by the same judges for the contents of the same can. A-2.3.3 Assignment of Grade basis of the points given in Table Assigning 1. of grade shall be done on the

10

lS:9791TABLE ORQANOLEPTIC CIIARAGTERISTIC (1)

1981

3

METHODS REQUIREMENT

FOR

GIVING SCORE ( Clause A-2.2 ) MAXIMUM NUMBER OR POINTS (3) 20

FOR

CANNED

TlNDA POINTS REDUCING TJIID VALUE UPTO (5) 15

PROPERTIES WHICH REDUCE THE VALUE (4) Not quite uniform slightly varying shades of the characteristic colour; slight discolouration. Non-uniform, some units having peel; discolouration. Dull non-uniform colour varying considerably in shades, total discolouration. Not quite tender in some units, fibrous and tough; size almost within limits. Units rather fibrous, size varying within reasonable limits. Mostly fibrous units, seeds hard, size of units v a r y i n g beyond limits. A slight variation in the normal flavour trace of metallic taste. Taste indicative of over mature TINDA; traces of off odour, slight sour smell. Off taste, strong metallic taste, stale. disintegrated One units present and one blemished unit present. Vary slight sediment in brine loose seeds present up to 1.0 percent. More that two disintegrated and blemished unit present. Brine slightly cloudy. More than two blemished or disintegrated units; loose stalk or skin present; brine visibly cloudy.

Colour

Good uniform colour characteristic of the vegetable of proper maturity free from any discolouration. Uneven distnbution pigments and of change in colour normally associated with processing proper shall not be considered as defects Good texture, just firm and tender but not soft or tough. Uniform size within limits

(2)

13 0

Texture and Uniformity of size

25

19

16 0

Taste a n d flavour

Taste and flnvour characteristic of TlflDA of appropriate maturity free from dbjectionable or off flavour, taste or smell; free from sourness, staleness or metallic taste. Free from defects; free from broken or disintegrated units; free from extraneous material free from discoloured units. Loose seeds in brine not to exceed 0.5% of drained weight. Covering brine shall be clear, free from cloudiness, blackening or thickening and free from sediment.

20

15

13

0 26

Absence defects

of

35

23

0

11

IS : 9791.1981
SCORE SHEET FOR INDIVIDUAL
Sample

JUDGE
No. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .._.......... . . .._................... ...

Date of Sampling Details of the Sample Can

:
b) Name of the Manufacturer _...........

a) Product

. . . . . . . .._. ._. . . . . . . .. . . . _ . .

_ .... ...

c) Type/Style

. ..
.. .. .

d) Batch No. ._.......

. . . . . . . . . __. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

e) Date of Manufacture

_ . . .. ._ . ... ... .. .. .. _._ _....._... _-..-.. .. .-... ... . .- .. . ... ... .. . .. ...
SAMPLECANS *-------_-_--~ 4 5 6 7

FACTOR

SCOREPOINTS Grade 1 _~__~__ Grade 2

r----------1 2

3

8

9

10

Colour Texture and uni-

: 15-20 : 13-14

Grade 1 : 19-25 Grade 2 : 16-18

Taste and flavour essence defects

Grade 1 ---Grade 2 Grade 1 Grade 2

: 15-20 : 13-14 : 26-35 : 23-25-

Signature

of the Judge

with Date . . .._......................

12

1.3: Sir91 - 1981
SCORE CARD
Sample No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . .. . .. .

Date of Sampling Details of the Sample Can: b) Name of the Manufacturer e) Date of Manufacture
TEXTURE AND UNIFORMITY OF SIZE TASTE AND FLAVOUR

a) Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . d) Batch
FACTOR

. .. . .. . .,,)...............-..-....

c) Type . . ..-......................

No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -CoLooa

. . . . __ ._..........

,.. .. .... ...-----.----*.ABSENCE OXDEFECTS TOTAL SCORES AVERAQE SCORE FOR

JUDGE-t CAN NUMBER .L
I

A

B

C

D

E

ABCDE

ABCDEABCDEABCDE

4 0

71)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9) (10)

(11)

(12)

(13) (14)

(15)

(16)

(17) (18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

13

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS :9791-1981
( Confinucdfrom fqe 2)

Processed Fruits and Vegetables
Conoenef SERI M. BHATIA Members AURICULTURAL MAREETINQ AUVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF

Subcommittee,
Representing

AFDC 23 : 3

Central Fruit Products Advisory Committee ( Ministry. of Agriculture ), New Delhi Directorate of Marketing & Inspection of Agriculture ), Faridabad ( Ministry

DIRECTOB OF LABORATORIES ( Alternate ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), DR J. C. ANAND New Delhi The Midland Fruit & Vegetable Products ( India ) Snn~ N. P. BIIARGAVA Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Technical Standardization Committee ( FoodCHAIRMAN stuffs ) ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Directorate of Supplies & Transport, Army HeadCOL S.K. CIIIB quarters, New Delhi The Canning Industries ( Cochin ) Limited, SIiRI M. I. DAVID Trichur Surti Mango Pickles, Untdi SBRI T. B. DZSAI SIIRI A. T. DES&I ( Alternate) Provision Merchants' Association, Delhi SHI~I GIRUUARI LAG, Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of SHRI K. S. JAYARAMAN Defence ), Mysore .. .\ SHRI L. A. RAMANATIIAN ( Atternate ) Fruit and Vegetable Co-operative Processing SHEI V. S. MAhlAUAPUlt Society Limited, Kushalnagar National Co-operative Development Corporation, SHI~I B. C. MATFUR New Delhi All India Food Preservers' Association, New Delhi DR A. G. NAIE-KURADE SHRI A. I(. TIKOO ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI A. M. NANJU~DASWAMY ( CSIR ), Mysore SHRI M. V. SASTRY ( Alternate ) Punjab State Co-operative Supply & Marketing SHRI M. K. REHMAN Federation Limited, Chandigarh Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry SECRETAI~Y of Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi Development Council for Food Processing IndusSECRETARY tries ( Directorate General of Technical Development ), New Delhi Tims Products Limited, Calcutta SHXI V. L. SBARDA DR L. L. KHATRI ( Alternate )

15

INTERNATIONAL
Bare Units Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current

SYSTEM OF UNlTS(SI
Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mote Symbol m ko s A K cd mol

UNITS)

Thermodynamic temperature Luminous lntenslty Amount of substance Units

Supplementary Qoanfiiy Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units

UnM radian rteradlan

Symbol rad sr

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux denslty Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, force stress

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt pascat

Symbol N J W Wb 1 HZ S V Pa 1 1 1 1

Oeflnltlon N J 1 k&m/s2 1 N.m

W = 1 J/s T = 1 Wb/mc

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = lc/s

( s-1)

1
1

S-IA/V V=l W/A

1 Pa = 1 N/ma

NO. 1 APRIL 1996 TO IS 9791 : 1981 SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED 7'IiWA

AMENDMENT

( Page 3, Foreword, clause 0.4 ) -Insert and renumber the subsequent clause:

the following new clause after 0.4

`0.5 A scheme for labelling environment friendly products known as ECO-Mark has been introduced at the instance of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MEF), Government of India. The ECO-Mark shall be administered by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) under the BIS Act, 1986 as per the Resolution No. 71 dated 20 February 1991 and Resolution No. 425 dated 28 October 1992 published in the Gazette of the Government of India. For a product to be eligible for marking with the ECO-Mark it shall also carry the Standard Mark of BIS for quality .besides meeting additional environment friendly (EF) requirementsThe environment friendly requirements for canned TfNDA are, therefore, included through Amendment No. 1 to this standard. This amendment is based on the Gazette Notification No. 624 (E) dated 6 September 1995 for Labelling Beverages, Infant Foods, Processed Fruits and Vegetable Products as environment friendly, published in the Gazette of the Government of India.' ( Page 7, clause 55.5 ) "5.6 5.6.1 Additional Requirements Insert the following new matter after 5.5.5: for ECO-Mark

General Requirements shall conform to the requirements prescribed under 5.1

5.6.1.1 The product to 55.5.

5.6.1.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consent clearance as per the provisions of Water (PCP) Act, 1974, Water (PCP) Cess Act, 1977 and Air (PCP) Act, 1981 along with the authorization if required under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the Rules made thereunder to the Bureau of Indian Standards while applying for the ECO-Mark and the product shall also be in accordance with the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the Rules made thereunder. Additionally, FPO 1955 (Fruit Product Order) framed under Essential Commodities Act, 1955, Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1977 requirements wherever applicable has to be complied with. 1

Amend No. 1 to IS 9791 : 1981 5.6.1.3 The product/packaging may also display in brief the criteria based on which the product has been Iabelled environment friendly. 5.6.1.4 The material biodegradable. used for product packing shall be recyclable or

5.6.1.5 The date of manufacture and date of expiry shall be declared on the product package by the manufacturer. 5.6.1.6 The product shall be microbiologically safe when tested as per IS 5403 : 1969 `Method for yeast and mould count of foodstuffs' and IS 5887 ( Part 5 ) : 1976 `Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning : Part 5 Isolation, identification and enumeration of Vibrio Cholerae and Vibrio Purahaemolyticus (first revision )' and shall be free from bacterial and fungal toxins. 5.6.1.7 The pesticide residues, if any in the product shall not exceed the limit as prescribed in PFAAct, 1954 and the Rules made thereunder. 5.6.1.8 The product package or leaflet accompanying it may display instructions of proper use, storage and transport (including refrigeration temperature compliance) so as to maximize the product performance, safety and minimize wastage. 5.6.2 Specifi(: Requirements 5.6.2.1 The product shall not contain any of the heavy metal contaminants excess of the quantities prescribed in Table 2." (Page 9, clause 6.3 ) `6.4 ECO-Mark The product may also be marked with the ECO-Mark, the details of which may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.' Insert the following new clause after 6.3: in

(FADlO) Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 2

