( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 10106 ( Part 1 ;Sec 3 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
PACKAGING
PART Section 3 1 PRODUCT Fabrics Textiles,

CODE
PACKAGING and Allied Products

Packaging
Chairman SHRI M. R.
SURIL.O~.~NIAN

Code Scctionrtl

Committee,

h/ICPD f4
Bombay

Reprecentiry Indian Institute of Packaging,

Members P. v. NI\RAYANAN ( Alternate to Shri M. R. Subramanian ) Plastic Containers Sectional Committee, MCPD 11, SHRI A. S. ATRALYE BIS SRI~I V. Don.4rn~J ( Alternate ) Indian Aluminium Co Ltd. Bombay SRRI A. K. CAPRIIIAN Snnr P. CHAKRAVORTY ( Altercate ) India Foils Limited, Calcutta SHRI S. P. CHATTERJEE SHI~I B. K. MALLIK ( Alternate ) Pate1 Roadways (P) Ltd, Bombay SHRI F. J, DE Sobah Snnr S. S. NAI~AYANAN( Ahrnatr ) BASF India Limited, Bombay SHRI R. N. GANJOO SHRI B. JOSHI ( Alternate ) Metal Containers Sectional Committee, MCPD 12, Sam J. K. KHOSLA BIS Srrnr _~ _.. U. D. LAAD i Alternate 1 SHRI K. V. K&&NAM&TRY ' .I.T.C. Limited, Calcutta Dtr P. P. SINQU ( Alternate ) The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Eombav CAPT S. B. Kn~nan01 of Standardization ( Ministry of Directorate SII~I M. M. S. MISEA Defence ,, 1. New Delhi SH~ZIA. N. SKIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) of Chemicals Sectional Committee, Packaging DR H. MUICHPBJEE MCPD 23, BIS SHRI A. S. GROSRAL ( Alternate ) Air India, Bombay REPILESENTATIVE Wood and Wood Products Containers Sectional SHRT A. C. SEK~AR Committee, MCPD lti, BIS Ministry of Transport ( Railway Board ), New Delhi SKRI R. C. SHARMA SI~RI LOVE DEV RAJ ( Alternate ) ILAC Limited, Bombay SHRI U. U. SRENOY SEI~I V. H. DESAI ( Altern& )
SHRI

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indrarr Cofirri& A;1 ( XIV of 1!9.>7) am1 reproduction in whole or in part bv any means exceor with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copvrighr under the sai? .Acr.

IS : 10106 ( Part l/Set 3 ) - 1986 ( Continued from page1 1
Members SHRI C.K. SOXANT Glass Containers BIS Representing Sectional Committee, MCPD 13,

SHRI K. H. PAIEXH ( Alternate ) The Paper Products Limited, New Delhi DR K. K. TALWAR SHRI H. L. CH~PRA ( dllsrnotc ) Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay SHRI H. K. UPADHAYAYA Paper and Flexible Packaging Sectional Committee, SHR~ K. VI~WANATHAN MCPD 14, BSI Director General, BIS ( Ex-@`icio Member ) SHRI B. L. RAINA, Director ( MCPD ) Secretary SHKI S. P. ARBEY Joint Director ( MCPD ), BIS

2

IS : 10106 ( Part

1, Set 3 ) - 1986

Indian Standard
PACKAGING
PART Section 3 1 PRODUCT Fabrics Textiles,

CODE
PACKAGING and Allied Products

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 22 October 1986, after the draft finalized by the Packaging Code Sectional Committee bad been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. issued in the following parts, each

0.2 The packaging code is being having one or more sections: Part Part 1 Product 3 Ancillary packaging materials materials operations machinery Part 2 Packaging Part 4 Packages Part 5 Packaging Part 6 Storage Part 7 Packaging

and transportation

0.2.1 This section ( Part l:Sec 3 ) of the code, which deals with textiles, fabrics and allied products, is intended to provide guidance to manufacturers and users in the type of packaging best suited for a particular product.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
of textiles, the headings

( Part l/Set 3 ) lays down guidelines for the packaging These are dealt with under fabrics and allied products. jute, cotton, wool, man-made fabric and miscellaneous.

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For
products,

definitions reference

of terms relating to textiles, fabrics may be made to the following standards: Glossary revision ) of textile terms-natural

and

allied

IS : 232-1967

fibres ( first

3

IS : 10106 ( Part l/Set 3 ) - 1986 IS : 1324-1966
IS : 2364-1979 IS : 3596-1967

Glossary of textile terms relating to man-made fibre and fabric industry ( &t revision ) Glossary of textile terms natural fibres ( first revision ) Glossary Glossary of terms relating of terms relating fabrics made from

to hosiery to jute

IS : 5476-1969 3. JUTE

3.0 Jute products are in great demand and huge quantities are being Proper packaging is essential to give adequate protection exported. against possible damage due to normal handling during transit and to ensure that the products reach their destination in a sound condition. Jute products are packed either in rolls or in bales. 3.1 Packaging in Roils - The jute cloth is wound in rolls and covered first with a layer of polyethylene sheet or other waterproof This is further wound with jute cloth, stitched with jute material. twine and marked with the desired information. For details, see IS : 4744-1968*. 3.2 Packaging in Bales - Fabrics or bags are `made up' in bales and the top and bottom layers are covered with a pack sheet of the same The bales covering is then stitched with quality as the bale covering. jute twine and securely bound with steel strips running at right angles to the bale length. The bales are then compressed to a density of and marked with the desired information. For dead weight volume details, see IS : 2873-1969t. 4. COTTON 4.0 Cotton yarn, cotton cloth, hosiery yarn and hosiery goods are to be suitably packed for transportation by rail, road and sea. An outline of the packaging methods is given belokv. Reference may also be made to the following Indian Standards for complete details: IS : 293-1980
IS : 1347-1972 IS : 3086-1965

Code for seaworthy cloth ( third w&ion Inland Code yarn packaging for and seaworthy goods
recision )

packaging
)

of cotton cloth and

yarn yarn

and ( first

of cotton

packaging

of cotton

hosiery

*Packaging $Pnchging

of jute products ofjute producis

in rolls. in bales.

4

IS : 10106 ( Part IS : 3325-1965 4.1 Packaging 4.1.1 Tarn Code for inland and goods packaging

1,`Sec 3 ) - 1986 hosiery yarn

of cotton

for Inland Yarn

Transportation yarn or cotton hosiery yarn.

may be cotton

cones, 4.1.1.1 Cotfon yarn - Yarn may be in the form of hanks, cheeses and spools. Hanks are packed in bales while cones and cheeses in either cases or bags and spools in cases. a) Packaging in baIer - The hanks are made into bundles and further which consist of the following layers from packed in bales, inside to outside, and are strapped and marked: i) LLDPE, LDPE, or Waterproof ii) 2 layers iii) Wooden paper ( 1 layer ) of HDPE slats woven fabric or PP woven fabric of hessian or bamboo HMHDPE film

b) Packing in cases - The cones, cheeses and spools are wrapped in low density polyethylene and packed in wooden cases having a layer of low density polyethylene or waterproof paper on the inside and a layer of medium weight hessian on the outside. Sealing of the outer layer is done with a waterproof adhesive and the lid is securely nailed and the case strapped and marked. c) Packing in bags - Cones and cheeses are also packed in separate bags. In the case of cheeses, these are. individually wrapped in polyethylene film or kraft paper and packed in bags having a layer each of wax paper, waterproof paper and hessian from In the case of cones a piece of commercial inside to outside. plywood is added between the layers of waterproof paper and hessian, both on top and bottom. The bags are then stitched and the bag containing cones is further bound by hoops. 4.1.1.2 Cotton hosiery yarn - This may be in cones. The hanks and cones are packaged respectively. the in form of hanks or bales and cases

a) Packing in bales - The hanks are pressed into bundles of square or rectangular shapes, tied and wrapped in kraft paper. The bundles are made into bales and the covering materials consisting of the following layers arranged from inside to outside in the order given below: i) &-aft ii) Light paper or fents. or matting 5 or fents. weight hessian

IS : 10106 ( Part

l/Set

3 ) - 1986 paper or polyethylene monsoon film. months ).

iii) Waterproof iv) Tarpaulin v) Medium

( only during weight hessian.

The bale is pressed

to make it tight,

sewn and strapped.

b) Packing in cases - Each cone is wrapped in kraft paper or in a polyethylene bag. The subsequent procedure is the same as for cotton yarn [ see 4.1.1.1 (b) 1. 4.1.2 Clorh cloth. Cloth may be in the form of grey cloth or processed folded to yarn [ see in bales or

and 4.1.2.1 Grey cloth - Each piece of cloth is plaited proper size and packed in bales as in the case of cotton 4.1.1.1 (a) I. 4.1.2.2
in cases. a) Packing Processed cloth -

Processed

cloth is packed

either

in bales - Each piece is plaited, folded or wrapped on cardboard or strawboard. Each piece or bundle of pieces is wrapped in materials such as kraft paper, cellophane or polyethylene film which will not stain the fabrics. It is then packed in bales as in the case of grey cloth.

b) Packing in cases - Each piece is `made up' as is done in the case of bales and is further packed in cases in a similar manner to cotton yarn [ see 4.1.1.1 (b) 1. 4.1.3 Hosiery Goods - Hosiery bundles or cardboard boxes. goods may be packed in bales, cases,

4.1.3.1 Pakcing in bales - The fabric is made into rolls or bundles and wrapped with kraft paper and tie. Garments are folded suitably, formed into a bundle with cardboard pieces on the top and bottom of the bundle, wrapped in kraft paper and tied. Sufficient number of rolls or bundles are packed in bales as in the case of cotton hosiery yarn 1 JP~ 4.1.1.2 (a) ] and marked suitably. 4.1.3.2 Packing in cases - Hosiery goods are folded suitably and placed in cardboard boxes. The superfine variety of hosiery garments A required number of cardboard are first put in polyethylene bags. boxes are placed in a wooden packing case lined with waterproof paper which is folded and sealed with a waterproof adhesive over the contents, The lid is securely nailed and the case strapped and marked, In monsoon months the case is covered with a layer of bitumen coated hessian cloth and suitably marked.

IS : 10106 ( Part

l/Set

3 ) - 1986

4.1.3.3 Packing in bundles ( for post parcel ) - Hosiery goods are folded suitably and wrapped with kraft paper in the shape of rectangular bundle. Cardboard pieces are placed on the top and bottom of the bundle, which is than wrapped in a layer of polyethylene film and then a layer of grey cotton cloth. This is then stitched and the seams sealed with sealing wax and the bundle suitably marked. 4.1.3.4 Packing in cardboard boxes ( for prsr parrPI ) - Hosiery goods are suitably folded and put in polyethylent: bags. These are arranged in cardboard boxes, lined with a layer of polyethylene film or other waterproof paper and then covered with a layer of grey cotton cloth. The boxes are then stitched and the seams sea:ed bvith sealing wax and In monsoon months the cnrdboard shoulc! be covered suitably marked. with a layer of bitumen coated hessian cloth. 4.2 Packing Yarn for Sea Transportation

4.2.1

cones, 4.2.1.1 Cotton yarn - This may be in the form of hanks, cheeses and spools. Hanks are packed in bates and the other forms in cases, CFB boxes or bags. a) Packing in bales - The hanks are made into bundles paper of suitable size is placed on top and bottom of The bundles are packed to which is then tied. having the following layers of material from inside to i) Kraft paper. film. film. strapped and labelled. ii) Polyethylene iii) Hessian. iv) Polyethylene and kraft the bundle, form bales outside:

V) Hessian.
The bale is then stitched, b) Packing in wooden cases - Each piece of cone, cheese or spool is wrapped in polyethylene bag or kraft paper and a number of case having layers of kr-aft these packed in a wooden packing paper/sulphite paper, polyethylene film and hessian, from inside to outside. The hessian is tucked on the sides and the lid naiIed and case strapped. is c) Packing in CFB boxes - Each piece of cone, cheese or spool in polyethylene fil m or kraft paper and suirabie wrapped, number of these packed in the box with the inner loose liner which is sealed lvith a lvarerof kraftjpolyethylene laminate, proof adhesive. The flaps of the box are secured with adhesive The box may be reinforced \vith plastic tape or by gluing. straps along the g&l. 7

IS : 10106 ( Part l/Set 3 ) - 1986 cl) Packing in bags in polyethylene in a laminated Each piece of cone, cheese or spool is wrapped film. Suitable number of these are then packed hessian bag. The bag is closed by stitching. Packaging is in bales or cases ( CFB/

4.2.1.2 Colfon hosiery yarn wooden ) or bags.

a) Packing in bales - The method is the same as for inland packing [ see 4.1.1.2 (a) ] except that the layers in the bale are as folLows: i) Kraft ii) Light iv) Hessian v) Heavy paper/LLDPE/LDPE/HMEDPE weight hessian or man-made paper or plastic fabric film. lined with kraft paper. fabric. or waterproof fabric or matting. paper.

iii) Waterproof

or man-made

tee cloth or man-made

b) Packing in wooden cases - Each cone is wrapped in kraft paper and then packed in the manner as for cotton yarn [see 4.2.1.1 (b) 1. c) Packing in CFB boxes - Each piece of cone, cheese or spool shall be wrapped in polyethlene film or kraft paper and a suitable number packed in the box with the inner loose liner of kraft polyethlene laminate which is sealed with a waterproof adhesive. The subsequent procedure is same as for cotton yarn [see 4.2.1.1 (c) 1. d) Packing in bags - Each piece of cone, cheese or spool is wrapped in polyethylene film or kraft paper. SuitabIe number of these are then packed in a laminated hessian bag. The bag is closed by stitching. 4.2.2 Cloth Cloth shall be grey cloth or processed Grey cloth may be packed cloth. in bales, cases or

batch

4.2.2.1 rolls.

Grey clolh -

a) Packing in bales - Each piece of cloth is plaited or folded to the appropriate size and packed in bales as in the case of yarn [see 4.2.1-l (a) 1. b) P&ing in cases - Each appropriate size and [see 4.2.1.1 (b) 1. c) Packing end to plastic to the piece of cloth is plaited or folded to the packed in cases as in the case of yarn

in batch rolls - The cloth pieces are stitched from end to form a continuous length which is wound on paperboard tubes plugged at the ends to prevent crushing and damage The rolls are then wrapped in the following tubes. 8

IS:10106(Partl/Sec layers from inside to outside.
the roll strapped: i) ii) iii) iv) v) Kraft paper film. fabric fabric Processed lined with kraft paper. lined with kraft paper. in bales, film. cloth is packed or man-made or man-made LLDPE/LDPE/HMHDPE Hessian Hessian LLDPE/LDPE/HMHDPE The outermost

3 )- 1986
and

layer is stitched

4.2.2.2 Processed cloth cases or CFB boxes. a) Packing in bales on a carboard is then wrapped film, kraft paper as in the case of

wooden

Each piece is plaited or folded and wrapped or strawboard. Each piece or bundle of pieces in materials such as cellulose, polyethylene and sulphite paper. It is then packed in bales grey cloth.

b) Packing in wooden cases - The cloth piece is `made up' as in (a) above and packed as in the case of grey cloth [ see 4.2.2.1 (b) ]. c) Packing in CFB boxes - The cloth piece is `made up' as in (a) above and packed as in the case of cotton hosiery yarn [ see 4.2.1.2 (c)l.

4.2.3 Hosiery Goods cardboard boxes.

Hosiery

goods may be packed

in bales, cases or

4.2.3.1 Packing in bales - Fabric is made into rolls ( in case of continuous fabrics ) or bundles, wrapped in kraft paper and tied. These are formed into bales as in the case of hosiery yarn [see 4.1.1.2 (a) ] except that the layers from inside to outside are as follows: i) ii) iii) iv) Light weight hessian or man-made film. fim. fabric. fabrics.

LLDPE/LD?E/HMHDPE Waterproof Heavy paper or plastic

tee cloth or man-made

4.2.3.2 Packin,? in C~SCS - The procedure followed is the same as for hosiery goods for inland transportion ( see 4.1.3.2 ) except that the wooden case is lined with a layer of kraft paper on the inside and waterproof paper of polyethylene film on the outside, instead of just waterproof paper. 4.2.3.3 Packing in cardboard boxes ( for post parcel ) - The procedure followed is the same as for hosiery goods packed for inland transportation ( see 4.1.3.4 ). 9

IS : 10106 ( Part 1,`Sec 3 ) - 1986 5. WOOL 5.0 Raw wool, woollen and worsted yarn and cloth, wool hosiery yarn and goorls are to be packed both for internal transportation by rail or
road and for sea transportation is given below. Reference may Standards for complete details: IS : 32-1971 IS : 741-1971 IS : 2156-1962 IS : 2518-1964 IS : 3353-1966 5.1 Packaging for An outline of the packing methods be made to the following Indian

Code for seaworthy packaging of woollen worsted yarn and cloth ( second revision ) Code for inland packaging of woollen yarn and cloth ( firs! revision ) Code for packing raw wool for export packaging of wool and

and

worsted

. Code

for seaworthy yarn and goods

hosiery and

Code for inland goods Inland

packing

of wool hosiery

yarn

Transportation yarn, worsted yarn

5.1.1 yarn - Yarn and hosiety yarn.

may be in the form of woollen

5.1.1.1 Woollen and worsted yarn - These may be in the form of Hanks are packed in bales or cases and cheeses hanks, cheeses or balls. and balls in cases: a) Packing in bales sprinkled with a thylene film and a layer each of inside to outside Hanks are made into bundles, which are suitable insecticide and covered with a polyetied. This is then made into bales having polyethylene film, kraft paper and hessian, from and then strapped.

b) Packing in casts - The hanks, cheeses or balls are sprinkled with a suitable insecticide and packed in a polyethylene bag. This is placed in the case with a layer of polyethylene film on the inside and kraft paper on the outside. The outer layer is then sealed, the lid nailed and the case strapped. 5.1.1.2 Hosiery yarn - Hosiery yarn may be for machine for hand knitting. For machine knitting it is packed either cases and for hand knitting in cases. a) Packing in bales - Hanks of yarn are made securely. They are then made into bales layers from inside to outside: i) I&aft paper or fents. 10 into bundles having the knitting in bales or or

and tied following

IS:10106( Part l/See 3)- 1986 ii) Light weight hessian or matting
iii) Waterproof iv) Heavy The paper weight hessian stitched, or fenta; film. fabric.

or LLDPEiLDPEiHMHDPE or man-made labelled

bale is pressed,

and strapped.

b) Packing in cases ;) For machine knitting - The cones, spools or cheeses are wrapped in kraft paper or polyethylene bags and a suitable number of these placed in a wooden packing case lined with a layer of polyethylene film on the inside and light weight hessian on the outside. The hessian in stitched, the lid nailed and the case strapped. ii) For hand knitting - The required number of hanks or balls of similar quality, colour and size are placed in a polyethylene bag. A suitable number of these are arranged in a cardboard box. These are then packed in cases as the case of machine knitting yarn. 5.1.2 Cloth Cloth may be packed in bales or cases.

piece of cloth is sprinkled with a 5.1.2.1 Packing in bales - Each suitable insecticide and folded or wrapped on cardboard or strawboard and then wrapped in kraft paper or polyethylene film. This is then made into a bale having layers of kraft paper, polyethylene film and hessian A layer of hessian laminated with polyethylene from inside to outside. film or high density polyethylene woven fabric may be used as an alternate to the last two layers. This is then stitched and strapped. piece is `made up' as given 5.1.2.2 Packing in wooden cases - Each in 5.1.2.1 and then placed in a wooden case lined with kraft paper on The lid of the case is nailed the inside and polyethylene on the outside. securely and the case strapped. 5.1.3 Hosiery Goodr cardboard boxes. 5.1.3.1 Packing These may be packed in bales, cases, bundles or

in bales is made into rolls or bundles which are wrapped tied and packed in bales as given in [ 5.1.1.2 (a)]. are folded neatly and made into bundles packed as in the case of fabric [see (a) above 1,

a) Fabric - This in kraft paper,

b) Garments - These which are further 5.1.3.2 case of fine of these are in [ 5.1.1.2

Packing in wooden cases - The garments are folded and in Suitable numbers variety are packed in polyethylene bags. then placed in cardboard boxes and packed in cases as given (b) (i) 1. 11

IS : 10106 ( Part

l/Set

3 ) - 1986

5.1.3.3 Packing in bundles - The garments are folded and a number of them arranged in the shape of a rectangular bundle and wrapped This is then tied and wrapped with a layer of polywith kraft paper. ethylene film and further covered with a layer of grey cotton cloth which is stitched and sealed.

5.1.3.4 Packing in cardboard boxes - The garments are folded and individually wrapped in polyethylene bags. These are then arranged in a cardboard box which is wrapped with a layer of waterproof paper and then covered with a layer of grey cloth which is stitched and sealed. 5.2 Packing
for Sea Transportation 5.2.1 Raw Wool - The box of the half press is filled with wool and layers of hessian are placed on the bottom of the box of the half press and under the top portion of the half press. The latter piece shall be such that the top and sides are covered when the bale is fully pressed. This is then transThe press is operated till the bale is half pressed. ferred to the full press. The two ends of the bale are covered with hessian and the bale pressed to optimum size and strapped.

5.2.2

Tarn

5.2.2.1 Woollcn and worstedyarn - This may be in the form of hanks, Hanks are packed in bales or cases and cheeses and cheeses or balls. balls in cases. a) Packing in bales - The procedure followed is same as in the case of packing for inland transportation [ see 5.1.1.1 (a) ] except that the bale is made up of layer each of hessian, polyethylene film and hessian from inside to outside. A layer of hessian laminated with polyethylene film or HDPE woven fabric may be used as an alternate to the first two layers. b) Packing in cases - The procedure followed is same as in the caseof packing for inland transportation [ see 5.1.1.1 (b)] except that the case is lined with folding boxboard on the inside and waterprof paper on the outside. 5.2.2.2 Hosiery yarn - Packing is the same as given in 5.1.1.2 except that the lining materials are given below: a) Packing in bales i) ii) iii) iv) v) Layers from inside are: Kraft paper. Polyethylene film or waxed paper. Medium weight hessian. Polyethylene film or waxed paper. Heavy tee cloth.
12

IS : 10106 b) Packing in cakes Lining and film or waxed peper, materials

( Part

l/Set

3 ) - 1986
are:

from inside to outside

i) polyethylenes ii) kraft paper, iii) polyethylene 5.2.2.3 Clolh the lining materials a) Packing

film or waxed

paper, and except that

Packing is the same are as given below: Layers film, and

as given in 5.1.2 are:

in bales -

from inside to outside

i) hessian, ii) polyethylene iii) hessian. A layer of hessian laminated with polyethylene film or high density polyethylene woven fabric may be used as an alternate to the first two layers. b) Packing in cases - Lining materials for the wooden packing cases are waterproof paper on the inside and polyethylene film on the outside. 5.2.2.4 Hosiery cardboard boxes. goods These may be packed in cases or in

4

Packing cases - Each piece is sprinkled with suitable insecticide, folded and placed in polyethylene bag and a suitable number of these placed in cardboard boxes which are fastened and tied. The same procedure as given for hosiery yarn is followed ( see 5.2.2.2 ). Packing in cardboard boxes - Each piece is sprinkled with a suitable insecticide, folded and placed in a polyethylene bag. These are arranged in cardboard boxes lined with a layer of kraft paper and a layer of polyethylene film or waxed paper. The box is secured and bound with wire. The box is covered with a layer of polyethylene film and then a layer of cotton cloth which is then stitched and sealed with sealing wax.

b)

6. MAN-MADE 6.1 For
man-made fibres, packaged for transportation made to IS : 2194-1963*, complete details. fabrics and man-made fibre yarns to be by rail, road and sea, reference may be IS : 21%1964$ and IS : 3862-1966$ for

*Code for seaworthy packaging or man-made fibre fabrics. tCode for inland packaging of man-made fibre fabrics and man-made SPacking of rayon staple fibres.

fibre yarn.

13

IS : 10106 ( Part

l/Set

3 ) - 1986

7. MISCELLANEOUS 7.0 A number of textile products require special packing. For details reference for a few selected items is given below. be made to the following Indian Standards: IS : 1066-1980 IS : 3256-1980 IS : 4039-1975 IS : 5756-1970 7.1 Ropes Code of packaging of sewing threads of ropes An outline may also

(first revision ). and cordages for

Code for inland packaging (jut revision )

Code for packaging of ready-made export ( jirst revision ) Code for packaging of carpets

garments

and Cordages

7.1.1 Ropes and Twines - Each coil is tied and wrapped in layers of LDPE, waterproof packing paper and hessian from inside to outside or an inner layer of LDPE and an outer layer of hessian and stitched. 7.1.2 Cords and Twines - A cords are made into rectangular suitable number of hanks or skeins of packages and packed as given in 7.1.1.

7.2 Sewing Threads - Each cone or cheese is wrapped individually and in case of spools, tubes, hanks/skeins and reels, a suitable number are wrapped together. These are marked and packed in cases or cartons. 7.2.1 Packing in Cases - The item is packed in the case lined with two Iayers of kraft paper, one layer of hessian and one layer of polyethylene The lid is then sealed and case strapped. film from inside to outside. 7.2.2 Packing in Cartons - The item is packed in the carton a polyethylene film and lid sealed and the carton strapped. 7.3 Readymade Garments for Export - Ready-made be packed in bales, cases, cartons or as post parcels. lined with ma;

garments

7.3.1 Packing in Bales - The garment is folded to a suitable size, and a number of these formed into a bundle which is wrapped in a polyethylene film or bag and tied. This is then packed into a bale having layers The last layer is stitched and the of hessian, polyethylene and hessian. bale strapped. 7.3.2 Packing in Cases - The garments are folded to suitable size using stiffeners such as cardboard, tissue paper or butter paper and secured by means of brass or aluminium pins or plastic clips. Each item is packed in a polyethylene bag and a required number put into a cardboard box 14

IS:l0106(Partl/Sec

3). 1986

or wrapped in kraft paper. These are then packed in wooden cases having a polyethylene film on the inside and waterproof paper on outside. The outer layer is sealed, lid nailed and the case strapped. 7.3.3 Pack&g in except that final waterproof paper sealed and carton Cartons - The same procedure is followed as in 7.3.2, packing is in cartons lined with a layer of either or polyethylene film which is sealed. The lid is then strapped.

7.3.4 Packing for Post Parcel - The procedure is same as given in 7.3.3. The carton is further wrapped in a cotton cloth or hessian and then stitched and sealed with sealing wax. 7.4 Carpets - Carpets may be packed either in rolls ( rolled width wise ) or bales ( folded and stacked one over the other ). These are wrapped in a layer of polyethylene film on the inside and 2 layers of medium hessian as the second and third layer. For export purposes, two layers of polyethylene are used instead of one. The hessian is stitched and ears provided for Iifting.

15

INTERNATIONAL
Bame Units QQ ANTITY Length Mass Time Electric Current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity uaitr, Amount of substance Supplementnry QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Uaits
QUANTITY

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( $1 UNITS )
UNIT SYMBOL m k S

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

A K cd mol

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

UNIT

SYMBOL N 1 I 1 1 1 1 N = W = T = S = 1 kg.m/s'

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force Electromotive Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt paxal

.J w
Wb T HZ S V Pa

J=lN.m

1 Wb =

1J/j 1 v.s
1 Whims 1 A/V

1 Hz = 1 c/s (3-l). V=lW,A

1 Pa = 1 N/m'

