(Reaffirmed 2002)

Indian Standard

METHODFOR TEXTILEDYESTUFFSDETERMINATIONOFRELATIVECOLOUR STRENGTHOFDYESINSOLUTION

KS

59.020

OBIS

1997

BUREAU OF INDIAN h4ANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI
July 1997

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 MARG

Price Group

2

Dyestuffs Sectional Committee, TX 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the' draft finalized by the Dyestuffs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. Determination of colour strength in solution with higher accuracy is useful for control during production of different batches of the same dye. The method for determination of xolour strength is based on absorbance measurement of dye solutions. It is usually followed for routine testing and validity of result is ensured by comparison with evaluation by means of an application method. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`.

IS 14444 : 1997

Indian Standard

METHODFOR TEXTILEDYESTUFFSDETERMINATIONOFRELATIVECOLOUR STREN~GTHOFDYESINSOLUTION
1 SCOPE

3.3 Colour Strength Values
The extinction coefficient at the maximum absorp-

This standard prescribes a method for determination of colour strength of a dye in relation to that of a standard dye by means of spectrophotometric absorption measurements on solutions of dyes.
NOTES 1 Basic requirements for this~method are that the dye &Attions do not scatter light and obey the Bougher - Lambert - Beer law as well as identical or similar absorption curves of samples and the reference in the visible region of spectrum. 2 Identical or similar absorption curves are usually obtained if the tests are carried out for the purpose of dye production control of batches/deliveries of the same dye. Thismethod is not applicable for the evaluation of dyes with distinctly different absorption cutves. 3 The colour strength of a dye is not a physical constant, since it is dependent, for example, on the test medium and test method. The colour strength determined by this method therefore may differ with those found by other determinations that is instrumental or visual assessments of dyeings.

tion of the reference dye is designated as colour strength value.
N`bTE - C'olourstrength is traditionally a colouristic concept, being based essentially on a visual assessment. Therefore colour strength determined instrumentally should not contradict visual assessment. Such a contradictionwould not beexpected if the samples to be compared exhibit concentrationdependent differences in absorption only that is their absorptioncurves in the visible region are identical when the strength of the absorption curvea is made equal, or show only _insignificant differences.

If the absorption curves differ more markedly (shade differences), a better correlation with the visual assessment may be obtained if the weighted total extinction in the visible region is used as the colour strength value. 4 PRINCIPLE Solutions of dye under test and the reference dye are prepared and the absorptivity or colour strength values derived from them are determined. The percentage relative colour strength, Fs, is given by following equation:

2 REFERENCE IS 1070 : 1992 `Reagent grade water (third revision)' is a necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Colour Strength A measure~of the ability of a dye to impart.colour to other materials. This property is characterised by its absorption in visible region of spectrum and is expressed as a colour strength value. 3.2 Relative Colour Strength The percentage ratio of the colour strength value of the sample to that of the reference dye, the c&our strength of which is 100 percent.
NOTE - As the relative colour strength is determined by comparison with a reference dye, this is assumed to remain constant. It is therefore essential to ensure careful storage and control of reference dye. Many dyes are hygroscopicand sensitive to oxidation. It is essential to protect the reference dye from exposure to light in firmly sealed containers that are impervious to moisture.

fkz Fs=Flxloo
where

f'a = fkz=
5.1 Flasks

colour strength value of reference dye, and colour strength value of dye under test.

5 APPARATUS 5.2 Pipettes 5.3 Cells spectrophotometric 1 cm). (optical path length 0.5 cm or

5.4 Analytical Balance 5.5 Spectrophotometer
6 REAGENTS 6.1 Quality of Reagents or Filter Colourimeter

Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals shall be employed in tests. Pure chemicals shall mean
1

IS 14444 : 1997 chemicals that do not contain impurities which affect the test results. 6.2 Solvents 6.2.1 For Water Soluble Dyes grade (see IS 1070). 6.2.2 For Water Insoluble Dyes: water reagent ing/dispersing in about 20 ml of the dissolving/dispersing medium or an additional solvent or Water soluble dyes are auxiliary is advantageous preferably dissolved hot. !t is essential to ensure that the solubility limit is not exceeded during subsequent cooling. After equilibrating the solution to ambient temperature (2O'C to 25"C), the graduated flasks are made up to the mark and the solution/ dispersion is homogenized by shaking or stirring. 7.1.4 Dilution
The

a) b) 4 4 e) 9

Methanol, ethanol; Acetone; N-Methylpyrrolidone ; Dimethyl formamide; Cellosolve, ethylene glycol monoethyl ether; and Mixtures of the above solvents.

Dilute the concentrated stock solution (see 7.1.3 and 7.1.4) with the same solvents. Dissolve the stock dispersion in organic solvents and then dilute. The following additives are recommended to improve the stabilityand reproducibility : a) to adjust thepH: acids (for example, sulphuric acid, acetic acid); bases (for example, sodium hyodroxide, sodium carbonate); and buffer systems. b) to eliminate the influence of unwanted metal ions : sequestering agents. c) agents with a deagglomerating or disaggregating action in water : surfactants, generally ethylene oxide adducts to alkanols. d) other additives : dispersing agents, and antioxidants. 7 PROCEDURE 7.1 Preparation 7.1.1 Samples It is necessary to ensure that samples are representative. The samples are~stored in firmly sealed containers in order to avoid erroneous results arising from the release or uptake of moisture. 7.1.2 Weighing The weigh not less than 0.5 g of sample due to, thereby avoiding errors attributable to micro-inhomogeneities to the nearest 0.000 5 g. It is essential to ensure that uptake of moisture by hygroscopic dye samples does not lead to errors during weighing. 7.1.3 Dissolving/Dispersing
The weighed dye is transferred

solution/dispersion prepared according to 7.1.3 is diluted or dissolved so that the maximum extinction value lies whithin the range of 0.5-1.5. To avoid errors, of dilution no pipette of total volume less than 5 ml nor graduated flask less than 100 ml should be used. For commercial dyes the corresponding concentrations for measurement are within the range of 10 mg/l to 100 mg/l for 1 cm cell path length or proportionately more for shorter path length cells. 7.2 Measurement and Evaluation 7.2.1 Carry out the measurement as soon as possible after preparation of solution, in order to exclude the influence of changes in solution.
NOTE! - When a dye is measured for the first time it is advisable to confirm the validity of the relationship (Beer's law) under the conditions selected (solvent, concentration) within a range of concentrations between one-half and twice that actually used.

Appropriate techniques of handling (darkened flasks, working in dimly lit surroundings) should be adopted with light sensitive solutions. 7.2.2 Measurement
The absorbance of the solution is measured in cells

of Solutions for Measurement

of identical path length (normally 0.5 cm or 1 cm). In order to minimize the influence of variations in the spectrophotometric response over a relatively wide range of concentrations, the difference in absorbance between the sample and the reference dye should not exceed 30 percent. Depending on the measuring instrument used, the absorbance, A, of'the dye solution is obtained directly as a measured result (double-beam spectrophotometer with simultaneous measurement of an identical cell filled with the solvent used for dilution, or a singlebeam instrument previously calibrated with a cell containing solvent), or is calculated as the difference between the absorbance of the dye solution, An, and a blank value Ag (measurement of the solvent)
A =AR-AB 7.2.3 Evaluation of Relationship The evaluation

and dissolved/dispersed.

to a graduated flask As a rule, pre-dissolv2

is based on Beer's law using the following equations:

IS 14444: 1997

A = log10 (l/t) = &cd where
A = absorbance; t = transmittance

" where

A2C1 =-xl00

A1 C2

(decimal fractions, 0 to 1.0) (per unit mass), cm2/g; & = specific extinction coefficient (per unit mass), cm2/g; c = dye concentration, g/cm3; and d = cell path length, cm.

Subscript 1 refers to the reference dye, and Subscript 2 refers to the dye under test. If the measured concentrations are equal, the following simplified equations is obtained :
Fs=xx

7.2.4 Relative Colour Strength The relative colour strength is given by the followinn - equation:
A

A2

100

S TES,I. REPORT The test report shall contain the following details: a) Date; b) Type and designation of the sample and the reference dye; and c) Relative colour strength.

Fs=~ho
or by substituting from the above equation :

3

Bureau of Indian~Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bwem oflndinn Smndcmfs Acr, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review df Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates l.hat no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are ncedcd, it is taken up for revision. U:jers ~of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. TX 17 ( 0099 ).

Amendments

Issued Since 1'ublic:~tion

Amend No.

Date of lssue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 31; 42 337 84 99,337 8fj 61 337 86 26,337 9:i 20 60 38 43 1 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 { 832 7S 91,532 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARFI 160022

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUPI4BAI 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNQW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THTRUVANANTHAP~JRAM.
Printed at Printograph, New Delhi (INDIA).

