**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  12056  (1987) :  Recommendations  for  safety  requirements 
for  fuel  tank  assembly  of  automotive  vehicles  [TED  6: 
Automotive  Body,  Chassis,  Accessories  and  Garage 
Equipments] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  f  7ui^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


UDC    629-113'011-525-4:  614-84  18:12056-1987 


(  Reaffirmed  2003 )  I 
Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR 

SAFETY  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  FUEL  TANK  ASSEMBLY  OF 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES 


1-  Scope  —  Covers  the  safety  requirements  for  the  integrity  arid  security  of  fuel  tanks,  fuel  tank  filter 
pipes  and  fuel  tank  connections,  used  on  automotive  vehicles  to  minimize  fire  hazard  resulting  from 
fuel  spillage  during  and  after  crash/collision. 

1,1  This  standard  applies  to  passenger  cars,  multipurpose  passenger  vehicles,  trucks  and  buses. 

2.  Definitions  —  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 

2.1  Fuel  Tank  Assembly  —  Any  container  on  the  automotive  for  storing  liquid  fuel  to  be  used  by  the 
power  unit  of  the  automotive,     ft  includes  all  fittings  which  are  integral  with  the  storage  unit. 

2.2  Fuel  Spillage  — Th\s  means  the  fall,  flow  or  run  of  fuel  except  through  the  supply  line  to  the 
prime-mover  from  the  vehicle  fuel  system. 

3.  General  Requirements 

3.1  Location 

3.1.1  No  part  of  the  fuel  system  shall  constitute  the  widest  part  of  the  vehicle.  Rear  view  mirrors  and 
side  mounted  lights  shall  be  ignored  in  determining  the  points  of  maximum  width  of  the  vehicle. 

3.1.2  No  part  of  the  fuel  tank  shall  be  in  front  of  the  vertical  transverse  plane  passing  through  the 
centre  line  of  the  front  wheels. 

3.1.3  No  part  of  the  fuel  tank  or  the  filler  pipe  shall  be  located  within  or  above  the  vehicle  cabin  or 
any  other  enclosed  passenger  or  goods  area  unless  separated  by  a  metal  or  other  approved  fire  resistant 
barrier  designed  to  prevent  any  leakage  from  entering  the  driver  s  cabin  or  any  other  enclosed  passenger 
or  goods  area. 

3-1.4  A  minimum  distance  of  35  mm  shall  be  maintained  between  any  part  of  the  fuel  tank  and 
exhaust  pipe  unless  a  heat  shield  is  interposed. 

3.2  Design  Requirements 

3.2.1  The  design  of  the  fuel  system  shall  not  provide  for  gravity  or  self-sustaining  feed  from  the  tank 
to  the  carburettor  or  fuel  pump. 

3.2.2  The  filler  pipe  shall  be  designed  and  protected  in  such  a  way  that  overflow  from  a  filling 
operation  would  be  prevented  from  spilling  on  any  part  of  the  exhaust  or  electrical  system. 

3.2.3  At  least  one  safety  vent  shaft  shall  be  provided  on  the  fuel  tank  system  which  is  above  the  fuel 
level,  when  it  is  filled  to  the  maximum  designed  capacity. 

3.2.4  No  safety  vent  shall  discharge  into  an  enclosed  compartment. 

4.  Performance 

4.1  From  a  tank  filled  with  liquid  fuel,  the  rate  of  leakage  from  a  fuel  tank  and  fittings  shall  not 
exceed  50  g/min,  when  inverted  for  five  minutes  relative  to  its  installed  position  on  the  vehicle.  The 
fuel  outlet  pipe  connection  shall  be  plugged  while  carrying  out  the  test. 

4.2  Each  fuel  tank  shall  be  fitted  with  a  safety  vent  of  size  not  less  than  the  diameter  given  below: 

a)  Automotive  vehicles  weighing  up  to  6  000  kg  —  VB  mm 

b)  Automotive  vehicles  weighing  above  6000  kg  —  2  0  mm. 

4.3  Pressure  Test  — The  fuel  tank  shall  be  capable  of  withstanding  without  leakage  an  internal  pressure 
of  130  kPa  (  rs  atmosphere ).    Change  of  shape  may  be  permitted, 

EXPLANATORY      NOTE 

This  standard   is  one  of  the  series  of   Indian  Standards  on  safety  requirements  of  various 
automotive  components. 


Adopted  3  March  1987 


©  November  1987,  BIS 


Gr  1 


BUREAU      OF      INDIAN       STANDARDS 
MANAK     BHAVAN,     9     BAHADUR     SHAH     ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW    DELHI    110002 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1        OCTOBER  1988 

TO 

IS  :  12056  -  1987     RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  SAFETY  REQUIREMENTS 
FOR  FUEL  TANK  ASSEMBLY  OF  AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES 

(  Page  1,  clause  3.1.3  )  —  Delete. 


( EDC  101 ) 


Printed  at  New  India  Printir.j  Press,  Khuria.  India 


AMENDMENT  NO.  2  APRIL  1994 

TO 

IS  12056  :  1987    RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR  SAFETY 

REQUIREMENTS  FOR  FUEL  TANK  ASSEMBLY  OF 

AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLES 

( Page  1,  clause  4.3 )  —  Substitute  the  following  lor  the  existing: 

'43  Pressure  Test  —  The  fuel  tank  shall  be  capable  of  withstanding  without 
leakage  an  internal  pressure  of  130  kPa  (1.3  absolute  )  when  tested  for  5  minutes. 
Change  of  shape  may  be  permitted.' 


(TED6) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS.  New  Delhi.  IiiJli 


