(Reaffirmed - 2012)

IS : 7247 ( Part

5 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FUMIGATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
PART 5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Storage

Structures

and Storage Management AFDC 28

Sectional

Committee,

Chairman DR K. KRISHNAMURTHY

Representing Department of Food ( Ministry Supplies ), New Delhi of Food & Civil

Dr K. Krishnamurthy DR R. A. A~AR~AL

DR G. K. GLRIBH (

Altrmat: to
) Indiy e wAgd$;ftural Research Institute (ICAR), Ministry

DR T. D. YADAV ( Aknatc ) M A R X I 1' I :i (: AORIOULTUKAL
ADVISER TO TFIE GOVERNNEST

OB IND1.4 SIIRI A. P. BHATNAQAIL( Alternafc ) Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New DR A. ATAM Delhi Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DE A. P. BIIATNI\QAR CHII<P EN(:INI<ER Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Defence Materials & Da C. D. L)\VIVI~~I~I Storage Research & Development Establishment, Kanpur Sm11 V. K. I\fBTRUR ( Alternate) BI<IC V. N. K,trno~< QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi Bltra li. N. VAilMa (~kwmtr ) Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SIIRI K. PANI)IT~IURAI San1 P. K. MooRJAN ( Alfernatc ) Planning Commission, New Delhi SHRI M. V. PAVA'TI: S~IHI RAMESH CH~ND~A ( Alfernnte ) PI.A~T PHOTIXTION AWWER TO Directorate of Plant Protection, o_uarantine & TRE GOV~:I~NMK-T'I. OB INDIA Storage, Faridabad SIIRI T. R. SHAIWA ( Alternatr ) National Development Corporation, New Delhi Srrw K. S. N. Ra.rri Snnr R. L. G..\uR ( il[ternate ) ( Continuedon pagr 2 ) Q Copyright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act,

Directorate of Marketing dr Inspection, of Agriculture, New Delhi

I!3 ; 7247 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 ( Continued from page 1 )
Representing Members Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SEBI P. R. VISHWAMBHARAN SHRI AJAY KHERA ( Alternate I ) SHRI P. P. MATHUK ( Altrrnafc IL ) Director General, IS1 ( Es-o&cio Mcmbsr) SIiRI T. ~IRNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food )

sccretlny
SHRIXA~~ISHASHI SAREEN Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Storage
Convener

Management

Subcommittee,

AFIX

28 : 9

DR K. KRISHNAMUWTHY

Department of Food ( Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies ), New Delhi

Members SHRI G. N. BHARDWAJ Dr K. Krishnamurthy DR R.A. ACAKWAL

( illternatc )

to

Indian Agricultural New Delhi

Research Institute ( ICAR ),

DR T. D. YADAV (Ahnate) Da S. S. BAINS DR B. S. CHAHAL SHRI R. N. DEWAN

SHRIV.S. AGARWAL
(Akmalc )

Indian Produce Association, Calcutta Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Punjab State Co-operative Supply Federation Ltd, Chandigarh Food & Supplies Department, Puniab. Chandigarh & Marketing of

DIRECTOR ( FOOD & SUPPLIES )

CIVIL ENQIXEER ( Altcrnatr )

Government

SHRI S. S. BEDI (Alternate ) DR C. D. DWIV~:IX

Defence Materials & Stores Research & Development Establishment, Kanpur

SHRI V. K. MATHUR ( Alternate ) The Roller Flour Millers' Federation of India, SRRI R. P. JAIN New Delhi SHRI RAGHUNANDAX BHATIA ( jlffcrnafe ) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI S. K. MAJUMUAR (CSIR), Mysore Food Corporation of India, Nrw Delhi MANAGER ( STORAGE ) The Grain, Rice & Oilseeds Merchants AssociaSHRI M~NQALD.LS NATHUTIHAI tion, Bombay of Plant Protection, Quarantine & PLANT PROTECTIOX ADVISER TO Directorate Storage, Faridabad THE GOVERNMENT OR 1~~1.4 SHRI D. SRINATH ( Alrernate ) National Co-operative Development Corporation, Da M. S. PRAI>HAN New Delhi SHI:I J. I'. Mr~r~r.<r, ( Alternate ) ( Co&iucd on page 13 )

2

IS : 7217 ( Part 5 ) - 1985

hdian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FUMIGATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
PART 5. GENERAL REQUiREMENTS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Institution on 31 Structures and approved by the Standard (Part 5 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards January 1985, after the draft finalized by the Storage Storage Management Sectional Committee had been Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.

0.2 The use of fumigants for the control of pests of agricultural inrportance is on increase in the country. Fumigants, being poisonous chemicals result in toxic manifestations to operators exposed to them drlring or after fumigation process, if handled carelessly. `I he fumigation operation can be made safer involving good practices leadmg to safe and economical use of fumigants and control of the infesting organisms. 0.3 This standard ( Part 5 ) is one of the series of Indian Standards on The other Code of practice for fumigation of agricultural produce. parts published in this series are: Part 1 Methyl bromide dibromide phosphide dichloride and carbon tetrachloride mix.ture and suitable

Part 2 Ethylene Part 3 Aluminium

Part 4 Ethylene

These parts ( Parts 1 to 4), cover the selection, application techniques of individual fumigants.

safety

0.4 During the preparation of this standard ( Part 5 ), guidance has been taken from AS : 2476-1981 `General fumigation procedures', issued by the Standards Association of Australia.'

1. SCOPE I.1 This standard (Part 5) lays down the general procedures and precaut,ons to be adopted when chemical fumigation for the eradication of storage pests is being carried out. 3

IS : 7247 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 1.1.1 This standard also recommends the general principles for the use of gases and vapours for the fumigation of buildings, ships' holds, shipping containers, silos, materials under sheeting, and soil. The standard should, however, be used in conjunction with a specific code of instructions or State requirements, applicable to the particular fumigation being carried out, where this is available. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions to those given in IS : 615 1 ( Part 1 )-1967* shall apply. in addition

which at ambient temperature 2.2 Fumigant - A chemical pressure can exist in a gaseous state in sufficient concentration penetrability and for sufficient time to be lethal to storage pests. 2.3 Fumigation disinfestation. -The process of employment of fumigants

and and

for

2.4 Fumigation Enclosure - Any space which to be made gas tight to contain the fumigant.

has been or is intended

2.5 Risk Area --The area surrounding the fumigation which there is any rerlson to suspect that the fumigant concentrations hazardous to man and animals.

enclosure into may escape in

2.6 Authorized Fumigator - That person who is licensed to carry out fumigation, or a trained and experienced person who is in charge of the fumigation.

3. SAFETY 3.1 Safety Equipment

3.1.1 Full Face Canister Type Respirator - The respirator most commonly used is the full face canister respirator used as a combination of respirator facepiece and correct canister, in accordance with IS : 852S- I !)77.1. This apparatus is the most important piece af equipment usedfor the protc>ction It is advisable that each operator be of persons working with fumigants supplied with his own respirator and that the fumigator in charge be responsible for its care and maintenance.
`Storage management tRespirators~ canister code: Part 1 Terminology. type ( gas masks ).

4

IS : 7247 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 3.1.1.1 Each
following checks a) That time should a full face canister be carried out: canister is being used; respirator is donned, the

the correct

b) That the facepiece is the correct fit, by closing the inlet to the canister with the palm of the hand and inhaling deeply; the vacuum so created should cause the facepiece to adhere to the face for at least 15 seconds; c) That the shelf life of the canister has not expired ( see 6.2); and usage

d) By reference to the canister log, that time has not been exceeded ( see 6.2 ).

the recommended

NOTE - In no circumstances should a full face cansister respirator be used when there is a possibility of exposure to fumigation concentra!ions or to an atmosphere deficient in oxygen. In such cases self-contained breathing apparatus should be used.

3.1.2 Self-contained Breathing Apparatus - For emergency use where an operztoi, must enter a fumigant-filled area, a self-contained breathing unit or :tpparatus complying with IS : 8523-1977* shall be worn.
when releasing fumigant shall 3.1.3 Protective Clothing - All operators Impervious gloves and impervious footwear wear protective clothing. should, where applicable, be worn. NOTE- Impervious is taken here to mean impermeable to the relevant fumigant gas., under the conditions of use. Only products known by the fumigator to comply with this requirement should be used. 3.1.4 Safety Harness and l?opfs - When any fumigator is required to enter a basement or the hold of a ship or other such area for the purpose of applyrng fumigant or for rescue purposes, he shall wear a safety harness All safety to which is attached a rope by which he can be hauled up. harness and lifelines shall comply with IS : 3521-19657. 3.1.5 kept tubes.

fumigant

Detection Equipment - The correct detection equipment for the being used shall be available on every fumigation and shall be halide lamp or detector in efficient working order, for example,

3.1.6 TorcIz - An efficient torch shall be available on all fumigations, certified by a recognized testing authority as safe for use in an atmosphere made flammable by the fumigant or any other material such as dust.
*Respirators, canister type ( gas masks ). tlineman's leather safety belt and strap.

5

IS : 7247 (Part

5 ) - 1985 of fumigant poisoning shall
State

3.1.7 Medical Kit-A kit for the treatment be available at each fumigation done.
NATEdepartment

Advice on this kit may be obtained from ths appropriate of health or department responsible for industrial regulations.

3.2 First

Aid Instructions

3.2.1 Entering ContaminntPd Area - Adequate protective equipment shall be used when a contaminated area is to be entered for rescue purpose. 3.2.2 Evacuation of Succumbed Person - A succumbed person shall removed to fresh air, laid down in a restful position and kept warm. be

3.2.3 First Aid Treatment - When an accident occurs, first aid treatment If possible, one person should begin treatment shall be started at once. while another calls a doctor and ambulance giving details of fumigant and circumstances of exposure. 3.2.4 Measures to be Taken While Awaiting Arrival of Medical Aid - Where practicable, the following measures shall be carried out while awaiting the arrival of medical aid: a) Apply artificial required; b) Loosen resucitation and external cardiac massage, if

all tight clothing; clothing including wrist watch and and

c) Remove contaminated spectacles; d) Tholollghly

wash contaminated

skin with clean

water;

e) Eye contamination:
i) Hold ii) iii)

eyelids open and flow of water; Continue washing

wash

eyes immediately arrives; and

with

a gentle

until doctor

Do not use any chemicals, BEFORE FUMIGATION

as they may increase

the injury.

4. ACTION

4.1 Notification

of Authorities

and Persons

Concerned

4.1.1 Fumigation of a Building or Enclosed Space - .4 fumigator intending to fumigate a building or other enclosed space shall intimate to the occupant about the intention of fumigation.

IS : 7247

( Part 5 ) - 1985

4.1.2 Fumigation of a Vessrl - The fumigator in charge, when intending to fumigate a vessel, shall deliver a notice in writing prior to the fumigation about the intention of fumigation. 4.2 Fumigation Warning Signs -The fumigator incharge of fumigation on any building, vessel or enclosed space shall, before the application of the fumigant, affix to each door and other means of access to the fumigation enclosure a notice in the form of Schedule 1 (see Appendix A ) with a white background on which there shall be printed the words `DANGER KEEP OUT', followed by the words BY.. . . . . . ..( name of fumigant )' in capital letters not `FUMIGATION less than 10 cm high, in contrasting colour to the background. The fumigator's name and telephone number should be clearly shown at the All warning notices shall be suitably illuminated. foot of the notice. 4.3 Precautions and Tests of Equipment -No person commence a fumigation until the following conditions apply: shall

a) The fumigator has by personal inspection ascertained that all pot tions of the fumigation enclosure and risk area have been vacated. b) All fires and naked lights within the fumigation enclosure have been extinguished. For flammable fumigants there should be no smoking or carrying of matches and cigarette li<ghters in the risk area. c) All electric points have been thoroughly checked ascertaining that there is no spark while operating the points/buttons. All loose connections have been properly repaired. d) Fans as required are in position and tested for efficiency. For flammable fumigants, it is essential that fans and their switches, if any, used within the fumigation enclosure comply with the requirements of hazardous locations. e) All cracks, crevices or openings in or between walls and ceilings or roof and floors and all fireplaces in the building, vessel, or other enclosed space about to be fumigated have been sealed to prevent the escape of fumigant from the fumigation enclosure. f) All liquids, foods and other items that are not required to be included in the fumigation and might be affected by the fumigant are separated from the fumigation enclosure.

g) In case of open area, fumigation shall be carried out either early morning or when there is no wind blowing, that is, in calm atmosphere.

IS : 7247 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 h) Fumigator has attached a card to his shirt indicating his name, full address and telephone number, required in case of emergency. j) The nearest noted. operable telephone has been located and number

k) Fumigator has ( see also 0.3). 5. FUMIGATION

consulted

individual

standards

on fumigants

PROCEDURE

5.1 Fumigation Process - The efficacy of all fumigants is dependent upon a suitable concentration and duration of fumigation. The instructions for the particular fumigant, volume of fumigation space, qoods to be fumigated and pest to be controlled should be followed. The mstructions should be consulted before hand and followed in detail. Under no circumstance shall be fumigant concentration be grossly different from the recommended concentration which is based upon scientific experiment. 5.2 Minimum Number of People to Conduct a Fumigation - No matter how small the dosage or how restricted the extent of the fumigation, at least two persons shall always he present during the introduction and removal of the fumigant. One of these should he designated the fumigator and he should ensure that the other fumigation staff receives instructions on the use of protective equipment and first aid measures specific to the fumigation being conducted. should be made during the 5.3 Ventilation - Provision for ventilation preparation,of structures for fumigation. Where possible, two openings to facilitate flow-through vemil:rtion should be provided with temporary seals that can be removed from the outside of the fumigation enclosure at the completion of fumigation. Doors, windows or hatches selected for this purpose should be arranged so that they may be opened froin the outside of the fumigation enclosure. Where fans are used, these should comply with the requirements of 4.3 ( d). Generally fans should be operated intermittently to allow for desorption of fumigant from Where fans are run continuously, no reduction in the commodities. nominal ventilation period should be made. should be introduced to 5.4 Introduction of Fumigant -Fumigants with specific fumigation the fumigation enclosure in accordance taking care to ensure that all instructions and safety measures, application equipment is gas tight and that the correct dosage is applied. 5.4.1 The fumigant should be introduced enclosure wherever possible. 8 from outside the fumigation

IS : 7247 ( Part 5) - 1985 5.4.2 Whenever a safety harness is required to be worn (see 3.i.4), at least one other member of the fumigation staff shall remain in the Adequate immediate vicinity and in clear sight of the operator. provision shall be made to haul out the operator in an emergency. 5.4.3 The fumigant shall not be applied absorbed in liquid form by goods or structures. in a manner as to be

5.4.4 During the liberation of the fumigant and until the fumigation enclosure and risk area are free from danger, any member of the fumigation staff who is in or who enters any part of such areas shall wear a suitable respirator or other approved breathing apparatus. He should wear protective clothing also. -Where the fumigation enclosure and risk area cannot 5.5 Watchman be satisfactorily secured by locking, a watchman shall be on duty. It is recommended that, even on locked premises, a watchman should be present during the exposure period. 5.6 Detection of Leaks - During and after completion of introduction of the fumigant, the fumigator, wearing a respirator, shall inspect and with appropriate detection apparatus, for leaks in visually, equipment and in the fumigation enclosure. The following action should be taken if leaks are detected: a) Seal and re-test any leaks located, enclosure is gas tight; and to ensure that the fumigation of fumigant,

b) In the event of a massive accidental evac,uate the risk area immediately.

release

5.7 Removal of Fumigant - At the end of the required fumigation period, the fumigant should be removed by controlled release into the atmosphere, ensuring that the following conditions are complied with: a) That b) That and the risk area is free from all unauthorized the fumigation team is properly equipped persons; for fumigation;

c) That ventilation of the fumigation enclosure is done by mechanical means, where available; where mechanical ventilation is not available, that the enclosure is unsealed in sections to allow gradual release of the fumigant. Where natural ventilation is insufficient for rapid clearing of the gas, fans may be utilized, but operators should retire from the risk area for at least 30 minutes immediately after switching on the fans.

IS : 7247 ( Part 5) - 1985 5.8 Checking for Clearance -The clearance of the fumigant as follows: risk area shall be checked for

a) The fumigation team shall be properly equipped in with' 3 and, after. a stlfficient period of ventilation, the concentration ot' fumigant in the risk area nccept;lbly low, should proceed to check the enclosure; anti

accordance shall check and, if it is fumigation

b) Upon excessively high concentration of fumigant being detected, the funligatiou team shall retire, wait a further period oftime and recommence the check procedure until all sections of the fumigation enclosure have been proved safe for re-entry. 6. ACTION AFTER FUMIGATION

6.1 Re-entry into the Fumigation Area -When the fumigant concentrations in the fumigation enclosure and risk area have fallen to a safe working level, operators may re-enter the areas to remove fumigation equipment. 6.2 Use and shall always recommended canister may manufacture Care of Respirator Canister - The respirator canister be replaced before either its shelf life has expired or the usage time has been reached. The expiry date of a easily be calculated since each is marked with the date of and shelf life. away shall

6.3 Canisters should be stored in a cool, dry, well ventilated place from contaminalion by any fumigants. The following precautions always be observed:

a) When the canister is attached to the respirator faccpiece after the top seal is removed, record the date. This is best done by writing the date on a small adhesive label which must be afbxed to the canister. This label can be used as a `log' to record exposure of the canister to the fumigant. b) Before using the respirator, remove the cap and the seal over the air inlet valve of the canister. Again, at this time mark the date on the `log' label. Once this seal is removed, even if there is no exposure to fumigant, replace the canister after a lapse of 6 months. c) After any fumigation in which there has been prolonged exposure to low concentrations of the fumigant or accidental to high concentrations, immediately discard the exposure canister. As a guide, on hour of wearing is the usual period after 10

IS : 7247 ( Part 5 ) - 1985 This could be extended which a canister should be discarded. Allow a wide to two hours only when exposure is minimal. margin of safety in estimating exposure times as canisters cost If there is any doubt little in terms of health of the individual. about the exposure life of the canister, discard it.

4
4

When canisters are discarded, they should be rendered unusable by mutilating the inlet port and disposed of under conditions which will prevent them from being picked up and used again. Canisters considered the metal permitting that show any sign of external damage must be A severe blow on worthless, and shall be discarded. covering may cause displacement of the contents, contaminated air to pass through to the wearer.
renders it useless. Water may enter the hose and canister when cleaning

of the canister in water NOTE - Immersion Disconnect the canister through the facepiece. or disinfecting the facepiecc.

6.4 Fumigation Records - Every shall keep a record of the fumigation following: a) Address b) Fumigant c) Fumigation d) Fumigation of fumigation

person in charge of a fumigation which shall include details of the

enclosure,

used and dosage, commencing clearance date and time,

date and time, and

e) Copies of all notices submitted, f) Results of fumigation. be retained

This information should authorities on demand.

for examination

by the concerned

IS t 7247 ( Part

5 ) - 1985

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.2 )
FUMIGATION SCHEDULE DANGER KFEP OUT 1 )-1973*. WARNING

A
NOTICE

POISON GAS SYMBOL, in accordance with IS : 1260 (Part FUMIGATION Authorized Telephone BY

Fumigator No.

Affix Flammable Label, if applicable, in accordance with IS : 1260 ( Part 1 )-1973".

*Pictorial markings ( jinr revision )

for handling

and

labelling

of goods:

Part

1 Dangerous

goods

12

IS : 7247 ( Part 5 ) - 1985
(Conlinurd

ffem pa&6
Membrrs

2 )

SHRI A~USU~ILLI SUBHA RAO

SHRI P. N. THOMAS SHR~ A. C. SHROFF (Alternafc j Indian Grain Storage Research Institute, Hapur SHRI B. K. VERYA SHRI B. R. BI~~GWAR ( Alternate) QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters (Ministry of BRIQ R. N. VARMA \ Defence ), New Delhi LT-COL K. N. ACHARYA ( Altcrnatc ) Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. R. VISEWAMRHARAN

Andhra Pradesh Rice Millers' Vijayawada Excel Industries Ltd, Bombay

Association,

13

INTERNATIONAL
Base Unit*
QUANTITY

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS)

UNIT

SYMBOL m kg 1

Length Malr Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

K cd mol

Units
UNIT SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress,

radian steradian

rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL IN J" W Wb T HZ s V Pa

DEFINITION

-

1w = 1 J/s 1 Wb = 1 v.s = 1 Wb/m* 1T 1 Hz - 1 c/s (s-1) 1s a 1 A/V 1v = 1 W/A 1 Pa = 1 N/m'

1J

P

1 kg.m/s' 1 N.m

