IS 2705 ( Part 3 ).: 1992

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

hdian Standard
CURRENT TRANSFORMERS
PART 3 PROTECTIVE ( CURRENT

-

SPECIFICATION

TRANSFORMERS

Second Revision )
Third Reprint MARCH 1997

UDC

621'314'224

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 3 ZAFAR MARG

NEW November 1992

Instrument

Transformers

Sectional

Committee,

ETD 34

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian finalized by the Instrument Transformers Sectional Committee had Electrotechnical Division Council. Standards, after the draft been approved by the

This standard was first published in 1964 and revised in 1981. This revision to bring it in line with the latest developments at the international level. Indian Standards Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 4 on current transformers have been published in four parts:

has

been

undertaken

General Measuring Protective Protective

requirements current current current transformers transformers transformers for special purpose applications should current

For obtaining an efficient protection, it is necessary that the protective current transformers The requirements of protective maintain the accuracy up to several times the rated current. transformers differ from measuring current transformers mainly in this respect.

This specification applies to protective current trasforrners intended for use in non-balaced protective equipment, for example, for the operation of overcurrent devices both of the non-directional types and the protective current transformrrs used for the operation of earth-fault devices with time lag characteristics. When the operation of the protective equipment is more precisely dependent upon the magnitude and phase relationship of voltage and current, for example, earth-fault protection in instantaneous earth-fault resonant earthed networks, or upon the balance of current, for example, the current transformers may require characteristics other protection and differential protection, than those prescribed in this specification. In such case, the designer of the protective system should spzcify th: additional requiremznts that may be necessary. in the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived published from the following: by Intermltional Electrotechnical published by

IEC Pub 185 ( 1987 ) Current Commission. BS 3938 : 1973 Specification British Standards Institution. for

Transformers, Current

Transformers

with latest amendments;

of

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded elf in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 2705 (Part 3) : 1992

Indian Standard

CURRENT TRANSFORMERS
PART 3 PROTECTIVE

-SPECIFICATION

CURRENT TRANSFORMERS

(
1 SCOPE

Second Revision )
2.3.1 Rated Accuracy Limit Factor

This standard (Part 3) gives the specific requirements and tests for protective current transformers used with electrical protective devices (relays/trip coils). It also covers the protective cores of multi-core current transformers. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply in addition to those covered in Part 1 of this standard. 2.1 Protective Current Transformer to supply protective

The value of the accuracy limit factor for which the
accuracy requirements rated burden. 2.3.2 of this specification are met at

Rated Accuracy Limit Primary Current

The value of the highest primary current up to which
the transformer will comply with the specified limits of composite error. .It is the product of the rated primary current and the rated accuracy limit factor. 2.4 Secondary Limiting emf

A current t,ransformer intended devices (relays/trip coils). 2.2 Composite Error

The product of the accuracy limit factor, the rated secondary current and the vectorial sum of the rated burden and the impedance of the secondary winding. 2.5 Exciting Current

Under steady state conditions, difference between:

the rms value of the of the primary

a) the

instantaneous cu.&em, and

values

The rms value of the current taken by the secondary winding of a current transformer when a sinusoidal voltage of rated frequency is applied to the secondary terminals, the primary and any other windings being open-circuited. 3 ACCURACY LIMlT FACTOR

b> the

instantaneous values of the actual secondary current multiplied by the rated transformation ratio.

The positive signs of the primary and secondary currents are corresponding to the convention for terminal markings. The composite error EC is generally expressed as a percentage of the rms values of the primary current according to the formula: 100 EC=-----I
P

The standard accuracy limit factors shall be 5, 10, 15, 20 and 30. 4 ACCURACY CLASS

J

1 *

T ( K.* i` - ip)2 dt' J0 ratio,

The accuracy class shall be designated by the highest permissible percentage composite error at the rated accuracy limit primary current prescribed for the accuracy class concerned, followed by the letter "P" (meaning protection). 4.1 Standard Accuracy Classes current

where

Kn =
I
P

rated transformation

= rms value of the primary current,

The standard accuracy classes for protective transformers shall be 5P, 1OP and 15P.
NOTE accurwy class followed

iP i8 T

= instantaneousvalueoftheprimarycurrent, 5, instantaneous
current, and value of the secondary
5

Protcctive~current transformers are designated by by the accuracy limit ikctor (for exampie SPIO).

= duration of one cycle.
Limit Factor

LIMITS OF ERRORS

2.3 Accuracy

The ratio of the rated accuracy limit primary current to the rated primary current. 1

5.1 The current error, composite error and the phase displacement at .the rated frequency and with rated burden connected, shall not exceed the values given in Table 1.

IS 2705 (Part 3) : 1992 Table 1 Limits of Errors ( Clause 5.1)
Accuracy Cl= Curnat Prhay Fi-ror Cumnt pbast DisplDces8cnt rt Rated himary cumnt Composite Error at Rated Accuracy IhIt Primary Carreti (Percent) (1) 5P 1OP (2) *1 z3 t5 (Minuks) (3) GCI (PcrccnI) (4) 5 10 15 aI Rated

i5P

6 MARKING 6.1 The following particulars shall be marked in addition to those required in Part 1 of this standard: Rated accuracy limit factor shall be indicated following the corresponding output and accuracy class (for example, 30 VA Class 5PlO or 30/ 5PlO). 6.2, In case of current transformers required to meet combination of output and accuracy classes, the necessary information should be given. 7 TESTS Accuracy test forcurrent errorand phase displacement and for composite error shall be carried out both as type test and routine test. 7.1 TypeTest 7.1.1 Current
Error and Phase Displacemenr

With the primary winding spen circuited, the secondary winding is energized at rated frequency by a substantially sinusoidal voltage having an rms value equal to the secondary limiting ernf. The resulting exciting current expressed as a percentage of the rated secondary current multiplied by the accuracy limit factor shall no1 exceed the limit of composite error given in 5.1 (see also A-7).
NOTES 1 In calculating the secondary limiting emf used above. the secondary winding impedance shall be assumed IO be equal IO the secondary winding resistance measured a1 room temperature and correacd IO 75T. 2 In delermining Ihe composite error by Ihe indirect method. a possible difference between turns raIio and rated transformation ratio need tm1 he trken into accounl.

Test shall be made to prove compliance with 5.1 with respect to the current error and phase displacement. 7.1.2 7.1.2.1
Composite Error Direct lest

7.1.3 For the &termination of ratio error and phase displacement in accordance with 7.2.1, tbe burden shall have a power factor of 0.8 lagging except that when it is less than 5 VA, power factor of unity is permissible. For the determination of composite error in accordance witb 7.1.2, tbe burden shall have a power factor between 0.8 lagging and rlnily al the discretion of the manufacturer. I 7.2 Routine Tests 7.2.1 Current Error and Phase Displacement
This

Compliance witb the limit of composite error given in 5.1 shall be demonstrated by a direct test, in which a substantially sinusoidal current equal to the rated accu.racy limit primary current is passed through the primary winding, with the secondary winding connected to the rafed burden. The composite error may be determined as given in Annex A (see A-3 and A-6).
NOTE -The distance of the return primary conductor from the current transformer shall be Irken inIo accounl from the point of view of reproducing setvice conditions.

test shall be carried oti as given in 7.1.1.

7.2.2 Composi$ Error
7.2.2.1

For low reactance current transformen, routine test shall be as given in 7.1.2.2.

the

7.1.2.2 indirect test For loiu reactance current transformers (see A-9), the direcj test given in 7.1.2.1 may be replaced by the following indirect test provided that theeffect ofreturn conductor is negligible. 2

7.2.2.2 For other current transfomlers, the lest may be made by the indirect method given in 7.1.2.2. In such cases, a correction factor shall be applied to the results. This correction factor is obtained from a comparative test between the indirect and the direct methodsoflestand tbe resultsofsuch test shall be held available by the manufacturer.
NOTE - The correclion factor is equal IO the ralio of Ihe complsife error obtained from Ihe direcI melhod (see 7.1.21) and Ihe exciliog rurrenl expressed as a percentage of the rated secondary currenI mutlipiied by the acc!Jracy limit factor, as dclermined by the indirect method (see 7.1.22).

IS 2705 (Part 3) : 1992

ANNEX A (Clause 7.1.2.1)
NOTES ON PROTECTIVE CURRENT TRANSFORMERS A-l VECTOR DIAGRAM the current transformer A-23 In evaluating performance fr', the primary current divided by the rated transformation ratio, and Ir", the primary current divided by the turns ratio has to be distinguished. Absence of turns correction means 6' is equal to g".
A-2A If intentional turns correction

A-l.1 Considering a current transformer where the turns ratio (number of secondary turns to number of primary turns) is equal to the rated transformation ratio, and idealized to the extent that it contains only linear electric and magnetic components in itself and initsburden,andfurtherassumingasinusoidalprimary current, all the currents, voltages, and fluxes will be sinusoidal and the performance of the current transformer can be described in vector diagram, such as Fig. 1. A-l.2 In Fig. 1, Is.represents the secondary current. It flows through the impedance of the secondary winding and through the burden which determines the magnitude and direction of the necessary induced voltage E, and of the flux which is prependicular to the voltage vector. `Ibis flux is maintained by the exciting current I, having a magnetizing component I parallel to the flux, and a loss component Ii paralfil to the voltage vector. The vector sum of tbe secondary current and the exciting current (f, + I is the vector 6" representing the primary current s'ivided by the turns ratio (number of secondary turns to number of primary
tums).
Im _.

is present, we havel `less tbanl "andsinceit isf "that goesinto the vecto!diagram a&I I ' is used fort& determination of the ratio error, it fs seen that turns correction will have an infbrence on the ratio error (and may be deliberately used with that purpose). However, the vectors1 ' and I "have the same directionso that turns correct&i has `no influence on phase displacement. It is also apparent that turns correction has only a partial influence on composite error. A-3 ERROR TRfANGLE A-3.1 In Fig. 2, the upper part of Fig. 1 is redrawn to a larger scale and under further assumption that the pbase displacement is so small that for practical purposes the two vectors, 1% and $y may be considered parallel. Assuming again that there ISno turns correction, it mayt~seenbyprojectingl~on toZr" that witha good approximation, the in-phase component of 5 (AZ) instead of the arithmetic difference between I " and I may be used when the ratio error is to be fo&d, and likewise the quadrature component of I, (Mq) may be used to express the phase displacement. 7

hl

e
FIG. 1 VECTORDIAGRAMOF CURRENT TRANS~R~AS

rP

A-l.3 Thus, for a current transformer with turns ratio equal to the rated transformation ratio, the difference in the lengths of the vectors I, and Ir", related to the length of !r", is the current error and the angular difference ISthe phase displacement according to 3.13 and 3.14 respectively of Part 1 of this standard. A-2 TURNS CORRECTION A-2.1 When there is a difference between the actual turns ratioand the rated transformation ratio the current transformer is said to have turns correction. A-2.2 Turns correction may be intentional, accidental (for example, if the number of turns is so great that an accurate check is difficult) or it may be unavoidable (for example, if the rated transformation ratio is not rational, as in the case where it is a multiple of fi 3

FIG.

2 ERRORTRLANGLE OF CURRENT
-bNSFORMEXS

A-3.2 It is further seen that under the given assumptions the exciting current I, divided by I " is equal to the composite error according to 2.2. Thus, for a current transformer without turns correction and under conditions where a vector representation is justifiable, the ratio error, the phase displacement, and the composite error form a right-angled triangle. A-3.3 In this triangle, the hypotenuse representing the composite error is proportional to the magnitude of the total burden impedance consisting of burden and secondary winding, while the division between

IS 2705(Part 3) : 1992 current ratio and phase displacement depends upon the power factors of &hetotal burden impedance and of the exciting current. Zero phase displacement will result when these two power factors are equal, that is when I, and I, are in phase. A-4 COMPOSITE ERROR primary (sinusoidal) current, a secondary burden with linear characteristics, and to an ammeter in such a manner that both the primary and the secondary current pass through the ammeter, but in opposite directions. In this manner the resultant current through the ammeter will be equal to the exciting current under the prevailing conditions of sinusoidal primary current and the rms value of that current, related to the rms value of the primary. current, is the composite error according to the defmuion in 2.2. A-S.2 Figure 4, therefore, for the direct measurement represents the basic circuit of composite error.

A-4.1 The most important application, however, of the concept of composite error is under conditions where a vector representation cannot be justified because non-linear conditions. introduce higher hamronics in the excitingcurrent and in the secondary current (see Fig. 3). It is defined vector shown for this reason that the composite error is as in 2.2 and not in the far simpler way as the sum of ratio error and phase displacement as in Fig. 2.

A-S.3 Two current transformers having the same rated transfomlation ratio are shown in Fig. 5. The current transformer marked N is assumed to have no (or negligible) composite error under tbc prevailing conditions (minimum burden), while the other current transformer marked X is connected to its rated burden. They are both fed from the same source of primary sinusoidal current and an ammeter is connected to measure the difference between the two secondary currents. Under these conditions the rms value of the current through the. ammeter AZ, related to the rms value of the primary current in ammeter A,, is the composite error of the transformerlk:
NOTE-The ammrierA, inFig.

FIG. 3 CONCEIT OF COMPOSITE ERROR A-4.2 Thus, in the general case, the composite error also represents the deviations from the ideal current transformer that are caused by the presence, in the secondary winding, of higher harmonics which do not exist in the primary. The primary current is always considered sinusoidal for the purpose of this standard. A-S DIRECT TEST FOR COMPOSITE ERROR

5 should havean impedance of not more than 0.1 ohm for a S-ampere current transformer. a..d not more rhan 1.5 ohms for a 1-ampere current transformer. This is to ensure that there is minimum effect of the ammeter on the actual composite error of the current transformer under test.

Pl

N

PZ

Pl

X

PZ

Y t
1

52

51

52

t

R

A-5.1 A current transfomrer having a turns ratio 1:l is shown in Fig. 4. It is connected to a source of
Pl Sl

FIG. 5 ~~JZAWREMENTOF COMPOSITE ERROR WITHTHE USEOF AN AUXKMRY~ CURRENT TRANSFORMER A-5.3.1 The measurement is further simplified if a ratio meter is used as shown in Fig. 6. This ratio meter

FIG.4 BAHC CIRCUIT FORTHEDIRECT MEASUREMENT OFCo~posrr~ ERROR 4

FIG. 6 USE OF RATIOMETFRFORTHE~~EAWREMWT
OF COMPOSITE ERROR

IS 2705 (Part 3) : 1992 reads directly the ratio of the rms spill current and rms primary current. A-5.4 Figure 5, therefore, represents the practical circuit for the direct measurement of the composite error for current transformers having rated transformation ratios differing from unity. For the use of this method, it is, however, ncccssary that Ihr composite error of transformer N is truly negligible. If is not sufficient that the tramformer N has a known composite error, for it is not possible to correct the resultsaccordingly. The reason fortbis is that while the composite error is expressed simply by a numerical value, it is in fact of a highly complicated nature. A-6 ALTERNATIVE METHOD FOR `i-III< DIRECT MEASUREMENT OF COMPOSITE ERROR A-6.1 Composite errorofcurrent transformers may be measured by an alternative method as shown in Fig. 7. measures the difference between currents of transformer N and N'. the secondary

A-6.4 If the rated transformation ratio of transformer N is Kn, OftransformerA is Knxand oftransformerN' is K'n the ratio K?Jshould equal Lhe product of k'n and Knx, that is Kn = K'n. Km. A-6.5 `Under these condition5 the rms value of the CurrentinammeterA?, related tothecurrentinammeter A,, is the composite error of transformerX. A-6.6 While using the methods sbow~l in Fig. 5 and 7, great care should be taken to use a lower impedance instrument for ammeter AL, since the voltage across this ammeter(divided by the ratio oftransformationof N' in the case of Fig. 7) ronstitutes part of the burden voltage of transformer X and tends to reduce the burden on this transformer. Similarly, this ammeter voltage increases the burden on transformer N. A-6.7 In order to carry out the test as described in Any of the direct methods, the primary winding may be required to carry a high current for the duration of the test. This may cause damage or destruction of the winding or the adjacent insulation. If the effect of the return primary conductor is negligible, the test may be carried out on a prototype in which :

a) the accuracy limit primary ampere turns are
the same:

b)

the geometrical arrangement of the primary with respect to Ibe cores and secondary windings is the same; ings are identical; and

c) the magnetic materials and the secondary windd)
A-6.2 While the method described for the measurement of composite error for current transformer in Fig. 5 requires a special reference current transformer N of the same rated transformation ratio as the transformer X and having negligible composite error at the accuracy limit primary current. the alternative method as shown in Fig. 7 enables standard reference current transformer N and N' to be used at or about their rated primary currents. It is still essential, however, that these reference transformers should have negligible campsite error. A-6.3 In Fig. 7, X is the current transformer under test, N is a standard reference transformer with a rated primary current of the same order of magnitude as the rated accuracy limit primary curre.nt of current transformer X, and N is a standard reference transformer having a rated primary current of the order of magnitude of the secondary current corresponding to the rated accuracy limit primary current of tmnsfomier X. It should be noted that the transformer N' constitutes a part of the burden Z, of transformerxand must, therefore, be taken into account in determining the value of the burden Z . A and A are two ammeters and care should be talen'tbat Af 5 A-7 JNDJKECT TEST FOR COMPOSITE ERROR

A-7.1 Under the conditions of Fig. 4. when: the pri~ilary current is sinusoidal, the direct measurement of the composite error is in practice equivalent to measuring the exciting current under these conditions. In particurar, it should be noted that tbe secondary voltage is not sinusoidal. A-7.2 The definition of exciting current according to 2.5 however, presumes a sinusoidal secondary voltage. A-73 It has beenshown that under certain conditions (as mentioned in A-9) the rms value of these two kinds of exciting currents are almost alike, and consequently the indirect test for the determinnlion of composite error is acceptable. The applied voltage should preferably be measured by a rectifieroperated moving coil voltmeter indicating 1.11 times the mean value and the exciting current should be measured by an instrument for measuring rms values. A-7.4 In those cases where (hese symmelrical conditons are not fulfilled, there exists, nevertheless, a relation between the results obtained by the two methods

IS 2705(Part3):lWt of determining tbe composite error. Once tbis re1ation has been established for a certain type of transformer (preferably with no turns correction) for a given burden, and for a given accuracy limit factor, then this relation may be used in the routine determination of the composite error by the indirect method as mentioned in 7.2.2.2. A-8 USE OF COMPOSITE ERROR A-9.1.1 All current transformers are of low reactance if: a) Tbe core is of the jointless ring type (including spirally wound cores); b) Tbe secondary turns are substantially evenly distributed along the whole length of tbe magnetic circuit; c) Tbe primary conductor(s) passes tbrougb the approximate centre of the core aperture or is approximately evenly distributed along the whole length of tbe magnetic circuit. d) Flux eqttalizing windings, where employed to meet tbe requirements of design, consist of at least four parallel connected coik, evenly distributed along with whole length of tbe magnetic circuit, each coil occupying one quadrant. Such an arrangement ensure substantially even flux distribution within the core irrespective of the presence of stray flux which may result from such conditions as the close proximity of the return primary conductor. A-9.13 Alternatively, any current transformer may be shown to be of low reactance by a type test comprising the determination of the composite error of the current transformer by the direct test and comparing it to the composite error determined by the indirect test. If the composite error obtained by the direct test is less tban 1.3 times the error obtained by the indirect test, the current transformer shall be accepted as of 1oHjreactance. However, since in the case of Class PS current tmnsformels (see Part 4) which must be of low reactance, there is no rated burden and accuracy limit current, tbe burden and primary current for the direct test, and the voltage to be applied to tbe secondary winding for the indirect test, should be agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser.

A-8.1 Tbe numerical value of tbe composite errorwill always be larger than the vector sum of ratio error and the phase displacement. Tbe composite error consequently is always a true expression for the maximum value of ratio error or phase displacement. When the power factor of the total load is known, the error triangle may be used for an estimate of the mtio error (of particular interest, for example overload relays), and of the phase displacement (of particular interest for phase-sensitive relays, for example, directional relays). For differential relays, the sum of tbe composite errors of tbe current transformers involved iS always a consentative estimate of the maximum error. A-8.2 For burdens between 50 percent and 100 percent of the rated burden, it is usually conservative to estimate tbe composite error proportionally lower, but no estimate can be made for greater burdens. Aa.3 An additional advantage of a limitation of composite error is the resulting limitation of the harmonic content of tbe secondary current which is necessary for tbe correct operation of certain types of relays. A-9 DETERMINATION OF LOW REACTANCE TYPE CURRENT TRANSFORMER A-9.1 Protective Current Transformers may be established to be of low reactance in any of the ways described below.

6

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form BIS has the copyright of all its publications. without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. ETD 34 ( 3389 ) Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue Issued Since Publication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,23523 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 1 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah &far Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZTABAD: GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India

