NAT He IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Waal A E BO ENDE] 
saan — ofa afear 
Ar 3 ya Affe Ma HT SAT 
( RAT GARETT ) 


Anti-termite Measures in 
Buildings — Code of Practice 


Part 3 Treatment for Existing Buildings 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 91.120.99 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 6 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Termite control in buildings is very important as the damage likely to be caused by the termites is huge. 


Wood is one of the cellulosic materials which is damaged by termites, whose basic nutrient is cellulose. Termites 
also damage materials of organic origin with a cellulosic base, household articles like furniture, furnishings, clothing, 
stationery, etc. Termites are also known to damage non-cellulosic substances in their search for food. Rubber, leather, 
plastics, neoprene as well as lead coating used for covering of underground cables are damaged by termites. The 
widespread damage by termites and high constructional cost of buildings have necessitated evolving suitable measures 
for preventing access of termites to buildings. 


On the basis of their habitat, termites are divided into two types, namely: 
a) subterranean or ground nesting termites, and 
b) non-subterranean or wood nesting termites having no contact with soil (see Annex C). 


The subterranean termites are most destructive and are mainly responsible for the damage caused in buildings. 
Typically, they form nests or colonies underground in the soil, near ground level in a stump or in other suitable piece 
of timber, and some species may construct a conical or dome shaped mound. These colonies may persist for many 
years and, as they mature, contain a population running into millions. All attacks by subterranean termites originate 
from the nest but timber either lying on or buried in the ground may be reached by means of shelter tubes constructed 
within, or over such materials or else by the erection of an independent, free standing mud structure. Chemical barriers 
which prevent the termites from reaching the superstructure of the building will protect the building and its contents. 
Treating the soil beneath the building and around the foundations with a soil insecticide is a good preventing measure. 
The purpose of this treatment is to create a chemical barrier between the ground from where the termites come and 
the woodwork, cellulosic materials and other contents of the buildings which may form food for the termites. Timber 
which is seasoned and is naturally durable in heartwood or such species of timber which can be adequately treated 
to the desired retention of preservative for durability, may be used in the building structure. However, non-durable 
timbers and sapwood of all timbers should be treated for durability to withstand the attack of dry wood termites 
[see IS 401 : 2001 ‘Preservation of timber — Code of practice (fourth revision) and IS 1141 : 1993 ‘Seasoning of 
timber — Code of practice (second revision)’ |. 


This standard (Part 3) was first published in 1971 and subsequently revised in 1981, 2001 and 2013. 
This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 

Part 1 Constructional measures 

Part 2 Pre-constructional chemical treatment measures 


In the 2013 revision, the chemical lindane was removed and imidacloprid was introduced; measures for human 
protection and detection techniques for termite determination had been widened, apart from some other modifications. 


In view of the developments since the last revision and based on the further knowledge that has become available, the 
committee responsible for formulation of this standard decided to take up its revision. 


In this revision, the following significant modifications have been incorporated: 
a) Bifenthrin has been added to the existing chemicals namely chlorpyrifos and imidacloprid recommending 
its use for anti-termite treatment. 
b) An informative annex on comparative statement of termiticides with respect to their properties has been 
included as Annex D. 
c) References to latest Indian Standards have been updated. 
The provisions of this standard are without prejudice to the various Acts, Rules and Regulations including the /nsectides 
Act, 1968 and the Rules framed thereunder. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed 
or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for 
rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


ANTI-TERMITE MEASURES 
IN BUILDINGS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 3 TREATMENT FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS 
( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 3) covers measures for the eradication 
and control of subterranean termites in existing buildings 
using chemicals. It includes reference to chemicals to be 
used, lays down minimum rates of application for usage, 
and outlines procedures to be followed. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the standards listed 
below: 


IS No. Title 

456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 

2568 : 1978 Specification for malathion dusting 
powders (second revision) 

4015 : 1998 Guide for handling cases of pesticide 
poisoning (first revision) 

8944 : 2005 Chlorpyrifos, emulsifiable 
concentrates — Specification 
(first revision) 

15936: 2011 Pesticide — Bifenthrin, technical — 
Specification 

16131 :2015  Imidacloprid suspension concentrate 
(SC) — Specification 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions 
shall apply. 


3.1 Chemical Barrier — The layer of chemically 
treated soil in immediate contact with foundation 
and floor structure of a building which kills or repels 
termites thus forming a barrier which is imprevious to 
termite entry. 


3.2 Post-construction Treatment — The application 
of chemical termiticides to buildings to eliminate 
existing termite infestation and to make them resistant 
to termite attack. 


3.3 Soil Treatment — The application of chemicals 
(toxicant solutions) to the soil adjacent to and under a 
building to form a chemical barrier which is lethal or 
repellent to termites. 


3.4 Wood Treatment — The application of chemical 
termiticides to woodwork and wood-based materials 
to eliminate existing termite infestation and to make it 
resistant to termite attack. 


4 CHEMICAL SOLUTION 


4.1 Chemicals to be Used for Anti-termite 
Treatment 


4.1.1 Any one of the following chemicals as given in 
Table 1 conforming to relevant Indian Standards in 
water emulsion may be used for the soil treatment in 
order to protect a building from termite attack. 


Necessary precautions as in the material safety 
data sheets (MSDS) supplied by manufacturer 
shall be ensured including when applying the 
termiticides in the exterior of a building where 
pisciculture/aquaculture is practiced, near water 
bodies and during foraging period of honey bees as 
some termiticides are toxic to honeybees and fishes. 


4.1.2 Mineral oil or kerosene based solution of 
chlorpyrifos 20 percent emulsifiable concentrate 
(EC), 1 percent (by mass) or imidacloprid 30.5 percent 
suspension concentrate (SC), 0.075 percent (by mass) 
or bifenthrin 2.5 percent emulsifiable concentrate 
(EC), 0.05 percent (by mass) concentration is useful 
for treatment of wood. 


4.2 Water to be Used for Preparing Chemical 
Solution 


Quality of water used to prepare chemical solution 
shall conform to IS 456. Potable water from municipal 
supply is considered suitable for the purpose. 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


Table 1 Chemicals for Anti-termite Treatment 
( Clause 4.1.1 ) 


SI No. Chemical Relevant Indian Concentration by Mass, Dosage 
Standard Percent (Active Ingredient) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Chlorpyrifos 20 percent EC IS 8944 1.0 250 ml in 5 litre water 
50 ml in 1 litre water 

ii) Imidacloprid 30.50 percent SC IS 16131 0.075 10.5 ml in 5 litre water 
2.1 ml in 1 litre water 

111) Bifenthrin 2.5 percent EC see Note 3 0.05 100 ml in 5 litre water 
20 ml in 1 litre water 

NOTES 


1 The above mentioned chemicals are registerd (as on date) chemicals with the Central Insecticides Board — Registration Committee 
(CIB RC). Efforts will be made to update (add/delete) the list of chemicals (termiticides) as obtained time to time from the CIB 
RC for incorporation in the above table appropriately. However, the chemicals from the above table as available in the CIB RC’s 
approved list at any point of time, shall only be used. 

2 The chemicals described in this standard are insecticides with a persistent action and are regarded highly poisonous. These 
chemical can have an adverse effect upon health when absorbed through the skin, inhaled as vapours or spray mist or swallowed. 
Detailed precautions for the safe handling of these chemicals are given in Annex A. Persons carrying out chemical soil treatment in 
accordance with this standard should familiarize themselves for these precautions and exercise due care when handling the chemical 
whether in concentrate or in diluted form. The use of the chemical should be avoided where there is any risk of wells or other water 
supplies becoming contaminated. 


3 IS 15936 provides specification for bifenthrin-technical for pesticide purposes, which needs to be suitably referred until a separate 
Indian Standard on emulsifiable concentrate of bifenthrin is formulated. 


5 POST-CONSTRUCTION TREATMENT 


5.1 Inspection 


Before undertaking any type of treatment, a thorough 
inspection shall be made of the infestation in the 
building with a view to determine the extent to which 
it has spread and the routes of entry of termites into the 
building. A study of structure of the foundation and the 
ground floor helps in finding out the routes of entry of 
termites from the soil and also in deciding the mode of 
treatment. For guidance, a note on termite detection in 
buildings is given in Annex B. 


5.2 Extermination of Termites in Building 


After making a study of the infestation in the building, 
the next step is to exterminate the termites located 
inside the building. This operation shall be carried 
out in a thorough manner, seeking the termites in their 
hideouts, such as ceiling behind wooden panellings, 
inside electrical wiring battens, conduits, switchboards 
and similar locations. Recourse shall be taken to inject 
chemical solutions as given in 4. All traces of termite 
tubes shall be removed so that any fresh infestation 
which might occur at a later date may be easily detected. 


5.3 Preventive Measures 


5.3.1 Soil Treatment 


The object of soil treatment is to establish chemical 
(toxic) barrier between the termites in the soil and 
the building to be protected. Basically, it consists of 
treating the soil adjacent to or under the building with a 
chemical toxicant which kills or repels termites. Water 
emulsions of one of the chemicals given in 4.1.1 shall 
be used in soil treatment and applied uniformly at the 
prescribed rate. 


5.3.1.1 Treatment 
foundations 


along outside of masonary 


The soil in contact with the external wall of the building 
shall be treated with chemical at the rate of 7.5 1/m? 
of the vertical surface of the substructure to a depth of 
300 mm. To faciliate this treatment, a shallow channel 
shall be excavated along and close to the wall and 
chemical emulsion shall be poured at 1.75 litre per 
running metre of the channel. Rodding with 12 mm 
diameter mild steel rods at 150 mm apart shall be done 
in the channel if necessary for uniform dispersal of the 
chemical to 300 mm depth from the ground level. The 
balance chemical of 0.5 litre per running metre shall 


then be used to treat the backfill earth as it is returned 
to the channel directing the spray towards the wall 
surface. If there is a concrete or masonry apron around 
the building, approximately 12 mm diameter holes 
shall be drilled as close as possible to the plinth wall at 
300 mm apart, deep enough to reach the soil below, and 
the chemical pumped into these holes to soak the soil 
below at the of 2.25 litre per linear metre. 
NOTE - In soils which do not allow percolation of chemicals 
to the desired depth, the uniform dispersal of the chemical to a 
depth of 300 mm shall be obtained by suitably modifying the 
mode of treatment depending on the site condition. The dosage 
of 2.25 litre per linear metre shall however remain the same. 


5.3.1.2 In the case of reinforced cement concrete 
(RCC) foundation, the soil (backfill earth) in contact 
with the column sides and plinth beams along the 
external perimeter of the building shall be treated 
with chemical at the rate of 7.5 1/m? of the vertical 
surface of the structure. To faciliate this treatment, 
trenches shall be excavated equal to the width of a 
shovel exposing the sides of the column and plinth 
beams up to a depth of 300 mm or up to the bottoms of 
the plinth beam if this level is less than 300 mm. The 
chemical shall be sprayed on the backfill earth as it is 
returned into the trench directing the spray against the 
concrete surface of the beam of column as the case may 
be. If there is a concrete or masonry apron around the 
building, approximately 12 mm diameter holes shall 
be drilled as close as possible to the plinth wall about 
300 mm apart, deep enough to reach the soil below and 
the chemicals emulsion pumped into these holes to soak 
the soil below at a rate of 2.25 litre per linear metre. 


5.3.1.3 Treatment of soil under floors 


The points where the termites are likely to seek entry 
through the floor are the cracks at the following 
locations: 


a) at the junction of the floor and walls as a result of 
shrinkage of the concrete; 


b) on the floor surface owing to construction defects; 


c) at construction joints in a concrete floor, cast in 
sections; and 


d) expansion joints in the floor. 


5.3.1.4 Chemical treatment should be provided within 
the plinth area of the ground floor of the structure 
wherever such cracks are noticed, by drilling vertically 
12 mm holes at the junction of floor and walls, 
constructional and expansion joints mentioned above 
at 300 mm interval to reach the soil below. Chemical 
shall be squirted into these holes using a hand operated 
pressure pump until refusal or to a maximum of one litre 
per hole. The holes shall be sealed. In general, the idea is 
to treat the soil below the floor at the locations of cracks 
with toxicants so that termites in the soil are denied 
access through such cracks and openings in the floor. 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


5.3.1.5 Treatment to voids in masonry 


Termites are known to seek entry into masonry 
foundations and work their way up through voids 
in the masonry and enter the building at ground and 
upper floors. The movement of the termites through the 
masonry walls may be arrested by drilling holes in the 
masonry wall at plinth level and squirting chemical into 
the holes to soak the masonry. The holes shall be drilled 
at downward angle about 45° preferably from both sides 
of the plinth wall at approoximately 300 mm intervals 
and emulsion squirted through these holes to soak the 
masonry using a hand operated pressure pump. Depth 
of the holes drilled will be depending upon the size of 
the wall, for normal size brick wall that is, 230 mm 
thick wall, depth of drilled hole shall be 150 mm. The 
depth of the drilled hole shall be increased or decreased 
depending on the size of the wall. This treatment shall 
also be extended to internal walls having foundations 
in the soil. Holes shall also be drilled at critical points, 
such as wall corners and where door and window 
frames are embedded in the masonry or floor at ground. 
Emulsion shall be squirted through the holes till refusal 
or to amaximum of one litre per hole. The treated holes 
shall then be sealed . 


5.3.1.6 Treatment at points of contact of woodwork 


All existing woodwork in the building which is in 
contact with the floor or walls and which is infested by 
termites, shall be treated by spraying at the points of 
contacts with the adjoining masonry with the chemical 
of concentration given in 4.1.1 by drilling 6 mm holes 
at a downword angle of about 45° at the juntion of 
woodwork and masonry and squirting chemical into 
these holes till refusal or to a maximum of half a litre 
per hole. The treated holes shall then be sealed. 


5.3.2 Treatment of Wood Work 


For the purpose of treatment, woodwork may be 
classfied as follows: 


a) which is damaged by termites beyond repair and 
need replacements, and 


b) which is damaged slighty by termites and does not 
need replacement. 


5.3.2.1 The wood work which has already been 
damaged beyond repairs by termites shall be replaced. 
The new timber should be dipped or liberally brushed at 
least twice with chemicals in mineral oil or kerosene as 
in 4.1.2. All damaged woodwork which does not need 
replacement shall be treated as indicated in 5.3.2.2. 


5.3.2.2 Infested wood work in chaukhats, shelves, 
joints, purlins, etc, in contact with the floor or the wall 
shall be provided with protective treatment by drilling 
holes of about 3 mm diameter with a downward slant to 
the core of the woodwork on the inconspicuous surface 
of the frame. These holes should be at least 150 mm 
centre to centre and should cover the entire framework. 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


One of the chemicals given in 4.1.1 shall be liberally 
infused in these holes. If the wood is not protected by 
paint or varnish, two coats of the chemicals given in 
4.1.2 shall be given on all the surfaces and crevices 
adjoining the masonry. 


5.3.3 Treatment of Electrical Fixtures 


If infestation in electrical fixture (like switch boxes in 
the wall) is noticed, covers of the switch boxes shall 
be removed and inside of such boxes shall be treated 


liberally with 5 percent malathion dusting powder 
conforming to IS 2568 or chlorpyrifos dust. The covers 
of the switch boxes shall be refixed after dusting. 


6 INSPECTION 


Periodical inspection and vigilance are neceessary 
after carrying out the preventive treatment measure 
described in 5.3. It is essential that follow up action 
be maintained during subsequent humid and hot 
seasons if termites appear. 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Table 1) 
SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 


A-1 PRECAUTIONS FOR HEALTH HAZARDS 
AND SAFETY MEASURES 


A-1.1 All the chemical mentioned in 4.1.1 are 
poisonous and hazardous to health. These chemical 
can have an adverse effect upon health when absorbed 
through the skin, inhaled as vapours or spray mist or 
swallowed. Persons handling or using these chemical 
should be warned of these dangers and advised that 
absoroption through the skin is the most likly sources 
of accidental poisoning. They should be cautioned to 
observe carefully the safety precautions given in A-1.2 
to A-1.6 particularly when handling these chemicals in 
the form of concentrates. 


A-1.2 These chemicals are brought to the site in the form 
of emulsifiable concentrate/suspension concentrate. 
The container should be clearly labelled and should be 
stored carefully so that children and pets cannot get at 
them. They should be kept securely closed. 


A-1.3 Particular care should be taken to prevent skin 
contact with concentrates. Prolonged exposure to dilute 
emulsions should also be avoided. Workers should 
wear clean clothing and should wash thoroughly with 
soap and water specially before eating and smoking. 
In the event of severe contamination, clothing should 


be removed at once and the skin washed with soap and 
water. If chemicals splash into the eyes they shall be 
flushed with plenty of soap and water and immediate 
medical attention should be sought. 


A-1.4 The concentrates are oil solutions and present 
a fire hazard owing to the use of petroleum solvents. 
Flames should not be allowed during mixing. 


A-1.5 Care should be taken in the application of soil 
toxicants to see that they are not allowed to contaminate 
wells or springs which serve as sources of drinking 
water. 


A-1.6 The person/operator who uses the chemicals 
shall wear personal protective equipment (PPE), like 
hand gloves, eye goggles, face masks, safety shoes, ear 
muffler and cap. 


A-1.7 In case of poisoning, suitable measures shall be 
taken for protection in accordance with IS 4015. 


A-1.8 The application of anti-termite treatment should 
be carried out by a professional agency which is trained 
and possess a valid pesticides licence issued by the 
respective state/central govt department of agriculture 
as required under the /nsectides Act, 1968 and the Rules 
framed thereunder. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.1 ) 
GUIDE FOR TERMITE DETECTION 


B-1 TERMITE DETECTION IN BUILDINGS 


B-1.1 A termite control operator must be able to find 
out the existence of termites in a building. A certain 
amount of technical knowledge and experience is 
necessary to determine if there is termite infestation 
in a building, particularly in the early stages when 
the attack has just started or it is confined to remote 
locations in the building. The operator should know the 
habits of termites in general, the manner in which they 
work, the places where they are likely to be found and 
the signs which go to show that they are present. 


Modern techniques like microwave based termite 
movement detector and thermal imaging cameras may 
also be employed for possible detection of termites in 
inaccessible areas by non-invasive way. 


B-1.2 A bright light is essential for termite inspection. 
A bright electric bulb protected by a wire-cage and an 
extension cord would be useful. If this is not available, 
a flashlight may be used. The operator should also carry 
with him a knife with a sharp pointed blade to probe 
into wood work. 


B-1.3 As subterranean termites emerge from the soil to 
seek entry into a building, the portions of the building in 
contact with or adjacent to the soil should be the first to 
be inspected. These would include the basement, ground 
floor, steps leading from the ground, columns, porches, 
etc. Locations where there is dampness or where humid 
conditions prevail, such as bathrooms, toilets, lavatories, 
or other places where there are leaky pipes or drains 
are likely places of termite infestation. Woodwork at 
basement or ground floor level, particularly in damp 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


locations, should be examined. The places which 
demand careful scrutiny are the points where woodwork 
is embedded in the floor or in the wall as termites seek 
entry through crevices in the concrete or brickwork in 
which the wooden frames are fixed. 


B-1.4 The signs of presence of termites in a building are 
the tell-tale shelter tubes which are termites runways. 
As termites have soft bodies which cannot withstand 
the drying effects of air, they move about in sheltered 
mud tubes which they build when they have to cross 
open spaces which are exposed to the air. These are, 
therefore, not easily noticed and may go undetected 
except to the trained eye of an experienced temite 
control operator. 


B-1.5 Termites work inside timber without breaking the 
surface. They are known to eat away a board completely 
leaving only the film of paint on the surface. If they 
break open the surface at any point accidentally, they 
quickly seal it up, and their activity continues beneath 
the surface without detection. 


B-1.6 Wood work in the vulnerable locations mentioned 
in B-1.3 should be carefully examined to find out if 
termites have attacked the wood. In the absence of any 
external signs of damage, woodwork should be tapped 
to see if it is hollow having been eaten up from inside. 
A sharp pointed instrument or sharp end of a pen-knife 


may be used to pierce the woodwork to determine if 
there are cavities in the wood. 


B-1.7 There is nothing as certain as termite runways to 
establish that infestation exists. However, an operator 
should be able to distinguish between old runway and 
new ones. The old runways are brittle and break away 
easily while the new ones will be moist and stronger. It 
is not advisable to remove or destroy termite runways 
during inspection. 


B-1.8 If termite activity is noticed in any one location 
of a building, it becomes necessary to make a thorough 
search in the entire building. In a multi-storeyed 
building, if infesation has occurred at the ground floor, 
all the upper floors must be subjected to thorough 
scrutiny. There have been instances where termite 
activity was noticed in one of the upper floor, with no 
visible signs of attack in the lower floors except perhaps 
the ground floor. This is explained by the fact that the 
termites had travelled from floor to floor under cover 
through lift wells or casings covering electric wiring, 
telephone cables, utility pipes, etc. Such covered 
conduits should, therefore, be examined carefully as 
they are ideal routes for termites. Other places which 
should be examined are woodwork, wooden panelling 
on staircases and walls, behind picture frames hung 
on walls, false ceiling, special attention being paid to 
locations where dampness prevails, such as bathrooms, 
toilets and kitchen sinks. 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
A SHORT NOTE ON TERMITES 


C-1 CLASSIFICATION 


C-1.1 Termites constitute a separate order of insects 
called ‘Isoptera’ (isos is ‘equal’ and pteron means 
‘wing’ in Greek). Although, they are commonly called 
white ants, they are not related to ants who have a thin 
waist in contrast to the thick waist of the termites. 
Furthermore, the front pair of wings of the ants are 
longer than their hind pair whereas in termites, both 
pairs are equal. There are over 2 300 species of termites 
out of which about 220 are found in India. All these 
species are not considered to be serious pests. 


C-1.2 According to their habits, termites can be divided 
into two well defined groups: 


a) subterranean termites which build nests and live in 
the soil, and 


b) non-subterranean termites which live in wood and 
do not require contact with the soil. 


C-1.3 Subterranean termites require moisture to sustain 
their life. They need access to ground at all times. 
They build tunnels between their nest and source of 
food through earth and earth-like covered runways 
around obstructions. These covered tunnels provide 
humidity conditions and darkness necessary for their 
movement and for maintaining contact with earth. The 
subterranean termites enter a building from ground 
level, under the foundation, working their way upwards 
through floors, destroying all before them. So little is 
seen of these termite operations that sometimes the 
structural member attacked is found to be merely a shell 
with the inside completely riddled and eaten away. 


C-1.4 The drywood termites on the contrary are able 
to live even in fairly dry wood and without contact 
with ground. These frequently construct nests within 
the roofs and other parts of houses, which they destroy, 
if not speedily exterminated. However, they are not as 


prevalent and common as subterranean termites, and 
are generally confined to coastal regions. 


C-1.5 A subterranean termite colony consists of a 
pair of reproductives, the so-called king and queen 
and a large number of sterile workers and soldiers. If 
however, the queen is lost or destroyed, her place is 
taken by number of supplementary reproductives, thus 
even by removing the queen, the colony will not be 
destroyed. All the work of the colony is carried out by 
the workers. Guarding the colony is the work of the 
soldier. The adult workers and soldiers are wingless. 
The workers are gernerally greyish white in colour. 
The soldiers are generally darker than the workers and 
have a large head and longer mandibles. There are, 
however, other types of soldiers whose mandibles are 
small, degenerated and functionless; instead, the frontal 
part of the head is prolonged to form a long nasus; they 
dispel the enemy by squirting out white poisonous fluid 
through the nasus. The reproductives, that is, the flying 
adults, have brown or black bodies and are provided 
with two pairs of long wings of equal size in contrast to 
the reproductives of ants which have two pairs of wings 
of unequal size. 


C-1.6 The food of the termite is cellulosic material 
like timber, grass, stumps of dead trees, droppings of 
herbivorous animals, paper, etc. Once termites have 
found a suitable foothold in or near a building, they 
start spreading slowly from a central nest through 
underground and overground galleries in the case of 
subterranean termites and galleries within the structural 
member, once they get direct access to them, in the 
case of drywood termites. In their search for wood they 
bypass any obstacle like concrete or resistant timber to 
get a suitable food many metres away. 


C-1.7 In subterranean termite colony, the worker feed 
the reproductives, soldiers, winged adults and young 
nymphs. One of the habits of the termites which is of 
interest is the grooming of their own bodies and the 
bodies of their nest mates by licking. This grooming 
habit is associated with their eagerness to obtain the 
glandular secretions that are extruded over the body 
surface. During the course of grooming, any dust 
particle that may be adhering to the body surface are 
removed and ingested. This habit plays an important 
role in the poisoning of termites for control operations. 
If finely powdered toxic material is introduced into 
termite runways, particles of the powder will adhere to 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


the body of the termite and will kill any termite that 
subsequently grooms the dusted one. 


C-2 DEVELOPMENT OF TERMITE COLONY 


At certain periods of the year, particularly after a few 
warm days followed by rain, emergence of winged adults 
on colonising flights, frequently occurs. This swarming, 
also called the nuptial flight, may take place any time 
during the monsoon or the post monsoon period. The 
flight is short and most of the adults perish due to one 
reason or another. The surviving termites soon find 
their mates, shed their wings and establish a colony if 
circumstances are favourable. The female of the pair 
or queen produces a few eggs in the first year. The first 
batch of the brood comprises only of workers. The rate of 
reproduction, however, increases rapidly after 2-3 years. 
Although a colony may increase in size comparatively 
rapidly very little damage may occur in a period less 
than 8-10 years. Any serious damage that may occur in 
a short time is perhaps due to heavy infestation in the 
initial stage due to large population of termites existing 
in the soil before the building is constructed. 


C-3 RECOGNIZING THE PRESENCE OF 
TERMITE INFESTATION IN BUILDINGS 


C-3.1 Swarms of winged reproductives flying from the 
soil or wood are the first indication of termite infestation 
in a building. Often the actual flight may not be observed 
but the persence of wings discarded by them will be a 
positive indication of a well established termite colony 
nearby. Termite damage is not evident from the exterior 
in the case of subterranean termites, since they do not 
reduce wood to a powdery mass or push particles like 
some of the wood borers or drywood termites. These 
termites are also recognised by the presence of earth-like 
shelter tubes which afford them the runways between 
soil and their food. 


C-3.2 Drywood termites on the contrary may be 
recognised by their pellets of excreta. Non-subterranean 
termites excrete pellets of partly digested wood. These 
may be found in tunnels or on the floor underneath the 
member which they have attacked. These termites may 
further be noticed by blisters on wood surfaces due to 
their forming chambers close to the surface by eating 
away the wood and leaving only a thin film of wood on 
the surface. Also the hollow sound on tapping structural 
timber will indicate their destructive activity inside. 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX D 
( Informative ) 
( Foreword ) 


COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF TERMITICIDES 


Imidacloprid Chlorpyrifos Bifenthrin 
| 30.5 percent SC 20 percent EC 2.5 percent EC 
Property 
Active ingredient 0.075 percent 1 percent 0.05 percent 


Formulation 


Suspension concentrate 


Emulsifiable concentrate 


Emulsifiable concentrate 


Chemical classification Neonicotinoids Organo phosphates Synthetic pyrethroids 
Dilution per litre of water 2.1 ml (1:476) 50 ml ( 1:20) 20 ml ( 1:50) 
Odour No smell Felt Felt 
(aromatic hydrocarbon 
odour) 
Type of termiticide Non-repellent, but Repellent Repellent 


termites get affected 


NOTES 


1 The above is purely a general comparison of the three termiticides to serve only as a preliminary guide. 


2 Users are suggested to examine the respective material safety data sheets (MSDS) of the termiticides from manufacturers for detailed 
information/comparison thereof, so as to make an informed choice for their project based on its location, size, soil type, amount of 


infestation, type of building, etc. 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector-18A, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110078) 


Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products and Services, 
New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Development Alternatives, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi 


Indian Plywood Industries Research and Training 
Institute, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. S. SACHDEV (Chairman) 


SHRI SHOBHIT UPPAL 
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A .N. PRAKASH 
SHRI SATISH V. SALPEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
SHRI H. E. IYER (Alternate) 


SHRI SUROJIT SAMANTA 
SHRI RAM AVTAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDI NATH JHA 


SHRI S. K. NEGI 
DR AJAY CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr S. D. BARUAH 
SHRI AMITAVA Biswas (Alternate) 


DR S. SAIBABU 
SHRI FARVAZE AHMED (Alternate) 


Dr B. S. PHOGAT 
Dr J. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH KUMAR 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAMESH KUMAR 
SUPTDG ENGINEER (P)-1 (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHOSLA 


SHRI ANURAG SINHA 
SHRI RAVINDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR KISHAN KUMAR V. S. 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. BHATIA 
SHRI P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


VICE PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAVA SIL 
SHRI ANAND NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


Organization 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


Military Engineering Services, Engineer-in- Chief’s 


Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence 
(Army), New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
Rentokil Pest Control (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Gujarat, 
Gandhinagar 


Public Works Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


The All India Glass Manufacturers’ Federation, 
New Delhi 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 
The Energy Resources Institute, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity [Pratap Nursery Lane 
(Near Gurudwara), Panditwari, Dehradun 
248007] 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJAN VENKATESWARAN 
SHRI V. SUKUMAR HEBBAR (Alternate) 


Ms MALA MOHAN 
SHRIMATI SHOBHANA V. (Alternate) 


SHRI D. D. S. SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI AJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIR.L. Das 
SHRI ANIL KAPOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR M. GHUGE 
SHRI JAYANT DANDAWATE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. PATEL 


SHRI A. K. SINHA 
SHRI PUNEET Kumar Vats (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (WORKS) 
ADE/WORKs (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL DEWAN 
PROF JaYa KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY GARG 
SHRI SHAMIT MANCHANDA (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. ADLAKHA 
SHRI DEVENDRA GILL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SETH 
Ms MEGHA BEHAL (Alternate) 


SHRIK. S. PRUTHI 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretaries 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S. 
SCIENTIST “E” (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


and 


SHRI DURGESH KUMAR PATEL 


10 


IS 6313 (Part 3) : 2022 


SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 
Working Group on Anti-termite Measures in Buildings, CED 13/WG 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers SHRI D. S. SACHDEV (Convener) 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector-18A, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110078) 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
SHRI H. E. IYER (Alternate) 
Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad Dr B. S. PHOGAT 


Dr J. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


CSIR- Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI S.K. NEGI 
Dr Asay CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI MANOJ KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI AMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi VICE PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Paramount Pest Consultants, Pune Dr SARANG SAVALEKAR 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 13 (16813). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


