IS : 3842 ( Part I I- 1967

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR ac SYSTEMS
PART I OVERCURRENT RELAYS AND TRANSFORMERS FOR FEEDERS

Seventh Reprint DECEMBER 1995

UDC

621'316'925'43 : 621'314/`315

0 CopYrfghl 1967
BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN.

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

:9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 11

December 1967

IS: 3842 (PartI)-

Indian
PART I

Standard

APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR dC SYSTEMS
OVERCURRENT RELAYS FOR FEEDERS AND TRANSFORMERS
Relays Sectional Committee, ETDC 35
SHRl K. Ch&ZiWZRl XL CHWNAPPA to Mysore State Electricity Board, Bangalore Heavy Electricak (India) Ltd. Bhopal Tata Hydra-Electric Repesmling Power Supply Co Ltd, Bombav.

St.mt G. K. THAKUR (Alkmati SLvi K. M. Chinnappa) SW1 M. c. BAsAvAl,mOAIAH SRIU S. K. Bwru SHEI A. RAJAMO (Akern&) SHRI V. S. BHAIU SHRI M. M. SH~U P. J. D-Y SHEFWNA (Afhm&)

TheB2$bFyy Jyoti Limited,

Electric Baroda

Supply

and

Transport

Undertakii

Smua.

SHRI B. L. Sn*nv~~ (Aflrmoti) SHRZ B. K. Mur~sry~a PADYANABKAN SHN A. C. DAYLB (Akm~&) SHar s. G. PARANOS

.

National Tat House, Calcutta The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamsbedpur Directorate General of Supplies & Dkpaab (Inspection W (Ministry of Supply Technical Development h Ma a# Planning) The Eng1k.h Electric Co of India Ltd, Ma&u Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore Hindustan Steel Limited, Ran&i Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) Punjab State Electricity Board, Pa&la Central Water & Power Commission (Power Dir&orate General of Ports & T&g&u Communications) Radio & Electrical Manufacturing Co Ltd, Director General. 161 (Ex-oflcio Member) )

SEm L. c. S~lu N. T. T-

J*m

(Aft8rn.w)

Wmg) (Dwartawnt B&g&n d

Smu H. S. VowmwSHlU Y. s. VenuTBaw~, Director (Eke tech)

Panel for Application Guide for Electrical Relays, ETIX

35/PZ

-

Indian

Institute

of Science, Bangalonz

Mysore State .Etectricity BuoaaTre Huvy Elcctricais (India) The English Electric Co (1 d In'diaP:&Madrm Punjab State Eiectricity Board, 1 Tat8 Hydra-Electric Power SUPI>lY co Loa. Bombay

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

IS:

sw?cputI)-1~7

Indian Standard
APPLICATION GUIDE FOR ELECTRICAL RELAYS FOR ac SYSTEMS
PART I OVERCURRENT RELAYS FOR FEEDERS AND TRANSFORMERS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part I) was aoopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 2 March 1967, after the draft finalized by the Relays Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. Q.2 Modern power systems are aesrgned to provide uninterrupted electrical supply, yet the possibility of failure canuot be ruled out. The protective relays stand watch and in the event of a failure, short-circuits or abnormal operating conditions help de+mergize the unhealthy section of the power system and restrain interference with the remainder of it, and thus limit damage to equipment and ensure safety of per;ronnel. They are also used to indicate the type and location of failure SO as to assess the effectiveness of the protective schemes. 0.3 In spite of the many refined protective schemes available today, tht overcurrent~ protection has held its own because of its simplicity and economical cost. It. is primarily used for the protection of feeders but has also been employed for the protective schemes of transmission lines, transformers, generators and other electrical apparatus. Subsequent to the pubhcation of `IS : 3231-1965*, it was felt that an application guide for overcurrent relays be prepared SO that the system planning engineers may select and apply the overcurrent relays'correctly from among the multitude of those available today. 0.4 The -features which the protective relays should possess are: a) reliability, that, is, to ensure correct action even after long periods of inactivity and also after repeated operations under severe conditions; b) selectivity,. that is, to ensure that only the unhealthy system is disconnected; c) sensitivity, that is, detection of short circuit or abnormal conditions;
*Spccificaticm for clcchicai relaysfor power systemprotection.

part of the operatmg

2

I8 : 3845

@art

I) -.l887

4
4

speed to prevent or minimize rotating plant; and

damage

and risk of instability of

stability, that is, the ability to operate only under those conditions that call for its operation and to remain either passive or biased against operation under all other conditions. guide deals with only those relays which are covered

O.!I This application by IS : 3231-1965*.

0.6 It is emphasized that this guide has been prepared to assist in selection rather than to specify the relay to be used. Th,is guide deals only with the principles of application of overcurrent relays and does not deal with the selection of any particular protective scheme. The actual circuit conditions in all probability may be different from those discussed here. The examples, although drawn from actual field applications, should be regarded as mere illustration of one or the other point. 0.7 In the preparation of this guide considerable assistance has been derived from several published books and from manufacturers' trade literature., Assistance has also been rendered by State Electricity Boards in wllecting actual examples. 0.8 This guide is one of the series of Indian Standard application guides for electrical relays for ac systems. The other guides in this series are: IS .: 36381966 Application guide for gas operated relays IS : 3842.(Part II)-1966 Application guide for electrical relays for ac systems: Part II Overcurrent relays for generators and motors IS : 3842 (Part III)-1966 Application guide for electrical relays for ac systems: Part III Phase unbalance relays including negative phase sequence relays IS : 3842 (Part IV)-1966 Application guide for electrical systems: Part IV Thermal relays relays for ac

1. SCOPE 1.1 This guide deals with the application of overcurrent relays for ac systems, covered by IS : 3231-1965* for feeders and transfiiers. It wvers both directional and non-directional overcurrent relays and their application for phase faults, earth faults, restricted earth faults and corebalance earth-fault protection. It also covers time-current characteristics and considerations for the setting and co-ordination of overcurknt (nondirectional) relays.
*Specificationfor electrical relays for power system protection. 3

Is@ 384!2(PartI)-1967 1.2 This guide does not cover: a). the principles of system design and system protection, b) direct acting overcurrent devices, and c) static relays. 2 TFSUWINOLOGY 20 For the purpose of this guide the following definitions shall apply, in addition to those given in IS : 1885 (Part 1X)-1966*. 21 Main Protection - Protection normally expected to take the initiative in case of a f&It in the protected zone. 22 Rack-Up Protection - Protection provided to act as a- substitute for the main protection in the event of failure or inability of the latter to perform its intended function. 221 Relay Back-Up - An arrangement which provides an additional relay using the, same or different principle of oneration from that of the main relay.
NOTE- It iE preferable to have separate currcmt transformers, and if necusary, separate voltage transformers for relay back-up.

222 Circuit-BreakerBack-U' - An arrangement which provides isolation Corn source when the circuit-breaker m&rest to fault fails to open or in case there is failure of the secondary current or voltage.
NoTz-`~~ usually consists of a'timodelay relay operated from the main protection and connected to trip all the incoming feeders. !&!&3 Remote Back-U@-An arrangement at th- next station in the direction towards the source which trips after a delayed time if the circuit-breaker in the faulty section is not tripped.

23 R&siduaI in a-system.

Current

-The

algebraic

sum of all the phase currents sum of all the phase-to-earth

24 Re&dual Voltage voltages in a system.

The algebraic

2!IlCnee Poht Voltage-The sinusoidal voltage of rated frequency applied to the secondary terminals of a current transformer, all other windings being open-circuited, which when increased by 10 percent, causes the exciting current to increase by 50 percent.

26 0vea.r~ ch than its setting.

The tendency `of a relay to- operate for

faults farther

*EIectrotcchniCal vocabulary: Part IX Electrical relays. 4

IS : 3842 (Pati, I) - 1987 2.7 Percentage Transient OverreachThis is given by the following:

lotj(
where

y)percent

A = steady state rms value of operating current of the relay in
amperes; and

B = steady state rms value of the current which, when fully offset
will just operate the relay. 2.8 Resetting Ratio - The ratio expressed as a percentage of the resetting value to ,the operating value. 2.9 Resetting Time - The time which an operated relay takes in assuming the initial position as a result of a specified sudden change of the characteristic quantity, being measured from the instant at which the change occurs tendency of the moving parts 2.10 Overtravel (Overshoot) -The of the relay to continue in the direction of their travel when the energizing quantity is removed.
NOTE 1 -The time grading. effect of overtravel is important where selectivity is obtained by

NOTE 2- This is measured as the difference of time for which the relay is energized by a current corresponding to 20 times the plug settit-,g to close its contacts and for which the same current should be applied in order to just prevent the contacts from closing.

2.11 Plug-Setting Bridge-A device providing settings for varying the relay operating current.

a

range

of current

2.12 Pick-Up Errors - The error in the current value at which the disc starts to move .and at which the contacts close, expressed as a percentage of the plug setting. 2.13 Time-Setting Multiplier -A means of adjusting the travel of the disc, and thereby varying the time of operation of the relay for a given value :>f the fault current. 3. TYPE3 OF OVERCURRENT (NON-DIRECTIONAL) RELAYS

3.1 An overcurrent relay operates when the magnitude of the current in its circuit, suppLied directly or from current transformers, exceeds a preset value. Most pvercurrent relays have a number of current settings to make them suitable for a wide range of applications; 3.1.1 Mostly two overcurrent elements for phase faults, and one earthfault element for earth-fault protection, shown as connected in Fig. 1, are used with due consideration to the current transformer polarity. These Three phase-fault relays are are sufficient on solidly-earthed system. 5

IS: 384z(PartI)-1961 desirable on systems earthed through high impedance or unearthed. They are sometimes necessary on the delta side of delta-star transformers as the current in one phase may be twice that in the other two phases for a phaseto-phase fault on the star side. Earth-fault protection may also be provided by using core balance current transformers (see aLso6.8.1).

k

i

B

Fro. 1 APPLICATION OF Two OVERCURRENT `RELAYS WITH
ONE EARTH-FAULT I~ELAY

3.1.2 `Fault currents change in magnitude and phase while being transformed in delta-star transformers. An earth fault on the star side produces a circulating zero sequence current in the delta winding but no zero sequence current in the lines on the delta side of the transformer. &r earth4ktlt relay on the delta side will not, therefore, respond to an earth fault on the For the purpose of gradatioxi earth-fault star side of the tra&onnerS. relays the delta and the star sides thus become independent. 3.2 Overcurrent relays operate on one of the following principles: a) Electromagnetic attraction b) Electromagnetic induction, and c) -Permanent magnet moving coil/moving iron. The details of each operating principle .and the construction of relays may be obtained Corn text books or Corn manu6acturers. The main 6

I!3 : 3842 (Part I) - 1967
features of the relays, operating given in 3.2.1, 3.2.2 and 3.2.3. on the above mentioned principles are

The power required to operate an overcurrent relay and the impedance of the relay coil together with the impedance of the leads and current transformers should be known to determine the capacity and accuracy of current transformers. Relay impedance or burden is also given in the manufacturers' publications. 3.2.1 Electromagnetic Attraction Ty@e Relay - The electromagnetic attraction type relays operate by a hinged magnetic armature attracted to the poles of an electromagnet or by a magnetic plunger dra;vn into a solenoid. These may be actuated by both dc and ac currents. Such relays are mostly instantaneous and are used where fast tripping on high magnitude of currents is required. Time delay, however, may be obtained by delaying mechanisms. 3.2.2 Electromagnetic Induction Ty@e Relays - The electromagnetic induction type relays are essentially induction motors. Torque is developed in a,rotor by the interaction of induced cqrrents and fluxes to drive the rotor and thereby close or open the relay contacts. The induction relays operate on ac current only and are not affected by the dc component of a symmetrical short-circuit current. The induction type relays have a high resetting ratio and resetting value is normally higher than 90 percent of plug setting value. 3.2.3 Permanent-Magnet Moving Coil/Moving Iron, Relay - The permanent moving coil type relays for ac application are provided with rectifier bridge and are essentially constituted by a magneto-electric measuring element which is associated with a system designed to obtain the restraining torque and consist of a delicate moving coil element. The operating time of this type of relay is normally below 100 ms depending on the following three variables : a) ,magnitude of overcurrent, b) gap between the tied and moving contacts existing at the moment of fault appearance, and c) damping. Generally these relays have a low burden and wide range of adjustment. 3.3 Selectivity with overcurrent following methods : a) Grading the magnitude b) Grading d) Direction c) Combination relays may be achieved by one of the

of the fault current; the most common method; and

the time of operation; of (a) and (b) of the fault current. 7

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967 4. TIME-CURRENT APPLICATIONS 4.1 Overcurrent characteristics : CHARACTERISMCS OF OVERCURRENT
may have any of

AND COMMON RELAYS
the following time -current

relays

a) Time delay, b) Instantaneous, and c} Combination of (a) and (b). All these characteristics are shown in Fig. 2. Various characteristics of overcurrent relays are discussed in 4.2 to 4.4. time -current

CURRENT PLUG A = C = Inverse time time Extremely-inverse

IN MULTIPLES SETTING Cl = E =

OF

Definite

time dial setting

6 = Very-inverse

Instantaneous Relay-time

time

TD =

FIG. 2

TIME-CURRENT CHARACTERISTICS OF VARIOUS OVERCURRENT RELAYS 8

IS: 3842 (I+tI)-1967 a2 De&&e Tinxe-Current Relays

4.2.1 These!relays operate at a constant time predetermined by adjustment and are independent of current magnitude as long as it is sufficient to operate the relay. The time-current characteristic is shown by curve D in Fig. 2. 42.2 These days are generally us&l for radial circuits or for those loop circuits which have a few sections in series and there is no difference between the fault current at the end of one s~&on and the beginning of the next one. This relay is also used for back-up protection to differential and distaze relays. 4Z.3 If there are several sections in se&s, say more than three or four, the time of operation increases as the fault location moves closer towards the source of power and thus the heavier faults get cleared in longer times.
Nom - The resetting current or time or both arc important where hi is uSed or if the breaker is not supposed to trip. There is a poleibility 8!2zz3 condition may cause the overcurren t relay to operate but a return to normal condition for a relay wth a low resetting current or a high resetting time is not possible and an undesired operation may result.

4.2.4 This relay `may also be advantageously used qn systems where the Eaultcurrent at a particular point varies widely due to the changes in source impedance, as there is relatively small change in time with the variation of Gult current. 4.2.5 For earth-fault protection, if the fault current is severely limited by neutral impedances or by arc or earth resistances, which is often the case in industrial plant systems, the definite time overcurrent relay may be used to facilitate co-ordination between two successive sections. In such cases it is recommended to use relays with similar charact&istics. 4.!2.6 Selectivity is achieved by time grading as shown in Fig. 3.

Erk,

1.0s

I

o,5s

,

Rc

R2

R3

R4

POWER FLOW

FIG. 3

DEFINITE

TIME GRADING

ON RADIAL CIRCUIT

4.3 Instantaneoaas Over current Relays

4.3.1 Though classified as instantaneous, the time of operation of these relays may be up to 240 ms. It also varies with current magnitude at low currents as is shown in curve F in Fig. 2. The main difference between 9

IS:

3842(PartI)-1967

various instantaneous relays is the resetting ratio which varies from 25 to 90 percent. The resetting ratio is important where the instantaneous .it is set near the full load current and initiates the tripping sequence .rough an auxiliary time-lag relay. 4.3.2 The instantaneous relays are very useful in reducing the time of ripping. However, since their selectivity is dependent solely on the nagnitude of de current, there must be a substantial difference (preferably a ratio of 3 : 1) in the short-circuit current between the two relay points to make them selective. Thii difference should also be greater than the fault current difference at the far end of the section for maximum and minimum generating conditions. In a transformer feeder the impedance of the transformer permits good selectivity of instantaneous overcurrent relays. 4.3.3 The instantaneous overcurrent relays are hardly used by themselves but when used, are invariably combined with time-delay overcurrent relays. By adding instantaneous overcurrent relays to inverse-time relays at each relay location point on transformer feeders or on long transmission lines the grading interval between inverse time relays can be shortened. With this arrangement the overall tripping time over a very large portion of the circuit can be reduced as explained in 6.3.2.1. 4.3.4 Since the attracted-armature type relays are responsive to direct current as well, they are affected by the offset w-aves in the short-circuit current before the dc component dies out. The slower the decay of the dc component, the sooner the relay tends to operate. Thus the instantaneous overcurrent relays have a tendency to overreach and cause tripping for offset faults which are outside the zone of protection. The extent of the section that can be thus protected by these relays is dependent on the percent transient overreach of these relays. The overreach characteristic of certain instantaneousovercurrent relays is shown in Fig. 4. Instantaneous relays with low transient overreach characteristics are available.

10

20 SYSTEM

30 ANGLE

40 IN

50
DEGREES

60

70

80

FIG. 4

OVERREACHCHARACTERISTIC OF A TYPICAL INSTANTANEOUS OVERCURRENT RELAY 10

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967
43.5 If the generating capacity does not vary widely, the relays provide

protection up to 80 percent of their protected zone, provided the source &pedance is small in comparison to the circuit impedance.
4.4 Inverse `Time-Current Characteristic

4.4.0 Most time-delay overcurrent relays are inverse-induction type. It means that the relay operating time decreases as the actuating current increases. Such relays are classified as `inverse time', `very-inverse time' and `extremely-inverse time'. 4.4.1 Inverse-Time (IDM TL) Relays] Relays [Including Inverse Dejinite Minimum Time-Lag

4.4.1.1 Curve A in Fig. 2 shows the time of operation of an inversetime relay whose operating time is proportionate to the energizing quantity (no simple mathematical expression for the characteristic of `inverse-time relays is available). The most common type of these relays has got a definite minimum time and is generally known as IDMTL relay. These relays may or may not have instantaneous reset. 4.4.1.2 These relays are used on systems where system fault current at a particular point does not vary widely due to the change in source impedance. Its relatively flat time-current characteristic permits the relay to give reasonably fast operation over a wide range of short-circuit currents. These relays are generally used on systems where there is a wide difference between the fault currents at the end of one section and the beginning of next. The ratio of the fault current at the near end to the fault current at the far end is ~ Z&Z where & & = impedance between the relay and the power source, and met in distribution net = impedance of the protected zone.

4.4.1.3 The ,above conditions are generally works and industrial plant systems.

4.4.1.4 The application of these relays on impedance earthed systems and in intercoimected systems where the generating capacity varies between wide ranges, should be carefully studied. Such relays may also be used as back-up for differential and distance relays. 44.1.5 IDMTL overcurrent relay may be used for earth-fault protection if the fault current is limited by neutral impedances, by arc, or earth resistances which is often the case in industrial plant systems. To facilitate co-or&nation between two successive sections, relays with similar cbamcteristics should be used by grading the time or current setting or both. 94.1.6 Circuit breakers fitted with undervoltage release coils are protected by an IDhKt'L relay fitted with voltage operated relay as shown 11

in Fig. 5. The setting of voltage operated relay shou!d be less than the resetting values of undervoltage release coil.

/-

CURRENT TRANSFORMERS

tl PHASiFAUL-f RELAY

1

EAW$ULT

UNOERVOLTPIGE RELEASE HAND RESET TRANSFORMEF

1

VOLTAGE OPERATED
RELAY

CIRCUITBREAKER

FIG. 5 PROTECTION OF CIRCUIT-BREAKER FITTEDWITH AN UNDERVOLTAGE RELEASE COIL BY AN IDMTL RELAY 4.4.1.7 Theoretically the time of operation should be proportionate to the time multiplier setting but on account of the inertia of the rotor this is not possible at low current values. Since standard relays are built on a production line basis, certain tolerances in operating t&es are allowed. Figure 6 illustrates the permissible errors in accordance with IS I 3231-1965*. *Specification for electricalrekys for power systemprotection. 12

IS: 3842 (PartI)-

PICK UP ERRORS 1.05 TO 1.3 TIMES THE SETTING

/
43 30

20 B f,
; z g i= 6`3 3 2

4-T
1 2 L 5

+_12.5% TIME ERRORS

10

1 10 CURRENT 20 MULTIPLE OF PLUG SETTING tF&. 6

SEITING

PJIRMRWBLE ERROR AT TIME MULTIPLIEK FOR F'ROTECTIVE RELAYS

4.4.2 V+4werse- Time Relays 4.42.1 The time-current characteristic of such relay is shown by curve
b in Fig. 2 and is eypres& following applications : by It=IC. These relays are suitable for the

4

Feeders supplied from large generating systems where the shortcircuit current magnitude is practically constant; sub-transmission lines where there is a substantial reduction in fault current as the distance from the power source increases; Loop systems where it is necessary to have approximately the same interval between operating times for faults. at the near end and far end of the protected section; and Where fast operation is required over a restricted current range. 13

W Long 4 4

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967 4.4.2.2 Figure
time-current 7 gives a comparison characteristics. of the very-inverse and inverse

PRIMARY

CURRENT

IN

AMPERES

----

A.O.C.D n'.e'.d.o'

STANDARD

lDMT1

RELAVS

VERY INVERSE TIME-CURRENT CHARACTERISTIC RELAYS

FIG. 7

COMPARISON OF VERY-INVERSE AND INVERSE TIME-CURRENT CHARAETERISTICS

4.4.3

Extremely-Inverselime Relays

4.4.3.1 Curve C of Fig. 2 shows the time-current characteristic of extremely-inverse relays. The characteristic of thii relay can be represented by'Pt=K. Since only a small difference in current is necessary to obtain adequate selectivity, this relay is very useful for distribution and industrial feeders where it is necessary that the relay should ride through the high initial load current when a feeder is energized after an outage and yet provide fast operatiori on short-circuit faults. Because. its characteristic is the same as the heating characteristic of most of the electrical apparatus, it is also useful for protection against over heating. Typical applications are earthing transformers, power transformers, cables and railway trolley wires. 4.4.3.2 It also provides accurate 14 discrimination

rt-c,k;::`:b which can seldom be made selective with standard IDMTL

with fuses and autorelays.

IS:

3S42 (PartI)-

Care should also be taken in applying these relays on systems where standard IDMTL relays are used and eo+r&nation between the two types shall` be checked. 4.4.4 Special Inverse-Time Ch&tics - The time-current ~haractaisti~ enclosed fuses approximates to P5t=K and even the extremely-inverse relays cannot be considered to provide 100 percent discrimination with them. Only static relays can achieve still more inverse charaCte2%ti*l than the extremely-inverse relays. It is possible to obtain the characteristic Dt=K, for n>2 at higher currents by altering the circuit parameters of the static relays. For mercury arc rectifiers which have a time-current characteristic of 19=X, the static relays are admirably suitable.
of

5. DATA REQJJIRED FOR RELAY

SETI'INGS

5.1 Basic Data - The basic data required before determining the settings of the relays are given belowa) A single-line diagram of the system which should give the ratings and impedances of rotating plants, transformers, feeders, etc. It is desirable that any likely additions in the near future are also included. The details of instrument transformers and the protective relays and `other devices should also be shown. b) Maximum and minimum values of short-circuit currents at all the relay points. Short-circuit current contributed by the users' own power generators and other rotating plants should also be considered. c) Characteristic curves of current transformers. d) Characteristic curves of the relays, circuit breaker series trip coils,. and the fuses which have to be co-ordinated. 5.2 Fault Currents for the Operation of Ove rcnrrent Relays - The type, settings and time of operation of the overcurrent relay depends upon the magnitude of the fault current. 5.2.1 Hinged Armature hshtme

ous Relays 5.2.1.1 Since these relays can operate within the first half cycle of

asymmetrical fault current, sub-transient reactance of the rotating plant should be used for calculating the fault current for the operation of these relays, if situated near the generating plant. In industrial distribution net work, the contribution of f&rIt current by synchronous.machines and local induction motors should also be included. The symmetrical `fault current should be multiplied by I-6 to obtain the magnitude of the asymetrical fault current. 5.2.1.2 At locations remote from generating plant where the d%ct of transmission line, transformers or cable impedances are predominant the decrement effect is negliible. Therefore, in such cases only the transient 15

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967
reactance of the rotating plant need be considered. relays where time of operation is one cycle or more. This also applies to

5.2.2 Time-Delay Induction Relays - These relays are too slow to be affected by the sub-transient reactance and their maximum operating current is the initial value of symmetrical fault current on the basis of transient reactance. However, where these relays are being used for back-up protection near the generating station which supplies most of the fault current+ generator shortcircuit decrement curves should be consulted for determmmg the pick-up of the relays particularly if the operating time of the relay is 1 second or more. 5.3 Setting of Relays -The current settings of relays should be high enough to carry normal overloads and yet low enough to operate the relay positively on the minimum short-circuit current. Normally there will be plenty of margin between the two values., Occasionally the difference may be small and discrimination between the two doubtful. In such cases, it is better to specify relays that do not operate on current magnitude alone, such as, voltage-controlled relays. For every relay, two settings, that is, current and time settings, are required. 6. SETTING

AND CO-ORDINATION RELAYS FOR FEEDERS

OF OVERCURRENT

relays may be used both for main as well as back-up protection. Modern practice is to use distance, carrier and pilot wire schemes for the main protection of high voltage feeders. Overcurrent relays provide the most economical and reliable back-up protection for phase and earth faults. Sometimes distance relays are used for the main protection against phase faults only. The overcurrent relays then are used for the main protection against earth faults. Two typical applications of the overcurrent relays for back-up protection are shown in Fig. 8 and 9. In Fig. 8 a standard IDMTL relay is used while in Fig. 9 overcurrent relay with definite time-lag characteristic is shown. Remote back-up relaying with overcurrent relays, however, is made ineffective sometimes on interconnected power systems or where power is in-fed at a number of locations, 6.1.2 Faster back-up times can be achieved with a non-directional inverse-time overcurrent relay with an instantaneou< ur,it as shown in Fig. 8. As the reach of the time-delay overcurrent relays (IDMTL and definite time) varies with generating conditions and in-feed, these may cover at times more than one line section. Therefore, these relays shall be given a time setting of at least one second, that is, corresponding to the third zone time setting of a distance relay. Referring to Fig. 9, a fault at X is normally cleared by the distance relay at B if the distance relay at C fails to operate. If the distance relay at B cannot operate because of a

6.1 General 6.1.1 Overcurrent

16

Is t __DISTANCE RELAY IDMTL + INSTANTANEOUS OVERCURRENT RELAY WITHOUT IN-FEED

ir.

. (PartI)-

WITH AT C

IN-FEED

AT C

2 z

A

I

B

I
BIN-FEED DISTANCE Fso. 8 LOCAL FAULT

BACK-UP PROTEC~ON WI'W INVRRSE AND INsTANTANROUS OVRRCURRRNT %XAYS
DISTANCE RELAV TIMELAG RELAV

_---

DEFINITE

, w
E

`;-i,-;-"__;_,_.;

E
6.

A
B I. B-

I
I
DIN-FEED DISTANCE FAULT

c 1

Fxo. 9

LOCAL BACK-UP PROTECTION WITH DRFINIT~ TIE-LAO OVRRCURRRNT~LAYS

heavy in-feed at C, the time-delay overcurrent relay at C will operate and clear the Emit. For a fault near the bus-bar C, if distance relay at C fails to operate, distance relay at B will operate earlier than the time-delay overcurrent relay at C. Therefore, back-up, protection for line faults will be always available. 17

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967 6.2 Settings for Definite Time-Lag Relays - On account of the factors mentioned in 4.2, the earth-fault current on certain systems may be of very low value for which relays with 5 percent or less settings should be used. However, relays with such low settings are susceptible to maloperation due to unbalance in load currents or current transformer output and therefore while applying these relays manufacturers should be consulted. Where these relays are used as back-up protection for high voltage feeders reference may also be made to 6.1 (see Fig. 9). 6.3 Setting of Instantaneous Overcurrent Relays - Maximum use of instantaneous overcurrent relays along with the standard IDMTL relays is.made on long transmission lines and on sub-transmission line transformer feeder circuits which provide sufficient impedance between two relay locations (see 7). The relays protecting the feeders but located near the power source should be set for faster operating times than those protecting the generators. In industrial and distribution systems instantaneous relays cannot be made selective on ordinary lengths of cables because the circuit impedances are too low to provide the necessary current differential between two successive relays in series. It is preferable, therefore, to use the instantaneous relays on the branch feeders at the receiving end of the main feeder cables. This provides fast selective tripping of the branch circuits in trouble. Had the instantaneous relays been used on the main feeders, a f$ult on one of the branch feeders would have shut down all the branch circuits regardless of the fault location. However, on systems where instantaneous relays can be used the considerations mentioned in 6.3.1 and 6.3.2 govern the setting of relays. 6.3.1 Phase-Fault Relays - The following considerations govern the settings of the instantaneous overcurrent relays for phase faults: a) * relays should operate for the maximum fault current well within the far end of the protected zone, and b) The relay should be adjusted not to operate for a fault in the adjoining zone when the maximum fault current flows. To meet the above two considerations, account should be taken of the overreach characteristic of the instantaneous overcurrent relay. Where accurate data is not available and the source to line impedance ratio is small it is recommended to set the relays to operate at 125 to 135 percent of the maximum symmetrical fault current at the far end, that is, the relay protects about 70 to 80 percent of the feeder or the protected zone. However, to allow accurately for the overreach, percent transient overreach curve for the relay, similar. to the one shown in Fig. 4, should be obtained from the manufacturer. Nor~-The maximumfault currentis die 3;phase fault current for such relays. The line coverage for phase-to-phase faults will be skhtly less. 18

&S: 3642 (PartI)6.3.1.1An example of the setting of the above type of relay is given below : Assume that the instantaneous overcurrent relay has an overreach of 20 percent for a fault whose steady state component of current is 16A. If the relay is not to operate for this fault, the relay setting must exceed: 100x 16 100 B 100 - percent transient overreach =!oo-_20 = 20A where B =steady state component Thus the setting of the instantaneous overcurrent relay should be above 20A. It may be added that nowadays instantaneous overcurrent relays with low overreach characteristic are available.
6.3.2 Earth-Fault Relays - The principles of setting for the earth-fault relays are the same as for phase-fault relays, except that the value of fault currents for setting a relay should be for a single line-to-earth fault. Generally a setting of more than 20 percent will give adequate protection and it is better not to adopt too low a setting (see also 6.2). 6.3.2.1 In Fig. 10 is given an example of the use of instantaneous overcurrent relays along with standard IDMTL overcurrent relays. It may be seen that with the use of high set instantaneous overcurrent relays, the IDMTL relays at A, B, and C need be selective only at the reach point of the instantaneous overcurrent unit. Thus in addition to obtaining high speed protection, for about 80 percent of the line, faster tripping times for the IDMTL relays are possible as an additional advantage. 6.4 Settings for IDMTL

Relays

section for the minimum fault current. Phase-to-phase fault current should be considered for phase-fault relays, and line to earth-fault current for earth-fault relays. 6.4.1.2 The settings for phase-fault element may be as high as 150 to 200 percent of full-load current. The relay shall not operate at a current ec+l to or less than the setting and the minimum operating current shall not exceed 130 percent of the setting. While choosing the setting, account should be taken of the minimum operating current of the relay. The -earth-fault element is not affected by the 3-phase balanced current and may therefore be set at low values. Generally, the setting of these relays is between 20 to 80 percent of the current transformer rating. The effects of Earth resistance may arc and earth resistance should also be considered. range over such wide limits that the only practical thing to do is to measure the value for any given locality. As for the arc resistance, at least the resistance of the arc when it first occurs should be taken into account. 19

6.4.1 Current Settings 6.4.1.1The reach of the relay should be up to the end of the adjoining

IS: 384z(PartI)-1967
C
INSTANTANEOUS

B
50 WA INSTANTANEOUS 150 WA INSTANTANEOUS

k

300

HVA

&Xt&"

CURRENT TRANSFORMER

15op RATIO

2*0

zi g t ,,, 5 2 F

1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4

0.2

0.1 1

CURRENT

IN

AMPERES

NOTE -A not used.

and B are

IDMTL

characteristic curves when instantaneous units are

FIG. 10

APPLICATIONOF IDMTL RELAYS WITH HIGH-SET INSTANTANEOUS OVERCURRENTUNITS

6.4.1.3 Earth-fault relays are liable to maloperation due to the following reasons: a) Saturition of current transformers during phase fault, b) Unbalanced currents from current transformers or the normal system load unbalance, and c) Induction effects in a parallel unfaulted line for earth faults on the faulted line. In most cases, the difficulties may be overcome by increasing current setting or the time delay. A low setting should be used with utmost care specially in solidly earthed systems which produce high earth-fault currents. 6.4.1.4 To take advantage of the inverse part of the characteristic, the highest possible current setting should be chosen. 20

Is:

3842 (Parta)-1967

6.4.1.5 Where the overload-withstand ability of relays is also a firctor to be considered, the current through the relay should be limited to about 20 times the lowest current setting by adopting a higher current setting or a higher current transformer ratio.
6.4.2 Time Settitegs

6.4.2.1 The relay farthest from the supply source should be set fbr the lowest possible operating time.
6.4.2.2 Co-ordinating time intervals which are usually of the orda of 0.4 to 0.5 seconds should be allowed between the time of operation d two adjacent relays. However, it will be' necessary to calculate the COordinating time interval if a lower co-ordinating time interval is rtquired. 6.4.2.3 Example showing the calculations for the co-ordinating time betwrm two adjacentrelays: The di&rence where II = the operating time of the relay at location 1, T, = the operating time of the relay at location 2, between the operating time of the adjacent relays: T1- l-2=B,f0,+E+F

Ba = the opening time of the breaker at location 2,
O1 = overshoot of relay at location 1,

E = errors in the operating times of relays at location 1 and location 2 (made additive to allow for a bigger safety margin and are in accordance with IS : 3231-1965*), and

F = the safety factor.
Values for a typical relay are as below: Breaker time Overshoot Relay `errors at locations 1 and 2 0.1 to O-16 second 0.04 to O-1 second 0.2 to 0.3 second
calculated when the fault

NOTE -The relay errors can be more accurately current and the time setting multiplier are known.

Factor of safety Total time

0:06 to 0.1 second 0.4 to O-66 second

6.4.2.4 Adjustment should be made for the maximum S-phase symmetrical fault current for a fault located beyond the adjacent relaying point. This will ensure selectivity for lower fault currents. 6.4.3 The following example shows the caiculations for the setting of a relay with IDMTL curve whose time-current characteristics are shown in Fig. 11. *Specification for electricalrelays for power system protection. 21

IS: 3842(PartI)-1967
It is required that the relay operates in 2 seconds on a short-circuit current of -6 000 A. The current transformer ratio is 400/5 and the normal fullload current is 300 A. The relay current setting .range is 50 to 200 percent in step of 25 percent. Let the current setting be at 125 percent, that is, about 66 percent above the normal full-load current: 6 OOCx5 Then secondary value of short-circuit current = = 75 A; this 400 corresponds to 12 times the plug setting of the relay (625 A). From Fig. 11, at 12 times the plug setting, the time of operation of the relay is approximately 2.8 seconds if the time setting multiplier is 1. Therefore, the time setting multiplier should be adjusted to: -&==o-7
10

8-O 6.0

0.1
I

2

4

6 OF

610 PLUG

20 SETTING

40 CURRENT

60

80 lt

MULTIPLES

FIG. 11 TIME-CURRENT CHARACTERISTICS OF A STANDARD IDh4TL RLELAY

22

Is:

3842(PartI)-l!w

NOTE - As the operating current may be up to l-5 times the plug sctting, it is prcfkrable to set the relay at 100 pacent whtch would provide better protection against prolonged overloads. In this case the time setting multiplier would be 0.8 to get the operating time equal to 2 seconds.

6.4.3.1 Setting and co-ordination of IDMTL relays --phase-fault relays Figure 12 shows a simple radial circuit being fed at end A only. At each station the fault level and the current transfbrmer ratios are indicated. For deciding the setting and co-ordination, the first step is to prepare a transparent template of the time-current characteristicsof the relays used for the protection of the circuit. This is made by plotting the relay characteristic corresponding to the time setting multiplier of 1 on a log graph paper in such a way that the origin corresponds to 1 second along the Y axis and 100 percent plug setting along the X axis. A typical template curve is shown in Fig. 13. The curve is then transf&.on to a transparentmaterial. To obtain the set.tings at the various substations in the radial circuit shown in Fig. 12 the sett' of the relay Wthest from the source is taken up e-fault current at this station is 50 MVA at first. The maximum 3-p % 11 kV, that is, 2 620 A. This is 52 times the primary rating of the current transformer, well over its saturation value. In order to obtain the lowest possible time of operation at this location the plug setting of 100 percent and the time setting multiplier of O-1 are selected. A log log graph is prepared with time in seconds along the Y axis and current in amps in the primary circuit at 11 kV along the X axis, as is shown in the lower half of Fig. 12. The next step is to tran&r the curve on the transparent template to this log log graph so that the origin of the template rests against 50 A and O-1 second, that is, 100 percent plug setting and the time multiplier scale of O-1. The relay setting at location D, that is, next to substationE should give a discrimination of O-5 second (or whichever co-ordination time interval is decided). The template is moved on the log log graph so that the time of operation of the relay at D must not approach that of the relay at E by less than O-5 second UP to the maximum value of fault current that can fiow at s&ion E. It will ne seen that the settingsat D come out to 150 percent and O-3 second. The procedure for setting the relays at stations C, B and A is the same. The current and time settings and the characteristic graphs at these stationsare shown in Fig. 12. A further advantage of this method is @at the circuit-breakeroperating time, the overshoot and the relay error maybe plotted to see that the safety factor is reasonable. In Fig. 12 this is shown for stationsB and C. The co-ordination time interval of O-5second has been taken in the above example. It mav become necessary to calculate this interval more accurately in case the tie of operation of the relay at the location next to the source may be too long. The procedure for calculating the co-ox-dir&or time interval is explained in 6.U 23

CURRENl TRANSFORMER IO 8

. . . . . ._

2 -OVER SHOOT

1 04

Od

0.1

10 OF TEUPLAlE

100

1000

L

10000

~

ORIGIN

SHORT-CIRCUIT

Y

CURRENTS

FAULT CURRENT

IN AMPERES
A

FIG. 12 SETRNG AND C~O-ORDDIATION OF IDMTL, RELAYSFOR RAmAL ChIWJIT FED ATONE END ONLY

Is : 3842 (PartI)--1967

TMS = Time setting inuItiplicr (or time multiplier scale)

Fro. 13 TEldpw'rz.

FOR

&mnm

IDMTL

&LAYS

It may not be too much to add that a check should be made regarding the ability of the cables to withstand the short-circuit current for the duration of the time of the operation of the relays. Data giving the short-circuit withstand abiity of the cables should be obtained front the manufacturers. The example given above is a &nple one in order to illustrate how selectivity is achieved with standard IIX@I'L relays. But in actual practice the networks are more complex. The networks should be divided into sections consisting of 4 or 5 stationsand the principles enunciated above be applied. It may be necessary to do the exercise a few times before arriving at the final settings. -Thins is particuhu~y true for loop circuits and especially if there is in-feed at a number of locations. The trial and error methods is the. only way to proceed with such circuits. However, the use of template after some experience becomes instinctive and the length of time involved in settings is reduced to a very little percentage of that normally required for obtaining them by arithmetical methods. The template method is of definite advantage where different types of relays are used. 6.431 Setting and co-ordination of IDMTL relays - earth-fault relays The method of setting earth-fkult relays is the same as explained in 6.4.3.1. Since no current flows through the earth-fault relays in the systemsnormally having balanced J-phase load conditions, the earth-fault relays may have current settings lower than those generally used for phase-fault relays. However, in distribution networks single phase loads are likely to be present and the effect of expected unbalanced currents in the neutral must be taken 25

into account in choosing the current setting. The earth-fault relays may abo be set to trip faster than phase-fatilt relays because firstly the later have to be selective with the phase-fault relays next to their location and also because of the fact that the earth-huh relay cannot see the fault current through star-delta or delta-star power transformers. The earth-fault relays operate satistactorily over their entire tap range provided current transformers have high accuracy. The relay. may not, however, operate on the lowest tap if it is connected to bushing type current transformers of low turns ratio. This is because the ratio accuracy of the bushing current transformers breaks down on account of high impedance of the relay at its lowest current tap. If on checking it is found that the relay may not operate, it is preferable to use a higher current tap on the relay or the current transformer. The earth-fault relays may also maloperate during a phase fault because of the current transformer errors. It has been found that the magnitude of the current error may be as much as 30 to 40 percent or even more. One solution may be to increase the earth-fault current setting but this may result in greater damage during an earth fault. The better alternative is to select the minimum relay pick-up consistent with positive operation and then prevent maloperation by giving a one step slower operating time. In systems where current limiting impedances are used in the neutral of generator or power transformer the application of earth-fault relays needs careful consideration. The more sensitive the earth-fault relay the greater possibility $here is of its maloperation on account of current transformer error currents. Secondly, the e&&t of limiting earth current is to reduce the difference in mawitude of earth-fault currents at diiixent locations. If this difference is small then the inleiso-time characteristic is of little use and selectivity should be obtained on the basis of time alone. 6.5 Setting of Very-Inverse ovecmmat Relays

6.51 Figure 14 shows 4 substations on a radial fcedcr. The fault levels and the current transformer ratios at the substations arc indicated. It may be seen that the fault 1cveJs at the consecutive stations are of `the order of 4 : 7 or .i : 2. This permits the best use of very-inverse relays because the timecurrent characteristic of very-inverse relays is such that the time of operation is nearly halved when the fault cLlrrenthappenstobebetween4to7times of the plug setting multidicr, that is, the inverse part of the &arac&stic is made use of. 6.5.2 Another advantage of using these relays is that the coordinating time interval between the relays at two locations can be brought down to O-35 seconds which can be explaiied as below: a) Circuit breaker opening time b) Overshoot 10.16 4.05 second. second.

26

Is:
D
BOMVA

3842 (Parq.1967
A

C
100 NVA

B

CURREN~R*;;F.~FORMER X0/5 50015 tson

10.0

---

VERY IDMTL

INVERSE RELAV

RELAV

100
FAULT

500 CURRENT

1000 IN AMPERES

5000

10000

50000

FIG. 14 SETTING OF VERY-INVERSE RELAYS c) Relay errors, that is, positive at one location and negative at the other location: 1) at 4 times relay setting and 0.2 time setting =0.084 second, multiplier at 12.5 percent error 2) at 7 times relay setting and O-2 time setting =0927*second. multiplier at 7.5 percent error Total t&e =0~16+0~05+0~084+0~027 =0*32 1 second;

The co-ordinating time interval of O-35 second thus provides reasonable safety margin. 6.5.3 The settings and the co-ordinations of the relays are obtained by the template method, already explained. To make the difference between the

27

10: 3842(PartI)-1967
use of very-inverse and IDMTL relaya obvious, dotted curves on Fig. 14 : show the operating time characteristics of the later at various relay locations, using the same settingsfor both the.rela~ The IDMTL relays at B and A do not allow sufficient time for ducnmmation. Also, the minimum time of operation of the two types of relays (for a fault in its own zone) will be as follows: V7L-s

ZDMn, S.%O?ld
0.27 046 0.63' 0.7

D
c

.

o-15 O-26

B A

O-36
0.4

65.4 An approximate method is also sometimes used to achieve coordination. The same time setting multiplier is used at all the relay locations. Settings of the various relays are selected so that the fault current at its own location and those at the location befbre it are 7 and 4 times respectively of the plug setting multiplier. 6.6 Settiug ofExtremely=Invme Relays

6.6.1 In distribution systuns, the operation of the feeder circuit breaker has to be co-c&mated with the fuseson the high voltage side of distribution transformers. For simple radial distribution circuits, it is enough to draw the time-current characteristic of the extremely-inverse relay and the fusesmaking provision for a co-ordinating time interval of O-4to 0.5 second. However, it is normal practice to sectionalize the distribution circuilts with fuses or reclosers or both so as to interrupt a section of the distribution circuit only in cast of persistent faults on a particular section. An instantaneous overcurrent attachment is added to the extremely-inverse relay so that the auto-reclosersoperate before the fusesare blown on transient 6udts. The instantaneousovercurrent relay is removed fioin service as the first reclosure takes place. If the fault persists the fuse blows before the extremely-inverserelay operates. As the majority of the faults in distribution systemsare transientin nature_, unnecessaryblowing of fusesis thus avoided. Figure 15A shows a distributton system with fusesand circuit breaker with auto-reclosingfacility and Fig. 15Bshows the grading. The extremely-inverse relay operating the circuit breaker 2 and the fuses A and B on either side of the feeder transformer arc time graded providing a co-ordinating time interval of 0.4 second between the operating time of the fusesand the relay.
6.6.2 To set extremely-inverse relays on distribution systemsin which the initial load current is many times the normal full load current when it is re-energized after an outage, that is, cold load restoration it is usefulto have the load current versus time curve of the distribution system. Figure 16 shows a typical curve. Assuming that the ovcrcurrent element is set to operate at 200 percent of full load, the curve in Fig. i6 shows that the 28

Is:3842

(Part I) - 1967

EXTREMELY NVERSE RELAY

0

INVERSE

RELAY

B 300kVA WI0415kV

_Et
-c14+

FUSE AN0 AUTO RECLOSER ' '

CURRENT TRANSFORMER RELAY

ct7 EXTREMELV INVERSE RELA.

Q 415v FEEDER

Q 015v FEEDER

Full-load Fuse A -

current of main transformer Rating=

=

2000 I 43x33=

=

35 A on 33 kV side 350 A on 3.3 kV side

100 A, 33 kV HRC Fuse = 350 0~ = 7 000 A

Fault current at secondary

300
Full load current Fuse B Rating=75 of distribution
transforms = fl x

3.3 =

52A

A, 3.3 kV HRC 050 A

Fuse

Fault, current at B=l

ISA Circuit Diagram

FIG. 15

EXTREMELY-INVERSERELAYS USED FOR CIRCUIT-BRI?AKERS WITH AUTO-RECLOSING FACILITY IN CONJUNCTION WITH FUSESFOR DISTRIBUTION NETWORIB

current higher than the setting persists for about 2.3 seconds. The average value of the current over this period should be worked out, which in this example is about 170 percent of the relay setting. Therefore, the !ime setting multiplier is selected so that the relay operating time at l-7 times the plug setting multiplier is more than 2.3 seconds. In practice, the instantaneous overcurrent relay will invariably operate after prolonged outages. The trip circuit of the instantaneous overcurrent relay is opened manually to allow for the load currents to fall below its setting. 29

IS: 3&12(PartI)-1967

AMPERES IO0 700 .lOOo !OOOO AMPERES

AT 3.3"" 47 33kY

A = 100 A, 33 kV fuse characteristic B = 75 A, 3.3 kV fuse characteristic C = Circuit-breaker h&-current characteristic D = IDMTL overcurrent relay characteristic E = Extremely-inverse overcurr ent relay characteristic Current setting 100 percent rime multiplier O-2 Fuse Tolnanccs B' 7 Manufacturing tolerance B" = Arcing time toleranti B"' =' Minus 10 percent tolerance for possible fuse damage ISB Grading

FIG. 15

EXTREMELY-INVERSE RELAYS USED FORCIRCUIT-BREAKERS WITHAUTO-RECLOSING FACILITYIN CONJUNCTION WITH FUSESFOR DP~RIBUTION NETWORKS

6.7 Overcurrent

Relays wi&

ac Tripping

are also available for use at substationswhere provision of battery and the associated charging equipment is rather uneconomical. In one type, a tripping reactor is connected in series with the relay coil in the current transformer secondary circuit. The tripping coil of the circuit breaker is connected across this tripping reactor

6.7.1 Overcurrent relays with ac tripping

30

Is : 3842 (PartI)-x367

TIME IN FIG. 16

SECONDS

COLD LOAD RESTORATION CURVE

through the contact of the overcurrent relay. Figure 17 shows the comrections for a triple pole overcurrent relay. During a short-circuit, voltage drop through the reactor is sufficient to operate the trip coil when the overcurrent relay closes its contacts. However, this method is effective only if the short circuit current is equal to or higher than the rated load current because at low-fault currents the current transformers are unable to produce sufficient voltage. Saturation of the tripping reactor limits the voltage to a safe value at high-fault currents. Shunt resistors (not shown in the diagram) are used to hold down the peak value of this voltage. Reliable tripping can be ensured for both phase and earth faults.
SINGLE PHASE OVERCURRENT RELAY

CIHCU~T- BREAliER TRIP COIL

WITHAN FIG. 17 TYPICAL WIRINGDIAGRAMOF ac TRIPPING OVERGURRENT RELAY AND A `TRIPPING REACTOR 31

Is:

3842(PartI)-1967

6.7.2 The circuit of another type of ac tripping overcurrent relay is shown in Fig. 18. Internally it has an instantaneous +t which opens a normally closed contact when the main relay closes its normally open contact. This allows the fault current to flow through the trip coil which operates the circuit breaker. Before using this relay the following points should be checked : a) The current transformers have sufficient output at the minimum setting of the relay to operate the trip coil. b) The current rating of the normally closed contact of the instantaneous unit should be ascertained from the manufacturers. The current flowing through it should be limited if necessary by external resistance.
NOTE - An example for working out the values of the series resistor and tne saturating choke is given in 6.7.4. c)

The voltage which appears across the contacts is- also sometimes a limitation and its value should be ascertained from the manufacturer.

CIRCUIT-BREAKER

SINGLE PHASE SERIES

OVERCURRENT RELAY

FIG. 18

TYPICAL WIRING DIAGRAM OF ac SERIESTRIPPINQ OVERCURRENT RELAY

6.7.3 Alternate current tripping relays are basically inferior because of their lesser sensitivity. Their contacts require more maintenance because of the severe duty imposed on them. The burden imposed on the current transformer is high and because of this, accurate metering cannot be provided from the same current transformer. 6.7.4 Exantple Showing the Calculation of Choke Inipedance and Resirtance 6.7.4.1 To determine the values of choke impedance and resistance the following data should be collected: a) The knee point voltage and the maximum voltages of the current transformers, 32

Is:

3842 (PaHI)-

b) The

impedance of the trip coil at the maximum and minimum tripping currents in both the plunger up and phmger down `positions, The secomlary resistance of the current transformers and the leads,

The burden of the relay, and Fault currents in the primary circuit. 6.7.4.2 It is assumed that a series trip IDMTL relay having a current setting of 50 to 200 percent of 5 A is used. It has an impedance of 0.025 a at 20 times the tap current. The normally closed contacts can break a current of 150 A and withstand 150 V. The other data is as follows: Current traqfonners:
= loo/5 = 36 v Knee point voltage = 50 v Maximum voltage developed by current transformers = 0.12 Q Secondary resistance = o-01 Q Lead resistance Circuit-breaker rupturing capacity at 11 kV = 250 MYA 250 x IO* Maximum phase-fault current = 11006x~~ = 13 100 A Tr$ coil: R.&O

= 30 percent (1.5 A) Setting Impedance of the coil with plunger at the = 3.56 fi beginning of the stroke Impedance of the coil with plunger at the = 5.35 Q end of the stroke at minimum tripping current 6.7.4.3 Series resistor-The value of the current through the resistor should be limited to 150 A. The ohmic value of this resistor is given by: R = & where = = = = Rs = R V R, R, resistance maximum secondary resistance resistance of the series resistor in hms, rms voltage developed by the current transformer, resistance of the current transformer in ohms, of the relay in ohms, and of the leads in ohms. (R,+R,+Rs) Q

33

Is:

3642(PartI)-1967 Substituting the values given in 6.7.4.2:

R =

-+$I:

-(0~12+0~025+0~01)]

= 0.18 f2.

This value holds provided the. maximum voltage developed by the current transformer does not exceed 50 V. .6.7.4.4 Saturation choke- The unsaturated value of the impedance of the choke is calculated for the miniium operating value of the trip coil and the minimum relay setting. This is given by:

where c = unsaturated value of the impedance of the choke in ohms, II = minimum trip coil setting in amperes, ,& = trip coil impedance at minimum trip coil setting and with plunger up in ohms, Z$ = resistance of the series resistor in ohms, and Ze = minimum relay setting in amperes. Substituting the values given in 6.7.4.2: < = 1.5x (5.35+0.18)
1 1.2~(',55.-1.5) = 5*53 "

The saturated value of the choke impedance at 20 times the relay setting with current transformer voltage at knee point is given by: & = RGRJ

R-t_ Rz-`f
where = saturated value of the impedance of the choke in ohms; = the resistance of the series resistor in ohms; V = knee point voltage of the current transformer; I' = 20 times the maximum relay setting current; and R, = the combined secondary resistance of the current transformer, leads and the relay in ohms. &

R

Substituting

the values, we get: 36 0.18 x p 20x10 zz = 0.18 + 0.155 34

go

0.155

> = 0.029

n.

The

ratioof
that

the unsaturated to saturated choke -impedanceworks out In practice, a ratio of 48 : 1 is possible,

to $$,

is, roughly~*

that is, the saturated impedance of about O-138Q is attainable. Assuming that the relay is set at 200 percent and the saturated choke impedance of 0.138 Q is used, the relay will remain accurate up to 15.5times the maximum setting. However, if the relay is set at 100 percent it will remain accurate well over 20 times the setting. 6.8 Core Balance Earth-Fault Protection 6.8.1 Thiiform of protection consistsof a ring core current transformer which is designed to pass over S-core cables. The output from this current transformer is used to energize a current operated relay as shown in Fig. 19. This arrangement provides very sensitive earth-fault protection and is recommended for industrial and distribution feeders in mines. The earthfault settings as low as 5 A .(primary) may be obtained with this protection. The protection is normally quite stable for faults in other cables adjacent to the core balance current transformer and for phase faults in the protected cable.

Fro. 19 EARTH-FAULT PROTECTIONUsmo CORE B-on CURRENTTRANSFORMER

6.8.2 This protection may be used to give indication of earth faults in cable networks (see Fig. 20). This arrangement assistsin rapid location of feeder faults. A cable which is feeding an earth fault, energizes all the relays between the supply and the fault, permitting the faulty section to be readily indentified. The wre balance current transformer is designed to saturate during heavy earth faults, providing thermal protection to the relay by limiting the secondary current.

Is: m2(Ptutr)-1967

la
0

OPERATED UNOPERATED

REM REIAV

Fm. 20

INDICATION OF Ehxm~ FAULTS Usx~o

CURRENTTRANSFORMER

CORE B~LANGE

7. SETTlNG AND CO-ORDINATION
FOR TRANSFORMERS

OF OVERGURRENT

RELAYS

7.1 General-As a rule, diierential schemes are used for the main protection of large transformers and overcurrent relays provide the back-up protection. Generally for smaller transformers, that is, up to 5 WA, for economic reasons, overcurrent relays are used as main protection. The impedance of the transformers gives a sufficient fault current differential on the primary and secondary sides. This fact is made use of, especially on transformer feeders to achieve high speed tripping for faults up to the terminals of the secondary windings by using instantaneous overcurrent relays. 7.1.1 Phase-fault protection for transformers is relatively simple but the earth faults need careful analysis. The following factors should be kept in mind while applying the overcurrent relays for the protection (main or back-up) of transformers: . a) Magnetizing in-rush current-The IDMTL relays generally have sufficient time delay to ensure against false operation. The setting of the instantaneous overcurrent relays should be carefully chosen. b) Connections of the transformer delta-star connections give different current distribution on the primary and the secondary side for phaseto-phase faults. If only two overcurrent relays are. used for phasefault protection, the lower current should be used for the current setting, and the. higher current for the time setting. When the primary windings of the transformer are delta connected or have an unearthed star point, an earth-fault relay (connected in 36

rsr

3842 (F&tr)-1967

the residual circuit of &current tran&orme~~) on the primary side.
operates for internal faults on the primary windings, only because earth faults on the secondary windings do not produce zero phase sequence currents on the primary side. The restricted earth-fault protection (discussed in detail in 7.4) may then be used for high speed tripping for faults on the star-connected earthed secondary winding of the transformer. c) Primary full load current. 7.1.2 For 3-winding transformers IDMTL relays on each winding shalI be required if all the 3 windings are connected to sources of power. 7.13 The current transformers on the high voltage side of a transformer are of comparatively low ratio but are of ring pattem'because they have to withstand heavy fault currents. Their rated output and impedances are low. This consideration is of particular importance in the case of earthfault relays in the residual circuit of S-current transformers as the shunting effect of the low impedance secondaries in the healthy phases has a considerable effect upon the fault setting of the relay. 7.2 Settings of Overcurr ent Relays former Feeders for Transformers and Tram-

7.2.1 IDMTL Overcurrent RelaysIDMTL overcurrent relays are generally set at 125 percent of the transformer rating. The time delay of the IDMTL relays should be sufficient to override normal overload swings or magnetizing in-rush currents. If there are several transformers on the main feeder without individual primary side fault protection, the relay setting of 1.25 times the total full-load rating of all the transfi~~mersis ample. However, it shculd be ensured that this setting is adequa+e to clear the fault on the secondary side of the smallest transformer. If the transformers have their individual protection then the overcurrent relays on the main feeder should be <et to co-ordinate with the protection on the transformer. 7.2.2 Setting of Instantaneous Overcurrent R~kays

7.2.2.1 The setting of the instantaneous overcurrent relay on the primary side of the transformer should be a little above asymetrical value of the fault current for J-phase fault on the secondary terminals of the transformer. As far as possible the relays with a low transient overreach should be used or the effect of the overreach should be taken account of. `Ihe settin is usually high enough to override the magnetizing in-rush at the time 0 `r- energizing the transformer.
7.2.2.2 On a main feeder supplying several transformers, the current setting depends on the total magnetizing in-rush of the transformer banks and a setting of IO to 15 times the full-load rating is chosen for the instantaneous relay. 7.2.2.3 Where the application dictates that overcurrent relays should be 37

-IS:

3842(PartI)-1967

set at about 4 to 5 times the full load, a time delay is required to avoid maloperation. 7.3 External Fault Back-Up Protection - Inverse time relays with a long time delay are commonly used to give a final back-up protection for isolating the transformer or bus bar from the rest of the system if the earth fault persists and the other earth-fault relays do not clear it. The relay is connected to a current transformer in the neutral of the transformer. If there is a neutral grounding resistor or an earthing transformer, the relay is set for long time delay to permit the flow of current up to the thermal limit of the resistor or an earthing transformer, for example, if the resistor is rated for 10 seconds the relay would be set to operate between 7 to 10 seconds. 7.4 Earth-Fault
Feeders 7.4.1 Earth-Fault Protection for Delta or Unearthed Star-Connected Transformer Protection of Transformers and Transformer

7.4.1.1 An earth-fault relay connected in the residual circuit of the line current transformers gives protection against earth faults on the delta or unearthed star-connected windings of the transformers. As already stated in 7.1, earth faults on the secondary side of the transformer are not reflected on the primary side. Thus it is possible to obtain very low fault settings (for example, 10 percent of the full-load rating) and high speed tripping. The relay should be of the high impedance type to prevent wrong operation on false residual current from the 3-line current transformers during a heavy external fault between phases or during magnetizing current in-rush. Alternatively, a stabilizing resistor is introduced to increase the impedance of the relay coil circuit. This is seldom necessary for IDMTL overcurrent relays which have an inherent time delay but is essential for an instantaneous attracted armature type overcurrent relay. 7.4.1.2 It may also be seen that an earth fault on one line energizes only one of the S-line current transformers. The secondary current thus produced gets divided in the relay coil and the secondary windings of the unfaulted line current transformers. Therefore, the primary fault current required to operate the relay at the minimum current setting should be sufficient to allow for the shunting effect caused by the two healthy secondary windings of the current transformers. The primary current which will operate the relay is given by: 1, where = primary current, = magnetizing current of the current transformer at a voltage V = I~ximpedance of the relay coil, IR = operating current at the minimum setting of the relay, and .N = current transformer ratio. ;; 38 = (3 I,%f+IR) x.N

IS: 384!2 (PartI)7.4.1.3 Figure 21 shows an earth-fault relay connected in the residual dircuit of 3-current transformers for a delta-connected primary winding of the transformer.

2IA

Piotection

Suitable for Single Delta/Star

Transformer

or Transformer

Feeder

2lB

Protection

Suitable

for

Single Delta/Star Transformer an Adjacent Transformer overcurrent restricted relay earth-fault

or Transformer

Feeder with

A = Non-directional B = Non-directional

relay

FIG. 21 CONNECTION OF EAB.TH-FAULT RELAY IN THE RESIDUALCIRCUITOF THREE CURRENTTRANSFORMERS FOR PROTECTION OF TRANSFORMER WITH DELTA CONNECTED PRIMARYWINDING 7.4.2 Restricted Earth-Fault Protection- Tlne star-connected earthed winding of a transformer feedes may be protected by a restricted earth-fault relay which will operate for earth faults in its winding only, The connections for such a relay are shown in Fig. 22. It is basically a differential connection 39

IS: 3842(PartI)-1967 in which a current transformer in the neutral of the earthed star winding
is balanced against the residual current of the J-line current Very sensitive relays may be used to give high speed tripping. &ect of the healthy current transformers and the stability during external fault conditions, already detailed in 7.4.1, restricted earth-fault protective system also.
R

transformers. The shunting requirements apply to the

v a

R

V

B

CIRCUITBREAMER

1

Nom -

Current through the Relay I&J = I0 -

$? = 0

FIG 22 CONNECTIONS FOR RESTRICTED EARTH-FAULT PROTECTION FOR TRANSFORMER OR SHORT TRANSFORMER FEEDER Usually the total impedance of the relay and the series resistor is low enough to prevent the current transformers from developing voltages above 2 kV rms during the most severe internal fault. However, in some applications if the voltage is higher &an 2 kV rms a non-linear resistor may be required to limit the voltage and is connected across the relay and the stabilizing resistor. 7.4.2.1 The stabilizing resistor is chosen to ensure that the voltage developed under maximum fault current conditions does not operate the relay. - An example giving the calculations for the stabilizing resistor is given below : Relay : Instantaneous earth-fault relay Type 10 to 40 percent of 5 A Current setting range 1.0 VA at current setting Burden

Is:

3842 (PartI)-

CurrenttratqsJmers : = 100/5 Ratio = 36 V Knee-point voltage = 0.12 Q Secondary resistance (Rc~) Lead resistance (R,) = 0.01 ii2 Maximum phase-to-phase fault current (rms symmetrical value) Minimum relay current setting (I,) Impedance of the relay at minimum setting

7 2 000 A = 0.5 A r4&

Assumed that the resistive component of the above is 10. Minimum knee-point voltage (V,,) is given by the formula:

Vk,
where Vkl =2x2000x100

z

`2 2

c

fc7+Rd c

5

(0.12 + 0.01)

= 26 V I, = equivalent secondary pilot current of maximum phase-tophase fault, and R+ = total resistance of relay circuit. If S=stabiliiingresistance, total resistance of relay circuit (R,) =(8+4))n or O-5X (S+4) = 7 or S = 22L? A variable (or tapped) stabilizing resistance with a value of 0 to 3OQ will ensure that the current transformers meet the minimum knee-point requirements at the higher current settings also. The effective primary fault current setting (1,) for a given-relay cm-rent setting (I,) is given by the formula: I, = (3 &+I,) xn where IM = magnetizing current of the current transformerat voltage I, x R,. In the above wple, = O-5 A (10 percent setting) Relay setting I, Magnetizing current at (O-5x26) V = 044 A .*. Effective primary fault current setting I, = (3 x044+0.5) x F =: 36.5 A = 36.5 percent (using 100/5 current transformers) 41

IS : 3843 (Part I) - 1967 7.4.3 Ooercurrent Protection of Unit (or Station) Tmnsformfm - The application of over-current relays for the protection of unit transformers is different from that for power transformers for the following reasons:

a)

The unit transformer has very small rating compared to that of the main transformer, for example, for a hydra-generator its rating is about 1 percent of the rating of the main transformer. Therefore, the impedance of the station transformer is so high that the fault currents on the primary and secondary sides differ greatly in their magnitudes. provide adequate short-circuit protection and reasonable overload protection of the station transformer, low ratio current transformers which will saturate for faults on the high voltage side wilI have to be used but care has to be taken that their ratio is not so low as to cause maldiscrimination between protection on the high voltage and low voltage sides of the transformers for faults on the low voltage circuits. thermal rating of the relay should- be considered to protect its coils, if too large a current flows through it during faults within the transformer.

b) To

C>The

In view of the above considerations, an IIMKTL overcurrent relay is used to provide overload and back-up protection for faults beyond the secondary terminals of the transformer. It is supplemented by an instantaneous overcurrent relay with low transient overreach set to operate for faults within the transformer and on the primary side. 7.4.3.1 Figure 23 shows a imit transformer and an example is given below to make clear the application of the over current protection :
AUXILIAdlES L14V

111132 kV TRANSFORMER

132RV

-r

CIRCUIT-BREAKER

BUS BAR

132kV
42

TRlP415V CIRCIIIT-BREAKER

FIG. 23

PROTECTION OF A UNIT TRANSFORMER

Is:

3842 (PartI)-

Unit transformer:
Rating
Ratio

= 300 kVA = 11/O-415kV = 5 percent Impedance Vector group = Dy 11 at 11 kV

System fault level = 250 MVA cum?lt tratqformers :
Ratio Class Knee-point voltage Secondary resistance = 2015 = 15P5 =4Ov = 0-16Q

Relay : IDMTL overcurrentunac:
Current setting range = 50 to 100 percent of 5A = 1.0 VA Burden = 0*015n Impedance at 20 times current setting

Instantaneous overcument unit:
Current setting range = 500 to 2 000 percent of 5A Cuwent tmnsformer Lwi resistance=O* 1a If the sonrce impedance (5) is 10 percent on 17 h4VA base, impedance (&) of unit transformer on 17 MVA 17000 = 300 x0.05 = 300 percent Ratio of fault current on high voltage side of transformer fault current on low voltage side x8+& =-z-_ (lO-t300) 10 17 000 = 3*1xfixll = 300 A 43 = 31

Fault current on high voltage side (for a fault on the low voltage side}

Is:

3842(PartI)-1967 Setting of

instantaneous overcurrent relay:

A current setting of 125percent of 300 A is chosen considering 25 percent overreach, that is, a setting of 380 A may be given to this unit.

.' . Current setting = 2 Setting of IDMT+
Full-l&d

x 100

= 1900 percent overcwmzt relay:

current of unit transformer 300 = _ = 15.7 A &x11

Choosing a Setting of 16 A for the relay the 80 percent rap may be used. The IDMTL relay will then give protection for a short-circuit current of 380 = 24.times current setting and less. 16 7.4.4 Protection of Transformers in Parallel - When the transformer is operating in parallel with other units, in addition to pro&ion of the overctient relay (see 7.1) and the earth-fault relay (see 7.4.1.3), it will be necessary to have directional overcurrent and earth-fault relays on the secondary side to prevent the healthy section in parallel feeding into the faulty section, .although isoiated by the operation of the overcurrent relay on the feeding The principles of directional overcurrent relays are @l&nndY; ;de. 7.4.4.1 Overcurrent protection - Figure 24 shows a typical overload protection scheme for transformers operating in parallel, using overcurrent relays with both, non-directional and directional features. By having directional relay in each of the ptirallel transformer circuits in addition to non-directional relays, the possibility of feediig into the fault (phase-tophase) through the alternate parallel circuit (feed-back) is eliminated by the operation. of the directional overcurrent relay (having faster setting) thereby isolating the faulty section. Thus both the non-directional overcurrent relay on the primary side and the directional overcurrent relay, together, isolate the faulty transformer section without interrupting the other transformer Section in parallel, thereby achieving a proper .&icrimination. In the above typical protection circuit, the current coils of both, the non-directional and the directional relays (on the secondary side) are connected in series. The directional relay beiig power operated has in addition, voltage coils fed by a voltage transformer. The resistances connected in series `with the voltage coils cause shifting of voltage vector by 45" at which the maximum torque is obtainable. If the power flows in the normal direction, the torque on the directional element is such as to close the relay contact thereby shunting the dc time-delay contactor, 44

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967 preventing the relay tripping operation. But still the circuit-breaker will be tripped by the delayed contact of the non-directional relay. If, however, the power flow is in the reverse direction (due to feed-back), the relay contact of the directional relay will not be closed and the dc timedelay contactor will not be shunted. The circuit-breaker will trip after set time delay of the contactor. The time setting for directional relay is lower (about O-2 second) than that for non-directional relay (about 0.4 second).
SOUF$E G
SOURCE

Q

28 Q

DIRECTIONAL 0VERCURREN.T RELAY

BUS-COUPLER FIG.

24

OVERLOAD

PROTECTION OF TRANSFORMER

IN PARALLEL

7.4.4.2 Earth-fault phase-to-phase fault.

protection - The above protection is adequate for In addition, earth-fault protection would be 45

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967 necessary as shown in Fig. 25 (showing the secondary side only). The nondirectional or directional earth-fault relay is used, which is power operated having a voltage coil in addition to current coil. While the non-directional relay is connected in the neutral circuit of the line current transformers, the directional relay is connected across the open delta winding of the voltage transformers. Normally, there is no voltage across the open delta winding since the 3 voltages are balanced. However, in case of earth fault on any one phase, voltage will appear across the open delta, causing the relay to operate. If the power flow due to earth fault is in the normal direction, the movement of the relay contact is to close the contact of the non-directional element. If, however, the power flow is in the reverse direction (due to feed-back), the relay contact will move so as to close the contact of the directional element. The time setting for the directional relay is very low (about 0.2 second) compared to that for nondirectional relay (about 2 seconds).

NON - O!RECTlONAL

FIG.25 EARTH-FAULTPROTECTION OF TRANSFORMER IN PARALLEL 46

IS: 3842 (PartI)7.4.5 Protection of Earthing Transformers
7.4.5.1 Earthing transformers provide an earthing point for the power system. They are connected in star-delta or in zig-zag formation. The neutral of either type may be earthed solidly, or through a resistance. 7.4.5.2 Whenever a fault occurs in an earthing transformer it contributes zero sequence current only and the positive or negative sequence currents flow only towards it and not from it. Therefore, the faults in the earthing transformer may be easily protected by overcurrent relays fed by delta-connected current transformers. A triple-pole instantaneous overcurrent relay as shown in Fig. 26 provides protection for faults on the earthing transformer. The relays are set between 25 percent to 50 percent of the continuous rating of the earthing .transformer. The primary current of the current transformers should be equal to the rating of the power transformer. It is usual to add a long time delay inverse-time overcurrent relay for back-up protection against external faults. Thi; relay is connected within the delta connections of the current transformers as shown in Fig. 26. Only one single pole relay is considered adequate as during external fault conditions the currents will be circulated in the delta-connected current

TRANSFORMER

TRANSFORMER

AB-

Instantaneous External fault

overcurrent back-up

relay relay

overcurrent

FIN. 26

PROTECTION SCHEME FOR EARTHING TRANSFORMER

47

1�3:3842(Part1)-1967
transformers. During external faults, zero sequence currents flow in the rimaries of the current transformers and the back-up relay is energized. 5% e time setting is chosen to co-ordinate with the thermal rating of the resistor {if used) or with the time settings of other earth-fault relays so as to isolate the transformer or bus-bar from the rest of the system on a persistent earth fault. 7.4.6 Protation of Recti& Transformer Units 7.4.6.1 Overcurrent relays with very-inverse or extremely-inverse time characteristics may be used for the overload protection of recti6er transformers. Actual protection depends on the class and type of rectifiers, for example, mercury arc rectifiers or silicon rectifiers. Static relays with characteristics which closely match the overload characteristics of the rectifiers may be used. The instantaneous overcurrent and instantaneous earth-fault relays are also used on the primary side of the rectifier transformer to protect against phase and earth faults on the primary winding. Instantaneous overcurrent relays will also protect against phase-to-phase faults on the secondary .side, rectifier back-fires and heavy dc through faults. 7.4.6.2 For faults on the rectifier, like an arc back-fire, high speed anode circuit-breakers or high speed HRC fuses are used to clear them in a very short time, about 1 cycle or less. However, a time-lag overcurrent relay on the primary side of the transformer is normally provided as a back-up protection for this. This current setting is slightly above shorttime rating of the rectifier and provides a time delay just high enough to ensure the necessary discrim' lnation for the high-speed anode breakers or fuses to trip off. A time delay of 100 to 150 ms is generally provided and is sufficient to provide the necessary selectivity. For this, an induction type of relay with the extremely-inverse characteristic is generally used or an induction relay of the very-inverse type is provided to take care of overloads over' the short-time rating and high-set relay (operating at about four times the continuous rating) with a time lag of about 80 ms is applied for the back-up protection against arc backs. In addition, an instantaneous overcurrent element is also provided to take care of inte#nal faults in the transformer. This is set high enough to override the arc backs and dccircuit faults. Where correct data is not available, a setting of about 8 to 10 times continuous rating of the transformer may be provided. An instantaneous earth leakage relay is generally added to provide the necessary protection on the primary winding if the earth-fault currents are not high endwgh to operate the high set relay. 7.4.6.3 In rectifiers where the anode fuse or anode circuit-breaker is not provided, the high set instantaneous overcurrent'relay is set just above the magnetic in-rush value of the transformer and should protect the transformer and rectifier against arc backs also. If no data is given by the manufacturer these relays can be set to override the magnetization in-rush current. 46

MERCURY

ARC

A = Very-inverse time overcurrent relay B = High-set instantaneous overcurrent relay C = Restricted earth-fault relay relay D = Time-delay FIG.

E = Slugged auxiliary relay F = Main ac circuit-breaker C = Direct acting reverse current H = Main dc circuit-breaker

trip

27

A `I%PICAL RECTIFIERUNIT PROTECTION FOR A CONSTANT VOLTAGE MERCURY ARC RECTIFIER

7.4.6.4 Figure 27 shows an example of the rectifier unit protection for Very-inverse time relays (range a constant voltage mercury arc rectifier. 49

IS:

384z(PartI)-1967

50 to 200 percent) allow an overload duty of 200 percent for 15 seconds on the rectifier equipment and also detect summated overloads on the dc side. A time-delay relay (setting range O-2 to 1 second) allows discrimi\ high-set instantaneous nation between dc and ac ' circuit-breakers. overcurrent relay detects transformer and ac cable faults, rectifier backfires and heavy dc through faults on feeders and dc bus-bars. High-set relay operates a slugged auxiliary relay (about 5-cycle delay) which allows discrimination between the dc feeder circuit-breakers and the ac circuitbreaker on through faults. This auxiliary relay also prevents the high-set relay from tripping the ac circuit-breaker on transformer magnetizing in-rush current. The high-set relay is normally set at four times the fullload current. Restricted earth-fault relay is provided on the primary side of rectifier transformers and protects the-delta winding against earth faults. Direct acting reverse current trip may be provided on the main dc breaker to detect back-fires fed from the dc system.
7.4.6.5 As mentioned above, the rectifier unit protection depends on the class and the type of rectifiers used. With silicon rectifiers, the overcurrent relay settings should be carefully selected so that correct discrimination is achieved between the diode fuses and the relays for external faults and for f&lts on the diodes. 8. DIRECTIONAL

RELAYS

8.1 General 8.1.1 The overcurrent relays discussed so far are suitable for circuits in which the fault current can flow in one direction only or if the magnitude of the fault current in one direction happem to be several times that of the fault current in the other direction. To obtain selectivity when fault current of about the same magnitude may flow in either direction, the directional feature is essential.
8.1.2 Directional relays are commonly used for selective tripping of the breakers at the receiving end of parallel lines or in a ring main system. They arealso' used to trip the circuit-breaker of an earthed neutral generator or transformer, if more than one source may supply earth-fault current. 8.1.3 Directional relays are.used: a) with instantaneous overcurrent relays, if the maximum back-feed current is more than 80 percent of the maximum far-end current; b) with time-delay overcurrent relays, if the maximum back-feed current is more than 25 percent of the minimum far-end current; and c) if the load current is in the non-trip direction and the pick-up setting of the overcurrent relay of less than about twice the full load current is desired. 8.1.3.1 The above three points are explained in Fig. 28. 50

IS:
I A

3842 (PartI)I

FA"`2+FZ-Z--fFIG. 28 AN EXAMPLE OF USE OF DIRECTIOYAI. RELAY 8.2 Directional Relays for Short-Circuit Protection - Two types of relays (see 8.2.1 and 8.2.2) may be used for protection against shortcircuits. The former is more common and single-phase relays of this type protect against phase fault, c as well as earth faults: However, 3-phase directional overcurrent relays are also sometimes used for uncommon conditions under which the single-phase relays may maloperate. The product type directional relays are otten used for protection against earth faults. 8.2.1 Directional Overcurrent Relays 8.2.1.1 The directional overcurrent type of relay is a combination of overcurrent element and a directional eleinent mounted in the same case. 8.2.1.2 The overcurrent element is similar in all respects to the nondirectional overcurrent relays, already described, except that its operation is controlled by the contacts of the directional element. 8.2.1.3 The directional element is usually very sensitive and responds to about 1 percent of the full-load current at rated voltage at maximum torque angle. One method of providing the directional feature is achieved by allowing the overcurrent relay to operate only if the fault current is in the trip direction. In this case the overcurrent element does not even begin to operate until the contacti of the directional element are closed. This type of relay is referred to as directionally-controlled type. 8.2.1.4 Another method used for controlling the operation of the overcurrent element is to connect the contacts of the directional and overcurrent element in series in the`circuit-breaker trip circuit and this type is referred to as directionally-supetked type. This is very rarely used because incorrect tripping under certain circumstances may take place, for example, when a very large current flows in the non-tripping direction, it may operate the overcurrent element if just at that time suddenly the direction of the current dew reverses, the directional unit may close before the overcurrent element has reset itself. 8.2.1.5 In Fig. 29 a schematic arrangement of the directionally-coMrolled overcurrent relay of an induction type is shown. 8.2.2 Product Tyfle Directional Relays-Product type directional relays are virtually sophisticated wattmeters only and are used for very sensitive earth-fault protection. Inverse-time characteristics may be achieved with 51

IS:

3842(PartI)-1967

9
V

lRlP

-5

q :__ 2
-m---_-e

I

--we

I-" I

---

-

I t
I
I

`SHADING WINDING OR SECONDARY WINDING OF INDUCTION DISC UNIT

I

I

1

I

L,,,-__-_-l\

FIG. 29

SCHEMATIC CONNECTIONSOF DIKECTIONALOVERCURRENT RELAY

this type of relay hut since the characteristics are affected by the current, voltage, and the phase angle between them, the setting and co-ordination of these relays becomes very complex. Therefore, the advantages of sensitivity and selectivity possessed by the product type relays are of minor importance in most of the applications. 8.2.2.1 The directionally-controlled overcurrent relay is very easy to set and co-ordinate because like the non-directional overcurrent relay the time-current characteristics are based on the magnitude of the fault current only. This relay imposes higher burden than the product type relay, on the current transformers. Therefore, the product type relay has been preferred, though very rarely now, for protection against earth faultc 8.3 The
Operating Characteristics

8.3.1 The directional relays are actuated by two fndependent quantities, current and voltage, or two currents or two voltages. The operating torque is a function of the two actuating quantities and the phase angle Consequently, one of the actuating quantities should between them. remain fixed when the other quantity suffers wide changes in its phase angle under different hinds of faults. The actuating quantity which is used as a reference is known as the `polarizing quantity' and its choice is rather important for the proper application of directional relays. This is dealt with in detail in 8.4.
8.3.2 The operating characteristics of typical directional relays, both wattmeter type and induction cylinder type, are shown in Fig. 30. It is obvious that the relay develops maximum torque for a specific phase angle 52

Is:

3842 (PartI)-

relationship between the, actuating quantities. The zone of operation It may, extends to 90" on either side of the maximum torque angle line. however, be added that the zero torque line is a zone of no operation and not a thin line through the origin as may be imagined from the typical The angle of the maximum torque may be varied characteristics shown. by incorporating phase shifting networks. #? I fl
TRIP 1 NON-lRP r> kf ZERO TOROUE UNE MAXIMUM TOROUE LINE

30A Wattmeter

Type Directional

Relay

TORQUE

LINE

30B Cylinder

Type

Directional

Relay for

Phase Faults

MAXIMUM TORQUE LINE

ZERO TOROUE

LINE

30C Cyl,inder FIG.

Type

Directional

Relay for

Earth

Faults

30

OPERATING CHARACTERKITCS OFDIRECTIONAL RELAYS

8.3.3 However, the characteristics of the relay alone is not enough and knowledge of the phase angle relationship between the energizing quantities should be analysed to connect the directional elements suitably to protect 53

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967 against different kinds of faults, that is, the connections of the directional elements should be properly chosen. Thii is dealt with in 8.4. 8.3.4 Although it is possible to have directional relays with any maximum torque angle, the most common of them have the following values: a) For phase fiults - Current leads the voltage by (1) 30" or (2) 45", and b) For earthfaults - Current lags the voltage by (1) 60" or (2) 45".
NOTE Voltage is regarded as the polarizing quantity.

8.4 Connections for Directional Relays)

Directional

Relays

(Polarizing

Quantity

for

8.4.1 The choice of a particular directional relay depends on the connections of the relay (polarizing quantity) and location of the relay in the power system. As is well known, under different types of short-circuits, the phase angle relationship between the energizing quantities will vary considerably, for example, the current lags behind its unity power fa,ctor by 60" to 70" for a phase fault on long-transmission lines, and between 30 to 60" for the same fault on distribution and sub-transmission lines. The phase angle relationship for a phase-to-earth fault is not the same as above and is also modified by the fault arc resistance. Thus maximum torque angle of the directtonal relay should match the behaviour of the system currents and voltage under different types of faults, that is, for most of the faults, the fault current should be in phase with the maximum torque line of the directional reIay. 8.4.2 Connections for Phase-Fault Relays - Three types of connections, that is, 90", 60", and 30" (which are also referred to as quadrature median and adjacent respectively) are used. These indicate the phase angle relationship between the energizing quantities under normal system operation at unity power factor. For each of these connections, the currents and voltages to be used are given in Table 1.
TABLE 1 VOLTAGES AND CURRENTS FOR DIFFERENT CONNECTIONS OF PHASEFAULT DIRECTIONAL RELAYS RELAY RELAY R ,---A---7 V I

CONNECTION
DIAGRAM

MAXIMUM TORQUE
ANGLE

RELAY Y r ' , v I
(5) v,, (6) I*

RELAY B ?J

MAXIMUM TORQUE

WHEN
LAGS

`hIRENT
UNIT,'

Powm FACTOR BY (DEGREES) (3) (4) I,

(1)
90" 90"
60' 60' r 30"

(2) 3o" 450 0" 0" 0"

(7)
vm

(8)
IB

(9)
60"
45O 60" 60" 30"

VYB
v YB

I,
-v,

v,,
v,,
VS?Z

IY

VRY

43

VRB A?-& -v* IR
v RB 1,

IF-43 VBY 4z--4z Iy -v, I.
I, vm 1,

54

IS:

3842 (PartI)-

The 90" connection is employed for most applications with a directional relay which has a maximum torque angle of 30" or 45" (current leads voltage). 8.4.3 Connectionsfor Earth-Find R&p - Directional earth-fault relays with a maximum torque angle of 45" (current lags voltage) is very commonly used. The voltage coil of the relay is connected to the tertiary The tertiary winding is winding of a J-phase 5-limb voltage transformer. connected in broken-delta and the voltage is the sum of the J-phase-toneutral voltages. Three single-phase voltage transformers may also be used. The connections of the voltage transformer are shown in Fig. 31. Although voltage polarization meetx practically all the applications of relays having current polarization are directional earth-fault protection, recommended where the transformer banks are solidly earthed and the line impedance is high compared to the impedance of the transformer bank. As it may result in a residual voltage of low magnitude for the remote end faults, dual polarized directional nnits (that is, having voltage as well as current polarization coils) are desirable at such locations. However, on modern voltage polarized relays which will work down to 1 percent or less, it is not necessary to go to the extent of using the dual polarized directional relay as a residual voltage of less than 1 percent of normal is not experienced in actual practice. 8.5 Use of Directional Relays on the Secondary Side of the Transformer - Directional relays may also be used on the secondary side for the protection of parallel transformers as shown in Fig. 32. The secondary windings may be protected by three directional overcurrent relays against phase `faults. 90" connection mentioned in 8.4.2 with a relay having a If proper 45" maximum torque angle is best suited for this application. settings and current transformer ratios are selected, the directional overcurrent relays can also provide protection for phase faults on the delta (primary) side of the transformers. For earth-fault protection it is common to provide restricted earth-fault protection on the secondary side. 8.6 Setting and Co-ovdination of Directional Overcurrent Relays 8.6.1 The principles of setting and co-ordinating the directional phasefault and earth-fault relays are the same as described for non-directional Figure 33 shows a typical loop system where directional overcurrent relays. relays are applied. Starting at station A in the clockwise direction, coordination between the relays should be as follows : a) b) c) d) e) f) 1 with 3, 5 and 6, 6 with 8, 8 with 10 and 11, 5with 11,and 11 with9andl.

3 tith

55

t

AUXILIARY

VOLTAGE TRANSFORMER

B AND EARTHFAULT
31A Voltage Transformer with Tertiary Winding 3 I B Voltage Transformer with an Auxiliary

RELAV

Voltag+ Transformer

Fro;

31

METHODSOF OBTAININGPOLARIZING VOLTAGE NORDIRECTIONAL RELAYS

IS: 3842 (PartI)-

FIG. 32 PROTECTION OF PARALLEL T~ANWORMEIU

8.6.2 In the anti-clockwise direction, starting from station B, the coordination between the relays should be as follows:
a) 2withlOand9, b) 9 with 7, c) 7 with 5 and 4, d) 4 with 2, e) 10 with 12, and f) 10 with 4 and 6. a system is a matter of trial and error, Wherever possible, instantaneous overbe applied, thus reducing the overall selectivity. 57 8.6.3 The co-ordination in such especially for earth-fault relays. current phase-fault relays should tripping time and achieving better

IS : 3842 (Part I) - 1967

FIG. 33 'I~PICALINTERCONNECTED POWER SYSTEM FOR THE APPLICATION OF DIRECTIONAL OVERCURRENT RELAYS

8.7 rolyphase Directional

Relays

8.7.1 In rare applications these relays may be used in place of single. phase directional elements for polarizing the overcurrent relays against interphase faults. 8.7.2 Polyphase directional relays are often useri to porarizc the earth,. fault relays also. However, these relays have lowest sensitivity for single phase-to-earth faults, because torque due to the two healthy phases opposes that due to the faulty phase and are therefore used only when the miniium earth-fault current is more than about three times the maximum load current. This requirement is easily met on solidly-earthed systems. 8.7.3 These relays are sometimes' used for selecting the faulty feeder in transverse differential or parallel feeder protection. 9. SUMMARY OF COMMON APPLICATIONS of' different types of time relays is

9.1 Summary of common given in Table 2.

application 58

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Telephones : 331 331 371

Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 01 31 13 75 94 02 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices)

RegionalOffices :
Central

Telephone
331 6617 335 3841 37 86 62 603843 23523 15 832 92 95

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002

*Eastern : l/l4 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 twestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093

Branch Offices :
`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 301348 $Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, a39 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 554021 Plot No. 21 Satyanagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751007 40 36 27 Kalaikathir Building, 6/48 Avanashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 21 01 41 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 8-28 88 01 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 8-71 19 96 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 541137 5-8-56C L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 201083 R 14, Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 381374 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 21 68 76 Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 23 89 23 LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 262305 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 6 21 17

lnspecfion OIfices [With Sale Point) :
Pushpanjali, 1st floor, 205-A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700(172 ISales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY 400007 *Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, BANGALORE 560002
l

52 51 71 323635

271085 309 65 28 2223971

Printed rt Simco Printing Press, Delhi

