IS : 10118 (Part IV) - 1982 ( Reaffirmed ( Reaffirmed 2001 1996 ))

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR
PART IV MAINTENANCE ( Third Reprint MARCH
1997 )

UDC

621.3 16.3/.7.004.5

: 006.76

0 Copyright 1982

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN STANDARDS
NEW DELHI 110002

BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 10

September

1982

IS : 101 18 (Part IV) - 1982

Indian Sttindard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR
PART IV MAINTENANCE Code of Practice for Power Installation and Maintenance Sectional Committee, ETDC 20
Chairman
SARI K. K. BOSE Members Swnr A. CHATTERJEE ( Alhrnafc to Shri K. K. Bose ) Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore SHRI B. C. ALVA SHRI T. N. R. RAO ( dltsrnnfe ) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of SHRI M. J. ANANDAMURTHY Tamil Nadu, Madras ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR f TECHNICAL ) TO THE GOVERNMENT OF T,\MIL NADU ( Alternote) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SXRI P. D. BAGADE SHRI R. C. BAJPAI (Alternate) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRZV. S. BHATIA SHRI K. K. PANT (Alternatn) The Federation of Electricity Undertakings of India, SHRI K. B. CHAUBAL Bombay SHRI K. S. JOSHI (Alternote) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways CHIEFELECTRICALENGINEER DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELEC )-IV, RDSO ( nlternafe ) Central Public Works Department, CHIEF ENGINEER ( ELEC)-I SURVEYOR OF WORKS ( ELEC )-I ( Alternate ) New Delhi The Calcutta Calcutta Representing Electric Supply Corporation Ltd,

( Continued on page 2

)

0 Copyright1982
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10118( Part IV) - 1989

( Continued from pageI )
Repesenting Members Engineering Construction Corporation SWRIRANE~RAY CHOUDHURI SHRI L. E. D. CRUZ~(Alternate ) Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHR~ T. P. R. SARMA ( A&mote ) Electrical Engineer to Government SXRI B. L. P)BSHPANDB Bombay
SHRI DEVENDER NATH

Ltd, Bombay

of Maharashtra,

SHRI K. V. DHARMADHIKAR~
SHRI D. J. HA~TAIC

Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi

MEMBER( HYDRO-ELECTRIC ) DIRECTOR( HED )-1 ( Altwnate)

NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI D. R. NEELAPPAREDDY SHRI G. S. N. MURTHY ( Altunatc )
SHRI K. P. R. PILLAl

Fact

SHRI C. R. R. MENON ( Alternate)

Engineering Udyogamandal

and

Design

Organization,

LT COL B. B. RAJPAL

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, ( Ministry of Defence ) SHRI S. K. SHAP~QARI ( Alternate ) Chief Electrical Inspector Punjab, Chandigarh SARDAR D. S. UPPAL ( Alternate )

Army

Headquarters

SHRI SARDULSIN~H

to the Government

of

SHRI B. M. SAMANT

The Bombay Eject& Supply and Transport Undertaking, Bombay SHRX S. R. U~RANKAR ( AIumat~ ) Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHRI I. C. SANQBR SHRI P. S. SAW~NEY ( Alternate) Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi

SHRI P. K. SAXENA SHRI G. L. DUA ( Alternate )
SHRI

Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras V. SATHYANATWAN SHRI S. KRISHNARAJ ( Alternate ) Tariff Advisory Committee, General Insurance SRRI R. SATYABAL Association of India, Bombay SARI K. K. MANDAL ( Alternate) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of DR T. C. SIDHAN Kerala, Trivandrum Bharat Heavy Electrical3 Ltd, Secunderabad SHIUK. S. SUBRAHUANIYAM SHRI G. P. PAHWA ( Alternate ) Engineera India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. N. THADANI SHRI S. G. GOKHALE (Alternate) Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum SHRI S. VAIDYANATHAN SHRI R. VARADARAJAN ( Alternoti ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretary SHRI K. GANBSH Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1 ( Continud on page 54 )

2

IS : 10118 (Part IV) - 1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR
PART IV MAINTENANCE

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part IV) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 19 January 1982 after the draft finalized by the Code of Practice for Power Installation and Maintenance Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 The object of this standard ( Part IV ) is to provide guidelines for the maintenance of switchgear and controlgear equipment and the associated auxiliaries. 0.3 It has been generally felt that the requirements of switchgear of different vohagc ratings can be conveniently covered in a single section. Keeping this in view, the Indian Standard IS : 3072-1975, was brought out to cover equipment for indoor and outdoor use. Equipment SO covered included circuit-breakers, isolators and other switches operating on ac or dc. Separate Indian Standards have also been formulated as follows, for detailed code of practices for fuses, ac induction motor starters, high voltage ac circuit-breakers, isolators and other switches : IS : 3106-1966 Code of practice for selection, installation maintenance of fuses ( voltage not exceeding 650 volts ). and

IS : 39141967 Code of practice for selection of ac inductor motor starters ( voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts). IS : 5124-1969 Code of'practice for installation and maintenance of ac induction motor starters (voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts ). IS : 5987-1970 Code of practice for selection of switches ( voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts). IS : 7987-1976 breakers. Guide for selection of high voltage
of switchgear

ac circuit-

*Code of practice for instailation

and maintenance

(fitsf rczision).

3

ZS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 0.4 This standard is being brought out with a view to update the contents of these standards and to present in a cogent fashion, the codes of practices for the various types of switchgear and controlgear used in electric power system, filling up the gaps, utilizing the latest in concepts introduced in the product specifications.
0.5 This standard presents the subject product-wise, bringing out the relevant good-practices recommended for LT and HT applications. This standard is being brought out in four parts: Part I Part II Part III Part IV General Selection Installation Maintenance with each other.

All these parts shall be read in conjunction

0.6 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the information contained in the Indian Standards listed of thi$ standard ( Parts I to IV ), the Indian in 0.3. On publication Standards in 0.3 would be withdrawn. 0.7 During the drafting of the`,vari&s parts of this standard, the expert Panel responsible for the same, had kept in view the fact that the standard could at best give guidance sn the bulk of the equipment used in the country and should be understood in the manner that aspects rcllting to selection, installation or maintenance of the EHV equipment as well those intended for very special use would have to be supplemented with additional data, not attempted by the present series. 0.8 In the preparation of this standard ( Part IV ) assistance has also been derived from the following standards issued by the British Standards Institution. 5405-1976 Code of practice for the maintenance of electrical gear for voltages up to and including 145 kV. Dot : BS 79/28033 DC Code electrical controlgear. of practice for the switchof

maintenance

0.9 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revid).

4

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part IV ) covers guidelines for maintenance of all types of switc!lgear and controlgear for indoor and outdoor application. 1.2 The requirement provided here shall be read in conjunction provided in Part I of this standard. with those

SEWION

I

GUIDANCE ON MAINTENANCE

SAFETY

DURING

2. SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS

SWITCHGEAR

FOR MAINTENANCE AND CONTROLGEAR

OF

2.1 Safety of Personnel

2.1.0 It is assumed that prior to engaging in any maintenance work in equipment, steps sh:tll be take:1 by a responsible engineer to adequately It is essential to safeguard the personnel carryin, 0 olrt such maintenance. In thz ca\e of high-voltage equiphave a simple code of Safety Rules'. ment they shou!d be based on a system of `Permit-to-work' (see IS : 5216-1969' ). 2.1.1 It is important that maintenance personnel shall be fully familiar with t!le operation of the various devices that they are called upon to handle. 2.1.2 Volh:ge Iurlirators - All voltage indicators should always on a known `live' smrce immediately before and after use. be tested

2 1.3 Ladders alld Tools - It is essential that personnel working in outd )or sub-stations where isolation is by sep.tratlon in air between bare conductors, due care and attention is tlken with regard to disposition of tools and handling of physical aid to maintzn.tnce, such as ladders and slings. 2.1.4 t..olation Before Mahtennnce Work - Before any work is ctrried out on or near parts which are normally live, or where d.mger would arise to men working if the tnoror were to be in advertently started, it is essential that the apparatus be isolated and proved dead. In the c.tse of equipment operating above 650 volts the conductors shou!d be efficiently earthed. Where provision is made for SO doing, the isolator may be locked in the OFF position and caution notices may also bi: exhibited at the points of isolation Where fuse carriers and their fuse-links are removed to assist maintenance of controlgear, reliance should not be pktced on retention of
*Guide for safety procedures and practices 5 in electrical works.

IS : X0118 ( Part IV) - 1982 these to prevent the circuits from being made live danger that duplicates might be inserted. It is beforehand special unfused dummy carriers, clearly to insert them in the place of those which have been again, since there is a preferable to provide identified as such, and removed.

The operation of an external handle of an isolator should not be assumed to have opened all o. any of the blades, as cases of mechanical failure have been known to occur. In particular this may happen when a handIe is operated against a mechanical interlock. Tests should therefore be carried out to ensure that the equipment is dead, that all the blades of the isolator are open and all the correct fuse carriers removed. These should include tests between each phase and earth to cover the possibility of wrong connection. It is in addition a wise precaution before starting work to attempt to restart the motor as a final check that the correct circuit has been isolated. Controlgear enclosures frequently contain circuits having sources of supply different from those of the motor. Examples of these are alarm All such circuits should be isolated by and live sequence interlock circuits. the main isolating handle when it is moved to the OFF position. This, however, may leave live contacts in the enclosure occupied by the isolator, even when the fuses controlling the feed to the motor are withdrawn. Sequence interlock circuits will generally have means provided for defeating the interlock so that drives may be run independently. In all such situations a warning plate should be iixed to the cover of the isolator enclosure warning the maintenance men that there are sequence interlock and alarm terminals in the enclosures which are not isolated by withdrawing the appropriate motor fuses. The function of interlocks is to ensure that operations are carried out in the correct sequence. It is essential, therefore, that no steps are taken to dzfext the interlocks as fitted, otherwise dangerous occurrences are likely to happen.
NOTE - Master keys are often provided with mechanical key type interlocks. These keys are for use in emergency only. It is recommended that the master key be placed in a box with a glass front in the rub-station, such that the key can be obtained only by breaking the glass,

2.1.5 Observation of Live Equipment - It is sometimes necessary for live equipment to be observed with the covers removed while operating. Only authorized persons should be permitted to do this and no one should do The companion to the authorized person should know such work alone. beforehand exactly what work has to be done and wbat he should do if an accident occurs. Accidental contact with any live conductor can generally be prevented by the use of insulating barriers which may be inserted before the work is commenced. 6

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 2.1.6 Precautions against Auxiliary Circuits - Precautions should be taken to ensure that control circuits to automatic equipment are disconnected from the supply before work is commenced on such equipment. It should not be assumed that the isolation of the main supply to the equipment isolates auxiliary circuits. For example, a voltage transformer may be made `live' back from another source. In isolating auxiliary circuits to automatic equipment, care should be taken that the tripping supplies to other units are not affected. 2.1.7 Precautions against Naked Flames - Smoking or the exposure of naked flames, such as blow-lamps, in the vicinity of switchgear which has operated on fault, or when emptying or filling switchgear tanks, is highly dangerous as it may lead to an explosion or fire. Where oil fumes are likely to be present, the vicinity of the circuit-breakers should be thoroughly ventilated before work is commenced. 2.1.8 Precautions for Oil-Zmmersed Equipment - Where oil circuitbreakers, oil-immersed contactors, oil-immersed rheostats, or any other oilimmersed equipment is used, no smoking or naked flames should be permitted in the neighbourhood of the circuit-breakers or contactors, especially after operation on a fault, or of the rheostat, or other equipment if overheating has taken place, because an explosion and/or fire may result. Where the presence of oil fumes is suspected the space should be ventilated and kept ventilated whilst work is in progress (see also IS : 1866-1978* ). 2.1.9 Bulk Oil Circuit-Breakers - Do not enter the tank of a bulk oil circuit-breaker until at least 10 minutes after removing the covers so as to It is advisable to have a fan blowing air allow the oil vapour to disperse. into the circuit-breaker tank whilst personnel are inside to maintain fresh air circulation and at the same time ensure that perspiration is not deposited on any insulation inside the circuit-breaker. 2.1.10 Earthing - Before touching any equipment which has been energized and after taking precautions regarding switching off supplies, the equipment shall be earthed. It is wise to assume that the circuit is alive at full voltage until it is proved that it is dead. Many makes of switchgear have special arrangements supplied for earthing. This may take the form of special attachments fitted to the switchgear, so that bus-bars or feeders may be earthed through the circuitbreaker. This is the safest method and should always be used if the equipment is available. If this equipment is not available, earthing should be carried out using a covered flexible earthing lead, which has been first clamped to the
*Code of practice f&Siwl ) . for maintenance and supervision of insulating oils in service (&t

7

IS : 10118 (Part IV) - 1982 earth bar and insulated rod. surate with the of earthing lead is then touched on the parts to be earthed by a suitably The earthing lead shall have a cross-sectional area commenshort-circuit rating of the switchgear. Rezommended sizes are given in 17.3.2 of IS : 3043-1966*.

2.1.11 Maintenance of Errrthing Connections - All equipment, other than those of all-insulated construction, should bc adequately earrhed. It is very important to ensure that earthing connections are mechanically sound and that all contact screws are tight and good contact obtained. After maintenance all bolts and screws should be replaced, together with any locking devices. Where pendant or wandering control devices such as foot switches working at mains voltage rely for their earthing connection on a flexible conductor, regular and frequent examination and testing for earth continuity is extremely important and the use of continuous earth monitoring may be worthwhile. Undue flexure of the flcxiblc connection should be prevented because this might cause failure between routine examinations.
NOTE For further information regarding earthing ( SC IS

: 3043-1966* ).

2.1.12 Fire Extirquishing Equipment - All personnel should be instructed as to the dangers arising from the use of water on electrical equipment in case of fire, and instructed in the correct method of use and limitations of the fire extinguishing equipment provided. All personnel should be thoroughly familiar with the methods of raising an alarm in case of fire. Care should be exercised in the choice materials employed in certain fire extinguishers electrical equipment. of extinguishing medium as are harmful to personnel and

Automatic fire extinguishing equipment is not generally required for controlgear, but in situations where it is installed it should be rendered inoperative during maintenance of the controlgear. Alternatively it may be changed over to manual operation where possible; in either case suitable After maintenance personnel have warning notices should be displayed. been withdrawn automatic operation should be restored. for the treatment of persons 2.1.13 First-Aid - A placard of inspection suffering from electric shock should be affixed in a prominent position (see also Appendix F of IS : 5216-19691_ ). It is desirable that all maintenance application of artificial respiration. burns, First-aid equipment cuts and abrasions. personnel be trained in the

should be made available for the treatment of The address and the telephone number of the

*Code of practice for earthing. tGuidc for safety procedures and practices in electrical works.

8

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982
nearest doctor, first-aid centre or hospital should be prominently on the premises ( preferably on the First-Aid Chart itself). displayed

2.1.14 Summary of General Safety PrecautionsExcept where it is necessary to work on `live' low-voltage or medium-voltage switchgear, no person should carry out work of any description (including maintenance, repairs, cleaning and testing) on any parts of apparatus which are normally `live', unless such parts of the apparatus are: a) Dead; b) Isolated and all practicable steps taken to look off from `live' conductors; c) Checked ( where practicable ) with voltage indicator; d) In the case of high-voltage apparatus, efficiently connected to earth at all points of disconnection of supply to such apparatus, or between such points and the point( s) of work, e) Adjacent equipment screened where ncccssary to prevent danger and Caution and `Danger' notictis &~zd ; and f) Released for work by the issue of a `Permit-to-work' where appropriate. It should be the duty of the person issuing the `Permit-to-work' to ensure that the foregoing provisions are complied with and that the person carrying out the work is fully conversant with the nature and extent of the work to be done and with the location of equipment which will remain alive during the work. Making `live' or `dead' by signal or by a pre-arranged after an agreed interval should be forbidden. understanding

Before returning switchgear to service, a final check should be made of the complete apparatus to ensure that everything is in working order. Tools or appliances that have been employed during the inspection should be checked to ensure that none has accidentally been left inside the apparatus and that all temporary earth conductors and devices have been removed. Omission of this precaution has been known to cause serious accidents. It would be advisable to have a check list made of all tools and tack@ employed and also any temporary shortings, earthings and other connections for enabling maintenance works. Care shall be taken to check out these operations before switching on the equipment. 2.2 Safety of Equipment

2.2.0 General - Many of the features which make for safety of electrical equipment generally are inherent in the original design ( as appropriately covered in the rt%pective ISS ), layout and installation of the gear involved
9

Is:10118(PartIV)-l!X2 (see Part III of this standard) and also of the buidings housing them. A clear appreciation of the various risks that apply may enable the maintenance engineer to initiate steps which might prove of great value in limiting the damage that a fault might cause. If by this means a potential `shut down' can be limited to a `minor disturbance', the time and trouble taken in planning and carrying out appropriate safety measures will have been very well spent. 2.2.1 Ingress of Moisture - The presence of moisture always constitutes potential danger to electrical apparatus. If a switchroom is damp, or if normal temperature variations result in condensation on insulators or switchgear enclosures, steps should be taken to correct this condition. The action to be taken may include improving the ventilation and/or the provision of heating. If heating is necessary the greatest efficiency will result from having the heating units as close as possible to the apparatus, compatible with safety. 2.2.2 Minimizing System Disturbances - Supply can generally be restored more quickly after shutdown with switchgear installations which are segregated into electrical sections than with those in which no sub-division of the switchgear is possible. Physical separation of sections and the introduction of fire-resisting barriers can greatly assist. Holes in floor, through which cablepass, should be sealed to minimize the spread of flame, smoke, oil or water and also to prevent the passage of vermin. Gravel or pebbles shall be provided in catchments for smothering burning of oil when it occurs, as well to prevent spread. These shall be periodically inspected and renewed when necessary. 2.23 Fire Extinguishing Equipment - Tote provision of fire extinguishing equipment of an appropriate character, suitably placed and adequately maintained, may limit damage in event of fire following an electrical breakdown. While maintenance personnel are working on switchgear, the automatic feature of any fire extinguishing equipment should be rendered inoperative in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and, where possible,~the equipment should be restricted to manual operation. After maintenance personnel have been withdrawn, automatic operation should be restored. Adequate and suitable fire extinguishing available for use by maintenance personnel. equipment should be made

After a fire or the operation of fire extinguishing equipment, adequate area is safe to enter. precautions should be taken to ensure that t Fire extinguishing equipment should be renlaced"Fo r recharged as soon as powiblo.

10

IS : 10118 ( Part Iv ) - 1882 SECTION 2 MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR CONTROLGEAR AND

3. MAINTENANCE OF COMPOSITE UNITS OF AIR-BREAK SWITCHES AND FUSES FOR VOLTAGES BELOW 1000 V 3.0 General -The

following recommendations assume that the necessary precuations to render the apparatus safe to work upon, have been taken.

3.1 Complete Overhaul - The equipment should be maintained regularly in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer. These units are used in such a wide variety of circumstances that no general recommendation can be given about the period between complete overhauls. In the case of continuously operating plant it may be necessary to co-ordinate maintenance with demands of the production programme. Periodical inspection should be made for corrosion, evidence of overheating, and any'obstruction which would impede operation. However, the following factors shall be borne in mind in deciding the interval between two complete overhauls: a) Recommendations of the manufacturer, b) The rating of the switchgear and normal load interrupted, c) Environmental conditions, d) Frequency of switching operation, e) Rated rupturing capacity and the actual short-circuit level, f) Type of switchgear, and g) Relative importance of the location of the switchgear. The interval shall preferably not exceed, in any case 5 years. In the intervening period routine maintenance as given in 3.2 shall be adhered
to.

3.2 Routine Maintenance - The following programme should be followed: 3.2.1 Cleaning - All loose external dirt should first be removed. Cloths used for cleaning purposes should be free of loose fibres, metallic threads or similar particles. Brushes and blower nozzles should contain no metallic material. Care should be taken to prevent loose parts, tools, metal filings or dirt falling into the apparatus. 3.2.2 Insulation and Bushings - Clean and inspect. Renew where necessary. Porcelain insulation should be examined for cracks or other defects. Bonded and laminated fibrous insulation should be examined for signs of tracking, blistering or delamination. Insulation resistance tests are recommended ( see also 10 ). 11

Is : 10118 ( Part xv ) - 198 All insulations should be cleaned with material which is non-fluffy. For insulations which are not immersed in oil, a soft dry cloth is suitable. The only liquids allowed are benzene, trichlorethylene or the like. For insulation immersed in oil, it is even more important that nonfibrous material be used for cleaning and chamois leather is recommended for this purpose. Insulations in general should be examined visually for cracks or signs of tracking and then cleaned. Porcelain insulators or bushings should be examined for cracks or damage and cleaned. In case of paper insulators or bushings, surface should be examined for damage, and if necessary, sealed with a good air-drying varnish. Dust and dirt should be removed with a soft dry cloth. 3.2.3 Conracts and Contact Shrouds - Examine for burning, or other damage and recondition or renew as required. overheating*

Fixed and moving copper contacts may be dressed by using a fine file or fine glass paper. ( Emery of Carborundum paper should not be used. ) Silver or silver-plated contacts seldom require cleaning despite a black If it is required to clean them, plate polish may be used. appearance. Alignment and wiped should be checked when contacts are replaced. Where practicable a check should be made to ensure that the contact pressure is adequate. 3.2.4 Mechanism - Clean, examine and check for correct operation. and renew worn parts. Re-lubricate

3.2.5 Indicating Devices and Interlocks - Examine `ON' and `OFF' indicators if fitted and also interlocks and padlocking devices. Adjust where necessary. 3.2.6 Fuses - Check fuse-links for continuity, and correct rating. In the case of semi-enclosed should be renewed. tightness of connections fuses the fusible element

3.2.7 Compound Level - Any compound-filled cable terminations associated with the switchgear should be examined for compound leakage. 3.2.8 Final Checking - Check Test insulation resistance. Operation tightness of circuit and earth connections. the apparatus to service.

should be checked before returning

3.3 Maintenance After Operation Under Fault Conditions - After operation on a fault, the opportunity should be taken of a visual inspection and to carry out as qany of the checks enumerated under routine maintenance as may be practicable 3.2.
*Overheating may be caused by overloading, loose connections, insufficient pressure, ineffective fusolink contacts or lack of alignment of switch contacts. contact

12

IS : 10118 ( part IV) - 1982 3.4 Maintenance of Ancillary Equipment - Recommendations applicable ancillaries which may form part of the equipment are given in 7. 4. MAINTENANCE 4.0 General 4.0.1 The foliowing recommendations assume that the necessary precautions to render the apparatus safe to work upon, have been taken. For power-closed apparatus it is important to ensure that the apparatus together with any associated remote controlling equipment is rendered inoperative. This can usually be achieved as follows : supply fuses should be OF AIR-BREAK SWITCHGEAR to

a) For solenoid-closed withdrawn,

gear the main solenoid

b) For spring-closed gear the spring should be discharged and in the case of motor-wound spring-closing mechanisms the motor-supply fuses should also be withdrawn, and c) Fuses or links in the tripping circuit should be withdrawn.

Particular care is necessary when working on the isolating contacts of draw-out type metalclad switchgear to ensure that these are `dead' and the use, wherever possible, of voltage indicators as a final check before comAny shutters covering isolating conmencing work is strongly advocated. tacts which remain `live' should be locked if the locking facility is provided. 4.0.2 A suggested preventive maintenance inspection schedule for power circuit-breakers and a trouble-shooting chart are given in Appendices A and B respectively. 4.1 Frequency of Overhaul - The interval which can be allowed between consecutive overhauls of switchgear will depend upon the operating conditions of the circuits controlled. In the case of continuously operating plant it may be necessary to co-ordinate maintenance with the demands of the production programme. These recommendations are therefore based on conditions appropriate to the majority of air-break switchgear in service, assuming that the gear is installed in situations which are dry, well ventilated and where the atmospheric conditions are not unduly corrosive. 4.2 Routine Operation of Circuit-Breakers - Circuit-breakers not periodically operated may fail to trip on rault due to stiffness developing in the It is therefore recommended mechanism or to defects in the trip circuit. that every automatic circuit-breaker should be tripped and reclosed at least once every six months. I3

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982

In the case of switchgear controlling circuits without alternative supplies, this interval may have to be extended. Every endeavour should be made to avoid such extensions, as switchgear mechanisms are more reliable when operated regularly. Circuit-breakers with trip coils should be tripped by operation of the relay and those with series trip coils should be tripped by manual operation of the plungers, where this is possible. Circuit-breakers with built-in release should be tested mechanically for tripping through each of the tripping elements separately. 4.3 Routine Inspection and Maintenance - A general inspection of the substation or switch-room should be made at regular intervals, attention being given to general cleanliness, heating and ventilation, evidence of overheating, and audible discharge. Regular checks should be made to ensure that ancillary equipment such as special tools, isolating equipment, earthing equipment, etc, are available and in good condition. All switchgear, whatever its class of duty, should be given close examination at intervals not exceeding one year in order to determine the extent of maintenance required. In power stations and important switching stations the intervals may be shorter, for example six months. In special cases a shorter interval may be desirable such as when switchgear controls highly inductive circuits, transformers not on load, or capacitative circuits such as power-factor correction capacitors. Particular attention may also be required where switchgear is subject to frequent operation or installed in adverse conditions or by reason of its age. For routine maintenance, the following programme snould be followed. The recommendations are supplementary to and should be read in conjunction with the manufacturers' operation and maintenance instructions. Replacement parts should be obtained from the manufacturers to ensure-interchangeability. In this connection the manufacturers' spare parts list is useful. Suitable caution notice boards of adequate number shall also be available for display. 4.3.1 Cleaning - All loose external dirt should first be removed. When cleaning switchgear it is most important not to use what is generally woven from loose fibres, metallic threads or similar particles. Brushes and blower nozzles should contain no metallic material. Care should be taken to prevent loose parts, tools, metal filings or dirt falling into apparatus. 4.3.3 tnsulation - Clean and inspect. Renew where necessary. Porcelain insulation should be examined for cracks or other defects. Bonded 14

Is : 10118 (Part-IV)

- 1983

and laminated fibrous insulation should be examined for signs of tracking, blistering or delamination. Insulation resistance tests are strongly recommended ( see also 10 ). 4.3.3 Confacts - Examine for burning or other damage and recondition or replace as required. Check that any backing springs are exerting proper pressure and that contacts are in correct alignment. Slight discoloration or burning of copper or copper-alloy contacts is not necessarily harmful but may be removed by using a fine file or fine glasspaper ( emery or Carborundum papers should not be used ). When cleaning contacts it is essential to ensure that the minimum amount of material is removed, as excessive filing of contacts may result in more rapid wear. The amount of material removed from contacts minimum and it is imperative that the spring pressure surfaces should not be materially reduced. Modern rated current Large beads, impede closing should be kept to a between the contact

high-pressure point or line contacts will normally carry their satisfactorily, even if there is some pitting of the surface. or ridges on the contacting members that would seriously should be removed.

In the special case of circuit-breakers using high-pressure contacts ( for example high-speed circuit-breakers ) it is usually undesirable to attempt to clean or to dress the contacts and the manufacturers' recommendations should be followed. Silver contacts seldom require cleaning despite a black If it is required to clean them, plate polish may be used. In the case of recommendations should laminated brush be followed. or renewed, contacts contact the appearance.

manufacturers' alignment

When contacts are replaced and wipe should be checked.

pressures,

Any flexible braids should be examined, especially for fraying at the terminations, and renewed" if necessary. In situations subject to corrosive atmosphere the braids may be provided with a protective compound. 4.3.4 Arc-Control Devices and Phase Barriers in the Vicinity of the Arc These should be examined and cleaned or, if badly burnt, renewed. Arc-control devices made from compressed fibrous material may be cleaned by draw filing with a fine file and smoothing the surface with glassPorcelain may be cleaned by wiping or washing. paper. Other materials should manufacturers' instructions. Any air-puffer be treated in accordance operation. with the

device should be checked for correct 15

IS : 10118( Part IV ) - 1982 4.3.5 Mecharzism - During inspection or maintenance of the mechanism care should be taken to avoid the fingers being trapped in any part of the mechanism and to avoid the possibility of anyone being struck by moving parts of the mechanism or the moving contacts. Clean, examine and renew worn parts. It is psrt'icularly important to ensure that rolling or sliding surfaces in the trip mechanism are free from dried-up lubricant. The mechanical details of the closing mechanism should be checked. Re-lubricate and adjust as required and check for correct operation. Extreme care should be taken to verify with the manufacturers' instructions. that the adjustments conform Auxiliary on them including

4.3.6 Auxiliary Switches, Indicuting Devices and Interlocks switches should be kept in clean and in sound condition because depends the correct functioning of other items of equipment, protective gear.

Examine the contacts and clean or renew if necessary. Check for good contact pressure, freedom of the operating links and for correct timing Indicating of the contacts in relation to the circuit-breaker contacts. devices, such as mechanical `ON' and *OFF' indicators, semaphores, etc, should be examined to ensure that they are in good order. Interlocks and locking devices should receive particular attention, especially those associated with earthing and testing facilities. A strained or worn locking device may result in a dangerous reduction of clearances. Particular attention should be paid to the timing of the auxiliary contacts controlling the trip circuits to see that these make before the main contacts. 4.3.7 Isolating Contacts - Clean, recondition or renew as necessary. examine for signs of overheating, for for

4.3.8 Overload Devices and Protective Relays routine maintenance are given separately in 9. 4.3.9 Instrument and Protective Transformers routine maintenance are given separately in 7.

Recommendations Recommendations

4.3.10 Control Relay or Contactor - Check mechanical parts for free movement with control and main solenoid or motor fuses withdrawn.

Clean arc chutes.

Examine contacts and renew if necessary.
Ensure that all fastenings are tigh, and good

4.3.11 Main Connections contact is maintained.

4.3.12 Secondary Wiring - Ensure that connections are tight, that -good contact is maintained and that terminal boxes are free from dirt and

16

Is : 10118( Part IV ) - 1982

moisture. Check insulation resistances and continuity of wiring to the time-limit fuses, instrument transformers, relays, instruments, motors and other associated items. Auxiliary plug and socket contacts should be cleaned and re-lubricated where necessary. Fuses should be tested for continuity. Fixed contacts carrying the fuses should be cleaned and tested for satisfactory contact. 4.3.13 Final Checking - An insulation resistance test should be made and before the circuit-breaker and its ancillary apparatus is returned to service it should be checked for correct operation. Where practicable, the closing and tripping of the circuit-breaker, after it has been restored to the service position, should be checked. The correct operation of safety shutters should be checked as the breaker is restored to the service position. 4.4 Maintenance After Operation Under Fault Conditions - After fault operation it is desirable that a complete inspection and overhaul be made as soon as possible in order to restore the making-capacity, breaking-capacity, normal-current carrying capacity and insulation level to their switchgear. In this respect inspection and overhaul after operation on fault will broadly follow as given in 4.3, but special attention should be given to the following points. 4.4.1 Cleaning - Insulation and other parts liable to the deposition of metallic "apour should be cleaned and inspected for signs of, cracking, burning or other damage. An examination for signs of tracking should also be made. 4.4.2 Confacts and Arc-Control Devices - Contacts should be examined for burning or other damage and reconditioned or renewed if necessary. Check contact pressure and alignment and wipe. To remove traces of metallic deposits, it will generally be found necessary to remove the arc-control devices, recondition them as recommended in 4.3.4 and replace them. 4.4.3 Mechanism - The mechanism should be checked for correct operation and particular attention should be paid to settings and clearances after contacts or arc-control devices are replaced. 4.4.4 Insulation Resistance - A test should be made of the insulation resistance before putting back into service ( see also 10). 4.5 Maintenance of Ancillary Equipment - Recommendations applicable to ancillaries which may form part of the equipment are given in 7. 5. MAINTENANCE OF OIL SWITCHGEAR

5.0 General -The following recommendations assume that the necessary precautions to render the apparatus safe to work upon, have been taken. 17

I!3 : 10118 ( Part IV) -

1982

For power-closed apparatus it is important to ensure that the afiparatus together with any associated remote controlling equipment is rendered inoperative. This can usually be achieved as follows : a) For solenoid-closed gear the main solenoid supply fuses should be withdrawn, b) For spring-closed gear the spring should be discharged and in the case of motor-wound spring closing mechanisms the motor supply fuses should also be withdrawn, ' c) For pneumatically-closed gear the air system of the circuit-breaker concerned should be exhausted and locked off, the local air receiver drain valves being left open during the whole of the time while work is being carried out on the gear. To ensure that the air pressure has been completely released a check should be made on the pressure gauge riading to conform that this is indicating zero pressure, before commencing work. d) Fuses or links in the tripping circuit should be withdrawn. When emptying or filling switchgear tanks or where oil is directly exposed to the atmosphere no naked fl lme or smoking should be permitted in,the vicinity. Particular care is necessary when working on the spouts of metalclad switchgear to ensure that the isolating contacts are `dead', and attention is drawn to the safety precautions of 2.1.10. The use of voltage indicators, is strongly advocated. Any shutters covering spouts which remain `live' should be locked closed. 5.1 Frequency of Overhaul of Circuit-Breakers - The interval which can be allowed between consecutive overhauls of switchgear will depend upon the operating conditions of the circuits controlled. In the case of continuously operating plant it may be necessary to co-ordinate maintenance with the demands of the production programme. These recommendations are therefore based on conditions appropriate to the majority of oil switchgear in service, assuming that the gear is installed in situations which are dry, well ventilated and where the atmospheric conditions are not unduly corrosive. For outdoor switchgear, it is assumed that the atmospheric conditions of the site are reasonably clean and that the switchgear is not subject to excessive pollution such as occurs in some industrial or coastal areas. 5.2 Routlne Operation of Circuit-Breakers - Circuit-breakers not periodically operated may fail to trip on fault due to stiffness developing in the mechanism or to defects in the trip circuit. To guard against such eventualities, it is recommended that every automatic circuit-breaker should be tripped and reclosed at least once every six months. 18

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982

In the supplies, this be made to reliable when

case of switchgear controlling circuits without alternative interval may have to be extended. Every endeavour should avoid such extensions, as switchgear mechanisms are more operated regularly.

Circuit-breakers with battery-operated trip coils should be tripped by operation of the relay and those with series trrp coils should be tripped by manual operation of the plungers where this is possible. 5.3 Routine Inspection and Maintenance - A general inspection of the substation or switch-room should be made at regular intervals, attention being given to general cleanliness, heating and ventilation, evidence of overheating, and audible discharge. Leakage of oil or compound, any unusual smell which may denote overheated or acid oil, an electrical discharge or noise indicating surface leakage or looseness of a component, should be investigated. Regular checks should be made to ensure that ancillary equipment such as special tools, isolating equipment, earthing equipment, etc, are available and in good condition. All switchgear, whatever its class of duty, should .be given close examination at intervals not exceeding one year in order to determine the extent of maintenance required. In power stations and important switching stations the intervals may be shorter, for example six months. In special cases a shorter interval may be desirable such as when switchgear controls highly inductive circuits, transformers not on load, or capacitative circuits such as power-factor correction capacitors. Particilar attention may also be required where switchgear is subject to frequent operation or is installed in adverse conditions or by reason of its age. For routine maintenance the following programme should be followed. The recommendations are supplementary to and should be read in conjunction with the manufacturers' operation and maintenance instructions. Replacement parts should be obtained from the manufacturers to ensure interchangeability. In this connection the manufacturers' spare parts list is useful. 5.3.1 Ckaning - All loose external dirt should first be removed. When clearing switchgear it is most important not to use what is generally known as `cotton waste'. Cloths used for this purpose should be clean and free from loose fibres, metallic threads or similar particles. Brushes and blower nozzles should contain no metallic material. Care should be taken to prevent loose parts, tools, metal fillings or dirt falling into the apparatus. 19

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 5.3.2 Insulation - Clean and inspect. Renew where necessary. Porcelain insulation should be examined for cracks or other defects. Bonded and laminated fibrous insulation should be examined for signs of tracking, blistering or delamination. Insulation resistance tests are strongly recommended ( see also 10). Oil-filled bushings should be examined for leaks and the oil level should be checked. 5.3.3 Contacts - Examine for burning and other damage and re-condition or replace as required. Check that any backing springs are exerting proper pressure and that the contacts are in correct alignment. Slight burning or tarnishing of copper or copper-alloy contact faces may be removed by using a fine file or fine glasspaper. ( Emery or carborundum papers should not be used. ) Silver contacts seldom require cleaning despite a black appearance. If it is desired to clean them, plate polish may be used. The amount of material removed from contacts should be kept to a minimum and it is imperative that the spring pressure between the contact surfaces should not be materially reduced. Modern high-pressure point or line contacts will normally carry their rated current satisfactorily, even if there is some pitting of the surface. Large beads, or ridges on the contacting members that would seriously impede closing should be removed. In the case of laminated brush contacts the manufacturers' mendations should be followed. recom-

When contacts are replaced or renewed, contact pressures, alignment and wipe should be checked. Any flexible braids should be examined, especiahy for fraying at the terminations, and renewed if necessary. 5.3.4 Arc- Control Devices - These should be examined and cleaned, or if badly burned, renewed. Care should be taken that vent holes and orifices are cleaned and the devices should be flushed out with clean oil before being replaced. Resistors, if fitted, should be checked for continuity or resistance value. 5.3.5 Isolating Contacts- Clean, examine for signs of overheating, recondition or renew as necessary. Removable plug contacts for busbar selection should be withdrawn and treated in the same manner. 5.3.6 Venting - Examine the venting system to ensure that a free passage for oil and gases exists. Where there is a joint between fixed and movable portions of the gear ensure that it is in sound condition. 20

Is : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 5.3.7 Mechanism - During inspection or maintenance of the mechanism care should be taken to avoid the fingers being traptied in any part of the mechanism and to avoid the possibility of anyone being struck by moving parts of the mechanism or the moving contact. Clean, examine and renew worn parts. It is particularly important to ensure that rolling or sliding surfaces in the trip mechanism are free from dried-up lubricant. The mechanical details of the closing mechanism should be checked. Lubricate in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions. Extreme care should be taken to verify that the adjustments conform to the manufacturers' instructions. Check for overall correct operation.
NOTE -Operation with the tank removed or empty of oil is undesirable, unless the manufacturers' instructions specifically indicate otherwise.

5.3.8 Auxiliary Switches, Indicating Devices and Interlocks - Auxiliary switches should be kept clean and in sound condition because upon them depends the correct functioning of other items of equipment, including protective gear. Examine the contacts and clean or renew if necessary. Check for good contact pressure, freedom of the operating links and for correct timing of the contacts in relation to the main contacts. Indicating devices such as mechanical `ON' and `OFF' indicators, semaphores, etc, should be examined to ensure that they are in good order. Interlocks and locking devices should receive particular attention, especially those associated with earthing and testing facilities. A strained or worn locking device may result in a dangerous reduction of clearances. Particular attention contacts controlling the main contacts. should be paid to the timing of the auxiliary trip circuits to see that these `make' before the Recommendations Racommendltions for for

5.3.9 Overload Devices and Protective Relays routine maintenance are given separately in 9. 5.3.10 Znstrument and Protective Trawformerr routine maintenance are given in 7.
-

5.3.11 Control Relay or Contactor -Check mechanical parts for free movement with control and main solenoid or motor fuses withdrawn. Clean arc chutes. Examine contacts and renew if necessary. 5.3.12 Zwrluting Oil- Take a representativt sample of oil from the circuit-breaker tank as described in 5.7. The handling and testing procedure should be observed as described therein and oil, samples of which do not conform to the tests specifiied, shoud be reconditioned or changed as necessary. Refill to correct oil level. 21

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 If, due to lack of testing facilities, it is not possible to carry out all the tests described in 5.7 and the oil is found to be discoloured or has an acrid smell, or if there is evidence of free water, it should be changed. In addition to the above routine maintenance, be made on oil levels, where practicable. a regular check should

Tank linings should be examined for 5.3.13 Tank and Tank Liningsevidence of burning or other damage, paying special attention to the edges for signs of separation of the laminaekwhich often indicates the presence of moisture. If moisture is suspected>a sample of the lining should be immersed in oil heated to approximatk'ly 125�C. The presence of moisture will be indicated by frothing. Damp or damaged linings should be They should not be refitted until reconditioned or renewed as necessary. the tank has thoroughly cleaned and dried. Gaskets should be examined and renewed where necessary. Ensure that all tank bolts are properly tightened in the correct sequence when replacing the tank. 5.3.14 Tank-Lifting Mechanism - Where the tank-lifting integral with the circuit-breaker, the rope ( where fitted) mechanism should be inspected for wear and freedom of Whore the device. is separable from the circuit-breaker, accordance with the prescribed rules may be necessary. 5.3.15 Main Connections contact is maintained. Ensure that all fastenings mechanism is and operating moving parts. inspection in

are tight and good

are tight, that good 5.3.16 Secondary Wiring - Ensure that connections contact is maintained and that terminal boxes are free from dirt and Check insulation resistances and continuity of wiring to the moisture. time-limit fuses, instrument transformers, relays, instruments, meters and other associated items. Auxiliary plug and socket contacts should be cleaned and re-lubricated where necessary. Fuses should be tested for continuity. Fixed contacts carrying the fuses should be cleaned and tested for satisfactory contact. 5.3.17 Final CheckingAn insulation resistance test on the primary connections should be made and before the circuit-breaker and its ancillary apparatus is returned to service it should be checked for correct operation. Correct operation of safety shutters gear is restored to the service position. Where practicable, after it has been restored should be checked as the switch-

the closing and tripping of the circuit-breaker, to the service position, should be checked.

5.4 Maintenance After Operation Under Fault Conditions - After fault operation it is desirable that a complete inspection and overhaul be maae as soon as possible in order to restore the making-capacity, breaking22

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 capacity, normal current-carrying capacity original rated values. This is particularly switchgear. and insulation level to their important in the case of older should to allow be for

Isolation of withdrawable metalclad circuit-breakers delayed for not less than 10 minutes after operation on fault the dis;>ersal of any ignitable gases in the live spouts.

The maintenance required after operation under fault conditions should generally follow the recommendations of 5.3, but special attention should be given to the following items. 5.4.1 Current-Carrying Parts - All contacts, including isolating contacts, should be examined. The arcing-contacts and arc-control devices should be reconditoned or renewed as required. Lack of attention to arcing-contacts may result in burning current-carrying surfaces at some future operation. of the main

5.4.2 Insulation - The insulation should be examined to see whether it has suffered damage and should be reconditioned or renewed as necessary. 5.4.3 Tank Linings - Tank linings burns and renewed if necessary. should be cleaned and examined for

5.4.4 Insulating Oil - If the oil is badly discoloured or shows evidence of carbon particles in suspension, it should be reconditioned or changed in accordance with the procedure detailed in 5.7. 5.4.5 Joints and Seals -All joints and tightness and particular attention should these are fitted. seals should be examined for be paid to tank gaskets where

5.4.6 General Mechanical Inspection - A general inspection for mechanical damage or distortion of the general structure and mechanism, both internal and external to the tank, should be made. The switchgear should be closed and tripped by each of the methods provided. 5.5 Maintenance of Oil Switches and Oil Isolators - Maintenance should broadly follow the recommendations for oil circuit-breakers. Interlocks and locking devices should receive particular attention, especially those A strained or worn locking associated with earthing and testing facilities. device may result in a dangerous reduction of clearances. 5.6 Maintenance of Air-Break Isolating Devices Associated with Oil Switchgear-The devices usually require attention similar to, and at the same intervals as the associated switchgear. l Linkages should be carefully cle,med and greased lubricant, and their adjustment should be checked. 23 using a suitable

IS:10118(PartIV)-1983

Contacts contact oil.

should be examined,

cleaned and treated with a suitable

Any flexible braids should be examined, especially for fraying at the terminations, and renewed if necessary. In situations subject to corrosive atmospheres the braids should be of tinned copper or, if bare copper, should be treated with hot lanoline or a similar protective compound. insulation should be carefully cleaned and examined for damage such as cracks. Any defective units should be renewed. 5.7 Maintenance of Switcbgear Oil - The maintenance of oil for switchgear and transformers is dealt with in detail in IS : 1866-1978*.
5.8 Maintenance of Ancillary Equipment - Recommendations applicable to ancillaries which may form part of the equipment are given in 7. 6. MAINTENANCE OF AIR-BLAST SWITCHGEAR

6.0 In view of different designs and constructions

of air-blast switchgear and its ancillary equipment, comprehensive guidelines for maintenance are not being made. In all cases, instructions for maintenance given by the manufacturer should be closely followed to be supplemented by operating experience on particular installations. 6.1 Maintenance of Ancillary Equipment - Recommendations applicable to ancillaries which may form part of the equipment are given in 7.

7. MAINTENANCE

OF ANCILLARY

ITEMS

7.0 The following enumerate

guidelines for the maintenance items common for the types of switchgear covered in 3 to 6.

of ancillary

7.1 Tripping and Closing Current Supply - It is important that the equipment for the supply of current for tripping and closing gear be kept in good condition. 7.2 Secondary Batteries - Secondary batteries may be used for closing and tripping circuits and frequently, in the case of larger batteries, they also supply indicator lamps and provide emergency lighting when necessary. They should be kept in a satisfactory state of charge and the condition and level of electrolyte should be regularly examined. Where batteries are used for tripping, they should be provided with an instrument having a loading resistor and test switch so that a simple switching operation can reveal the state of the battery. It is advantageous if the dial includes a danger mark to indicate the critical condition. Most modern installations include a
*Code of practice for maintenance WhiOR). and supervision of insulating oil in service (/irrt

24

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982

continuously operating trickle-charging equipment and the operation of this apparatus may be readily observed and checked. Where periodical charge and discharge take place, more attention will be needed to guard against unusual drainage of the battery or overload of the trickle charger. Experience has shown that under trickle charging conditions stratification of the electrolyte can occur and it is recommended, particularly where batteries are used for closing, that at intervals of approximately two years the battery should be given a charge and discharge cycle, alternatively a boost charge. In all cases the recommendations of the battery manufacturer particular type of battery installed should be closely followed. for the

7.3 Primary Batteries-Where primary batteries are used in place of secondary batteries for tripping circuits, they should similarly be provided with a test instrument which readily indicates their condition. 7.4 Other Sources of Supply - For rectifier and compressed-air apparatus, the maker's instructions should be followed. or similar

7.5 Current Transformers - Steps should be taken to ensure that a current transformer is `dead' and isolated before it is examined. When installed in cells or other locations which will allow them to be made accessible, maintenance attention to current transformers should consist of general inspection and the checking of main and secondary connections to see that all connections are tight. The oil in high voltage oil-filled current transformers should be checked for correct level and the electrical condition tested. Insulating bushings should be cleaned and examined thoroughly for any damage such as cracks, track marks, etc. Oil in bushings should be checked as above and an examination made for leakages. Current transformers enclosed in metalclad gear, or otherwise inaccessible, are usually safe against mechanical damage and they can only be checked electrically. Where testing windings are provided, this operation can be carried out without difficulty. Where such provision is not made, however, special means may have to be devised : an insulation resistance and a continuity test of the secondary winding should be regarded as an essential minimum. 7.6 Voltage Transformers - Steps should be taken to ensure that a voltage transformer is `dead' and isolated before it is examined. Particular care should always be taken to ensure that a voltage transformer is not liable to be inadvertently made `live' due to a feed-back via the secondary side. Attention as described above for current transformers is appropriate to voltage transformers. In addition the isolating contacts of withdrawable voltage transformers should be cleaned, examined for damage, reconditioned if necessary and re-lubricated.
25

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 Protective fuses and current-limiting resistances, if provided, will need checking for continuity of circuit and for general soundness. 7.7 Lifting Devices - The maintenance overlooked. of lifting devices should not be

Nora -Portable and transportable devices as distinct from integral devices are subject to inspection, tests and certification under the Factory Act.

7.8 Spares - In order that the full benefit of maintenance can be obtained it is recommended that adequate spares, properly stored, be kept available, for example fuses, arc-control devices, contacts and insulation. 8. MAlNTENANCE OF ELECTRIC MOTOR CONTROLGEAR 8.0 General - This Code of Practice covers such a wide range of equipment that .it is impracticable to set out detailed instructions for every variety of design in every class of equipment. The following paragraphs outline a procedure which if followed cover most maintenance needs. 8.1 Maintenance Instructions 8.1.1 Inspection 8.1.1.1' Inspection card- It is advisable to keep the record of all inspections of each starter. The card should contain all nameplate details of the equipment and any other relevent data, including a reference to the machine driven by the motor controlled by the starter. After each inspkction, the maintenance personnel should record the condition of each important component of equipment, such as contacts and overload devices, and the act+ taken. 8.1.1.2 Frequency af insp&tion and maintenance -- It is difficult with starters to recommend precise maintenance intervals. From experience the person responsible for planning the scheme should decide how long it would take for any item of equipment which is in good condition to deteriorate to a condition which may give rise to trouble under normal conditions of usage It should then be ensured that the item is inspected at intervals which are shorter than this periofi of time. The frequency of maintenance will dept&d on a number of factors, the most important being the conditions under which the equipment operates and the severity of duty. For continually operating plant it may be necessary to co-ordinate routine maintenance with the demands of the production programme, but where there are regular periods during which the plant is shut down, maintenance schedules may be arranged to coincide with those periods. 26

IS :10118 (Part IV) - 1982
In general it is recommended that the motor starter should be checked simultaneously when the motor controlled by it is being checked. The most important thing to check in a motor starter is its contacts which should be examined for burns, pitting, tightness of electrical connections and freedom of movement of contacts. In oil dash-pot type of starter, the oil requires frequent replacement. The level of oil in the dash-pot should be frequently checked and, if necessary, oil of proper grade should be filled in. 8.1.2 Use of Control Rooms - Rooms and cubicles containing switchgear are generally kept unlocked and use is often made of them as stores for articles unrelated to the equipment installed there. Such practice shall be condemned. Nevertheless a small number of spare parts, tools and instruments suitable for the equipment installed in the control room may be housed in proper receptacles provided for the purpose. 8.1.3 Manufacturer's Instructions - The maintenance instructions and lists of spare parts should always be obtained from the manufacturer before the starter is installed, and made available to the maintenance staff in a form suitable for easy reference. These instructions should be followed as far as practicable. The information in the code is intended to supplement such instructions and a list of the information required from the manufacturer for maintenance work is given in Appendix D. When ordering replacement parts, the full nameplate particulars should be quoted and in any case the serial number or other manufacturer's identification number should be quoted. 8.1.3.1 A list of equipment which may be useful in connection with the maintenance work of motor starters is given in Appendix C. 8.1.4 Changes in Service Condition-The maintenance staff should always be on the look-out for, and should report immediately, any changes in service conditions which may have a detrimental effect on the starter. Such changes may either necessitate more frequent maintenance or the replacement of the starter. These changes may occur generally in load conditions, supply conditions, safety conditions and site conditions. 8.1.4.1 Load conditions - The following changes in load conditions should be reported: 4 A change of drive; this could result in an increase in the starting period or in the starting and accelerating torque required; An W increased duty, for example, day and night shift working; 4 Any addition of lead to the driven machinery, for example, the addition of a new length of line shafting to an existing system of shafting: 4 A change in the frequency operation or in the load cycle, for instance, if a centrifuge has only 300 seconds rest instead of 600 seconds between successive runs; 27

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 e) A change of speed; this can be particularly

important

for centri-

fugal fans and pumps and similar drives; and f) Any increase in the frequency or more amount of inching. 8.1.4.2 Supply conditions-Any change in the supply condition should be taken care of. It is possible that the supply voltage may change due to increase of load on the system. This may require resetting of protective devices. 8.1.4.3 Safety conditions - Anything which adversely affects safety either permanently or temporarily, for men or machines, for instance, accumulation of split material in the well of a hoist which prevents the cage descending for enough to operate the ultimate limit switch. 8.1.4.4 Site conditions - Any change in the site conditions should be reported, for instance, plant or building alterations may make the area more dusty or damp than it originally was, may affect the ambient temperature or may introduce the risk of explosion. 8.1.5 End of Useful Life of Components - There comes a time with every starter when various components, such as contactor magnets, threaded rods, etc, become worn and require large-scale renewal. It is often difficult to decide when this moment has arrived, but when routine maintenance becomes costly the position should be reviewed and the equipment completely overhauled or replaced. 8.1.6 Replacement Parts - Care should be taken to see that all replacement parts are correct and suitable for the duty. A copy of the manufacturer's spare parts list should be kept readily available to maintenance staff. When ordering replacement parts, the full nameplate particulars should be quoted and in any case the serial number or other manufacturer's identification number should be quoted. 8.1.7 Nameplate Particulars - Full nameplate particulars should be kept in the office records, as plates may become damaged, defaced and painted over and may not even be in an accessible position. 8.2 Maintenance Procedure 8.2.1 Frequency of Maintenance ( see 8.1.1.2 ).
8.2.2 Cleanliness - For equipment to operate satisfactorily it is essential that it be kept clean. Before removing covers and opening doors, loose dirt and dust resting on the top of the enclosure should be removed with a brush.

8.2.2.1 When air is used for cleaning, a suction type device with dust receptacle should preferably be employed. 28

IS : 10118( Part IV ) - 1982 8.2.2.2 `Cotton waste' should not be used for cleaning. If clothes are used they should be chemically clean and free from loose fibres. This is particularly important in oil,immersed equipment as the presence of loose fibres in the oil may lead to failure due to the alignment of the fibres under dielectric stress. 8.2.2.3 When solvents are used for cleaning or degreasing they should be of a non-flammable and non- toxic nature whenever possible, and at all times precautions against fire should be observed. 8.2.2.4 instruments After maintenance work all covers and doors including those of and relays shou!d be securely replaced so as to exclude dust. ( under consideration ).

8.2.3 Flameproof and Intrinsically Safe Equipment 8.2.4. Marking of Covers arzd Connectiom. 8.2.4.1 All covers, cables, before removal to ensure correct shields, etc, replacement. should

be marked

carefully

8.2.4.2 If connections are disturbed or temporary connections made for testing purposes, they should be clearly marked to facilitate reconnection and the permanent connection must be restored and the temporary connections removed before the unit is returned to service. 8.2.5 Tightness of Connections 8.2.5.1 After maintenance, the bolts, screws and locking devices of all current-carrying and earth connections should be securely replaced. 8.2.5.2 Connections which have not been disturbed should be checked for soundness. It is not sufficient for nuts and bolts to apear to be tight, sometimes a bolt will not be threaded quite far enough and give the impression of a tight connsction when in fact, the connection is loose. A millivolt drop test will reveal bad connections and it may be possible to detect a bad connection by looking for signs of overheating. S.2.5.3 Connecting aluminium to aluminium, copper or brass satisfactorily requires care, particularly if the joint has to be made and broken from time to time, and the use of proprietary compounds recommended for use with aluminium, copper or brass connections may be advantageous. 8.2. i Testing of Protective Devices 8.2.6.1 Where practicable, test should be made for the correct operation and calibration of protective devices, periodically and particularly after faults. Readings should be recorded and compared with the figures obtainned wh:n commissioning the gear, the tests being carried out as far as posIt is essential that the sible under the same conditions on each occasion. settings be restored to the correct values after the test and verified that thejr are correct. 29

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 8.2.6.2 Care should be taken to ascertain whether calibrations marked are in terms of load current, or in terms of current required to trip the device (that is, load plus overload). It should be noted that protection against sustained overload may be lost in an attempt to cover a very long starting period.
NOTE - Where starters of identical type have different horsepower ratings, a suitable stock of overload units of different rating may be kept, so that there can be easy interchangeability of starters having different duties, and a starter can readily be altered if the size of the motor controlled is varied. If any such alterations are made, the overload calibration plate may require to be changed.

8.2.6.3 Where a single phasing protective be checked when maintenance is carried out.

device

is fitted this should

8.2.6.4 Where instruments and relays are fed from current transformers, it is essential to short-circuit the transformer secondary if the instrument or relay is disconnected, to safeguard against shock and against damage to the transformer. 8.2.7 Muintenance of Insulation - Reliable insulation is as important as conductors and contacts and with this in view close visual inspection and regular testing of insulation are most essential. 0.2.1.1 Testing - Visual examination usually suffices for porcelain insulation but other insulation, such as synthetic resin-bonded paper or fabric and impregnated or laminated wood, is particularly susceptible to the ingress of moisture, overheating or tracking and visual inspection should be supplemented by regular testing. Insulation resistance measurements are easily made and the most suitable for routine tests but, for their proper, interpretation, systematic testing and recording methods are essential. It is only possible to judge the condition of insulation by comparing insulation resistance readings taken over a considerable period. If these show a steady decline in value, the danger is greater than if a steady low value is recorded. If humidity and/or temperature readings of the ambient air can be taken and recorded at the same time as the insulation resistance readings this may be advantageous. 8.2.7.2 Where possible the insulation to be tested should to reach ambient temperature before resistance tests are made. be allowed

8.2.7.3 Laminated insulation may be susceptible to the ingress of moisture, particularly through the edges of the laminae. High voltage resistance tests and visual examination should pl;?vide valuable indication of the diylectric quality of this type of insulation. If low msulation value of a lafninated insulator due to moisture absorption~~is encountered, it may be oilercome by heating the insulator to drive away the moisture and subsequent application of suitable moisture protection varnish over the insulator. 30

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982
8.2.7.4 Porcelain insulation synthetic resin-bonded insulation under humid conditions.

does not deteriorate
but it may give

in the manner of
reading

low resistance

8.2,7.5 Thorough visual examination damage is as important as electrical tests.

for cracks or other

mechanical

S-2.7.6 Cleaning- It is advisable when cleaning insulation to wipe across the likely tracking path and not in line with it. The use of a brush in conjunction with a suction cleaner is recommended and note should also be taken of the recommendations set out in 8.2.2. 8.2.8 Maintenance o/Isolutors and Isolating Switc&s 8.2.8.1 Before working on isolators or isoIating switches particular care is necessary to make sure that both sides of the devjcz, and any auxiliary circuits, are `dead'. 8.X8.2 Many items of equipment are provided with isolators and isolating switches which may be of the knife switch pattern or of the plug and socket or some other form. The contacts of isolators and isolating switches are less frequently operated than others and are therefore particularly liable to failure arising from cumulative e:fects over a long period. Because of their position in the circuit, they tend to be noglacted, and it is therefore important during maintenance to inspect them for signs of overhe&ing and to replace parts where there is the slightest doubt. 8.2.9 Sixitches aad Composite Units of Switches and Fuses S.2.9.1 Maintennilce procedure is similar to 8.2.8 with the following Where cartridge fuses are used, readditional points to bc borne in mind. plasemzntj should be of the same pAtern as theoriginal. In no circumstances should attenpts bc made to rewire a non-rewireabie fuse. In rewiring R seA-enclosed I`USJ, clre shou!d be taken to keep within the maker's dejignalion of maximum fuse element size. The contacts should be examined for signs oi ovzrheuting. Where a locking device holds the fuse in po.;iti<ln, it should be replaced when the work is finished. It should be remembered that fuse-links>incorrectly chosen or badly fitted may contribute to overheating. Switch contacts should require no more than cleaning with Knife contacts should be lightly smeared a smooth fiie or fine glass paper. with petroleum jelly or other suitable lubricant. 8.2.10 Control Circuit Fuses 8.2.18.1 The reliability of control gear will be seriously hazarded by control circuit fa!llts and it is therefore most important to locate and correct im nediatzly any fault which causes the operation of any control circuit fuse Every fuse-link should be tested for contiand to report the oc*;urrence. nuity each tinle a routine inspection is carried out, where this is not an 31

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982

inevitable part of the final running test. Clear labelling of fuses in agreement with connection diagrams is also desirable. Such labelling should also indicate the fuse ratings. 8.2.11 Maintenance of Pushbuttons and Other Auxiliary Devices
8.2.11.1 Pushbuttons - Local and remote `stop' buttons are important Failure to ensure proper components of many motor control installations. maintenance of either operational or emergency `stop' buttons may produce dangerous conditions. Maintenance work on motor control equipment should therefore always include careful inspection of and attention to `stop' buttons; the fact that `emergency stop' buttons may seldom be used makes it more necessary that there be regular inspection.

Any defects in local or remote `start' buttons will generally be indicated at an early stage, but examination of contacts and insulation is an advantage, particularly as insulation failure may lead to inadvertent operation. The operation of `inch' buttons should be checked to ensure that in no circumstances will a rapid release of pressure on the button cause the contactor to remain closed. It is an advantage to list the location of all remote pushbuttons inside the door of the enclosure. 8.2.11.2 Auxiliary devices - i) Auxiliary devices include such items as press pressure switches, vacuum switches, limit switches, flow switches, speed sensitive switches, brakes, magnets and float switches. Safety of personnel and equipment depends largely on the reliability of auxiliary devices and it is essential that all such devices be regularly inspected and maintained. The recommendations set out in 8.2.12 should be followed regarding the maintenance of the contacts and 8.2.7 regarding the maintenance of insulation. ii) Of the auxiliary devices mentioned above, operational and emergency limit and control switches should receive careful attention, particularly where protection against overhoisting is given or where one switch gives protection against more than one dangerous condition. Where it is necessary to disturb the mechanical devices which operate limit and control switches in the course of maintenance work, care should be taken to restore them correctly before returning the gear to service and to repair any mechanical defects in the mechanical devices, for example, a frayed operating wire rope. iii) Satisfactory maintenance of the control circuits for brakes is essential for safety of personnel and plant as wellas for proper operation. Deterioration of working parts or maladjustment may impose more arduous conditions on the control gear than those for which it was originally designed. 32

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 iv) For detailed recommendations regarding auxiliary devices reference should be made to the manufacturer's service sheet. v) Tests for correct operation should always be made if possible before returning equipment to service. 8.2.12 Air-Break Contactors -It is good practice after an overhaul to disconnect the motor leads at the starter so that the correct operation of contactors and relays can be checked without the motor and, of course, the plant having to be run. 8.2.12.1 Maintenance of contacts - The correct treatment of contacts depends on the material of which they are made as well as on the duty of the equipment. Generally, copper contacts may be cleaned with a smooth file or fine glass paper ( emery paper should not be used). This cleaning should be confined to removing projecting pieces of metal. Contacts should never be lubricated with either grease or oil unless the manufacturer recommends a proprietary lubricant which will not adversely affect the breaking performance. Silver or silver-plated contacts seldom require cleaning in spite of a frequent discoloured appearance. 8.2.12.2 The pressure and alignment of contacts should always be checked. Recommendations regarding the method of checking are usually included in the service sheet supplied by the manufacturer. When new contacts have been fitted it is desirable to operate the equipment a few times to ensure that everything is satisfactory before it is put back into service. Whenever contacts are replaced, it is recommended that they are replaced in pairs (that is, both fixed and moving contacts ) and contact pressure should be checked after replacement. Contact pressure adjustment/replacement of contact springs may be necessary to achieve required contact pressure. The manufacturer's recommendations shall be followed as necessary. 8.2.12.3 Replacement of contactor units - It is recognized that it may be uneconomic to replace contacts or other small components in quantityproduced compact designs. For such equipment maintenance may well consist of replacement of the whole interior or even of replacement of the complete article. 8.2.12.4 Flexible braids - Flexible braids should be examined especially for fraying at the terminations, and renewed if necessary. In industrial situations subject to corrosive atmospheres the braids should be of tinned copper wire or alternatively, if of bare copper, should be treated with lanoline. 8.2.12.5 Latched contactors - These should have the latching features carefully tested since safety of personnel may depend on their correct operation. 33

IS :10118 (PartIV)-

1982

8 2.12.6 Arc-chzctes - The insulation of large arc-chutes should be cleaned, and any doubtful parts replaced. Care should be taken in assembly, as what might appear to be a minor change in the arc control arrangements may well be disastrous to the performance of the contactor. It is most important to ensure tllat arc-c!:utej are reolaced in their correct position after maintenance, since a mispiaced arc-chute m&y impede the moving parts of the contactor. 8.2.12.7 Auxiliary contacts - Auxiliary contacts are as important as main contacts: sometimes, from the safety standpoint, they are more SO. They should therefore receive detailed attention similar to that recommended in 8.2.12.1. 8.2.12.8 Operating magnets - The oper`tting magnet should be chsccked Pole faces should be examined for the collecfor freedom of movement. tion of material in the gaps, a!ld care taken to relnove any oil or grease If, \:ith without damaging the pole face; otherwise ` sticking' may occur. dc operated contactors, the magnet insdvcrtentiy remains closed when the coil is de-energized, the antiresidual device ( or the pull-off spring, if fitted) should be checked. With ac operated magnets the air gap should be checked when the by the mnnufacmagnet is closed and adjusted to the gap recommended turer, where necessary. Excessive humming in ac operated magne;s of causes, of which the following are examples: may be due to a number be removed from

i) Dirty magnet faces - All dirt and grit should the magnet faces.

ii) Excessive cnntact roll or excessive contact pressure - Contact roll and spring pressure should be checked against the manufacturer's instructions. iii) between magnet, drop out Inadegncrte air gap in magnetic circuit - hlechn~~ical contact the pole faces where an air gap is intended will result in a noisy and reduction of the air gap can result in the armature failing to when the coil is de-energized.

The air gap should be checked by inserting a piece of thin paper between the pole faces. This paper should be easily removed when the If the contactor appears sluggish in dropping out contactor is energized. when de-energized and it is mechanically free, the air gap should be checked against the manufacturer's instructions. iv) Incorrect alignment of magnet faces - This is unlikely to be the cause of noise on new installations, but after lengthy service or very severe operation uneven contact on the magnet faces may result in excessive noise. 34

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 The alignment of the faces may be checked by inserting a piece of thin paper between the surfaces and operating the contactor. The impression left on the paper will indicate any areas of uneven contact. It should be verified that there is no undue wear in other relevant parts. Any high spots remaining on the surface should be carefully removed, and care should be taken to ensure that the air gall in the magnet circuit is not reduced unduly.
V) Broken shading ring - In all probnbi!ity this will result noisy chattering magnet. The manufacturer should be consulted a permanent repair.

in a very regarding

vi) Low voltage at the coil terminal,; or improper control rating are also causes for humming of ac operated magnets. 8.2.13 Pneumatically Operated Contactors 8.2.13.1 In general the contacts other air-break contactors. and arc-chutes

transformer

are treated as those

on

8.2.13.2 The care of t!le magnet v:tlve or valves and power operating cylinder varies according to construction, and the manufacturer's instructions should be followed. 8.2.13.3 The operation of the contactor should be checked for stiffness, air leakage or other defect. If air leakage is taking place the pipe runs `should first be checked. 8.2.13.4The bearings of the operating mechanism should be oiled at intervals, the cylinder walls should be lubricated, and the leather piston packing ( if such is used ) greased with a grease recommended for this application. 8.2.13.5 The magnet valve should be inspected for leakage or sluggish operation. Valve leakage is usually due to dirt on the valve seat but may be caused by wear. Sluggishness may be due to a sticky valve stem or insufficient travel. Suitable solvents may be used to clean valve parts when this is necessary. 8.2.14 Oil-Break Confactors - In general these are treated as air-break contactors but on heavy-duty they may need more frequent contact maintenance. The oil should be examined and. if at all possible, a test in accordance with IS : 3X-1978* should be carried out on a clean sample taken after sludge, etc, from the bottom of the oil has been removed. If breakdown value specified therein is not obtained, the oil should be reconditioned
*Specification for new.insulating oils for transformers and switchgear ( second minion),

IS : 10118( Part IV) - 1982

When in doubt the or renewed. Small units rarely justify reconditioning. equipment should be refilled to the correct level with oil complying with IS : 335-19781. The mainetnance of insulating oil is dealt with in greater detail in IS : 1866-19787. 8.2.15 High-Voltage Air-Break Contactors 8.2.15.1 High-voltage air-break contactors require similar treatment to that described under ` Air-break contactors' above with particular attention being given to insulation and to arc-chutes. It is sometimes preferable to strip down, clean and re-assemble and arc-chute assembly both for routine and for post-fault maintenance. The correct reassembly of the arc-chute is most important. 8.2.16 Switching Starters
8.2.16.1 This type of starter may use contactors, but the following is intended to apply to manually-operated direct switching, star-delta, series parallel, pole changing, auto-transformer and similar starters. Manu;rlIyoperated direct switching starters frequently take the form of air- or oilbreak circuit-breakers: in this case the provisions of 4 and 5 will apply. More generally, however, maintenance similar to that for contactors will be required.

8.2.16.2 Oil immersed switching starters which depend on hydraulic buffers for cushioning may be damaged if operated during maintenance in the absence of the oil. Reference should be made to the maker's instructions. 8.2.16.3 Some oil-immersed switching starters have overload devices with oil dash-pots immersed in the oil. On first filling with oil or on refilling after maintenance the device should be operated two or three times by hand to expel the air from the dash-pot and ensure that it is properly tiled with oil. 8.2.17 Under-Voltage Releases - Under-voltage release features are often essential factors of safety provisions and should be checked for operation, if possible under conditions of steadily falling voltage. 8.2.18 Drum Controllers - Shaft bearings require adequate lubrication, checking and renewing where necessary. Notching arrangements are important since if they are defective, undue wear of the contacts may take place. Contacts should be carefully examined and lined up so that they ,register with the notching plate. Contact pressures should be checked and movement ( drop) should be adjusted to the correct value in accordance
*Specification for new insulating oils for transformers and switchgear tCode reoisian) . of practice for maintenance ( second revision). and supervision of insulating oil in service (&al

36

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 with the maker's instruction. Excessive drop of contact, fingers is harmful. A trace of lubricant such as petroleum jelly, on the contacts will help when mechanical wear is predominated; an oil specially designed for contact lubrication is now available and in certain cases can be helpful. Carbon contacts should not be lubricated. All are control devices should be checked for operation by observing where possible, with suitable precautions, the behaviour of the controller with the cover removed. On dc controllers, shunt blow-out coils are often used and interturn short-circuits on these may give trouble. Thorough cleaning of finger and barrel ( drum ) insulation is essential, particularly where there is marked wear of the segments and fingers and deposition of conducting dust. It is essential that the operation of a dead-man handle, if fitted, be checked since safety of personnel may depend upon its efficient operation. 8.2.19 Cam Controllers - Maintenance is similar to that of contactors and of the working parts of drum controllers. The cam profiles should be examined for undue wear leading to incorrect operation and the lubrication of the cams and rollers should be carefully carried out as recommended by the manufacturer; excessive lubrication is likely to cause electrical failure from accumulation of dust and dirt.
8.2.20 Faceplate Starters- These are either dry or oil-immersed. The latter pattern is usually associated with rotor starters. Contacts maintenance is generally similar to other gear, except that the smaller sizes of faceplate starters are usually not designed for renewal of the fixed contacts without dismantling the starter. It is important to clean thoroughly between contacts when cleaning faceplate starters. 9. MAINTENANCE OF PROTECTIVE DEVICES

9.1 Time Delay Devices

9.1.0 These are of many types and are employed for sequence operation and in connection with overload protection. The most important types are : a) Magnetic devices, bj Escapement and eddy current devices, c) Oil dash-pot devices, d) Air dash-pot devices, e) Thermal devices, f) Mercury switch devices, g) Capacitor devices; and h) Induction pattern devices with inverse time limit. 37

IS : 1.0118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 9.1.1 Magnetic Devices - These make use of the delaying action produced by a short-circuited turn surrounding an iron circuit. Maintenance is limited to ensuring that the movement is free and that the nonmagnetic spacer is not excessively worn or damaged. 9.1.2 Escapement and Eddy Current Devices - These may either drivo an escapement or an eddy current induction disc working as a brake in the adjustment field of a magnet. In the case of eddy current induction discs particular attention should be paid to removing dirt from the disc and the magnet air-gap. If not interfered with except for occasional drops of clock oil at the spindle bearings, and provided the duty is not severe and dust It should be realized cannot enter, they should need no further attention. that dust is the worst enemy of these devices. 9.1.3 Oil Dush-Par Devices - The oil should be maintained at the correct level at all times. Oil dish-pot devices generally use only a small quantity of oil which may form a sl:ldge of varying consistency fairly quickly. It is most important that only oil recommended by the manufacturer is used, both to give the correct delay and to minimize sludge formation. If the oil becomes c!o;ldy or if any sludge is formed, the dash-pot should be cleaned out well with a solvent and fresh oil put to the correct level. If a hard sludge forms rapidly, the manufacturer should be consulted. The use of silicon fluids may be advantageous where the variations of temperature occur or reduction of sludging and closer control of viscosity are needed. 9.1.4 Air Dash-Pot Devices -These a) Diaphragm type, and b) Piston-in-cylinder type. are of two types:

9.1.4.1 Where a dust-tight enclosure is provided, care should be taken during maintenance work not to impair the effectiveness of t'le enclosure. Types which have a piston moving 111a cylinder, even if graphite lubricated, may require an occasional drop of light oil, but this should only be done with the manufacturer's approval. 9.1.5 Thermal Devices - These includes bimetallic strip, eutcctic alloy and similar devices and should require little maintenance. The operating time of all thermal devices is considerably affected by ambient air temperature unless provided with a suitable compensator. Neglect of maker's instructions may adversely affect the device. 9.1.6 Mercury Switch Devices -The delay in switching is obtained by restricting the flow of mercury after the switch has been tilted by electrical The angle of tilt is important and the levelling of or mechanical means. the device when installed may be critical. A check should be made to see that the level had not been disturbed and that the column of mercury is 38

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 continuous, or broken completely, position of its movement. when the switch is at the appropriate

9.1.7 Capacitor Devices - If a capacitor fails it should be replaced by a new one. Except for cleaning and ensuring that the connections are sound, capacitors used as time limit devices require no maintenance. 9.1.7.1 Electrolytic Spare cap.icitors of the permanently charged at in a charging rack with Spare capacitors having kept dry. capacitors deteriorate when out of use or in store. continuously rated electrolytic type should be kept their rated voltage and should therefore be stored suitable interlock to prevent shock when handling. paper dielectric need not be charged but should be it should be the capacitor

9.1.7.2 If ani insulation tester is used to test a capacitor of the constant voltage type. It is essential to discharge through a suitable resistor before handling.

9.1.8 Induction Pattein Devices with Inverse Time Limit - Such devices operate in a time inversely proportional to the current flowing, generally with a definite minimum time. These devices are usually housed in their own enlosure because of the importance of excluding dust. Care should therefore be taken not to admit dust when opening the cases and to replace the covers in such a way that dust cannot enter subsequently. The contacts should be adjusted only, if necessary, and then with extreme care and as little as possible. The inductlon disc should never be rotated by hand as this may result in damage to the device; instead, the time setting adjuster should be used. 9.2 Overload Devices 9.2.1 Time Limit Fuses - These should be examined for bad contacts and if necessary cleaned. Bad contact may cause premature tripping. Where semi-enclosed fuses are used they should be examined for deterioration or mechanical damage. Deteriorated or blown fuse elements should be renewed with identical elements, if of the renewable type, unless an alteration of the release current or of the time delay is required. The manufacturer's instructions should be followed if any alteration is made. 9.2.1.1 Where provision is made for adjustment of the release current by adjustment of the position of solenoid armature, the rated current of the fuse should exceed the operating current of the solenoid. on the 9.2.2 Heat Sensitive Devices - This type of device is mounted apparatus to be protected and operate when the apparatus itself attains a predetermined temperature. Owing to the dependence of such a device on its good thermal contact with the part to be protected, it should not be disturbed and maintenance should be confined to checking the device for electrical continuity. Arrangements should also be made for convenient 39

IS : 10118 (Part IV) - 1982 access to the device and suitable warnings given both starter maintenance staff that such a device is in use. to the motor and

9.2.3 Latched Tripping Devices - Overload devices may be required to trip a latch and in this case the mechanical condition of the tripping mechanism may affect the current at which the device operates; therefore lubrication and adjustment of the mechanism and renewal of worn parts are particulariy important. 10.. MAINTENANCE AND TESTING GEAR AND CONTROLGEAR OF INSULATION IN SWITCH-

10.0 General-Close visual inspection and regular testing of insulation are most essential, since security of supply must always depend on the Visual examination usually suffices for insulation quality of the switchgear. porcelain insulation but other insulation, such as synthetic resin-bonded paper or fabric and impregnated or laminated wood, is particularly susceptible to the ingress of moisture, overheating or tracking, and visual inspection should be supplemented by regular testing. Insulation resistance measurements are easily made and the most suitable for routine tests, but for their proper interpretation systematic testing and recording methods are essential. Resistance tests are strictly comparative only, in that for each item tested a rejection value can only be fixed on the basis of experience, Test values obtained should be logged, by comparison with earlier results. together with the humidity and temperature at the time of the test, and in general, a steady fall of resistance over a period of time is a more reliable indication of deterioration than is a relatively low value which remains sensible constant. On long pieces of insulation such as lift rods on large circuit-breakers, deterioration may not occur uniformly and resistance measurement taken over the entire length may not reveal localized deterioration. It is recommended that where possible an electrode be placed mid-way along the insulation, and the resistance to each end measured separately. If there is a marked difference between readings, the insulation should be rejected. Particular attention should be paid to the lift rods of circuit-breakers where these are made of hickory or other natural wood. These should be examined for the wood shearing along the grain and for pulling out of the riveted end where this method of fixing is employed. Where possible the insulation to be tested should be allowed to reach ambient temperature before resistance tests are made. 10.1 Condenser Bushings 10.1.1 Resistance measurement should indicate serious ingress of moisture though it may not reveal partial tracking or internal deterioration. Any 40

1s : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 oil filling should be periodically checked for presence of moisture, and if this is suspected, the outer porcelain should be removed and the bushing examined for tr`lcking. The joints shouId be examined to determine where the moisture, if any, has entered. 10.1.2 With compound-filled bushings, a resistance measurement will not necessarily indicate the presence of moisture, and once every five years, where practicable, the space above compound should be examined for signs of moisture ingress. If the presence of moisture is suspected the bushings should be returned to the manuracturer to be decompouaded and subjected to a power factor test. Where covers have been removed care must be taken on reassembly to ensure that all joints are properly re-made. During inspection it is advised to check that the earth connection is sound. 10.1.3 Power factor measurements should be confined to the testing suspect. are difficult to make on site, and they of bushings at long intervals, or when

10.2 Oil-Barrier Bushings - Oil-barrier type bushings should have the bottom oil condition checked at least every five years and the bushing flushed and refilled with clean oil if necessary. If the oil is completely renewed the bushing must be allowed to stand for four hours before being made `live' in order that the oil may de-aerate. 10.3 Laminated Insulation - Insulation of laminated type may be suscep. tible to the ingress of moisture, particularly through the edges of the laminae. Tracking which tends to commence at the sharp comers of adjacent metal end fixing, often occurs beneath the surface, and is indicated as a surface blister. Delamination or cracking of the material may result in mechanical breakdown or may allow the entry of moisture or carbon High voltage resistance testing and with consequent electrical breakdown. visual examination should provide valuable indication of the dielectric quality of this type of insulation. 10.4 Porcelain Insulation - Porcelain insulation does not deteriorate in the manner of synthetic resin-bonded insulation but it may give low resistance readings under humid conditions. Careful interpretation of test results is necessary and a thorough visual examination for cracks or other mechanical damage is as important as electrical tests. 10.5 Applied Voltages for Insulation Resistance Tests - These may correspond to the values stipulated in the relevant Indian Standards on equipment.

Is : 10118 (Part IV ) - 1982

APPENDIX ( Chse
PREVENTIVE What to Znspcct Oil (for oil circuitbreakers )

A 4.0.2 )
SCHEDULE OF

MAINTENANCE INSPECTION POWER CIRCUIT-BREAKERS What to Znspcct For At the time of the overhaul of switchgear, the oil should be tested. If oil shows signs of carbonization or moisture, dirt it should be filtered and tested, if necessary, replaced. See that the oil level in the tanks is maintained at the proper height. Be sure the oil-level gauge is indicating properly the actual oil level. Check all oil valves to be sure that they do not leak. Also check the condition of all gaskets, seeing that they seal properly to prevent the entrance of water and leakage of oil.

Frequency At the time of overhaul

Every 6 months

Every 6 months

Bushings

Clean the external surface to remove any accumulation of dirt or other deposit. In locations where abnormal conditions prevail, such as salt deposit, cement, dust, etc, it should be recognized that a special hazard exists and the surface should be cleaned at more frequent intervals to avoid accumulations which might cause a fl ashover. Carbon tetrachloride or liquid ammonia or any other suitable agent may be used to clean the porcelain. 42

Every 12 months

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982
What to Inspect What to Inspect For Inspect the bushings to make sure that vibrations due to the breaker operation have not caused the bushings to move resulting in misalignment of the contacts. Be sure none of the porcelains are cracked or broken and that the oil (of oil-filled bushings) is at the required level. Xnternal parts insulating See that the surface of bushings and other insulating parts within the tanks of oil circuitthoroughly breakers are cleaned to remove all traces of carbon or sludges that may remain after the oil has been drained or the tank removed. All internal parts of the oil circuit-breaker should be cleaned before new or filtered oil is added. See that the contacts are properly aligned, that contact surfaces bear with firm, uniform pressure and are adjusted in accordance with the breaker instruction book. Badly pitted or burnt contacts should be replaced before they cause damage to other parts. Otherwise, the following action may be taken: Action Required zzl~ a) For plain finger Surfaces, if burnt should be cleaned with smooth file. 43 Frequency Every 12 months

At the time of overhaul

Contacts

Every 12 months

I!3 : 10118 ( Part IV) - 1982 What to Inspect What to Inspect For Type of Contact Action Required Frequency

rod Vent holes of arc b) For and socket chambers should or contac- be cleared. Contor butt tact surfaces type with should be trimarc control med with a fine chambers file, if necessary. c) Silver plated or with silver inserts Silver plate should be cleaned with good quality polish. Current-carrying silver inserts should be cleaned with fine glass cloth; file shall not be used.

NOTE 1 - Badly burnt contacts cause pre-arcing on the closing stroke, tend to slow down the operation on opening, and increase the heat losses. NOTE 2 - Incorrect assembly of explosion pots and other arc-control devices may render them inefficient I or completely ineffective.

Where the ` contacts ' consist of separate main and arcing contacts, the main contacts require little maintenance but should be inspected for good condition and kept smooth and clean. The arcing contacts, whether of the butt or finger type should be replaced if badly pitted and burned, before the main contacts are affected. Finger type arcing contacts because of their wiping operation against the bridging contact, require more maintenance than the butt type. 44

IS : 10118( Part IV ) - 1982 What to Inspect What to Inspect For Frequency

The breaker mechanism

The contacts of the air-break According to the manufacturers' circuit-breaker should be instructions or at inspected periodically to see the time of overthat no excessive wear or haul scoring has taken place on the surface of the wiping contacts. If excessive scoring is evident, the contacts should be replaced. A good indication of the condition of the contacts within the arc chute may readily be obtained without any disassembly work by observing the appearance of the arcing tips on the moving-contact blades. Severe burning shall indicate a similar amount on contacts. the arc-chute Severely burned contacts and badly eroded fibre parts of the arc-chute should be replaced. Contacts should be adjusted as outlined in the instruction book. See that the breaker mechanism Every 12 months operates smoothly and freely. Lubricate all bearing surfaces. Be sure all split pins are open and that all snap rings, locking plates, nuts, etc, are in place and properly tightened. Check the stop clearance against the dimension in the instruction book. Inspect the oil-filled dash-pots to ensure that they are filled with oil. The length of the breaker stroke and its opening and closing speed should be measured or checked and adjusted in accordance with the breaker 45

IS : 10118 (Part IV ) - 1982 What to Inspect What to Inspect for
instruction book. It should be ensured that there is no undue friction between the operating rod for the movable contacts and the guide. The operating mechanism The mechanism should be checked to see that it is properly lubricated in accordance with the instruction book, and operates freely through the entire stroke. Parts which are scored or which show excessive wear should be replaced and adjustments should be within the tolerances listed in the instruction book. Check the operating voltage at the mechanism terminals with full operating current flowing to see that it is adequate for current operation. This is especially necessary on solenoid-operated mechanisms. Check the air pressure of pneumatic mechanisms to be sure that it is adequate for proper operation, and that it is restored after each breaker's operation. See that there are no leaks in the air connections. Check the closing relay to see that it is functioning properly and that its contacts are in good condition. Check that all electrically operated valves of pneumatic mechanisms function properly. Check the tripping arrangement for positive tripping when 46 At the time of overhaul

Frequency

IS : 10118 ( Part IV fi 1982

What to Inspect

What to Inspect for
tripping is required. Auxiliary-switch adjustments should be checked and contacts examined to make sure that they are in good condition. Dress or replace damaged contacts. Check the opening and closing speed, with an analyzer, if possible, to detect any changes in adjustments or improper operation. Keep the air system clean by regular changing or cleaning of the compressor filter pads, regular blowing-off of water condensation and systematic overhaul and cleaning of the air strainer, check valve, unloader, and other critical parts which will eventually collect a certain amount of dirt. Replace the screen, if it is punctured or is rusting. Review the adjustment of all pressure switches and lockConsult the out devices. breaker instruction book for pressure settings. Inspect to see that all bolts, nuts, pins, and toter pins are in place and that they are tight or opened properly.

Frequency

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.0.2 )

B

TKOUBLE-SHOOTING CHART FOR POWER CIRCUIT-BREAKERS

Trouble Overheating

Cause Poor condition of contacts. Out of proper alignment and adjustment. Burned and pitted due to lack of attention after many heavy operations, or too frequent operation.

Kemedy

Contacts should be lined and adjusted properly.

up

Breaker kept closed (or open ) for too long a period (copper contacts )

Overloading ( continuous or prolonged current in excess of breaker rating)

Transmission of heat to the breaker from overheated or inadequate cables or connection bars

Burned and pitted contacts should be dressed up, if practical, or replaced with new parts. ( High pressure, butt type contacts usually do not require dressing. ) Silverto-silver contacts should be dressed very carefully and only when actually required. Operate breaker more frequently to wipe contacts clean. It may be advisable to consider the installation of new silver-to-silver contacts. If the breaker is overheating because of excess current, one of the two remedies can be followed: a) Replace with breaker having adequate rating for the present or future load. b) Arrange circuits so as to remove the excess load. If the bars or cables overheat because of current in excess of their capacity, this can be remedied by: Increasing the current-carrying capacity (that is, increasing the size or number of conductors or by removing the excess current from the circuit ).

48

IS : 10118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 Trouble Cause Remedy

Loose connections or terminal connectors Ambient temperature high Failure to trip binding Mechanism sticking caused by: a) Lack of lubrication b) Mechanism justment out of adis too

Tighten Relocate in a cooler place, or arrange some means of cooling

or Lubricate mechanism Adjust all mechanical devices, such as toggles, stops, buffers and opening springs, instruction according to book. Examine surface of latch. If worn or corroded, it should be replaced. Check Iatch ` wipe `, and adjust according to instruction book. Replace damaged coil Replace blown fuse

Failure of latching device

Damaged trip coil Blown fuse in control circuit ( where trip coils are potential type ) Faulty connections (loose or broken wire) in trip circuit Damaged or dirty contacts on tripping device Failure to Mechanism binding close or to sticking because of: latch closed a) Lack of lubrication b) Improper adjustment breaker mechanism or

Repair faulty wiring. See that all binding screws are tight. Dress or replace damaged contacts or clean dirty contacts

Lubricate mechanism of Adjust all mechanical devices, such as toggle, stops, buffers and opening springs, to specifications in breaker instruction book.

49

IiS :10118(Part IV)- 1983
Trouble Cause Remedy

Burn out of operating Replace damaged coil and educate operator how to ( closing ) coil ( of electrically operated breakers ) operate properly. A better remedy would be to change due to operator holding the connections to include an control switch closed too auxiliary switch, which autolong matically cuts off the closing coil as soon as the breaker closes. Closing relay sticking Cut off switch too soon operating Check or adjust closing relay

Adjust operation of cut off switch to delay cut off so as to allow breaker to close fully Readjust to reduce power at end of stroke, and eliminate ` bounce '

Cut off switch operating too late, causing the breaker to ' bounce ' open Insufficient control voltage ( of electrically operated breaker ) caused by: a) Too much drop in leads b) On ac control-poor regulation

Install bigger wires; improve contact at connections Install larger control transformer. Check rectifier, and be sure it is delivering adequate dc voltage from adequate ac supply. Give battery a sustaining charge, or repair according to instructions of battery manufacturer Replace blown fuse; repair faulty connection or broken wire; dress or replace damaged or clean dirty contacts in control switch

c) On dc control -battery not fully charged or in poor condition Blown fuse in control circuit, faulty connection or broken wire in control circuit, damaged or dirty contacts in control switch ( electrically operated breaker )
50

IS : 10118 ( Part IV) - 198 Trouble Cause Remedy

Insufficient Leakage of oil oil ( in circuit-breaker tanks) Oil thrown during operation Dirty oil ( in Carbonization circuit-brea- operations ker tanks) Moisture present in oil Condensation mosphere from many

Locate point of leakage and repair. Tighten up joints in oil lines. Fill oil tanks to proper level oil

Drain poor oil and filter, or replace with new oil. Clean inside of tank and all internal parts of breaker Drain and filter oil or put in new oil Repair source of water rance ent-

of moist

atfrom

Entrance of water rain or other source Sludging of oil Gaskets leaking Insulation failure Overheating

Improper installation of gaskets at a previous inspection or repair. Oil saturation moisture, Absorption of accumulation of dirt, grime, carbon, etc, on bushing and insulating parts

Filter or put in new oil. Remove source of overheating. Put in new gaskets, treated in accordance with breaker instruction book Thoroughly clean all insulated parts. Bake or dry out water-soaked parts ( or treat in accordance with directions in breaker instruction book ).

APPENDIX ( CZause 8.1.3.1 )

C

LIST OF EQUIPMENT WHICH MAY BE USEFUL IN CONNECTION WITH MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR a) Wiring and schematic diagrams of circuits. Maker's maintenance handbook and spare parts list. Handlamp or torch ( all-insulated type ). Mirror or an insulated handle. 51

*IS : 10118( Part IV) - 1982 e) Feeler gauges.

f) g) h) j) k) m) n) p) q) r)

Cigarette paper for testing contact pressure. Contact lubricant. Oil can. Clock oil, penetrating oil, dash-pot fluid. Voltage indicator. Insulation resistance tester. Universal test set. Millivolt drop tester. Blower, cleaning cloth and small brush. Suction cleaner.

APPENDIX (Clause 8.1.3)

D

INFORMATION AND PARTICULARS REQUIRED MANUFACTURER FOR MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT a) b) c) d) e)

FROM THE OF

Manufacturer's Identification number of the equipment. General description of equipment. Circuit wiring diagram and schematic diagrams. Overload relay calibration curves. Description of operation. f) Spare parts list with illustration. g) Instructions for maintenance and adjustment of all types of contactors, protective and operative relays forming part of the equipment with details of contact pressures, air-gaps, etc. 4 Lubrication instructions. 3 Values of all fixed resistances ( if any) and tappings with currentcarrying capacity and short-time rating. k) Particulars of shunt regulator and starting resistance (if any) ( ohms and current rating). Capacitance of capacitors ( if any ) and its rated voltage. m) Oil capacity of all oil-immersed equipment with grade of oil required. P) Type of dash-pot fluid (if of oil dash-pot type).

n>

52

r"S: 10118( Part IV ) - 1982

q) Particulars of all coils. r) Particulars of ammeter shunt or current transformer ( if any ), s) Particulars of voltage transformers, including limiting resistances or fuses ( if any ). t) Particulars of control circuit transformers ( if any), including secondary voitage and rating. u) Particulars of cartridge fuse links ( if any ). v) Particulars of indicating lamps ( if any), including cap size and wattage. w) Particulars of rectifiers ( if any );

53

1s : 19118 ( Part IV ) - 1982 ( Continuedfromjqe
2 )

Panel for Selection, Installation and Maintenance of Switchgear and Controlgear ETDC 2O/P25
Members SHRI 0. P. ANAND SHRI JAGMOHAN ( Alternate ) SHRI C. R. BALASUBRAMANIAN *SIIRI M. SESHADRI ( AZternc(e ) SHRI DEWXDER NATO SHRI P. D. JAHAGIRDAR Larsen & Toubro llaharashtra Ltd, Bombay Board, Bombay State Electricity Delhi Electric The English Madras Representing Supply Undertaking, Electric Company New Delhi of India Ltd,

NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI JAVEED AHMED SHRI I. NARAYANA RAO ( Altcrnatc j SHRI K. P. SARATHY ( Alternate ) DR T. C. SIDHAN Chief Electrical Inspector Kerala, Trivandrum PROF. G. RAVINDRAN NAIR ( Alternate ) Karnataka Electricity to the Government of

SHRI SYED KHADP.R MOHUDDIN

Board, Bangalore Ltd, Sccunderabad

SHRI R. SUBBARAO Bharat Heavy Electric& SHRI K. C. LAHARI ( Alterna:~ ) SHRI P. S. DAS (Alternate ) SHRI G. N. THADANI SHRI M. K. DAS ( Alternate ) SHRI A. S. UDHALIKAR SHRI S. R. POTNIS (Altrrnate ) Engineers Hindustan

India Ltd, New Delhi Brown Bovcri Ltd, Bombay

%5hri 51. Scshadri

chaired

th: Pa::cl Slc::lny:.

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062, 91 11 3239399, 91 113239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Central Laboratory: Plot No. 2019, Site IV, Sahibabad Regional Offices Central `Eastern Northern Southern Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 Telephone 8-77 00 32

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : 1114 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA700054
: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

323 76 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 235 23 15 832 92 95

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 TWestern : Manakalaya, E9 Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),
MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001

550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 19 96 54 11 37 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 26 23 05 6 21 17

$Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore - Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001 641037 121001 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI. Ganga Nagar. BHUBANESHWAR Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Savitri Complex, 58-58C, Road, FARIDABAD 201001 GUWAHATI 781003 500001 116 G. T Road, GHAZIABAD

5315 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, L. N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Marg, C-Scheme, Nagar, KANPUR E-52, Chitaranjan JAIPUR 302001 208005

Station Road, HYDERABAD

1171418 B, Sarvodaya

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 P. 0. Palayam, 695034 440010 T. C. No. 1411421, University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM Institution of Engineers

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR

52 51 71 32 36 35

( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Approach, P. 0. Princep Street,

`Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072

27 10 85 309 65 28 222 39 71 Square,

. TSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007
SSales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGALORE 560002

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

