( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF SOUND INSULATION IN BUILDINGS AND OF BUILDING ELEMENTS
PART VI LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS OF IMPACT SOUND INSULATION OF FLOORS
Acoustics Sectional Committee:
Chairman Drr M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist Physical Laboratory, New Delhi Representing

LTDC

5

National Members

Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) DR K. ACHYUTHAN SHRI R. S. VOHRA ( Alternate ) Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI S~NUE~P AHUJ~ SHRI S. P. JERATH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) COL T. R. BHALOTRA LT-COL KISHAN LAL ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), iSew Delhi DR A. F. CHHAPG.4R Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR P. N. GUPTA SHRI TEK CHAND.~NI ( Alternate ) Electronic Component Industries Association, SHRI R. K. JAIN ( ELCINA ), New Delhi SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH ( Alternate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SHRI K. S. KALIDAS SHRI V. JAYARAM.4N ( Alternate ) -Botton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRI J. S. MONGA SHRI M. S. M~NGA ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE SHRI J. K. -BHATTACIIARYA ( Alternate ) DR ( KU~IARI ) SHAILAJA NI~AM All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI K. D. PAVATB ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Films Division, Bombay SHRI A, V. RAiX4NAN Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi RESEARCH ENGINEER Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SHRI M. SANKARALINGARI New Delhi SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1982 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Cdpyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9901-( Part VI ) - 1981 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members Representing Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SRRI SARWAN KUMAR SHRIK. CHANDRACHUDAN( Alternate) SHRI M. N. SRUKLA Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SRRI S. K. TANDON ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDENT SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi WORKS ( Foou ) Piece Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH The Radio Electronics and Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SHRI K. D'SA ( Alternate ) SRRI R. C. JAIN, Director General, ISI ( Ex-o$ccio Member ) Head ( Electronics ) Secretary SHKI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

?

.._

IS : 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF SOUND INSULATION IN BUILDINGS AND OF BUILDING ELEMENTS
PART VI LABORATORY SOUND MEASUREMENTS OF IMPACT INSULATION OF FLOORS

0.

FOKEWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part VI ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard which covers laboratory measurements of impact sound insulation of floors is one of the series of Indian Standards on measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements. Other standards in this series are: Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part V Part VII Part VIII Requirements for laboratories Statement of precision requirements Laboratory measurements of airborne sound insulation of building elements Field measurements of airborne sound insulation between rooms Field measurements of airborne sound insulation of facade elements and facades Field measurements of impact sound insulation of floors Laboratory measurements of the reduction of transmitted impact noise by floor coverings on a standard floor can be used to compare the sound insulation to classify floors according to their sound

0.3 The results obtained properties of floors and insulation properties.

0.4 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from ISO/DIS 14O/VI ( Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and 3

IS : 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981 of building elements: Part VI Laboratory measurements of impact sound insulation of floors ' issued by International Organization for Standardization. 0.5 In reporting the result of a .test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part VI ) specifies a laboratory method of measuring impact noise transmission through floors by using a standard tapping machine. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part III/Set 8 )-19747 shall apply in addition to the following terms. 2.1 Average Sound Pressure Level in a Room - Ten times the common logarithm of the ratio of the space and time average of the sound pressure squared to the square of the reference sound pressure, the space average being taken over the entire room with the exception of those parts where the direct radiation of a sound source or the near field of the boundaries ( wall, etc ) is of significant influence. This quantity is denoted by L:

L = 10 log10
where $17

$12 + pz2 +

......... npoa

+ pn2

dB

.........

(1)

Pz . . . . . . . . .Pn =

the rms positions

sound pressures in the room, and sound pressure.

at

n

different

p0 = 20&a

= the reference

2.2 Impact Sound Pressure Level - The average sound pressure level in a specific frequency band in the receiving room when the floor under The quantity test is excited by the standardized impact sound source. is denoted by L,. 2.3 Normalized Impact Sound Pressure pressure level Lf reduced by a correction Level - The impact sound term which is given in
8 Architectural acoustics.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( retised ). j-Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section

4

IS ~: 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981 decibels, being ten times the common logarithm of the ratio between the reference equivalent absorption area As and the measured equivalent absorption area A of the receiving room. This quantity is denoted by Ln:

Ln = Li where

10 log 10 -$

dB .* . . . . . . . (2)

Ao=10m2
In all cases where it is uncertain whether results are obtained without flanking transmission, the normalized impact sound pressure level should be denoted by Ln. of Impact Sound Pressure Level (-Improvement of Impact Sound Insulation ) - The difference between the average sound pressure levels in the receivin, w room before and after installation of, for example, a floor covering [ see IS : 9901 ( Part VIII )-1981" 1, This quantity is denoted by AL.

2.4 Reductiou

3. EQUIPMENT
machine being constructed in accordance with the 3.1 The tapping following specifications serves as a standardized impact sound source. Further, the equipment shall be suitable for meeting the requirements of 5. 3.2 The tapping machine should have five hammers placed in a line, the distance between the two end hammers being about 400 mm. 3.3 The effective time between successive impacts should be 100 _I 5 ms. The mass of each hammer should be 0.5 kg ( within _I 2.5 percent ). on a flat floor should a free drop without be equivalent, with friction of 40 mm

3.4 The drop of a hammer respect to the momentum, to ( within f 2.5 percent ).

3.5 The part of the hammer which strikes the floor should be a cylinder of brass or steel, 3 cm in diameter, with a spherical end having a radius of about 50 cm. 3.6 Alternatively, especially in the case of a `fragile floor covering, hammers may be used having the part that strikes the floor coated with a layer of rubber, of which the dimensions, composition and vulcanization are specified as follows. *Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements: Part VIII Laboratory measurement of the reduction of transmitted standard impact noise by floor coverings on a standard floor.

5

IS : 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981 3.7 The hammer with a rubber coating should geometrically resemble the hammers of brass or steel only. The part of each hammer below a plane perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder, at 5 mm distance from the lowest point of the curved end of the hammer, should be of rubber of the composition and vulcanization `Cure' shown in Table 1.
TABLE 1 SPECIFICATION FOR RUBBER FOR
PARTS

HAMMER
BY h'f.\SS

CollPosrTIoN

Natural Stearic

rubber acid

100 15 2 40 1 ( Altax ) I.2 0.4 3 45 min at 142�C and 290 kPa.

Zinc oxide Carbon black EPC Phenyl betanaphthylamine 2.2-Benzothiazyl Diphenylguanidine Sulphur Cure: disulphide

3.8 The
maximum metal. 3.9 The hammer 4. TEST

rubber layer thus has a plane and a curved surface, and a thickness of 5 mm. It should be stuck or vulcanized on the distance between the supports line should be at least 100 mm. of the tapping machine and the

ARRANGEMENT

4.1 Receiving Room 4.1.1 Laboratory test facilities IS : 9901 ( Part I )-1981".
4.2 should meet the requirements of

Test Specimen

4.2.1 The size of the test specimen is determined by the size of the test opening of the laboratory test facility as it is defined in IS : 97791981? that is between 10 m2 and 20 ma with the shorter edge length not The size of floor test specimen and elements comprising less than 2.3 m. that specimen should be made as close as possible to the sizes of field installation.
*Measurement of sound insulation in Requirements for laboratories. j-specification for sound level meters.
buildings and of building elements: Part I

6

IS : 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981 NOTE - The tee specimen should preferably be installed in a manner as similar a$ possible to the actual construction with a careful simulation of normal connections and sealing conditions at the perimeter and at points within the specimen. The mo.znting conditions should be stated in the test report. 4.2.2 The sound transmitted by any indirect path should be negligible compared with the sound transmitted through the test specimen. 5. TEST PROCEDURE AND EVALUATION

5.1 Generation

of Sound Field by the tapping machine shall be in accordance Level

5.1.1 The impact sound shall be generated ( see 3 ). The position of the tapping machine with 5.5. 5.2 Measurement of Impact Sound Pressure

5.2.1 The impact sound pressure level in the receiving room should be an average over space and time. This average may be obtained by using a number of fixed microphone positions of a continuously moving microphone with an integration of pa. 5.2.2 The indicating device should be designed to determine rms values of the sound pressure or corresponding pressure levels. If a sound level meter is used, it should conform to IS : 9779-1981" for precision It is recommended to use the meter response `slow'. sound level meters. The complete measuring system including the microphone shall be calibrated before each series of measurements to absolute values for measurements in diffuse sound fields. 5.2.3 When in any frequency band the sound pressure level in the receiving room is less than 10 dB above the background level, then the background level should be measured just before and after the determination of sound pressure level due to the sound source and a correction as given in Table 2 shall be applied. 5.2.4 The above readings. corrections, if any, are to be made to the individual

5.2.5 If the difference is less then 3 dB, that is, the impact sound pressure level is less than the background level, a precise value of the impact sound pressure level cannot be determined. 5.2.6 In cases where the impact insulation is high, relative to airborne sound insulation, the airborne sound pressure level produced the source room by the tapping machine may be transmitted to receiving room at a higher level than the transmitted impact sounds. -.. *Specification for sound level meters. 7 the in the By

IS : 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981

TABLE

2

CORRECTION

TO

SOUND

PRESSURE

LEVEL

READINGS

( Clause 52.3 )
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL, MEASURED WITH TAPPING MACHWE OPERATING, AND BANKGROUND LEVEL ALONE COCXECTION TO BE SUATR~CTEJI FROI\ISOUND PRESSURE LEX-*L, MEASURED WITH TAPPING:

MACHINE OPERATING,

TO

OBTAIN SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL DUE TO TAPPIEG MACHINE ALWE dB 3 2 1

dB 3 4 to 5 6 to 9

measuring the airborne sound pressure level in the upper room and the airborne sound insulation between the rooms on both sides of the floor, the minimum measurable impact sound pressure level can be calculated. 5.3 Frequency Range of Measurements level should be measured by using ,thirdThe discrimination characteristics of the with IS : 6964-1973*. filters having at least the following 630 800 centre 1000

5.3.1 The sound pressure octave or octave band filters. filters should be in accordance 5.3.2 Third-octave band frequencies should be used: 100 1 250 125 160 1 600 2 000

200 250 315 400 2 500 3 150 Hz

500

If octave band filters are used, as a minimum the series beginning with centre frequency 125 Hz and ending at 2 000 Hz should be used.
NOTE 1 frequency. Use of lower frequency is dependent on !the distribution of natural

NOTE 2 - The minimum reverberation times for the empty room are adjusted to a volume of 180 ms. For other volumes, these times should be multiplied by the factor ( V/180 )i ( 17 being the volume of the room expressed in cubic metres ) except at high frequencies, where the air absorption is the predcminant factor influencing the decay rate. *Specificaton for octave, sound and vibrations. half-octave and third-octave band filters fcr analysis of

8

IS : 9901 ( Part VI ) - 1981 5.4 Measurement Area and Evaluation of the Equivalent Absorption

5.4.1 The correction term of equation (2) containing the eauivalent from cfhe reveiberation absorption area may preferably be evaluated and evaluated using time measured according to IS : 8225-1976" Sabine's formula:
A_

!e3v
T

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . (3)

.

A = equivalent V = receiving I reverberation

absorption room volume

area in square in cubic

metres,

metres,~and area by a

time in seconds.

5.4.2 An alternative method of taking the equivalent absorption into account is to measure the average sound pressure level produced sufficiently stable sound source the power output of which is known. 5.5 Position of the Tapping Machine

5.5.1 The tapping machine should be placed in at least four different In the case of an isotropic floor conpositions on the floor under test. struction ( ribs, beams, etc ) more positions may be necessary. Besides, the hammer connection line should be orientated at 45" to the direction The distance of the tapping machine from the of the beams or ribs. edges of the floor should be at least 0.5 m. 5.5.2 If the tapping machine is placed on a very resilient layer, hard pads may be necessary under the supports of the tapping machine to guarantee 40 mm for the fall of the hammer. 5.6 Measurement Procedure determine which affect a manual the test procedure of the

5.6.0 Each organization should which complies with this standard. 5.6.1 The measurements a) Number b) Positions necessary criteria are shown below: of the tapping

repeatability

and sizes of diffusing

elements; microphone and room boundaries

machine;

c) Minimum distance between with regard to near fields;
*Method of measurement

of absorption coefficients in a reverberation

room.

9

IS : 9901 ( Part

VI ) - 1981 or, in the case of a moving

d) Number of microphone positions microphone, microphone path; e) -Averaging time of `the level; and

f) Method for determination of the equivalent absorption area, which involves a number of repeated readings in each position. 5.6.1.1 An Appendix A. 6. PRECISION 6.1 It is required that the factory repeatability. This method shown in IS : 9901 ( time to time, particularly instrumentation. measurement procedure should give satiscan be determined in accordance with the Part II )-1981" and should be checked from when a change is made in procedure or
are under consideration pending

example

of

typical

test

conditions

is

given

in

NOTE - Numerical requirements for repeatability further experience with this test procedure.

7. EXPRESSION

OF RESULTS

7.1 For the statement of the impact sound insulation of the test specimen, the normalized impact sound pressure level should be given at all frequencies of measurement, preferably in the form of a curve. 7.2 The bandwidth used for the measurement and for the presentation shall be stated in every graph or table. If a numerical adjustment is made for the third-octave to octave bands, the graph or table of results shall bear the caption octave band levels calculated from third-octave band measurements. 7.3 For graphs with the level in decibels plotted against frequency on a logarithmic scale, the length for a 10 : 1 frequency ratio shou!d be equal to the length for 10 dB, 25 dB or 50 dB on the ordinate scale ( see IS : 8159-19767 ). 8. TEST REPORT

8.1 The test report should state: a) Name of organization b) Date of test; that has performed the measurements;

c) Description of floor construction and mounting conditions, with sectional drawing including the size and the flanking construction;
*Measurements of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements: Statement of precision requirements. iScales and sizes for plotting frequency characteristics and polar diagrams. Part II

10

IS : 9901( Part VI ) - 1981
Volume Type of the receiving room; pressure level of test specimen covering and ); as a

of filters used;

Normalized impact sound function of frequency; Type of hammers h) Brief description ( see 5.6 ); or

used ( without details

or with rubber of procedure

equipment

j ) Limit of measurement in case the sound pressure level in any band is not measurable on account of back-ground noise ( acoustical or electrical ) or transmission of airborne noise; and measured ( see Appendix B ) in the k) The flanking transmission -if It should be stated as clearly as possible which same form as Zn. part or parts of the transmitted sound are included in the flanking transmission measurement. With respect to the evaluation of a single value from the curve Xn (f ), or L'n (f ), see Indian Standard Specification for rating of sound insulation for dwellings ( under preparation ).

.

APPENDIX A ( Clause 5.6.1.1 )
EXAMPLE A-l. OF TEST PROCEDURE
normally be expected An example of a test procedure which will to give satisfactory repeatability is given below.

A-2. Where the receiving room is substantially rectangular with a volume of about 50 ma it will contain at least three randomly orientated diffusing elements or an equivalent area of rotating vane, the former having a typical edge length of 1.2 m each. The diffusers should not be suspended from the ceiling under test. A-3. Six positions of the tapping machine are chosen randomly distributed on a rigid floor, no position being closer than I.0 m to its edges. For each tapping machine position, one of six randomly distributed microphone positions is chosen in the receiving room. No microphone position should be nearer than 0.7 m to the room boundaries or diffusers. A-4. The readings of sound time of 5 s in each frequency pressure level are taken using an averaging band at each position. 11

IS : 9901(

Part

VI ) - 1981

A-5. As an alternative, the sound field sampling procedure can be carried out using a rotating microphone device having a sweep radius between 1 m and I.5 m. In this case the plane of the traverse is inclined in relation to the room boundaries and the device should have an averaging time equal to the traverse time, which should be a minimum of 30 S. A-6. The equivalent absorption area should be determined from readings taken using three microphones positions with two reverberation time analyses at each position.

APPENDIX B [ Clause 3.1 (k) ]
MEASURING OF FLANKING TRANSMISSION B-l. In case the flanking transmission has to be investigated, this may be done by measuring the average velocity levels of the specimen and the flanking surfaces in the receiving room. The average surface velocity level Lv of a specimen in decibels is ten times the common logarithm of the ratio of the average of the mean square normal surface velocity of the specimen to the square of the reference velocity: L, = where 01, %, . . . . . . . . . vn are the rms normal surface velocities at n different positions on the wall or ceiling, and vo = 5 x IO-8 m.s-r is the reference velocity. B-2. The vibration transducer used should Abewell attached to the surface and its mass impedance should be sufficiently low compared with the point impedance of the surface. B-3. If the critical frequency of the specimen or the flanking objects is low compared with the frequency range of interest, the power wk radiated from a particular element k with area Sk in the receiving room may be estimated from the formula: wk = where n*k is the spatial average surface velocity; of the mean square of 12 the normaI
PC skulk Ok................. (5)

10 log 10

vel -l- aa + ............ --tv'ndB
n.20

............

(4)

IS : 9901( Part VI ) - 1981 CQis the radiation
the critical efficiency, a pure frequency; and impedance number of about 1 above

PC is the characteristic

of air.

B-4. From the average surface velocity level Lv the average sound pressure level in the receiving room due to the radiation of the k-th flanking element may be calculated according to the formula:
Lk

= &k

+

10 logI,

A

4sk

dB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (6) level of all flanking 10 Lk/lO > constructions (7) is:

B-5. The resulting

sound pressure -f

L_Dr= 10 log 10

dB e..............

13

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QUANTITY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

SYSTEM

OF -UNITS

( SI UNITS

)

UNIT

SYMBOL m kg A K cd mol

metre

kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Supplementary QUANTlTY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz

SYMBOL N 1 1 N = 1 kg.m/s* J-1N.m

J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W-lJ/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 T1 Wb/m 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1) 1 1 S V 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/ms

conductance force volt Pascal

Electromotive Pressure, atress

1 Pa -

