RAT AAF IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Aral sa MeTHTS cht Meare 
aT 1 Riran Ratai & fora 
mahina roarai 


Glossary of Ayurvedic Terminology 


Part 1 Standardized Terminology for 
Fundamental Principles 


ICS 01.040.11, 11.020.99 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2020 Price Group 4 


AYUSH Sectional Committee, FAD 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
AYUSH Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


There is a worldwide resurgence of interest in holistic systems of health care, particularly with respect to the 
prevention and management of lifestyle-related disorders, chronic, non-communicable and systemic diseases. It is 
increasingly understood that no single health care system can provide satisfactory answers to all the health needs 
of modern society. Evidently there is a need for a new inclusive and integrated health care regime that should 
guide health policies and programmes in future. 


This Indian Standard is published in four parts. The other parts in the series are: 
Part 2 Standardized terminology for diagnosis and etiological factors 
Part 3 Standardized terminology for foods and beverages 
Part 4 Standardized terminology for medicinal preparations 


Ayurveda is a comprehensive scientific system of medicine evolved in India. Initially it was developed through 
ancient wisdom, clinical experiences and experimentation in scientific manner. At present, Ayurveda is growing in 
the paradigm of contemporary scientific, technological and medical parameters. Good health is a basic prerequisite 
to acquire materialistic, social and spiritual upliftment of individual. Ayurveda lays great emphasis on preservation 
and promotion of health and prevention of disease. This is achieved through lifestyle management complimented 
with other interventions including drugs and specialized procedures. 


The earliest concepts of Ayurvedic science are found in the ancient texts called Vedas, which are believed to 
be composed between 5000 and 1000 BC The classical texts of Ayurveda containing exclusive information on 
health and disease came around 1000 B.C. onwards, when fundamental and applied principles of Ayurveda were 
documented in a systematic manner. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


There are several technical terms which are specific to Ayurveda. Terminology pertaining to fundamentals of 
Ayurveda, Ayurvedic Pharmacology and Pharmacognosy, structure and function of human body as per Ayurveda, 
Diagnosis and Etiological factors in Ayurveda, signs and symptoms, treatment modalities, preparation of 
medicines, foods and beverages, etc. The inputs have been derived from information available in the public domain 
in print and electronic media inter-alia the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, National AYUSH Morbidity and 
Standardized Terminologies Electronic (NAMASTE) Portal and authoritative books of Ayurveda. 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF AYURVEDIC TERMINOLOGY 


PART 1 STANDARDIZED TERMINOLOGY FOR 
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) covers description/ definition 
of terminologies related to Fundamental Principles 
in Ayurveda. Other standards in the series cover the 
description/ definition of terminologies related to 
diagnosis and etiological factors, foods and beverages, 
medicinal preparations, signs and symptoms, treatment 
modalities, Pharmacology and Pharmacognosy, 


structure and function in Ayurveda. The original terms 
appearing in the text have been transliterated in English 
and defined for the purpose of clear understanding of 
the concept by any person who is not an expert in 
Ayurveda. These terms may be used by manufacturers, 
researchers, academicians, regulators, clinical 
practitioners and other enthusiasts interested in the 
science of Ayurveda. 


2 STANDARDIZED TERMINOLOGY FOR FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 


SI No. Term English Transliteration Definition 

1 HAHA- Moolabhoota shabda Terms related to fundamental principles of 
Ayurveda 

2 ada Ayurveda Science where advantageous and 
disadvantageous, happy and unhappy (states 
of) life along with what is good and bad 
for life, its measurement and life itself are 
described 

3 Sty Ayu Life/ lifespan including combination of the 
body, sense organs, mind and soul 

4 ane Dhaari The sustenance of life or the aspect of life 
which prevents decay 

5 sifa Jivitam That which keeps the body alive 

6 Aan Nityaga Continuous or uninterrupted process of life 

7 AJI Anubandha Continuity of result in the form of life due to 
the association of body, sense organs, mind 
and soul; which transmigrates from one body 
to another 

8 STY-UPR Ayu-prakaara Four patterns of lifestyle namely, wholesome, 
unwholesome, happy and unhappy 

9 Rag Hitayu Lifestyle which is beneficial to the self and the 
society 

10 aag Ahitayu Lifestyle which is neither beneficial for the 
society nor for the self 

11 Was, Sukhayu A lifestyle which provides comfort for the self 

12 quay Dukhayu A lifestyle which results in sorrow/pain 

13 orga -tGeTy, Ayurveda-swaroopam The science and knowledge of life, which 
describes all substances of the universe in 
terms of their being beneficial, harmful, 
pleasant and unpleasant to life 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


SI No. 


Term 


English Transliteration 


Definition 


14 


Paa fare 


Trisutram/ Triskandha 


A synonym of Ayurveda. The entire subject 
matter of Ayurveda can be categorized into 
three namely: 


a) hetu (causes), 
b) /inga (signs and symptoms), and 
c) ausadha (therapeutics) 


15 


Ashtanga Ayurveda 


Eight clinical specialties namely, Kayachikitsa, 
Kaumarbhritya, Agadtantra, Grihachikitsa, 
Shalya tantra, Shalakya tantra, Rasayana 
chikitsa and Vajikarana chikitsa 


16 


Kayachikitsa 


One of the eight branches of Ayurveda which 
deals with the cause, conditions, symptoms, 
progress and cure of the ailments afflicting 
the body. The treatment is usually aimed at 
correcting kaayaagni and thereby alleviating 
the diseases mostly physic 


17 


PRHA 


Kaumarbhrityam 


One among the eight branches 
of Ayurveda which deals with health and 
morbidity of the children and the nursing 
mother 


18 


Agadtantram 


One of the eight branches of Ayurveda which 
deals with the effects of the organic and 
inorganic poisons on the human body and 
their management. 


19 


Griha chikitsa 


One of the eight branches of Ayurveda which 
deals with treatment of possession and other 
physical and mental illness 


20 


Healy rata 


Urdhvaanga chikitsa 


One of the eight branches of Ayurveda which 
deals with diseases of eye, ear, nose, throat 
and head [also called as shalakyatantra| 


21 


Shalya chikitsa 


One of the eight branches of Ayurveda which 
deals with removal of foreign body, wounds 
and other surgical conditions 


22 


Jvara chikitsa 


One of the eight divisions of Ayurveda which 
deals with retardation of ageing changes and 
sustaining healthy cognitive and intellectual 
faculties till the end of complete human life 
span 


23 


Vrisha chikitsa 


One of the eight branches of Ayurveda dealing 
with sustenance of sexual vigour and obtaining 
healthy progeny 


24 


Darshanam 


Way of seeing and understanding the world. 


25 


Shaastram 


Classic, scripture, science, branch of 
knowledge, synonym of Ayurveda 


26 


Vigyaanam 


Systematic and perfect knowledge 


27 


Vidhi 


Mandatory injunction prescribed in text 


28 


Sootram 


Short sentence 


29 


Adhikaranam 


The main theme on which the entire science is 
build, or context of elucidation or discussion 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


SI No. 


Term 


English Transliteration 


Definition 


30 


Arthapraapti 


Unsaid idea conveyed by the said one 


31 


Siddhanata 


A demonstrated truth established after repeated 
examinations and reasoning by experts 


32 


Saamanya-Vishesha Siddhanata 


An applied principle of Ayurveda which is 
used for maintaining the equilibrium of the 
body constituent which states that similarity 
causes increase and dissimilarity causes 
decrease 


33 


TS- 


Shada Darshanam 


Six primary schools of philosophy which 
serve as the theoretical basis of Ayurveda 
namely, Saankhya, Nyayaa, Vaisheshika, 
Poorvamimaansa, Uttaramimaansa 


34 


Saankhya 


The branch of philosophy dealing with 
enumeration of basic constituents of the 
universe, a philosophy to declare the truth 


properly 


35 


Nyaaya 


The branch of philosophy dealing with 
epistemology 


36 


Yog 


The branch of philosophy dealing with union 
of the soul and the supreme. 


37 


Vaisheshika 


The branch of philosophy dealing with the 
study of objects of knowledge 


38 


Poorvamimaansaa 


The branch of philosophy dealing with 
performance of Vedic rituals 


39 


Uttarmimaansaa 


The branch of philosophy dealing with 
knowledge part of Veda known as Upanishad. 


40 


Satkaaryavaada 


The doctrine which proposes that, the effect 
is always resides in cause even before its 
manifestation 


41 


Asatkaaryavaada 


The doctrine which proposes that, the effect is 
not present in the cause 


42 


43 


eSRaTS 


Aarambhavaada 


Kshanabhanguravaada 


The doctrine which proposes that, effect is 
produced sequentially after the sequential 
destruction of the cause 


The doctrine which proposes that, nothing 
is stable or permanent and everything’s 
undergoes through continuous process of 
decaying 


44 


Vivartavaada 


The doctrine of the Vedanta philosophy which 
proposes that, ‘Brahman’/Almighty is the only 
truth and the rest is illusion 


45 


E ETIGI EZS Ire 


Svabhaavoparamvaada 


The doctrine of the Buddhism which believes 
that natural destruction is inevitable to 
everything 


46 


Parinaamvaada 


Doctrine of transformation which states that 
all the substances get changes continuously 


47 


Pitharapaakavaada 


The doctrine which explains about the 
transformation at physical plane 


48 


Peelupaakavaada 


The doctrine which explains about the 
transformation at molecular level 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


SI No. Term 


English Transliteration 


Definition 


49 wag 


Prameya 


Object of perceptible knowledge 


50 var 


Padaarth 


Entities which exist (astitvam), are 
knowable (gyeyatvam), and are denoted with 
a name (abhidheya); the meaning of a word or 
group of word 


51 Ye aly 


Shat Padaarth 


The six knowable objects which are: 
a) Saamanya, 
b) Vishesha 
c) Guna, 
d) Dravya, 
e) Karma, and 


f) Samavaaya 


52 UT 


Guna 


Quality of a substance; it is an inseparable 
entity with substance (dravya); guna is devoid 
of any action on its own, however guna is 
responsible for action through dravya 


53 FAT / neryo 


Triguna / Mahaguna 


Three chief principle attributes; 
indicative of three mental 
attributes (sattva, rajas and tamas) 


54 Ualdy 


Sattvam 


One among the three qualities (sattva, 
rajas and tamas) which is characterized by 
lightness, knowledge and enlightenment 


55 XT 


Raj 


One among the three qualities (sattva, rajas 
and tamas) which is characterized by activity, 
initiation, action and attachment 


56 da 


Tam 


One among the three qualities (sattva, rajas 
and tamas) which is characterized by darkness 
and ignorance 


57 TE 


Guru 


The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for nourishment (Brimhana) 


58 


a 


Laghu 


The quality of a substance which promotes 
lightness and decreases the bulk of the body 


59 a 


Manda 


The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for the slow activity or delayed response 


60 cer 


Tikshna 


The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for quick activity 


61 afta 


Shita 


The quality of a substance which is 
responsible for promoting coldness, promotes 
stiffness (Stambhana) and acts as styptic or 
astringent 


62 CUI 


Ushna 


The quality of a substance which is 
responsible for promoting sweating, softening/ 
ripening (Paaka) 


63 Rare 


Snigdha 


The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for imparting smoothness, moisture and oily 
nature to the body 


64 Bal 


Ruksha 


The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for dryness or which results in absorption of 
moisture 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


SI No. Term English Transliteration Definition 

65 RATT Shlakshana The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for wound healing 

66 W Khara The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for reducing corpulence 

67 as Saandra The quality of a substance which is responsible 
for gratifying/ satisfying effect. 

68 ad Drava The quality of a substance which is responsible 
for stirring up/ churning (Vilodana) and 
moistening 

69 Hg Mridu The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for bringing about softness or fragility 

70 alert Kathina The quality of a substance which is responsible 
for firmness/ hardness 

71 Wea Sukshma The quality of a substance which is responsible 
for spreading out/ penetration 

72 Re Sthula The quality of a substance which is responsible 
for closure/ concealment, bulkiness 

73 RR Sthira The quality ofa substance which is responsible 
for concentration/ immobility/ strength to the 
body and especially to hair, moustache, bones, 
nails, teeth, etc 

74 WR/ ad Sara / Chala The quality of a substance which is 
responsible for movement/ stimulation, 
normal movements such as peristalsis 

75 fara Vishada The quality of a substance which is responsible 
for cleaning and help tissues free from vitiated 
substances 

76 foresee Picchila The quality of a substance which is responsible 
for coating effect over the tissues 

77 Je Buddhi The power of forming and retaining 
conceptions and general notions, intelligence, 
reason, intellect, discernment, judgment 

78 WA Sukham Favourable perception including happiness, 
delight, joy, pleasure 

79 Gay Dukham Unfavourable perception including 
unhappiness, sorrow, grief 

80 gT Icchha Desired attributes produced from seeking of 
pleasure 

81 ay Dvesha Aversion - one among the suppressible urges 

82 Wad Prayatna The quality through which stimulus for useful 
activity is obtained 

83 IfA Paradiguna Group of ten properties often used in for 
analytical purposes and decision making 

84 RAA, Paratvam Priority or superiority of a substance over the 
other innumerable substances 

85 SURG Aparatvam Inferiority of substance over the other 


innumerable substances 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


SI No. Term English Transliteration Definition 

86 aT Sankhya The quality which enables us to quantify/ 
calculate 

87 dart Sanyoga Combination of two or more than two 
substances 

88 faurt Vibhaga Division of a particular substance 

89 quads Pritthakatvam The quality by which one substance is 
differentiated or separated from the other 

90 URANO Parimaana The quality by which measurement of various 
substances is possible 

91 Odd Yukti An activity as per plan/ scheme by logic that 
is, rational plan 

92 GPR Sanskaara The process through which some change/ 
transformation is brought to the original 
properties of any substance 

93 ARTN Abhyasa Getting used to/ repetitive action leading to 
development of a habit 

94 SH Dravyam An entity encompassing the attributes of 
quality and action 

95 PRAT Kaaranadravyam Elementary substances that are said to be the 


cause of manifestation of all other substances, 
nine in number 


96 TfR- RA] 


Moortadravya-Parmaanu 


Perceptible substances; tangible source 
substances; also denoted by: settled into any 
fixed shape, formed, substantial, material, 
embodied, incarnate 


97 qed Prithvi An entity which is responsible for hardness 

98 ody Jalam An entity which is responsible for fluidity 

99 dor Teja An entity which is responsible for heat 

100 ay Vayu An entity which is responsible for movement 

101 HA Mana The faculty through which the cognitive 
organs connect with the soul 

102 et Dhi Denotes understanding; intelligence; wisdom 

103 afd Dhriti Power of retention/ resolution; stable, 
controlling intellect 

104 walt Smriti Remembrance ofthe things directly perceived, 
heard (scriptures) or explained earlier. It is the 
result from a particular conjunction between 
the soul and mind and also from impression 

105 PIH Kaama Desire or of love or of pleasure 

106 EGALI Krodha Also denoted by wrath, passion 

107 may Lobha Insatiable desire for having something; 
excessive desire to acquire more than need 

108 ale Moha Confused state of mind that doesn’t lead to 
correct perception 

109 Ha Mada State of being emotionally aroused and 


worked up 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


SI No. 


Term 


English Transliteration 


Definition 


110 


Ahankara 


Denotes the negative roll of pride, haughtiness; 
also one of the principles of the evolution in 
the sense of conception of one’s individuality, 
self-consciousness 


111 


112 


Aatma 


Adhyatmika 


Soul or spirit: principle of life and sensation, 
the individual self; the only conscious element 
in the human body 


Relating to self or to the soul 


113 


Purusha 


The personal and animating principle in men 
and other beings, the soul or spirit 


114 


Rara- 


Chikitsayapurusha 


Person as the object of treatment 


115 


Moksha 


Liberation, cessation from worldly existence 
or transmigration 


116 


aufauatteaura 


Dashavidhaparikshyabhaava 


Ten important aspects for examination 
namely, Kaarana (cause); Karana 
(instrument); Kaaryayoni (source of 
action); Kaarya (action itself); Kaaryaphala 
(fruits of action); Anubandha (subsequent 
manifestations); Desha (habitat), Kaala (time), 
Pravrutti (initiation) and Upaaya (means of 
action). 


117 


Kaaranam 


In the context of Ayurvedic medicine, 
the Kaarana (cause) is considered as 
physician, as he/she is the causative factor 
for the achievement of the object that is, the 
maintenance of the equilibrium of Dhatus in 
the body. 


118 


119 


Karanam 


Kaaryayoni 


The tool for treatment that is, medicine/ 
procedure 


Intimate cause of illness 


120 


Kaarya 


The process undertaken for the attainment of 
health that is, treatment 


121 


Kaaryaphalam 


The outcome of intervention in the form of 
healthy state; result of the act is attainment of 
happiness. It is known by satisfaction of mind 
intellect, sense organs and the body 


122 


Anubandha 


The long term consequences/ result; in this 
context it is achievement of healthy longevity 


123 


Desha 


In this context, the patient constitutes the 
Desha 


124 


Kaala 


Both the year consisting of seasons and the 
state of disease 


125 


Pravritti 


Beginning the treatment or therapeutic action 


126 


Upaaya 


Excellence of the physician in terms of means 
of action and the correctness of the therapy 


127 


Vaidya 


The physician. A person who is an expert in 
medicine; academically qualified; experienced 
and observes purity of mind, body and 
thoughts. 


IS 17424 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
AYUSH Sectional Committee, FAD 26 


Organization 
Ministry of AYUSH, New Delhi 
All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi 


Association of Manufacturers of Ayurvedic Medicines 


(AMAM), New Delhi 


Ayurvedic Drug Manufacturers Association (ADMA), 


Mumbai, Maharashtra 


Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
(CCRAS), New Delhi 


Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants 
(CIMAP), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 


Defence Research and Development Organization 
(DRDO), New Delhi 


Delhi Institute of Pharmaceutical Science and 
Research (DIPSAR), New Delhi 


Dabur India Limited, Sahibabad, Uttar Pradesh 


Hamdard Laboratories, New Delhi 


Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), 
New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), 
Hyderabad, Telangana 


National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI), 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 


National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), 
Jaipur, Rajasthan 


National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB), 
New Delhi 


Pharmacopoeial Commission of Indian Medicine & 
Homoeopathy, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 


Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine 
(PLIM), Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 


Quality Council of India (QCI), New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Dr D. C. Katocu (Chairman) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr V. SASHIBHUSHAN 
Su ARJUN Muttant (Alternate) 


SH CHANDRAKANT BHANUSHALI 
Dr Amit AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr ARJUN SINGH 
Dr (Ms) Suruti KHANDuRI (Alternate) 


Dr KARUNA SHANKAR 
Dr Daya Nanpan Mani (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Dr Niput SANDAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR RANJAN MITRA 
Dr Arun Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI HAMID AHMAD 
Dr RANI KAUL 


Dr D. Vaya KUMAR 


Ms SAYYADA KHATOON 
Suri Cuv Rao (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEV SHARMA 
Dr Supipta Kumar Ratu (Alternate) 


Ms PADAMpRIYA BALAKRISHNAN 
Su N. PapMA Kumar (Alternate) 


DrK. R. C. REDDY 

Dr Vuay Gupta (Alternate) 
Dr RAJEEV KUMAR SHARMA 

Suri RAJEEV SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr MAnisH PANDEY 
Dr VANDANA SIROHA (Alternate) 


Suri P. RAJESH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Dr PRADEEP KUMAR DUA 
Scientist ‘C’ (FAD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 26 (15041). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


