Wat HAR IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


qm 2 dst he Hl Med Peay 
( Vee FART ) 


Fresh Concrete — Methods of 
Sampling, Testing and Analysis 


Part 2 Determination of Consistency of Fresh Concrete 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30 


© BIS 2018 


ada AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© AM FA, 9 ae VHC APM, As feeet-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 8 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 2 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Testing plays an important role in controlling the quality of cement concrete work. Systematic testing of the raw 
materials, the fresh concrete and the hardened concrete, is an inseparable part of any quality control programme 
for concrete. This helps achieve a higher efficiency of the materials used and greater assurance of the performance 
of the concrete, in regard to workability, strength and durability. The test methods used should be simple, direct 
and convenient to apply. This standard was prepared with this objective in view. 


This standard was first published in 1959. In this revision, it was decided to review and update the various existing 
test methods of fresh concrete taking into consideration the latest international practices and developments in this 
field in the country, and also introduced certain new test methods wherever required. In the process, the various 
existing test methods covered in IS 1199 : 1959 ‘Method of sampling and analysis of concrete’, have been revised. 
The revision of the standard is being brought out taking into consideration primarily the corresponding ISO 
standards while also examining the other best practices world over and in the country. In addition, test methods 
for determination of properties of new types of concrete like self compacting concrete have been included, covering 
tests such as consistency, viscosity, passing ability and segregation resistance. Also, for better understanding and 
implementation, some of the other test methods which were spread over in other Indian standards have been 
brought together under the fold of IS 1199 as its various parts, such as the setting time of concrete by penetration 
method and, water soluble and acid soluble chlorides in mortar and concrete. This is with a view to making the 
standard comprehensive in all respects, and rendering it a comprehensive source of provisions for testing of 
concrete and reference in other Indian Standards. 


This standard has been split into nine parts. The other parts in the series are: 
Part 1 Sampling of fresh concrete 
Part 3 Determination of density of fresh concrete 
Part 4 Determination of air content of fresh concrete 
Part 5 Making and curing of test specimens 
Part 6 Tests on fresh self compacting concrete 
Part 7 Determination of setting time of concrete by penetration resistance 
Part 8 Determination of water soluble and acid soluble chlorides in mortar and concrete 
Part9 Analysis of freshly mixed concrete 


This standard (Part 2) covers the procedures for the determination of consistency of fresh concrete. The consistency 
tests as per this standard may be treated as synonymous to workability tests. 


These test methods shall be applicable as and when published in place of the corresponding provisions given in 
IS 1199 : 1959. IS 1199 : 1959 shall be superseded after the publication of all the parts of the standard. The flow 
table test formerly covered in IS 9103:1999 has been updated and included in this standard, and the flow test 
referred in IS 9103 shall be superseded and may be conducted as per this standard. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


FRESH CONCRETE — METHODS OF SAMPLING 
TESTING AND ANALYSIS 
PART 2 DETERMINATION OF CONSISTENCY OF FRESH CONCRETE 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) specifies procedures for 
determination of consistency of fresh concrete. It 
specifies the following test methods: 


a) Slump test, 


b) Vee bee consistometer test (modified Vee bee 
consistometer test also included in Annex B), 

c) Compacting factor test, 

d) Degree of compactability, 

e) Flow table test (not applicable for SCC), and 

f) Slump flow test for high fluidity concrete and 
self compacting concrete [see IS 1199 (Part 6)]. 


NOTES 


1 When carrying out these tests, prevent skin contact with fresh 
concrete by wearing suitable protective clothing, gloves and 
footwear. If wet cement or concrete enters the eye, immediately 
wash it out thoroughly with clean water and seek medical 
treatment without delay. Wash fresh concrete off the skin 
immediately. 


2 The use of vibrating equipment, such as vibrating tables, can 
cause damage to joints and loss of sensation due to nerve 
damage. Moulds, etc, should be clamped to the table and not 
held in position using one’s hand while they are being vibrated. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 4845 and IS 6461 (Parts 1 to 12) and the following 
shall also apply. 


3.1 Roller Compacted Concrete — It is a stiff mix 
with zero slump but yet cohesive and can be compacted 
by vibratory roller. The concrete in its unhardened state 
will support a roller while being compacted. 


3.2 Self Compacting Concrete (SCC) — SCC is an 
innovative concrete that does not normally require 


vibration for placing and compaction. It is able to flow 
under its own weight, completely filing formwork and 
achieving full compaction, without segregation, even 
in the presence of congested reinforcement. 


4 DETERMINATION OF CONSISTENCY 


4.1 General 


The consistency of the concrete can be determined by 
any of the following tests: 


a) Slump test, 

b) Vee bee test, 

c) Compacting factor test, 

d) Degree of compactability, 

e) Flow table test, and 

f) Slump flow test for high fluidity concrete. 


Above mentioned tests are not applicable for foam 
concrete, no fines concrete, or where the nominal 
maximum aggregate size exceeds 40 mm. If the concrete 
contains coarse aggregate with size larger than 40 mm, 
the concrete shall be wet-sieved through 40 mm screen 
to exclude aggregate particles bigger than 40mm. 


4.2 Sampling 


Samples for the test shall be obtained as per IS 1199 
(Part 1). Each sample shall be remixed before carrying 
out the tests. 


4.3 Slump Test 
4.3.1 Principle 


The fresh concrete is compacted into a mould in the shape 
of a frustum of a cone. When the cone is withdrawn 
upwards, the distance that the concrete has slumped 
provides a measure of the consistency of the concrete. 


The slump test is applicable to a range of consistency 
of concrete that corresponds to slumps between 10 mm 
and 210 mm. Outside this range, other method of 
determination of consistency should be considered 
which are described elsewhere in this standard. 


4.3.2 Apparatus 


4.3.2.1 Mould, suitable of forming the test specimen, 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


shall be made of metal, not readily attacked by cement 
paste and having at least 1.6 mm thickness. The mould 
shall have a smooth internal surface and free from dents. 
The mould shall be in the form of a hollow frustum of a 
cone and shall have the following internal dimensions: 


a) Diameterofbase : 200 +2 mm 
b) Diameter of top 100+2 mm 
c) Height 300 +2 mm 


The base and the top shall be open and parallel to each 
other and at right angle to the axis of the cone. The 
mould shall be provided, on the upper portion, with 
two handles at two-thirds of the height, and at the 
bottom with fixing clamps or foot pieces to hold it 
steady. A sketch of a typical mould without guide is 
included in Fig. 1. 


The mould shall be visually inspected prior to each 
use to ensure that the interior is clean and free from 
concrete deposits. 


4.3.2.1.1 Calibration of the mould 


The mould shall be checked annually to ensure that its 
dimensions and condition remain within specified 
tolerances. 


4.3.2.2 Tamping rod 


The tamping rod shall be made of steel, having a circular 
cross-section with a diameter of 16+ 1mm, 600+ 5mm 
in length and with rounded ends. The rod may be 
extended with a handle of plastic conduit, provided that 
the overall length does not exceed 1 000 mm. 


The tamping rod shall be checked annually to ensure 


ATLEAST 1.6 
THICK 


0.2 THICK 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


NOTE — To facilitate the lifting of the mould in a vertical direction, it is recommended that suitable guide attachments may be provided. 
Any rivets used in the construction of the mould shall be countersunk flush on the inside of the cone. Attachments shall be preferably 


welded to the mould. 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL MOULD FoR SLUMP TEST 


that its dimensions and condition remain within the 
tolerances. 


4.3.2.3 Funnel (optional) 


It shall be made of non-absorbent material, not readily 
attacked by cement paste. 


The funnel shall consist of two coaxial conical frustums 
having a common diameter of 100 + 2 mm, the ends 
being of greater diameter, one frustum to act as a filling 
funnel and the other as a collar to enable the funnel to 
be located on the outer surface of the mould. 


The funnel shall be checked annually to ensure that its 
dimensions and condition remain within tolerances. 


4.3.2.4 Rule 


It shall be graduated from 0 mm to 300 mm, at intervals 
not exceeding 5 mm, with zero point being at extreme 
end of the rule. 


4.3.2.5 Base plate/surface 


It shall be rigid, flat, non-absorbent and smooth plate 
on which the mould is to be placed. 


4.3.2.6 Shovel 
It shall have a square blade. 
4.3.2.7 Re-mixing tray 


It shall be of good construction and fabricated from a 
non-absorbent material, not readily attacked by cement 
paste. It shall be of appropriate dimensions such that 
the concrete can be thoroughly remixed, using the 
square bladed shovel. 


4.3.2.8 Scoop 
It shall be of adequate size. 
4.3.2.9 Timer 


It shall allow time measurement accurate to 1s. The 
timer shall be calibrated at suitable frequency. 


4.3.3 Procedure 


a) Dampen the mould and base plate with a moist 
cloth. Wipe any excessive water from the 
surfaces using an absorbent cloth. Place the 
mould on the surface of the rigid horizontal 
base plate free from extraneous vibration and 
shock. 


b) Immediately after obtaining the sample in 
accordance with 4.2, fill the mould in three 
layers, each approximately one-third of the 
height of the mould when compacted. During 
filling, clamp or hold the mould firmly in place 
by standing on the two foot pieces. 


c) When filling the mould, ensure that the 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


concrete is distributed symmetrically around 
the mould. 


d) Tamp each layer with 25 strokes of the 
tamping rod. 

e) The strokes shall be distributed in an uniform 
manner over the cross-section area of the 
mould. For the bottom layer, this will 
necessitate inclining the rod slightly and 
positioning approximately half the strokes 
spirally towards centre. 

f) Tamp the second layer and top layer each 
throughout its depth, so that the strokes just 
penetrate into the underlying layer. 

g) In filling and tamping the top layer, heap the 
concrete above the mould before the tamping 
is started. 

h) Ifthe tamping operation of the top layer results 
in subsidence of the concrete below the top 
edge of the mould, add more concrete to keep 
an excess above the top of the mould at all 
times. Also ensure that the addition of concrete 
to the top layer does not provide extra 
compaction of the concrete. 

j) After the top layer has been tamped, scrap off 
the surface of the concrete level with the top 
of the mould by means ofa sawing and rolling 
motion of the tamping rod. Remove spilled 
concrete from the base plate/surface. 


k) Remove the mould in 5 + 2s by a straight 
upward push with no lateral or torsional 
motion being imparted to the concrete. 

m) The entire operation from the start of the filling 
to the removal of the mould shall be carried 
out without interruption and shall be 
completed within 180 s. 

n) Immediately after removal of the mould, 
determine the slump, 4, by measuring the 
difference between the height of the mould 
and the highest point of the slumped 
concrete (see Fig. 2). 

p) Measure slump to the nearest 5 mm. 


4.3.4 Test Results 


The test is valid only if it yields a true slump, this being 
a slump in which the concrete remains substantially 
intact and symmetrical as shown in Fig. 3A. If a 
specimen shears as shown in Fig. 3B or collapses as 
shown in Fig. 3C, take another sample and repeat the 
entire procedure as described above. 


Record the true slump, to the nearest 5 mm. 


If two consecutive test show portion of concrete 
shearing of from the mass of the test specimen or 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


MEASURED 
SLUMP 


SLUMPED 
CONCRETE 
SAMPLE 


‘METAL PLATE 


INVERTED SLUMP 
CONE 


Fic. 2 SLUMP MEASUREMENT 


collapsing, report the test as being invalid as the 
concrete lacks the necessary plasticity and cohesiveness 
for the slump test to be suitable. 


4.3.5 Test Report 


In addition to the information required in 5, the test 
report shall include the following: 


a) Slump, if there is a true slump, measured to 
the nearest 5 mm; or 

b) A notation that the test gave a sheared/ 
collapsed slump. 


4.4 Vee Bee Consistometer Test 
4.4.1 Principle 


The Vee bee consistometer test determines the time 
required for transforming, by vibration, a concrete 
specimen in the shape of a conical frustum into a cylinder. 


The fresh concrete is compacted into a slump mould. 
The mould (cone) is lifted of the concrete and a 
transparent disc is swung over the top of the concrete 
and carefully lowered until it comes in contact with the 
concrete. The slump of the concrete is recorded. The 
vibrating table is started and the time taken for the lower 
surface of the transparent disc to be fully in contact 
with cement paste of the concrete is measured. 


If the Vee bee time is less than 5 s or more than 30 s, 
the use of the test method to determine consistency may 
be unsuitable and other methods should be considered 
for this purpose (see Annex B for modified Vee bee 
consistomer test for testing of very stiff dry concretes 
such as rollar compacted concrete. This method also 
covers the method for determining the density of such 
concretes). 


4.4.2 Apparatus 


4.4.2.1 Consistometer (Vee bee meter), consists of the 
following items as shown in Fig. 4. 


a) Container (see 1 in Fig. 4) —It is cylindrical 
in shape, having an internal diameter of 
240 + 5mm and a height of 200 + 2 mm and 
made of a metal, not readily attacked by 
cement paste. The thickness of wall shall be 
3 mm and that of the base 7 mm. The 
container shall be watertight and of sufficient 
rigidity to retain its shape under rough usage. 
It shall be fitted with handles and protected 
from corrosion. The container shall be 
provided with suitable foot pieces to enable 
it to be securely clamped to the top of the 
vibrating table (see 7 in Fig. 4) by means of 
wing nuts (see 8 in Fig. 4). 

b) Mould (see 2 in Fig. 4), as described in 4.3.2.1, 
except that the fixing clamps or foot pieces 
are not required. The mould shall be visually 
checked prior to each use to ensure that it is 
clean and not damaged or dented. 


c) Disc (see 3 in Fig. 4) — A transparent and 
horizontal disc attached to a rod (see 9 in Fig. 4) 
that slides vertically through a guide sleeve (see 
5 in Fig. 4) mounted on swivel arm (see 13 in 
Fig. 4) and which can be fixed in a position by 
a screw (see 15 in Fig. 4). The swivel arm also 
supports a funnel (see 4 in Fig. 4), the bottom 
of which coincides with the top of the conical 
mould when the latter is positioned 
concentrically in the container. The swivel arm 
is located by a hold (see 12 in Fig. 4) and 
can be fixed in a position by set screw 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


3A TRUE 3B SHEAR 3C COLLAPSE 


Fic. 3 Types oF SLUMP 


1 container 6 set-screw 11 vibrator unit 
2 mould 7 vibrating table 12 holder 

3 transparent disc 8 wing nuts 13 swivel arm 
4 funnel 9 rod 14 weight 

5 guide sleeve 10 base for vibrator 15 screw 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 4 VEE BEE CONSISTOMETER 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


d) 


(see 15 in Fig. 4). When in the proper position, 
the axes of the rod and of the funnel shall be 
coincident with the axis of the container. 


The transparent disc shall be 230 + 2 mm in 
diameter and 10 + 2 mm in thickness. A weight 
placed directly above the disc shall be provided 
such that the moving assembly consisting of 
the rod, the disc and the weight has a mass of 
2 750 + 50g. The rod shall be provided with a 
scale graduated to at least 5 mm intervals to 
record the slump of the concrete. 

Vibrating table — It shall be 380 + 3 mm in 
length and 260 + 3 mm in width, supported 
on four rubber shock absorbers. 


A vibrator unit (see 11 in Fig. 4), carried ona 
base resting on three rubber feet, shall be 
securely fixed beneath it. The vibrator shall 
operate at a frequency of 55 + 5.5 Hz and the 
vertical amplitude of vibration of the table with 
empty container on the top of it shall be 
approximately 0.5 + 0.02 mm. 


The vibrating table shall be checked annually 
to ensure that the frequency and the vertical 
amplitude remain within tolerances. All the 
elements of the vibration table shall be checked 
annually to ensure that their dimensions remain 
within tolerances. 


4.4.2.2 Tamping rod — It is a straight rod, made of 
steel or other suitable material, of circular cross-section, 
having a diameter of 16+ 1 mm, 600 +5 mm in length, 
and with rounded ends. 


4.4.2.3 Stopwatch or clock, capable of recording time 
to an accuracy of 1 s. 


4.4.2.4 Remixing container — It is of rigid 
construction, made from non-absorbent material not 
readily attacked by cement paste. 


4.4.2.5 Scoop, of adequate size. 
4.4.3 Procedure 


a) 


Place the Vee bee meter (consistometer) on 
a rigid horizontal base free from extraneous 
vibration and shock. Make sure that the 
container is firmly fixed to the vibrating table 
by means of wing nuts. Dampen the inside 
of the mould with a moist cloth and place it 
in the container. Swing the funnel into 
position over the mould and lower the funnel 
on the mould. Tighten the screw so that the 
mould cannot rise from the bottom of the 
container. During the subsequent operations 
ensure that the mould does not rise or move 
until it is manually raised and ensure that 
concrete has not fallen into the container. 
From the sample of concrete obtained in 


b) 


accordance with 4.2, immediately fill the 
mould in three layers, each approximately 
one-third of the height of the mould when 
compacted. When adding the concrete, 
ensure that it is distributed symmetrically 
around the mould. 


Tamp each layer with 25 strokes of the 
tamping rod. The strokes shall be distributed 
in a uniform manner over the cross-section 
area of the mould. For the bottom layer, this 
will necessitate inclining the rod slightly and 
positioning approximately half the strokes 
spirally towards centre. Tamp the second layer 
and top layer each throughout its depth, so 
that the strokes just penetrate into the 
underlying layer. In filling and tamping the 
top layer, heap the concrete above the mould 
before tamping is started. If necessary, add 
further concrete to maintain excess above the 
top of the mould throughout the tamping 
operation. After the top layer has been tamped, 
loosen the screw, raise and swing the funnel 
through 90° and tighten the screw. Scrape off 
the concrete level with the top of the mould 
with a sawing and rolling motion of the 
tamping rod. Lift the mould from the concrete 
by raising it carefully in a vertical direction, 
using the handles. The operation of raising the 
mould shall be performed in 7 + 2s by a steady 
upward lift with no lateral or torsional motion 
being imparted to the concrete. Ifthe concrete 
shears, collapses or slumps to the extent that 
it touches the wall of the container, this 
information shall be recorded. Swing the 
transparent disc over the top of the concrete, 
loosen the screw and very carefully lower the 
disc until it just comes in contact with the 
concrete. When the disc just touches the 
highest point of the concrete without 
disturbing it, tighten the screw. When there is 
a true slump, the value of the slump shall be 
read from the scale and the value recorded. 
The screw shall be loosened to allow the disc 
to follow the concrete as it settles under the 
subsequent vibration. Simultaneously, start the 
vibration of the table and the timer. Observe 
through the transparent disc how the concrete 
is being re-moulded. As soon as the lower 
surface of the disc is fully in contact with 
cement paste of the concrete, stop the timer 
and switch off the vibrating table. Record the 
time taken to the nearest second. Complete 
the procedure within a period of 5 min from 
the start of filling. 


The consistency of the concrete mix changes with the 
time due to hydration of the cement and possibly, loss 


of moisture. Tests on different samples should, 
therefore, be carried out at a constant time interval after 
mixing, if strictly comparable results are to be obtained. 


4.4.4 Test Result 


Record the time read from the stopwatch to the nearest 
second. This is the Vee bee time which indicates the 
consistency of the concrete under test. 


4.4.5 Test Report 


In addition to the information required in 5, the test 
report shall include the following: 


a) Time from completion of mixing of the 
concrete until the time of removal of the 
mould; and 

b) Vee bee time, in second. 


CLAMP 


CYLINDER 
CLAMP 
EACH SIDE 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


4.5 Compacting Factor Test 


4.5.1 This clause specifies a procedure for determining 
the workability of concrete, where the nominal 
maximum size of the aggregate does not exceed 40 mm. 
The test is designed primarily for use in the laboratory, 
but if circumstances permit, it may also be used in the 
field. It is more precise and sensitive than the slump 
test and is particularly useful for concrete mixes of very 
low workability. 


4.5.2 Apparatus 


A diagram of the apparatus is shown in Fig. 5. It shall 
consist of the two conical hoppers (A and B) mounted 
above a cylindrical mould (C). 


4.5.3 The essential dimensions of the hoppers and mould 
and distances between them shall be as shown in 


Fic. 5 COMPACTION FACTOR APPARATUS 


7 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Table 1. The hopper and cylinder shall be of rigid 
construction, true to shape and smooth inside. They 
shall preferably be made of cast brass or bronze, but 
stout sheet brass or steel may also be considered 
satisfactory provided the inside surfaces of the joints 
are smooth and flush. The lower ends of the hoppers 
shall be closed with tightly fitting hinged trap-doors 
having quick release catches. Metal plate 3 mm thick 
is suitable for the doors. The frame in which the hoppers 
and cylinder are mounted shall be of rigid construction 
and shall firmly locate them in the relative positions 
indicated in Table 1. The cylinder and hoppers shall be 
easily detachable from the frame. The apparatus shall 
also include two ordinary trowels, one scoop of 
adequate size, a tamping rod made of steel, having a 
circular cross-section with a diameter of 16 + 1 mm, 
600 + 5 mm in length and with rounded ends, and scales 
(or a balance) to weigh up to 50 kg, with an accuracy 
to the nearest 10 g. 


4.5.4 Sampling 


The sample shall be taken as per 4.2. In the case of 
concrete containing aggregate of maximum size more 
than 40 mm, the concrete shall be wet sieved through 
40 mm screen to exclude aggregate particles bigger than 
40 mm. 


Table 1 Essential Dimensions of the Compacting 
Factor Apparatus for Use with Aggregate Not 
Exceeding 40 mm Nominal Maximum Size 


(Clause 4.5.3) 


SI No. Detail (see Fig. 6) Dimension 
mm 
a) (2) (3) 
i) | Upper hopper, A: 
a) Top internal diameter 250 
b) Bottom internal diameter 125 
c) Internal height 280 
ii) Lower hopper, B: 
a) Top internal diameter 230 
b) Bottom internal diameter 125 
c) Internal height 230 
iii) Cylinder, C: 
a) Internal diameter 150 
b) Internal height 300 
iv) Distance between bottom of upper 200 
hopper and top of lower hopper 
v) Distance between bottom of lower 200 


hopper and top of cylinder 


4.5.5 Procedure 


Dampen the inside of the hopper and cylinder with a 
moist cloth before its use. The sample of concrete to 
be tested shall be placed gently in the upper hopper, 
using the scoop. The hopper shall be filled level with 
its brim and the trap-door shall be opened so that the 


concrete falls into the lower hopper. Certain mixes have 
a tendency to stick in one or both of the hoppers. If this 
occurs, the concrete may be helped through by pushing 
the rod gently into the concrete from the top. During 
this process, the cylinder shall be covered by the trowels. 
Immediately after the concrete has come to rest, the 
cylinder shall be uncovered, the trap-door of the lower 
hopper opened, and the concrete allowed to fall into 
the cylinder. The excess of concrete remaining above 
the level of the top of the cylinder shall then be cut off 
by holding a trowel in each hand, with the plane of the 
blades horizontal, and moving them simultaneously one 
from each side across the top of the cylinder, at the 
same time keeping them pressed on the top edge of the 
cylinder. The outside of the cylinder shall then be wiped 
clean. The above operation shall be carried out at a 
place free from vibration or shock. The weight of the 
concrete in the cylinder shall then be determined to the 
nearest 50 g. This weight shall be known as the weight 
of partially compacted concrete. The cylinder shall be 
refilled with concrete from the same sample in layers 
approximately 5 cm deep, the layers being heavily 
rammed or preferably vibrated so as to obtain full 
compaction. The top surface of the fully compacted 
concrete shall be carefully struck off level with the top 
of the cylinder. The outside of the cylinder shall then be 
wiped clean. The weight of the concrete in the cylinder 
shall then be determined to the nearest 50 g. This weight 
shall be known as the weight of fully compacted 
concrete. 


NOTE — The test is sufficiently sensitive to enable differences 
in workability arising from the initial processes in the hydration 
of the cement to be measured. Each test, therefore, should be 
carried out at a constant time interval after the mixing is 
completed, if strictly comparable results are to be obtained. 


4.5.6 Calculation 


The compacting factor is defined as the ratio of the 
weight of partially compacted concrete to the weight 
of fully compacted concrete. It shall normally be stated 
to the nearest second decimal place. 


4.5.7 Test Report 


In addition to the information required in 5, the test 
report shall include the compacting factor value, 
expressed to the nearest two decimal places. 


4.6 Degree of Compactability 
4.6.1 Principle 


The fresh concrete is uniformly placed with trowel ina 
container avoiding any compaction while filling. When 
the container is full, the top surface is scraped off level 
with the top of the container. The concrete is compacted 
and the distance from the surface of the compacted 
concrete to the upper edge of the container is used to 
define the degree of compactability. 


The degree of compactibility test is valid for a range of 
values lying between 1.04 and 1.46. If the degree of 
compactability is less than 1.04 or more than 1.46, this 
test is not suitable. 


4.6.2 Apparatus 


4.6.2.1 Container — A container with parallel sides 
and shape as shown in Fig. 6, made of metal not readily 
attacked by cement paste and having following internal 
dimensions: 


a) Base: 200+2 mm x 200 +2 mm 
b) Height : 400+ 2 mm 


c) Thickness of the base and walls shall be at 
least 1.5 mm. 


The dimensions and condition of the container shall be 
checked at the time of test to ensure that they are within 
the tolerances. 


4.6.2.2 Trowel — A trowel with a flat blade or 
equivalent (see Fig. 7). 


4.6.2.3 Concrete compaction — The means of 
compacting concrete shall consist of one of the 
following: 


a) Internal vibrator, with a minimum frequency 
of 120 Hz (7 200 cycles per minute). The 
diameter of the vibrating head shall not exceed 
one-quarter of the smallest dimension of the 
container. The vibrator shall meet the 
requirements of IS 2505. 

b) Vibrating table, with a minimum frequency 
of 50 Hz (3 000 cycles per minute). The 
vibrating table shall meet the requirements of 
IS 2514. 


4.6.2.4 Mixing tray — This shall be of a rigid 
construction, made from a non absorbent material not 


200+2 


h=40022 


6A BEFORE COMPACTION 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


readily attacked by the cement paste. 


4.6.2.5 Straight edge scrapper — It shall have a length 
greater than 200 mm. 


4.6.2.6 Rule — It shall have a length greater than 400 
mm, having | mm sub-divisions along its entire length 
with the zero point being at the extreme end of the rule. 


4.6.3 Procedure 


a) Clean the container and dampen the inner 
surfaces using a moist cloth. 

b) Fill the container without tamping it, by tilting 
the trowel sideways from all four upper edges 
of the container in turn. When the container is 
full, remove all concrete above upper edges, 
using straight edged scrapper with a sawing 
action, in such a way as to avoid any 
compaction. 

c) Compact the concrete by means of vibrating table 
(reference method) or by the use of internal 
vibrator, until no further reduction in volume is 
determinable. During compaction, avoid loss of 
concrete through splashing or leakage. 

d) After compaction, measure to the nearest 
millimetre, the distance between the surface 
of the compacted concrete and the upper edge 
of the container at the middle of each side of 
the container. 


e) Determine the mean value of the four 
measurements. 


4.6.4 Test Results 

The degree of compatability is given by equation: 
c =h,/(h,-A,) 
where 


c = degree of compactability; 


6B AFTER COMPACTION 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 6 CONCRETE IN CONTAINER 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


hy 


h, 


internal height of the container; and 


mean value, to the nearest millimetre, of the 
distance from the surface of the compacted 
concrete to the upper edge of the container. 


160 + 25 


90 + 10 
110 +20 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 7 TROWEL 
4.6.5 Test Report 


In addition to the information required in 5, the test 
report shall include the degree of compactability, 
expressed to nearest two decimal places. 


4.7 Flow Table Test 
4.7.1 Principle 


This test determines the consistency of fresh concrete 
by measuring the spread of concrete on a flat plate 
subject to jolting. 


The flow test is applicable to a range of consistency of 
concrete that corresponds to flow values between 340 mm 
and 620 mm. Outside this range, the measurement of flow 
may be unsuitable and other methods of determining the 
consistency should be considered. If the concrete 
segregates during the test, this test is not suitable. 

NOTE — This test is applicable only for high workability 


concrete and not for SCC. This test is generally a laboratory 
test. 


4.7.2 Apparatus 


4.7.2.1 Flow-table — The flow-table shall be 
constructed in accordance with Fig. 8. It shall consist 
of a flat plate with a plan area of 700 + 2 mm x 700 + 
2 mm, on which concrete can be placed, hinged to a 
rigid base onto which it can fall from a fixed height. 


The flow-table top shall have a metal surface with a 
minimum thickness of 2 mm and it shall not be readily 
attacked by cement paste or be liable to rusting. This 
moving part shall have a mass of 16 + 0.5 kg and may 
be attached using a pin hinge to allow the weight to be 


10 


checked. The construction of the plate shall be such as 
to prevent distortion of the upper surface. The table 
top shall be hinged to the base in such a way that no 
aggregate can get trapped easily between the hinged 
surfaces. 


The centre of the table shall be scribed with a cross, the 
lines of which run parallel to the edges of the plate and 
with a central circle with a diameter of 210 + 1 mm. 


At the front corners of the plate, two hard, rigid blocks 
shall be firmly attached to the underside. They should 
be non-absorbent and should not deform when wet. 
These stops shall transfer the load of the tabletop to 
the base without distorting the table. The base frame 
shall be so constructed that this load is then transferred 
directly to the surface on which the apparatus is placed, 
so that there is minimal tendency for the tabletop to 
bounce, when allowed to fall freely. 


Footrest shall be provided to assist in stabilizing the 
table when in use. 


The total height of the tabletop, measured at the centre 
line of the front edge of the top place, shall be limited 
to 40 + 1 mm by means of one or more stops. 


A handle or lifting mechanism shall be provided for 
lifting the tabletop to ensure that the top is lifted without 
jerking and allowed to fall freely over the entire lifting 
height. 


4.7.2.2 Mould — The mould of slump cone shall be 
made of metal, not readily attacked by cement paste or 
liable to rust and with a minimum thickness of 
1.5 mm (see Fig. 9). The interior of the mould shall be 
smooth and free from projections, such as protruding 
rivets and shall be free from dents. The mould shall be 
in the form of hollow frustum of a cone having the 
following internal dimensions: 


a) Diameter of base 200 + 2 mm 
b) Diameter of top 130+2 mm 
c) Height 200 +2 mm 


The base and the top shall be open and parallel to each 
other and at right angles to the axis of the cone. The 
mould shall be provided with two metal foot pieces at 
the bottom and two handles above them (see Fig. 9). 
This mould may be clamped to the table provided it is 
releasable without movement of the mould. 


4.7.2.3 Tamping bar — It shall be made of hardwood 
or other non-absorbing hard material having a square 
section of 40 + 1 mm and a length of at least 200 mm. 
A further 120 mm to 150 mm shall be extended to a 
circular section to form a handle to the bar (see Fig. 10). 


4.7.2.4 Scoop, of adequate size. 


4.7.2.5 Sampling tray, with minimum dimensions 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Key 
1 metal plate 2 upper stop 3 tabletop 
4 external hinges 5 markings 6 base frame 
7 lifting handle 8 lower stop 9 toe-board 


Fic. 8 FLow-TABLE APPARATUS 


40+1 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 10 TAMPING BAR 
Fic. 9 CONCRETE MOULD WITH TYPICAL DIMENSIONS 


900 mm x 900 mm x 50 mm deep, of rigid construction 4.7.3 Procedure 
and made from non-absorbent material not readily 


attacked by cenieut paste: a) Place the flow-table ona flat horizontal surface 


free from external vibration or shock. Ensure 
4.7.2.6 Shovel, with a square blade. that the hinged top of the table can be lifted to 
the correct limit of its travel and is then free 
to fall to the lower stop. Check that the table 
is supported such that, when the top of the 
4.7.2.8 Timer, with accuracy up to 1 s. table falls to lower stop, there is a minimal 
tendency for the top to bounce. 


4.7.2.7 Rule, with a minimum length of 700 mm, 
having at least 5 mm subdivisions along its entire length. 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


)) 


Clean the table and mould and dampen 
immediately prior to testing, but keep them 
free from excessive moisture. Ensure that the 
contact blocks are clean. 


Place the mould centrally on the tabletop and 
hold it in position by standing on the two foot 
pieces, or by the use of magnets. 

Fill the mould with the concrete in two equal 
layers using scoop, and tamp each layer lightly 
10 times with the tamping bar. If necessary, 
add more concrete to the second layer to 
maintain an excess above the top of the mould. 
With the tamping bar, scrap off the concrete 
level with the upper edge of the mould and 
clean any excess concrete off the free area of 
the tabletop. 

Wait 30 s after scraping of the concrete, then 
slowly raise the mould vertically by the handle 
over a period of 5 + 2s. While the operator 
stabilizes the flow-table by standing on the toe 
board at the front of the table, slowly raise the 
tabletop until it reaches to the upper stop in 
such a manner that the tabletop does not 
impact hard against the upper stop. 

Then allow the tabletop to fall freely to the 
lower stop. Repeat this cycle to give a total of 
15 drops, each cycle taking not less than 1 s 
nor more than 3 s. 


Measure with the rule the maximum dimension 
of the concrete spread in the two perpendicular 
directions, d, and d,, parallel to the table edges 
and record each measurement to the nearest 
10 mm. 


Check the concrete spread for segregation. 
The cement paste can segregate from the 
coarse aggregate to give a ring of paste 
extending several millimetres beyond the 
coarse aggregate. Report that segregation has 


12 


occurred and the concrete was therefore 
unsatisfactory. 


4.7.4 Test Results 


Determine the flow value (d, + d,)/2 and record to the 
nearest 10 mm. 


4.7.5 Test Report 


In addition to the information required in 5, the test 
report shall include the following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 


Jolting time for 15 jolts, in seconds; 
Dimension d,, in millimetres; 

Dimension d,, in millimetres; 

Test result (d, + d,)/2, in millimetres; and 
Statement on any segregation identified. 


5 TEST REPORT 


In addition to the specifics required for each test 
method, the report shall include the following 


information: 
a) Identification ofthe test sample; 
b) Location of performance of test; 
c) Date and time of performance of test; 
d) Ambient temperature; 
e) Temperature of the remixed sample (optional); 
f) Method of compaction (wherever required to 
be mentioned): 
1) for mechanical compaction, the duration, 
2) for hand compaction, the number of 
strokes; 
g) Name of person carrying out the test or part 
of the test; 
h) Any deviation from standard test method; and 
j) Declaration by the person carrying out the test 


that it was carried out in accordance with this 
standard, except as noted in (h). 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
460 (Part 2): 1985 Test sieves: Part 2 Perforated plate 
test sieves (third revision) 


1199 Fresh concrete — Methods of 
sampling, testing and analysis 
(Part 1) : 2018 Sampling and fresh concrete (first 
revision) 
(Part 3) : 2018 Determination of density of fresh 
concrete (first revision) 
(Part 5) : 2018 Making and curing of test 
specimens (first revision) 
(Part 6) : 2018 Tests on fresh self compacting 
concrete (first revision) 
2505 : 1992 Concrete vibrators immersion 
type — General requirements 
(third revision) 
2514 : 1963 Specification for concrete 
vibrating tables 
4845 : 1968 Definitions and terminology 


relating to hydraulic cement 


IS No. Title 
6461 Glossary of terms relating to 

cement concrete 

(Part 1) : 1972 Concrete aggregates 

(Part 2) : 1972 Materials (other than cement and 
aggregate) 

(Part 3) : 1972 Concrete reinforcement 

(Part 4) : 1972 Types of concrete 

(Part 5) : 1972 Formwork for concrete 

(Part 6) : 1972 Equipment, tools and plant 

(Part 7) : 1973 Mixing, laying, compaction, 


curing and other construction 
aspects 

Properties of concrete 

Structural aspects 

Tests and testing apparatus 
Prestressed concrete 
Miscellaneous 


(Part 8) : 1973 
(Part 9) : 1973 
(Part 10) : 1973 
(Part 11) : 1973 
(Part 12) : 1973 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.4.1) 


DETERMINATION OF THE CONSISTENCY AND DENSITY USING MODIFIED VEE BEE 
CONSISTOMETER 


B-1 GENERAL 


This procedure describes the methods for measuring 
the consistency and density of freshly prepared 
concrete, both in laboratory and in field and having a 
nominal maximum size of 40 mm aggregate. For 
concretes containing aggregates with nominal maximum 
size greater than 40 mm, the concrete passing 40 mm 
can be screened and testing in accordance with the 
prescribed methods in this standard. In cases, where 
screening over 40 mm is used, cautious interpretation 
by experienced professionals is essential. 


The test methods prescribed herein are primarily 
intended for use in testing of very stiff, drier, non-slump 
or near-zero and/or zero slump concretes such as dry 
lean concrete (DLC), roller compacted concrete, no- 
slump concrete, dry cast concrete, cement treated 


13 


aggregates (used in pavements) and mixtures of similar 
types. 


The measurements made using this method can be 
reliably interpreted for applications if the Vee bee time 
ranges between 5 and 30 s. Readings beyond these need 
a cautious and experienced judgment while applying 
for practical purposes. 


Because of the characteristic nature and response of 
stiff to extremely dry concrete mixtures, the standard 
Vee bee test method of rodding the specimen in a slump 
cone is being substituted by a method with surcharge 
weight (WS). For the test method, if the mix is very 
stiff, a surcharge mass of 12.5 + 0.05 kg is placed over 
the transparent acrylic disc. In case of roller compacted 
concrete which is extremely dry, a surcharge of 22.7 + 
0.05 kg is placed over the transparent acrylic disc. The 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


concrete mix is then vibrated to get the cover disc in 
full contact with cement paste. 


This test method provides a measure of the consistency 
of concrete having zero-slump or no measurable slump. 
The consistency is measured as the time required for a 
given mass of concrete to be consolidated by external 
vibration in a cylindrical mould. Under the application 
of external vibration, the paste in the concrete rises to 
the surface. This test method uses this as the principle, 
wherein a measured volume of concrete is allowed to 
compact under a pre-defined surcharge weight and 
vibration until a uniform layer of cement slurry rises to 
the top. 

NOTE — The surcharge weights mentioned here are only for 


guidance and the Engineer-in-Charge may decide the surcharge 
weight to be used in a particular case. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 Cylindrical Mould — A watertight, rigid 
cylindrical mould made of non-corrosive material 
(preferably steel) shall have an internal diameter of 
240 + 5 mm, and a height of 200 + 2 mm. The mould 
shall be capable of being rigidly clamped to the Vee 
bee vibrating table. The thickness of the wall of the 
mould shall be 3 + 0.05 mm, while the base plate 
thickness shall be 7 + 0.05 mm. The top rim of the 
mould shall be smooth, plane, and parallel to the bottom 
of the mould and shall be capable of providing an air 
and watertight seal when an acrylic or plastic plate is 
placed on the top rim. 


B-2.2 Guide Sleeve with Swivel Arm — A metal 
guide sleeve with a clamp assembly or other suitable 
holding device mounted on a swivel arm shall be 
provided. The guide sleeve shall be made of non- 
corroding metal and shall be provided with clamp 
capable of holding a steel rod attached to the surcharge 
in a position perpendicular to the vibrating table, and 
centred over the sample, which will allow the rod to 
slide freely when the clamp is released. The swivel arm 
shall be capable of maintaining the guide sleeve in a 
locked position directly over the centre of the vibrating 
surface and capable of being rotated away from the 
centre of the table. The inside diameter of the guide 
sleeve shall be adequately larger than the diameter of 
the metal shaft of the surcharge to allow for a free 
movement while maintaining the concentricity. 


B-2.3 Surcharge — The surcharge shall have a 
transparent, circular acrylic plate rigidly attached to its 
base and the steel rod at least 450 mm length attached 
perpendicularly to the plate and positioned through the 
centre of the surcharge. The transparent acrylic plate 
shall have a diameter of 230 + 2 mm and shall be 10 + 
2 mm in thickness. The total surcharge weight including 
the complete assembly of weight, acrylic plate and the 


14 


holding rod shall be 12.5 + 0.05 kg for stiff mixes and 
22.7 + 0.05 kg for extremely dry mixes, like roller 
compacted concrete. 


NOTE — The surcharge weights mentioned here are only for 
guidance and the Engineer-in-charge may decide the surcharge 
weight to be used in a particular case. 


B-2.4 Weigh Balance — The weigh balance shall be 
of sufficient capacity to determine the total mass of the 
sample and mould, and have sufficient accuracy so that 
the mass of the concrete sample may be determined to 
the nearest 0.5 percent or 0.5 g, whichever is lesser. 


B-2.5 Vee bee Vibrating Table — A vibrating table, 
as per 4.4.2.1 (d) may be utilized. 


B-2.6 Strike-off Plate — A flat square metal plate at 
least 6 mm thick shall be provided for striking off 
excessive concrete. 


B-2.7 Sieve — A 40 mm sieve conforming to IS 460 
(Part 2) shall be used for screening concrete with 
nominal maximum size of aggregate greater than 
40 mm. 


B-2.8 Stop-Watch or Timing Device — A stopwatch 
or a timing device capable of recording time intervals 
of at least 3 min to the nearest 0.5 s shall be used for 
recording the Vee bee time. 


B-2.9 Miscellaneous Equipment — A square ended 
shovel, scoop of adequate size, slump test rod, flashlight 
and wrench, may also be required. 


B-3 SAMPLING 


B-3.1 Fresh concrete samples shall be obtained in 
accordance with IS 1199 (Part 1). Care shall be 
exercised in drawing a uniform sample without 
segregation. 


B-3.2 Concretes with higher than 40 mm nominal 
maximum size of aggregate shall be wet sieved over 
40 mm sieve according to the procedure given in 
IS 1199 (Part 5). 


B-4 CALIBRATION 


Calibration of the vibrating table and the container for 
holding concrete are essential. Usually with the age, 
handling and storage of equipment, the frequency of 
the vibrator may change, hence periodic calibration of 
the same is essential. Due to frequent use and cleaning, 
the container may also show some changes in its 
volume, thus necessitating calibration. 


B-4.1 Vibrating Table 


The vibrating table, shall produce a vibratory motion 
with a frequency of 55 + 5 Hz and a vertical double 
amplitude of vibration of 0.5 + 0.02 mm when 
the surcharge is bolted to the centre of the table. 


The frequency of such calibration should be at least 
once per year or depending on the usage and/or post 
repairs or when in doubt. 


B-4.2 Cylindrical Mould/Container 


B-4.2.1 Determine the volume of the cylindrical mould 
(V) using a glass plate. Procedure shall remain the same 
as is in the case of calibration of the density containers, 
as per IS 1199 (Part 3). Verify the volume of the mould 
monthly during times of regular use and annually when 
used infrequently. 


B-4.2.2 If this cylindrical mould is used in estimating 
the density, determine the mass of the cylindrical mould 
to the nearest 5 g. Record this mass as (W,). 


B-5 PROCEDURE 


B-5.1 Vee Bee Consistency 


Place the Vee bee consistometer on a rigid horizontal 
base free from extraneous vibration and shock. Make 
sure that the container is firmly fixed to the vibrating 
table by means of wing nuts. Ensure that the container 
is fairly levelled and acrylic plate would be able to 
concentrically move while retaining a practically 
horizontal plane during the testing. Without causing 
any segregation (especially of coarse aggregate), obtain 
a representative sample according to IS 1199 (Part 1). 
Dampen the inside of the mould with a moist cloth and 
place it in the container. Tighten the screw so that mould 
cannot rise from the bottom of the container. Gradually, 
without introducing any intentional compaction, using 
scoop fill the container with concrete till the top edge. 
Distribute the concrete evenly thus minimizing 
segregation and rock pockets. Level the surface of the 
concrete while ensuring that there is neither an 
overfilling nor under filling of concrete. Gently slide 
the shaft of the surcharge mass through the guide sleeve, 
and rotate the surcharge (with the transparent disc) in 
such a manner that it is centred over the mould filled 
with concrete specimen. 


Ensure that there is no additional pressure applied to 
the concrete by any means. Simultaneously start the 
vibrator and stopwatch. This may require some practice 
and/or prior experience. As the concrete is vibrated, 
the concrete will start settling down and an annular 
mortar ring will be gradually formed around the acrylic 
plate. Keep observing the mortar ring around until it 
covers the perimeter completely. When the perimeter 
is completely filled around the acrylic plat, stop the 
vibrator and the stop-watch and record the time as the 


15 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Vee bee time (tp). If the container or the acrylic plate 
tilts or the wing nuts loosen during the testing, then 
repeat the test. If the complete ring is not formed within 
120 s, then stop the test and record the condition of the 
test specimen. If the ring has formed all around the 
plate, except for a small length or due to rock pocket, 
repeat the test. 


NOTE — The surcharge may be handled with caution so as to 
avoid any injuries during the conduction of the test. 


B-5.2 Vee Bee Density 


Subsequent to recording the Vee bee time (¢,,,), remove 
the surcharge weight and vibrate the specimen for a 
total of 120 s (including t), while taking precaution 
for not letting any concrete fly off. Remove the mould 
from the vibrating table and place it on a leveled ground 
or surface. Using an acrylic or glass plate, cover it and 
measure the weight of the cylindrical mould plus the 
compacted concrete specimen and the acrylic/ glass 
plate. Record this weight as (W,). Remove the acrylic/ 
glass plate and gentle pour water onto the concrete 
specimen, until it reaches the top of the mould. Now 
gently slide the glass plate and keep pouring water and 
completely cover the cylinder with the acrylic/glass 
plate, while ensuring no air bubbles trapped in. Gently 
pick this assembly and record its mass as (W3). Compute 
the weight of the compacted concrete (Wec) as 
(W,-—W, — Wip), Wapis the weight of the acrylic plate. 
Compute the volume of water (V) over the compacted 
concrete as (W, — W,)/1 000 and the volume of 
compacted concrete (Vec) will be (V.— V,,). The Vee 
bee density (VBb) shall be computed as Woe Vec- 


B-6 TEST REPORT 


In addition to the information required in 5, the test 
report shall include the following: 


a) Temperature of concrete and the ambient 
temperature; 

b) Surcharge used for the test; 

c) Whether the test is carried out in the laboratory 
or in the field; 

d) Vee bee consistency time, in second; 

e) Vee bee density, in kg/m’; and if the ring of 


mortar does not form after 120 s of vibration, 
record the cause of the delay. The delay could 
be caused due to excessively dry consistency 
of concrete or an aggregate coming just below 
the acrylic plate, uneven level of the vibrating 
table or acrylic plate resulting in uneven mortar 
ring formation. 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (144, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 

ACC Ltd, Mumbai 

Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Noida 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Conmat Technolgies Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 

Construction Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


16 


Representative(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Chairman) 


SHRI S. A. KHADILKAR 
SHRI RAMAN SADANAND PARULEKAR (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Desar 
Dr BIBEKANANDA MOHAPATRA (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BIsHNo! 
Suri Sourav Acuarya (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHANTA KUMAR Basu 
Suri D. R. Sekor (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Sarı C. N. JHA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH BHARGAVA 
Dr S. K. Hanpoo (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Sarı RAJESH Kaare (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
Suri SUBHASH GURRAM (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satish PANDEY (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri N. Siva Kumar (Alternate) 


Director (CMDD) (N&W) 
Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&S) (Alternate) 


DR A. K. CHATTERJEE 
Suri SuBRATO CHowbuury (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 
Suri NiLoTPoL Kar (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
SHRI Vay SHANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
Suri ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


Suri V. N. HEGGADE 
Suri S. C. Upapuyay (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr Cuetan HAzaree (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK NAIK 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Pror Devpas MENON 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM (Alternate) 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Solid Waste Research and Ecological Balance, 
Visakhapatnam 


Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


OCL India Limited, New Delhi 
Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 


The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 


Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Education, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R. T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Representative(s) 


Pror V. K. Gupta 
Dr BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


Dr N. BHANUMATHIDAS 
Suri N. Karpas (Alternate) 


SHRI PRANAV DESAI 
Suri RAVINDRA KHAMPARIA (Alternate) 


May Gen S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
Dr S. Harsu (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIR SINGH 
Surimati S. A. Kausuit (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri RaGuurati Roy (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. AHLUWALIA 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


Dr D. VENKATESWARAN 


Suri P. R. BHAT 
Suri S. J. SHAH (Alternate) 


Dr H. C. VISVESVARAYA 
Suri S. H. Jain (Alternate) 


Sarı Barası K. Moortuy 
Suri ANIL Kumar Pirar (Alternate) 


SHRI SURYA VALLURI 
Dr M. R. Kataat (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri B. Muxuopapuyay (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAN 


Suri L. K. JAN 
Suri R. C. Wason 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


Suri Sanzay PANT, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (Civil Engg) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SuHRIMATI Divya S. 


Scientist ‘B?’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Concrete Sub-committee, CED 2:2 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (14A, Summer Breeze, Kuravankonam, 
Kowdiar, Thiruvananthapuram 695 003) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
Ambuja Cement Limited, Ahmedabad 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), Bengaluru 


17 


Representative(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Convener) 


Suri Avuit CHauBey (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. Desar 
Dr BIBEKANANDA Monapatra (Alternate) 


SHRI Avinash D. SHIRODE 
Suri K. K. Mecuasnyam (Alternate) 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Organization 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, Bhopal 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ghaizabad 
CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, New Delhi 

Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 

Hindustan Constrution Company Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Structural Engineering, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 
Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, Haryana 


National Council for Cement & Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology, Warangal 


18 


Representative(s) 


Suri L. R. BIsHNo! 
Suri Sourav ACHARYA (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 


Suri BuAGwati Prasap Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Suri RasesH Kuare (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. SUDARSHAN 
Suri R. NAGENDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Dr RasesH DEOLIA 
Suri H. C. Arora (Alternate) 


SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 
Suri Satısu PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Suri M. Rasa (Alternate) 


Dr B. H. BHARATH KUMAR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDER MOHAN 


SHRI BRAJESH MALVIYA 
SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH MOKAL 
SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 


Dr CHETAN HAZARE 
Suri AvINASH Harpe (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


Dr B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr SHASHANK Biısnnol (Alternate) 


DR SUDHIR MISHRA 
Dr Manu SANTHANAM 
Dr ASHOK Kumar JAIN 


Suri D. S. Josui 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Dr B. SIVARAM SARMA 
Suri S. Manonar (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SRIVASTAV 
Suri Man Sincu (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. Panpey (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. YADAV 
Suri Pawan Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
SHRI S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. B. KAmeswara Rao 
Dr D Rama Sesuu (Alternate) 


Organization 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


Research, Design & Standards Organization (Ministry of Railways), 
Lucknow 


Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, Mumbai 


Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Water Resource Department, Govt of Madhya Pradesh, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (452 Sector 14, Sonipat, Haryana) 
In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


In personal capacity [B-806, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi Garden 
City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-1, 402, White House Apartments, 
R.T. Nagar, Bengaluru) 


In personal capacity (M1 F1 VGN Minerva Apartments, 
Guruswamy Road, Nolambur, Chennai) 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr Suuna NAIK 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
Suri ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Jomt Director (B&S)/CB-I 
Jont Director (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 


Suri GIRISH BONDE 
Suri D. N. VisHwanatH (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Suri Vinay Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. DIWAKAR 
Suri Manos Kumar De (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dr A. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. JAN 
Suri L. K. Jain 
Suri A. K. JAN 


Suri R. C. Wason 


Suri S. A. REDDI 


Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Panel for Revision of Indian Standards on Test Methods for Concrete, CED 2:2/P7 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi 110064) 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Civil-Aid Technoclinic Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Hydraulic & Engineering Instrument, New Delhi 
Indian Concrete Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


19 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. C. Wason (Convener) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr V. M. SHARMA 


SHRI AJAY PRAKASH MATHUR 
Suri RasesH Kure (Alternate) 


Suri U. S. VIDYARTHI 


Dr R. NAGENDRA 
Suri SUNIL V. Sonnan (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. PANDEY 
Suri S. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR P. SRINIVASAN 
Dr S. BHASKAR (Alternate) 


Dr CHETAN HAZAREE 
Suri AvINASH HARDE (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI ASHOK Kumar TIWARI 


Dr RADHAKRISHNA PILLAI 
Dr Ravinpra Gettu (Alternate) 


Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI 
Dr S. Gupta (Alternate) 


IS 1199 (Part 2) : 2018 


Organization 


Larsen & Toubro Ltd, ECC Division, Chennai 

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 

RDC Concrete (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (50 Mangla Apartments Kalkaji, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Type IV/17, Presidents Estate, New Delhi) 


20 


Representative(s) 


Suri B. StvARAMA SARMA 
Suri S. MANouar (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Suri S. C. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri A. K. Lanaria (Alternate) 


SHRI K. TAGORE 
Suri V. MEIKANDA Moortuy (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
Suri JEAN PHILIPPE THIERRY (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. Marti 
Suri K. H. BABU 


(Continued from second cover) 


This revision has been taken up to incorporate the modifications found necessary in the light of experience gained 
in its use and also to bring it in line with the latest development on the subject. Significant provisions in this 
revision are highlighted below: 


a) 


b) 


c) 
d) 


The slump test has been elaborated by including figures on slump measurement and different types of 
slumps. 


The filling procedure for the concrete in slump test has been modified to three layers in place of four 
layers, as per international practice. This may result in slightly higher slump values and if required, may be 
suitably adjusted. 

An revised flow table test, in line with the international practices, has been incorporated. 


A new test for determining consistency of concrete, that is, the degree of compactability has been included. 
This test is similar to compacting factor test but is easier to perform. At the present revision, both the 
tests, (degree of compactability and compacting factor test) have been included. But once the sufficient 
data of correlation between the two tests is available, the compacting factor test may be withdrawn, in 
order to align with the international practices. 

Modified Vee bee consistometer test has been included for the determination of consistency and density. 
The test method is prescribed for use in testing of very stiff, dry, non-slump or near-zero and/or zero 
slump concretes such as dry lean concrete (DLC), roller compacted concrete, no-slump concrete, dry 
cast concrete, cement treated aggregates (used in pavements) and mixtures of similar types. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has also derived from ISO 1920-2 : 2016 ‘Testing of concrete — 
Part 2 : Properties of fresh concrete’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (10888). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


