**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13043 (1991) : Covered Manual Metal Arc Welding 
Electrodes - Determination of Efficiency, Metal Recovery 
and Deposition Co-efficient [MTD 11: Welding General] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13043:1991 
WRcffa WR*F (Reaffirmed 2003) 

Indian Standard 

COVERED MANUAL METAL ARC WELDING 

ELECTRODES — DETERMINATION OF 

EFFICIENCY, METAL RECOVERY AND 

DEPOSITION CO-EFFICIENT 



UDC 621'791-753'-0424:620'16 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 
July 1991 Price Group 1 



Welding General Sectional Committee, MTD 11 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized l>y the 
Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 

This standard has been formulated with a view to help the manufacturer and use of covered welding 
electrodes to determine the efficiency, metal recovery and deposition coefficients. 

In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from ISO 2401:1972 Covered elec- 
trodes — Determination of efficiency, metal recovery and deposition coefficient, issued by the Inter- 
national Organisation for Standardization. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2:1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ The number of signi- 
ficant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



IS 1304^:1991 



Indian Standard 



COVERED MANUAL METAL ARC WELDING 

ELECTRODES — DETERMINATION OF 

EFFICIENCY, METAL RECOVERY AND 

DEPOSITION CO-EFFICIENT 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers method for determina- 
tion of efficiency, metal recovery and deposition 
co-efficients of covered MMAW electrodes up to 
6*3 mm size. 

2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

2.1 Nominal Electrode Efficiency, En 

This is the ratio of the mass of weld metal 
deposited under standard conditions to the 
mass of nominal diameter eore wire consumed. 

2.2 Effective Electrode Efficiency, Ee 

This is the ratio of the mass of weld metal 
deposited under standard conditions to the actual 
mass of core wire consumed. 

2.3 Deposition Efficiency, Ed 

This is the ratio of mass of weld metal deposited 
under standard conditions to the total mass of a 
given electrode consumed, exclusive of stub ends. 

2.4 Weld Metal Recovery, Rw 

This is the ratio of the mass of weld metal 
deposited under standard conditions to the total 
mass of a given electrode tested. 

2.5 Deposition Co-Efficient, Cd 

This is the mass of the weld metal deposited 
under standard conditions perampere minute for a 
given electrode. 

NOTF While reporting the data, a further suffix shown 
below may be added to indicate the type of current 
used. 



is to be used. Approximate dimensions of test 
plate shall be: 



Type of Current 


Suffix 


Example 


DC Positive 
DC Negative 
AC 


+ 


Rw+ 
Rw- 
Rw— 



3 EVALUATION PROCEDURE 

3.1 Test Plate 

For each diameter of electrode to be tested, one 
test plate of carbon steel with 0'25 percent C{max) 



Length 


__ 


300 mm 


Width 


__ 


75 mm 


Thickness 


— 


10 mm 



If it is found that the length of weld exceeds the 
length of the test plate, the weld bead may be 
allowed to run continuous to but at rightangle to 
the run so as to follow the contour of the plate. 

The test plate surface shall be thoroughly cleaned, 
if necessary, by brushing and light grinding, to 
make it free from rust, scale, paint, oil, grease, etc. 
The plate shall be weighed to i g accuracy before 
and after welding. 

3.2 Weld Deposition 

3.2.1 Electrodes 

Usually five electrodes of same brand and batch 
shall be used for weld deposition. If the metal 
yield from each electrode exceed 1 00 gms, three 
electrodes may only be used. The electrodes shall 
be weighed before testing to an accuracy of 1 g. 
Another set of equal number of electrodes shall 
be carefully defluxed and the weight of the clean 
core wire shall be measured to an accuracy of 
1 g. The mass of the core wire can also be cal- 
culated by measuring the diameter and length of 
the wires carefully and calculating the mass on 
the basis of density of steel taken as 7*85 g, cm 3 . 

3.2.2 Welding Current 

The welding current shall be about 90 percent of 
the maximum value of the range recommended by 
the electrode manufacturer for flatposition. The 
current shall be measured by a dampened am- 
meter of Class 2 precision. For AC, the root 
mean square ( RMS ) value of the current shall 
be measured. The machine setting shall not be 
changed during the test. For calculation purposes, 
the average value of the current shall be used. 

3.2.3 Polarity and Arc Voltage 

The electrodes suitable for DC only, shall be tes- 
ted on the DC with the polarity recommended by 
electrode manufactuerer. The electrodes suitable 
for either DC or AC, shall be tested on AC. 



1 



IS 13043 : 1991 



In the later case, the transformer used shall have 
following characteristics: 

a) the transformer should have an open circuit 
voltage not higher than 10 Vthan the mini- 
mum value indicated for the electrode. 

b) the form factor ( ratio of RMS value and 
mean value ) of current in short circuit 
condition for the setting used in welding, 
should fall within the limit I'll < F <1*2. 

The arc length, arc voltage and welding procedure 
shall be typical of the electrode being used and 
the deposited bead shall be free from major defects. 

3.2.4 Welding Position 

The electrodes shall be deposited in down hand 
( flat ) position only without any interruption till 
a stub length of 40 mm approx remains. 

3.2.5 Arcing Time 

The arcing time of each electrode shall be 
measured with a precision of ±0*2 sand total time 
for the electrodes shall be calculated in minutes. 

3.2.6 Stub Ends 

Stub ends shall be carefully retained after welding 
each run. The stub ends shall be weighed to ± 1 g 
accuracy to obtain following data: 

a) Total weight in grams without loss of 
unfused covering. 

b) Total weight of the core wire after removal 
of the covering, and 

c) Total length of unfused core wire to ± 1 
mm to determine measured total length of 
stub ends. The total length of stub ends 
shall be between 175 and 250 mm for a 
sample of 5 electrodes and 105 and 135 
mm for the 3 electrodes samples. 

3.2.7 Cooling After Welding 

The test plate may be cooled in water after depo- 
siting each run. Interpass temperature shall not 
exceed i00 c C. Slag and spatter shall be thoroughly 
removed and the plate dried completely before 
depositing the subsequent run. 

After completion of welding, the test plate shall 
be cooled to room temperature. Slag and spatter 
shall be carefully removed and then the plate shall 



be weighed to an accuracy of ± 1 g. The plate 
shall be dried before weighing, if water cooling is 
employed. 

4 CALCULATION OF EFFICIENCY, METAL 
RECOVERY, AND DEPOSITION 
CO-EFFICIENTS 

Efficiency, metal recovery and deposition co- 
efficients may be calculated as follows: 

Mi 



Nominal electrode efficiency, En 
Effective electrode efficiency, Em 
Deposition efficiency, Ev> 
Weld metal recovery, Rw 



M± - M 1 

Mi 
M z M« 

_A/ 2 

Mi '- A/ 5 
M 2 
M x 
Mi 



It 



Deposition co-efficient, Co 

where 

Mi — mass of electrodes, in g. 

Mi ---= mass of deposited weld metal, in g. 

Mz = total mass of core wire ( actual ) in g. 

A/4 ■-- total mass of core wire as calculated 
on the basis of nominal diameter, in g. 

M 5 = mass of stub ends with unfused cover- 
ing, in g. 

Mr y = mass of core wire ( actual ) in the stub 
end, in g. 

M 7 — mass of nominal cere wire in stub ends 
as calculated, in g. 

L% = length of the core, wire of the electrodes 
in cm. 

Li — length of core wire of the stub ends, in 
cm. 

/ = average welding current, in amperes. 

t = total arcing time, in minutes. 

For calculating nominal efficiency the core wire 
mass M4 and M7 may be computed by the follo- 
wing formulae: 



Mi = 



M 7 = 



~di. 



T 



-<di. hi 



1 100 s 

7-85^ 



100 £ 



where d ^nominal diameter of electrode in mm. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



