**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13164 (1991): Ferrosilicomagnesium [MTD 5: Ferro Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13164:1991 
WTTcft^ TR^ (Reaffirmed 2000) 

/«J/a« Standard 
FERROSILICOMAGNESIUM— SPECIFICATION 



UDC 669i5-782'721 — 198 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN ST A ND ARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1991 Price Group 1 



Ferro Alloys Sectional Committee, MTD 5 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Ferro Alloys Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 

The use of Ferrosilicomagnesium in the production of nodular or SG iron is well established in the 
country. There is also a certain amount of indigenous production already started for this material as 
well as the related alloys like Nickel-Magnesium alloy and other innoculants for the purpose of produc- 
tion of the nodular iron, SG iron and other high grade cast irons. 

Keeping in view the importance of this material, it was decided to prepare a standard for ferrosilico- 
magnesium giving the various quality requirements of this product. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirements of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall l3e rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2: 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised),' The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in 
this standard. 



IS 13164 : 1991 



Indian Standard 
FERROSILICOMAGNESIUM—SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers the requiremeats offerrosili- 
comagnesiam used in ferrous and non-ferrous 
industry. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No, Title 

1387 : 1967 General requirements for the 
supply of metallurgical mate- 
rials ( revised ) 

1472:1977 Methods of sampling ferro- 
alloys for determination of 
chemical composition ( first 

revision ) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Cast ( Melt ) 

The product of any of the following: 

a ) One furnace heat, or 

b ) One tap of continuous furnace, or 

c ) A number of furnace or crucible heats of 
similar composition mixed in a ladle or 
holding furnace and used for making a cast. 

3*2 Consignments 

3.2.1 Tapped Lot Method 

A consignment constituted by the tapped lot 
method, consists of a ferrosilicomagnesium mass 
of one melt ( or one part of a continuous tap ). 

3-2.2 Graded Lot Method 

A consignment constituted by the graded lot 
method consists of a number of melts ( or parts 
of continuous taps ) of one ferrosilicomagnesium 
designation. 

The silicon and magnesium content of the melts 
( or parts of continuous taps ) constituting the 
consignment shall not differ from each other by 
more than 3 percent absolute. 

3.2.3 Blended Lot Method 

A consignment constituted by the blended lot 
method consists of a number of melts ( or parts 
of continuous taps ) of one ferrosilicomagnesium 
designation, which have been crushed to a particle 
size less than 50 mm and thoroughly mixed. 



The content of the m.ain constituent of the melts 
( or parts of continuous taps ) constituting the 
consignment may vary between the minimum and 
maximum limits specified for the appropriate 
ferrosilicomagnesium designation. 

3.3 Definition 

Ferrosilicomagnesium is an alloy of iron, silicon 
and magnesium containing 40-60 percent silicon 
and 2-22 percent magnesium, apart from limited 
amount of aluminium, calcium, etc. 

4 GRADES 

This standard covers six grades of ferrosilicoma- 
gnesium as specified in Table 1 . 

5 PARTICULARS TO BE SPECIFIED WHILE 
ORDERING 

For the benefit of the purchaser, particulars to be 
specified while ordering for the material to this 
specification shall be as follows: 

a) Quantity of the material; 

b) Constitution of consignment; 

c) Nam.e of the material; 

d) Grade; 

e) Size range; and 

f) Necessary requirements for analysis, and 
reports, packing, etc, as appropriate. 

6 SUPPLY OF MATERIALS 

General requirements relating to supply of the 
material to this specification shall be as laid xJown 
in IS 1387: 1967. 

7 REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 Constitution of Consignment 

Ferrosilicomagnesium shall be delivered inconsign- 
ments constituted by any one of the methods 
defined in 3.2. 

7.2 Chemical Composition 

7.2.i Each batch of the material shall coriform 
to the requirements of the chemical composition 
specified in Table 1 and if so specif ed by the 
purchaser at the time of enquiry and order, manu- 
facturer shall supply a test certificate of chemical 
analysis of the sample of material for each melt. 

NOTE — The material belonging toa cast/melt which is 
out of specification, shall not be blended or mixed with 
the material of another cast/melt. 



IS 13164 : 1991 



7.2.2 If specified by the purchaser at the time of 
enquiry and order that each lump of the consign- 
ment should conform to the chemical composition 
specified in Table 1, this shall be agreed to 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

7.2.3 The chemical composition given in Table 1 
shows only the main constituent elements and 
usual impurities. If the purchaser requires closer 
ranges for the main element contents and/or 
difTerent limits for specified elements and/or non- 
specified elements, this shall be agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

7.2.4 The chemical composition of the material 
shall be determined by any established instru- 
mental/chemical method. In case of dispute the 
referee method shall be agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer till the Indian 
Standard is published for the analysis of ferrosili- 
comagnesium. 

8 SIZE RANGE 

8.1 The material shall be supplied in lumps or 
as crushed and screened particles. The particle 
size range shall be 10-15 mm with tolerances of 
±10 percent maximum for the oversize and the 
undersize. The undersize values shall be valid at 
the point of delivery to the purchaser. 

8.2 If the purchaser requires particle size ranges 
and/or tolerances other than those given in 8.1, 
these shall be valid at the point of delivery to the 
purchaser. 



9 EXTRANEOUS CONTAMINATIONS 

The material shall be reasonably free from extra- 
neous contaminations like slag, non-metallic inclu- 
sions, etc. 

10 SAMPLING 

Each batch of the material shall be sampled in 
accordance with IS 1472 : 1977. 

11 PACKING 

The material shall be suitably sealed and packed 
in steel drums with the net contents of 100 kg or 
as mutually agreed to between the supplier and 
the purchaser. 

12 MARKING 

12.1 The container shall be marked with the 
following: 

a) Source of manufacture/trade-mark; 

b) Grade, cast or lot number and size designa- 
tion; 

c) Quantity; 

d) Date of manufacture; and 

e) Shelf life, if required. 

12.2 The material may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 



Table 1 Chemical Composition of Ferrosillcomagnesium 

( Clauses 4, 7.2.1, 7.2.2 and 7.2.3 ) 



Grade 




Si 




Mg 




Al 


Ca 




f "" 




r 




^ 






Over 


Up to and 


Over 


Up 


to and 


Max 


Max 






Including 




Including 






Fe Si 48 Mg 05 


46 


50 


3 




6 




1 


Fe Si 48 Mg 08 


46 


50 


6 




10 




2 


FeSi 50 Mg 12 


48 


52 


10 




14 




2 


Fe Si 50 Mg 15 


48 


52 


14 




18 




2 


FeSi 52 Mg 15 


50 


55 


14 




18 




2 


Fe Si 52 Mg 20 


50 


55 


18 




22 




2 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by RIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



