( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR VELOCITY RODS
.

Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee, BDC 17
Chairman DR A. N. KHOSLA 15 Jangpura ` B `, New Delhi Vice Chaiwnan SRRI N. D. GULHATI N-l 11 Panch Shila Colony, New Delhi R.epresertting Members Ministry of Irrigation & Power SHRI BALESHWARNATB SHRI V. N. NAOARAJA (Alternate 1 University of Roorkee DR B~ARATSINGIX Bombay Municipal `Corporation SXRI D. R. BHISE SHRI V. D. DESAI ( Alternate) Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi GRIEF ENCXNEER( FI & T ) Public Works Department, Government of Mysore CI~IEP ENQINEER, PWD SHRI D. DODDLAXX (Alternaia) Andhra Pradesh Research Laboratory, Hyderabad Central Water & Power Research Station, Poona %z:e: Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh DIRECTOR Land Reclamation, Irrigation & Power Research DIRECTOR Institute, Amritsar Central Water & Power Commission. New Delhi DIRECTOR (CSrVr) In personal capacity [ Raadcl Pufmcr @ lritton ( India ) SHRI K. K. FRAMJI Ltd, Jvew Relhi] Gan~ow~tcharge Circle, Ministry of Irrigation & SI3RIO.P.GAHG) SBRi N.K.GHos~ Pnos N. S. GOVINPA RAO SARI S. N. G~JPTA JOINTDIRECTOR SRRI KAHWA~ SAIL SRRI A. N. KRISHNABWAMY SIIRI B. MAITRA DEPUTY DIRECTOR (Altcmnfe) DRR.C.MALHOTBA MEWER(D& R) METEOnOLOQIST Sl'iRI B. B. RAO PROFK.SEETHARAMIAH National Instruments ( Private Ltd. Calcutta Central Board of Irrigation & b ower Central Board of Irrigation & Power Research, Designs and Standards Organization ( Railway Board ) In personal capacity ( C/o ECAFE, Bangkok ) AU India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers Association, Bombay River Research Institute, Government of West Bengal Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi Meteorological Department, Ministry of Tourism & Civil Aviation Roads Wing, Ministry of Transport & Shipping Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore ( Continuedon page 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

(-dfio7n* M&S
SVPEIZIH!rENDINO ( DE~IQN ) ExEclJTIfE SnnI d ?47::",",(Direc&(CivEr&)

1)

Re#madi&
ENOINEEB ENOMEIGB ) Director Gene& IS1 ( Er-#i0 Mnnba) Irrigation Department, Government of Madras

Deputy Dimctor

( Civ Engg ), ISI

FItid
*K.K.F-I ._

+i

Measuring

Instruments
In F*sb_b

Subcomaittee,

BDC 17 : 4

( mmbus

[ Rcrnlrl Palmer 69 Tritton ( India )

,

National Physical Ldxmtmy. New Delhi SEXIM.K.DA~GVPTA(A~~~~~~~~) $+iatry af Ihgation & Power Soar Bbxa~wda NATH - SEEIK.V.RAXARAO~-) . D&ration-Denartment. Government of Uttar Pradesh DIIIECTOB La& Racla&tlon, Irrigation & Power Research DI.nEc!rO~

IZB B. K. Aoaowb~ll

S-1

0. I'. Ga~o

Ganga

Diie

SEILI k

N. 8&lUINASWAMY

SxacxP. K. KULIKA&I Sam B. MAITEA SHRI Y. S. NARAYANA S~BI RAJINDEB PAUL SHRI N. C. RAWAL Sasr D. C. ROY SEEI P. C. S~XENA SERI M. P. SoOD SUPERINTENDING ( DE~IQN ) ExECUTIvE ENaENGINEER

AU Indii Instrument Manubcturers' and Dealen' Assnciation, Bomhay Central Water & Power Research Station, Poona River Research Institute, Government of West Bengal The Andhra Scientific Cc Ltd, Masulipatam Aryan Metal Works, New Delhi Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta Central Water & Power Research Static?, Poona Centmmgy Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), Irrigation Dektment, Government of Madras

-Power

-

Circle,

Ministry

of Irriaation

&

s_

B' p;;s

) ( Ahmute )

.%IEI ti.

6. VEENA

Sam D. NIJZODY ( Al&mu&)

Gun and Carriage Factory, Jabalpur Associated Instrument Manufacturers Ltd, New Delhi

( India ) Pvt

Panel for the Preparation of Draft Standards on Fluid Flow Measuring Instruments, BDC 17 : 4/P-l
SHRI 0. P. GARB MOllbffS Sam P. K. KULK~NI !&IBI N. G. RAWAL SERI P. C. SA~EHA Ganga Die Circle, Ministry of Irrigation. Power Central Water & Power Research Station, Poona Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi Central Water & Power Research Station, Poona &

2

ls:485&1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR VELOCITY RODS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 July 1968, after the draft finalized by the Fluid Flow Measurement Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 While current meters should be used as far as possible for the measurement of velocity of flow in open channels, under certain circumstances it may not be possible or advisable to use a current meter and in such cirWhile cumstances surface floats and velocity rods may have to be used. the surface floats give only surface velocity and the mean velocity has to be deduced with some consequential inaccuracy, velocity rods directly give However, the use of vele the mean velocity to a fair degree of accuracy. city rods is restricted to sites where the bed of the stream is uniform and free of large humps, that is for measurement of velocities in regular canals. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard practices in the field in this country. 0.4 Assistance has also been derived Ministry of Irrigation & Power. due weightage from has been given to the Discharge Circle,

the Ganga

0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards used in the measurement of flow in streams and standards published so far in the series are: IS : 3910-1966 Specification flow measurement IS : 39 1 l-1 966 IS : 3912- 1966 IS : 39 13- 1966 IS : 3917-1966 Specification Specification Specification Specification for current meter

on the instruments Other sediment. type) for water

(cup

for surface floats for sounding for suspended for bed material rods sediment load sampIers (scoop type) meter (cup type) samplers

IS : 3918-I 966 Code of practice for water flow measurements IS : 4073- 1967 IS : 4080-1967 Specification Specification

for use of current

for fish weights for vertical 3 staff gauges

lS:M58-I!%8
0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: Z-1960;. The number of &G&ant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard, 1. SCOPE 1.1 This Stan&d specifies the functional requirements, test to be carried out, and materials to be used, for both single tube rigid velocity rods and telescopic (adjustable) velocity rods. Typical examples are provided in Appendix A. 2. TE&N0L0GY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given'in IS : 1191-1959t shall zapply. 3. FUNCTIONAL REQuERElMENTS

3.1 Velocity rods should satisfy the requirements in 3.1.1 to.3.1.4. 3.1.1 The mean velocity on a vertical as obtained by a current meter by the integration method and the mean velocity obtained by the velocity rod for the panel enclosing the same vertical, shall be practically the same without any significant error (see 5.1.1). 3.1.2 The rod should not touch the channel bottom and weeds or acquatic growth on the channel bed should not obstruct the free run of the rod. 3.13 The rod shoLld be sufficiently weighted so that the rod remains truly ve&al. 3.1.4 The rod should have at least 5 cm projection above the water surface. 3.2 The rod gives best results when immersed up to 0.95 of the depth of the channel. 3.2.1 If by some reason or other, rods ok lesser depth are to be used, the correction factors for various depths (up to @9 d) are calculated by the following formula: 1-\ Vmean - Vrod 1-012-0~116 /\/F)
*Rules for iounding off numerical values ( revised ) . +Glossary of terms and syn$ols used in connection flow with a free surface.( Since revised).

with the measurement of liquid

'

4

IS:48!s=l!m where
d = depth of water, and

I=

submerged portion of the rod.

The correction factors calculated by the above formula for various depths ( in any event not less than 0.65 depth) are given below: I( Submerged
0.65 d 0.70 d 0.75 d O-80 d 0.85 d 0.90 d 4. MATERIALS Depth) Correction 0943 Factor 4

0.948 5 0.954 0 0,960 0 0967 1 0.975 3

4.1 The material for the rod should be light and should not be affected by water and shall conform to the following requirements: a) N'oorl-completely seasoned, of light weight, specific gravity less than 0.5, for example chaplash, kall, etc.
steel sheet -

b ) Galvanized

conforming to the relevant Indian Standards.

4.2 Paintings should be of fast colour, distinctly visible and waterproof. It is preferable to have them conspicuously painted in parts, black, white and red. 5. METHODS bF TEST

5.1 The following test shall be made on 3 of the velocity rods from a batch of 24 (of the same size, shape, material, etc) for acceptance of rods. 5.1.1 They should be tested in a standard canal at a regular cross-section. The difference between the mean velocity as obtained by the rod, and the mean velocity on the central vertical in the same panel as obtained with a cup type current meter by integration method shall not be more than f 2 percent when wind interference is negligible. 5.1.1.1 The average result of the 3 rods may be considered for the compliance of this test. 6. MARKING 6.1 These rods shall be marked with their actual dimensions, weight and tolerance values in velocity measurements as compared to a standard cup type current meter ( specifying the depth and velocity of flow at which the ,comparison was made ) . 5

Is:48!?8~1968 6.1.1 These rods may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark.

NOTE - The use .d th; IS1 Cztification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standax& Institution ( CcrtiScation Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the 8purBnce that they have been produced to comply with the requirements - ofthat standad under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supcrvixd by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked producta arc also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a fbrthcr safeguard. Details of conditions under which a liccncc for the use of the IS1 may be obtained Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, from the Indian Standa& Institution.

APPENDIX (czfzu.fe 1.1 )
TYPICAL EXAMPLES

A
RODS

OF VELOCITY

A-l. GkNERAL A-l.1 As these rods are weighted

at the bottom and generally submerged up to O-95 of the depth of water, which is a variable quantity, it is difficult to recommend a fix length for these rods. Alternatively these rods may be provided with thread on one end and collar on the other end, with provision for adding suitable weights to keep the rods vertical. Velocity rods are broadly classified into 2 types as detailed below: a) Velocity b) Telescopic rod, rigid ( single tube ); and ) velocity (SINGLE rod. TUBE) ROD ( adjustable

A-2.

RIGID

VELOCITY

A-2.0 General Description-This type of rod is used w.hen the depths are uniform and do not vary from vertical to vertical. As these rods are of fixed lengths, large number of rods of various lengths will be required if there are variations in depth from vertical to vertical. This may be made of wood or galvanized steel sheet. A-2.1 Details of Wooden Velocity Rod rod at the centre, a metallic crown with hooks at the top A-2.1.1 It consists of a cylindrical wooden hollow cylinder at the bottom and a metallic as shown in Fig. 1A.

A-2.1.2 Central Cylindrical Wooden Rod-It shall be made of completely seasoned light-weight wood of round shape with diameters ranging from 35 to 50 mm and lengths ranging up to 3 m. A-2.1.3 Metallic Hollow Cylinder at the Bottom -It should be made of galvanized steel sheet approximately 0.80 mm thick in the form of hollow cylinder with its top open and bottom closed. It shall be weighted at the bottom by the addition of lead shots so that the rod remains truly vertical during its submergence. This bottom galvanized steel cylinder should be fitted to the central wooden rod by means of screws fixed from outside and made leak-proof as far as possible. 6

A-2.1.4 Metallic Crown with Hooks-It shall be made of galvanized steel sheet approximately 0.80 mm thick in the form of a hollow cylinder with top'closed and bottom open. The open bottom end of the cylinder should be fitted to the top of the central wooden rod from the outside by means of screws. An assembly of umbrella handle shaped hooks three in number should be welded to the top of the cylinder as shown fin Fig. IA. These hooks should be made of steei rod about 2 mm.

of

LT
l--T

CYLlNDRlCAL WOODEN ROD

A
L

CYLINDRICAL ,GALVANIZED STEEL TUBE k OPEN

r"i
0 0
60 IA Velocity Rod (Wooden

OPEN

/METALLIC HOLLOW CYLINDER-

17
60

LEAD SHOTS\ ._ ) IB Velocity Rod (Galvanized

All dimensions are in millimetr~

Steel Sheet ) and approximate.

FIG. 1

VELOCITY RODS (Continued)

7

RRCWMARK FOR

F

-TOP LEVEL OF OUTER TUBE IN CLOSED POSITION L

I330

0.9 mm THICK GALVANIZED STEEL SHEET

510

1360 TOP LEVEL IN EXTENDED OF CATCH SPRING

1390

I420

rtmm

THICK GALVANIZED STEEL SIiCil

CLOSED
OUTER TUBE WITH MIDDLE AND INNER TUBES IN CLOSED POSITION

-6O+=MIDDLE TUBE
BRASS

f

SHEET OF SUlTA@LE GAUGE BRASS --r SPRING

ENLARGED SECTIONAL DETAILS OF CATCII SPRING

IC `Telescopic

Velocity

Rod

( Adjustable

)

AlI dimensions are in millimetres and approximate. Fro. 1 VELOCITY RODS 8

Is:48!58-1968 A-2.1.5 Painting-The bottom and top `metallic cylinder with hook assembly shall be painted with black enamel paint and the cylindrical wooden rod in black paint, so that the rod becomes conspicuous. A-2.1.6 Sizes-These rods may be of various sizes with diameters varying from 35 to 50 mm and the lengths varying from 300 mm to 3.0 m which can be used according to the depth at the measuring sites, with the weight suitably adjusted. A-2.2 Galvanized Steel Sheet Velocity Rod A-2.2.1 It consists of a cylindrical galvanized steel pipe tube at the centre, a metallic crown with hooks at the top and a metallic hollow cylinder at the bottom as shown in Fig. 1B. A-2.2.2 Cent& Cylindrical Tube - It should be made from 1 mm f O-2 mm thick galvanized steel sheet into round shape with diameters ranging fi-om 35 to 70 mm and lengths ranging up to 4.5 m. The joint shall be welded properly so that it is neat and leak-proof. A-2.2.3 Metallic Crown with Hooks -A hollow metallic cylinder of the same gauge as cylindrical tube with its bottom open and top closed shall be welded to the top of cylindrical tube. To the top of the cylinder an assembly of umbrella handle shaped hooks three in number should be welded as shown in Fig. 1B. These hooks should be made of about 2 mm dia steel rod. A-2.2.4 Metallic Hollow Cylinder at the Bottom-A hollow metallic cylinder of the same gauge as the cylindrical tube with its bottom closed and top open should be welded to the cylinder so that its base is strong enough to withstand any knocking due to outcrops on the bed of the channel. Lead shots should be added to its bottom to make the velocity rod float in a vertical position. A-2.2.5 Painting - The whole assembly of the velocity rod shall be painted with black enamel paint, with distinguishing black and white paint on the crown. A-3. TELESCOPIC VELOCITY ROD ( ADJUSTABLE)

A-3.0 General -This type of rod is useful when rods of different lengths are required as their lengths are adjustable. The life of these rods is less than the rigid rods, because of constant alterations in length, holes get bigger and lead to drowning of the rods. These rods are generally manufactured to read. from 300 to 600 mm, 450 to 750 mm, 600 to 1200 mm, 1 to 2 m, 2 to 3 m, and 3 to 5 m. A-3.1 Details of Telescopic Velocity Rods (Adjustable )

A-3.1.1 It consists of 3 metallic hollow tubes one working inside the other and each closed at the bottom as shown in Fig. 1C. The exterior cylindrical tube is weighted by the addition of lead shots. 9

ls t4mL1968
- A-3.1.2 0~ Tube -The outermost tube should be approximately 70 mm diameter and made of approxim&ely l-25 mm thick galvanized steel sheet. Its bottom and its sides should be welded properly so that they are leak-proof. In this tube, holes should be made so that the rods can be adjusted to read a difference of 30 mm in the length of the rod, as shown in Fig. 1C. If the rod is made to read from 300 to 450 mm the length range for making holes will be 150 mm and if the range is 300 mm, these holes will be spaced in a length of 300 mm and so on. The graduations on the outer tube should be marked according to the length of the total rod. Thus, if the length of the total rod from top end `of innermost tube to base of the otitermost tube is 300 mm, the `lowest holes should be marked 300 mm and if it is one metre, the lowest hole should be marked as 1 metre and so on. All these holes shall be closed by tight fitting rivets to make these leak-proof. Its sides and base shall be properly welded. A-3.li Middle Tube-The middle tube should be tipproximately 60 mm in d_iameter.and made of approximately 1.0 mm thick galvanized steel sheet and should be closed at the bottom. It should be longer in length than the outer tube by half the d`istance of the lowest hole in the outer tube. When this tube is pulled outside the outer tube, the spring catch is manoeuvred to fit in the desired hole by hand and the rest of the holes are closed by rivets as explained above, thus making the outer tube leakproof. A-3.1.4 Znner T&e-The inner most tube should be approximately 50 mm in diameter and of 0.80 mm thick galvanized steel sheet with its Its sides should be properly, bottom and. top closed by proper welding. welded to make it leak proof. Its length protruding outside the middle tube shocld be the same as the middle tube is protruding outside the outer tube, so that ,when both the middle and inner tubes are resting at their base the rbd shotild read the minimum length it is intended to, without any adjustment. The inner tube should have a spring catch, which should prevent its sliding down the middle tube as shown in Fig. 1C. Suitable size and type of rubber pacJcing shall be provided between the inside of the tubes so as td make them watertight. The outer tube, middte tube ;ind inner tube should be properly marked as shown in Fig. 1C. A-3.1.4.1 An assembly of umbrella handle shaped hooks three in number should be attached to the top of the inner most cylindrical tube as shown in Fig. 1C. These hooks should consist of approximately 2 mm dia, steel rod.
NOTE - For lengths more than 450 mm and up to 600 mm the inner most tube should be pulled out first to its cntin length to read 450 mm without pulling out the middle tube. Then the increase in lengths of 30 mm up to 600 mm may bc managed by pulling middle tube.

A-3.15Painting-The whole assembly shall be painted with distinguishing black and white paint.
10

