(Reaffirmed 2002)

IS:11786- 1986

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATION FOR CATTLE HOUSING FOR AN AVERAGE FARMER
Animal

Structures

and Equipment

Sectional Committee,
Representing

AFDC 17
Ludhiana Research, New

Chairman PROF A. P. BHATNAGAR Members DR C. L. ARORA

Punjab Agricultural India;$lTnciI

University,

of Agricultural

Directorate of Remount Veterinary Services, MAJ-GEN R. K. R. BALASUBRANew Delhi MANrAN .._. .. _. LFCOL K. VENKATARAMAN ( Alternate 1 Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development DR A. K. BASUTHAKUR ( Department of Agriculture and Cooperation ), New Delhi DR IQBALUDDIN ( Alternate 1 Directorate of Animal Husbandry, Governme.lt DR D. S. BHANDARI of Raiasthan. . Jaiour DR G. K. RASTOGI ( Alternate I ) DR P. S. CHAUDHARY( Alternate 11 ) Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), DR P. N. BHAT Izatnagar DR V. K. TANEJA ( Afternate ) Milk Commissioner, Government of Haryana, DR J. L. BHUTANI Chandigarh Centyid4r$$Zone Research Institute ( ICAR ), DR P. K. GHOSH E R R. S. GREWAL
SHRI H. GUHA

Directorate of Animal Husbandry, ment of Punjab, Chandigarh
) )

Govern-

DR N. S. UPPAL ( Alternate

SHRI S. GUPTA ( Alternate DR GURCHARANSINOH SHRI GURDIP SINGH DR

Directorate of Animal Husbandry, of West Bengal, Calcutta

Government ( ICAR ),

SHRI HAIDER ALI KHAN ( Alternate ) Directorate of Animal Husbandry, Government K. HANUMANTHA RAO of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad DR VISWA RAJ ( Alfcrnnte ) Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute DR MANOHAR SINGH ( ICAR ), Jaipur DR S. K. KAUSHISH ( Alternate )
( Continued @ copyright 1987 on page 2

Indian Agricultural Research Institute New Delhi Hi-Bred ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Karnal

)

INDIAN STANDARDS TNSTlTUTlON This publication is protected under the lndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission ofthc publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act,

IS:11786-1986 (Continued
from page Members

1)
Representing

DR M. R. MARATHE

The

Da D. V. RANGNEKAR ( Alternag ) central Da S. C. MOHAPATRA DR S. D. AHUJA ( Alternote ) Central SHRI V. D. MUDGAL

Bharatiya Puoe

Agro-Industries Institute, Research

Foundation, Izatoagar on Buffaloes

Aviao Research Institute for

SHRI S. K. JIE~DAL ( Alternate ) Indian Dairy Corporation, Da ( KUMARI ) A. PATE; DR S. N. SINGH ( Alternate ) NatiozalnD;iry Research DR M. V. N. RAO Da S. R. SAMPATH( Ahernafe DR P. V. RAO
LT-COLS.K.Roy )

f ICAR 1. Hissar ~ "

Vadodara Institute ( ICAR ), University,

DR P. VARADARAJULU( Alternate SHRI SHAH~DALI ( Alternate ) DR N. S. R. SASTRY Da S. N. SHARMA DR H. L. ABHI ( Alternate ) DR B. D. SHUKLA

Pradesh Aodhra Hyderabad
)

Agricultural

Directorate of Military Farms, Army Headquarters, QMG's Branch, New Delhi Haryaoa Agricultural University, Hissar Directorate of Animal Husbandry, Haryana Central Institute of Agricultural Eogioeeriog

SARI P. K. SRIVASTAV ( Alternate ) LCAR Research Complex for North Eastern SHRI M. D. SINGH Hills Region, Shilloog SHRI A. SINGH ( Alternate ) Kerala Agricultural University, Trichur DR M. SUBRAHMANYAN Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food )

( ICAR ), Bhopal

Secretary SHRI R. N. SHARMA

Joint Director

( Agri & Food ), IS1

IS:11786- 1986

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATION FOR CATTLE HOUSING FOR AN AVERAGE FARMER

0. FOREWORD
0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 August 1986, after the draft finalized by the Animal Structures and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.
0.2 Proper housing is an important feature in raising the production capabilities of animals, in addition to good breeding, feeding, selection and disease control. It is conducive to good health, comfort and protection from inclement weather and the animals are capable of utilizing their genetic abilities and feed for optimum production. 0.3 Cattle raising and dairying is practised in the country by various Generally these interests are: (a) An average farmer who has interests. not more than a pair of bullocks and two or three milch animals with their calves; (b) Rural milk producers normally having a total of about 20 animals including about 12 milch animals, their followers and a pair of bullocks; (c) Gaushalas and other organized milk producers; and (d) Large dairy farms. 0.3.1 This standard covers recommendations for shed for an average farmer. This would supersede IS : 4466 ( Part 1 )-1968*, IS : 5605 ( Part l)Since India's climatic condition, 19701_and IS : 8845 (Part l&1978$. unlike most of the principal dairy countries of the world, are very varied, hence shed of cattle would also vary according to the climatic conditions ln order to meet these varied requireprevailing in a particular region. ments wherever necessary specific recommendation has been made for: (a) Plain areas with medium rainfall, (b) Arid areas, (c) High altitude areas, and (d) Heavy rainfall and high humidity areas. *Recommendations for farm cattle housing for plain areas with medium rainfall: Part 1 Cattle shed for an average farmer. `rRecommendations for farm cattle housing for heavy rainfall and high humidity areas: Part 1 Cattle sheds for an average farmer. ;Recommendations for farm cattle housing for arid areas: Part 1 Cattle shed for an average farmer. 3

IS:11786-1986 1. SCOPE 1.1This standard recommends a layout and constructional
cattle shed . meant for an average. farmer__ nqrmallyhaving . animals with their calves and a pair of bullocks. 2. TERMINOLOGY

detail of a three milch

2.0For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 2.1 Standing ( Stall ) - The floor space provided within a shed for an individual animal to stand or lie.
3. SELECTION OF SITE and well-drained area

3.1 The shed shall be located on dry, elevated with consideration for future expansion. 3.2 The enough shade. trees be farm.

shed shall preferably be located at a place where there are suitably placed trees to serve as wind-breaks and to provide In order to break the wind it is recommended that a row of also planted across the direction of wind at the boundary of the
be planted

NOTE- In case there are no shaded trees on the site, these should immediately keeping a minimum distance of 4 m from the shed.

3.3 The site shall be throughout the year.

away from

public

road

but easily accessible adequate

3.4 The site shall be such that arrangement and good water supply.

could be made for

3.5 The site shall be such that the long axis of the shed could be oriented east to west in all areas except temperate Himalayanand hilly regions. In desert areas, the shed shall be oriented across the prevailing direction of the wind in order to protect the roof from being blown OK by high wind. 3.51 In coastal areas the shed shall be oriented along the prevailing wind direction in order to protect the roof from being blown off by high wind and at the same time to provide sufficient air movement In the shed. In sub-mountainous region, the buildings should be so sited as to avail of the natural aeration and drying. 4. LAYOUT OF THE SHED 4.1 An average farmer having not more than three milch animals with calves and a pair of bullocks generally makes use of an existing wall for constructing the cattle shed. The construction of shed under this 4

IS:11786-1986

interest, therefore, has been suggested assuming that a lean-to type roof could be built against an existing wall. Arrangement of adequate water supply and light shall be made in the shed. The typical layout of such a shed to accommodate five animals is shown in Fig. 1. The two side walls would be a height of not more than 1'2 m. The height of main wall (see A in Fig. I ) shall be minimum of 2'5 m.

MAIN
WALL

FIG.

1 TYPICAL LAYOUT OF FARM CATTLE SHED
5

IS : 11786 - 1986 5. CONSTRUCTION 5.1 Standings - The standings shall be constructed in such a way that the animals are kept facing towards the wall. The manger shall be adjacent to the wall. The length and width and area of cow shed and buffalo shed capable of accommodating one to four cattle is given in Table 1.
TABLE 1 No.
OF CATTLE Cow _---h--_7 Length SHED

SPACE NORMS All dimensions

FOR CATTLE in metres.
SHED

SHED
REMARKS

BIJFIAL~ r-_-h___7

1 2 3 4

2.5 4'2 5.7 5.6 t 2.0

Width 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 { 1.5

Length 2.7 5.2 7.3 6.8 i 2.4

Width 3.4 3.4 3-4 3.4 { 1.9

Along with calf Along with calves Along with calves For cattle For calves

5.1.1 Flooring of Standings - The flooring of the standing may be of or kankar or sand or stone slabs or brick-on-edge. The details of laying these types of floorings are given in Appendix A. A plinth of at least 150 mm in height shall be provided for the floor. The floor shall be sloped 1 in 40 for moorum, sand and kankar and 1 in 60 for brick-onedge or stone-slab flooring. 5.1.2 Manger - The manger shall be of continuous type. The manger wall shall be made either of stone slabs, wooden planks or brick-in-lime The flooring material of the manger shall be the or cement mortar. All the same as for the floor but the surface shall be finished smooth. corners of the manger shall be rounded off and finished smooth. The dimensions of the manger shall be as given in Table 2. Iron rings may be provided for tying the rope of the animals.
moorum
TABLE 2
DIMENSION iz.

DIMENSIONS
STONE SLAB

OF MANGER
WOODEN
PLANK

All dimensions

in centimetres.
BRKKS REF TO
FIG.

1

(1) i) ii) iii) iv)

(2) Height of fore curb, Max Thickness of fore curb, Min Inner width of manger, Min Depth of manger, Min

(3) 30 4 75 30

(4) 30 3 75 30

(4) 30 10 75 30

(5) B C D E

5.2 Roof - The roof shall be lean-to type suitably sloped according to local conditions. The roof material may either be asbestos cement or 6

IS :117861986
galvanized steel sheets, tiles or asphaltic roofing sheets or locally Where necessary, particularly in hot climate, available materials. asbestos cement or galvanized steel roofs may be overlaid with a 8 to 10 cm thick thatch to lessen the stress of extreme climate. In sheds where locally available materials are used, gunny sacks treated with cement lime mixture ( see 5.2.1 ) may be used. Generally, the eaves of the roof ( see Fin Fig. 1 > shall project out at least 50 cm away from the pillars and in the regions where extreme climatic conditions prevail, the eaves may project up to 75 cm from the pillars in order to afford protection to the animals from direct sun and rain. 5.2.1 Preparation of Cement-Lime Mixture - Stir thoroughly 12 parts by volume of cement and three parts by volume of lime (see IS : 7121973* ) in 20 parts by volume of water. Add one part by volume of common salt ( see 1s : 797-1976t ) and one-half part by volume of alum ( see IS : 258-19671 ) and stir until all ingredients are well mixed. Apply the mixture evenly with the help of a brush on the inner surface of the gunny sack. Give two c oa t s of the mixture on the outer surface of the gunny sack. Stretch the gunny sack and dry in the sun until it becomes stiff. 5.3 Pillars - The pillars may be made from any one of the following materials and their minimum dimensions shall be as indicated against each: a) Brick b) c) d) e) Mild steel I section Stone masonry Iron pipes Timber I) Rectangular pillar 2) Round poles 45
X 35 cm ( see Note 1 ) or 40 X 30 cm ( see Note 2 ) 10 X 10 cm 30 X 30 cm 10 cm diameter

10 X 10 cm 15 cm diameter
and 3 widths shall be

In case of 22.5 x 11.25 cm brick, 2 lengths NOTE lused. NOTE 2 - In case of 20 x IO cm ( modular ) brick, shall be used. NOTE 3 corrtision. *Specification tspecification $Specification All iron structures shall be suitably painted

2 lengths for

and 3 widths against

protection

for building lime ( second revision ). for common salt for chemical industries ( secondrevision for potash alum, technical (first revision ).

).

7

IS:11786-1986 5.3.1 All edges in rectangular pillars shall be rounded off and finished smooth, as far as possible. The height of pillar ( see G in Fig. 1 ) shall be minimum of 2'1 m.
5.4 Drain - There shall be a drain laid just outside the shed. It shall be built out of brick and cement mortar and shall have rounded corners. Its lengthwise slope shall be 1 in 40. The width of drain may be of 23 cm but in any case not more than 30 cm. The drain shall be of `U' section with a depth of 6 cm at the bottom of the section. The drain shall be let to a urine pit having a depth not exceeding 40 cm. It may be circular or rectangular.

APPENDIX A ( Clause 51.1 )
DETAILS A-l. MOORUM, OF LAYING DIFFERENT TYPES OF FLOORING OF STANDINGS AND SAND FLOORING

KANKAR

A-l.1 The moorum, kankar and sand flooring shall be laid over a subgrade of rubble packing or broken bricks of 15 to 25cm thick wetted and A 15-cm layer of hard moorum, kankar and sand ( as the well rammed. case may be ) shall be laid over this subgrade with coarser pieces at the bottom and fine ones over at the top. A layer of powder moorum, kankar and sand about 3 to 5 cm shall be spread over the top of this Water shall then be sprinkled and the surface shall be well layer. rammed. Water shall again be sprinkled until the floor is fully saturated. When the The surface shal! be rammed, levelled and well consol!dated. floor is dry, a thick paste of cow dung plaster shall be uniformly spread and it shall be well rammed. A final thm coating of mixture of cow dung ( four parts ) and cement ( one part ) shall be applied after the floor has dried up and wiped clean to prevent cracking and panelling. The cow dung plaster shall be applied weekly or fortnightly to keep the floor in good condition. A-2. BRICK-ON-EDGE FLOORING

A-2.1 The subgrade for this type of flooring shall be rubbles or brick aggregates whi'ch shall be hand-packed, watered and well rammed. A la!er of 10 cm 01 lime co1 Crete shall be splead over the sub-base, well rammed and shall be allowed IO set for 7 days. The br,cks sha!l be well burnt and of good qual!ty ( SET IS : 3583-1975* ) and shall be well *Specification for burnt clay paving bricks
8 (first revision ).

IS : 11786 - 1986 soaked in water before laying. Bricks shall be laid on about 10mm thick cement or lime mortar bed and each brick shall be properly bedded on edge and set hon;e by gentle tapping with the handle of trowel or a wooden mallet. Its inside faces shall be buttered with mortar before the next brick is laid and pressed against it. On Completion of a portion of flooring the vertical joints shail be fully filled from the top with the mortar. A-2.2 The surface of the flooring during the laying shall be frequently checked with a straight edge at least 2 m long so as to obtain a true surface with the required slope. The surface of the flooring shall be kept constantly moist for a minimum period of 7 days. In the case of fat lime mortar, curing shall commence two days after the laying of the flooring and shall continue for 7 days. The bricks may be laid in rows having the joints parallel and at right angles to the walls or in `herringbone' pattern. A-3. STONE-SLAB FLOORING

A-3.1 The stone slabs shall be of good quality, hard, sound and dense (see IS : 3622-1977' ). Apart from sandstone any other good quality stone slabs may be used according to the availability of the material. The subgrade shall be prepared as given in A-2.1 and the lime concrete bed shall be cleaned, wetted and mopped. The bedding for the slabs shall be made with cement mortar 1 : 4 (1 cement : 4 coarse sand) or with lime mortar (either 1 lime putty : 1 surkhi : 1 coarse sand or 1 lime putty : 2 coarse sand ). The average thickness of the bedding mortar The mortar shall be spread under the under the slab shall be 20 mm. area of each slab to the specified thickness. The stone slab shall be washed clean before laying. It shall be laid on top, pressed, tapped with wooden mallet and brought to level with the adjoining slabs. It shall be lifted and laid aside. The top surface of the mortar shall then be corrected by adding fresh mortar at hollows. The edges of the slab already paved shall be buttered with cement slurry. The slab to be paved shall be louered gently back in position and tapped with wooden mallet till it is prop.erly bedded in level with and close to the adjoining slab with as fine a joints as possible. Subsequent slabs shall be laid in the same manner. After each slab has been laid, surplus cement on the surface of the slab shall be cleaned off. The flooring shall be cured for a minimum period of 7 days. The surface of the flooring as laid shall be tlue to a level and shall be of the desired slope. Slight uneveness at the meeting edges of slabs shall be removed by fine chiselling.

*Specification of sandstone ( slabs and tiles ) (first revision ).
9

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) Base Units Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity
.

Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol m kg
S

A K cd mol

Arqount of substance Supplementary Units Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure. stress force

Unit radian steradiaa

Symbol rad
Sr

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa

Definition 1N 1J 1w 1T 1s 1v 1 Pa = 1 kg.m/s' = 1 N.m = 1 J/s 1 V.s = 1 Wb/mg = 1 A/V = 1 W/A = 1 N/m*

1 Wb=

1 Hz = 1 c/s(s-l)

