IS 13861:1893 ISfh 7FilR - IQXA ._I ,".W . .""_
( Reaffirmed 1998 )

Indian Standard

INSTANT

TEA IN SOLID

FORM

-

SAMPLING

UDC

663.95 : 620.113

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

September

1993

Price Group 3

Stimulant

Foods Sectional

Committee,

FAD 23

.

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7516 : 1984 `instant tea in solid form-Sampling' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Stancards on the recommendation ot the Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee ( FAD 23 ), and approval of the Food and Agriculture Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical Indian Standards; attention is drawn specially to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' be read as `Indian Standard'; and b) Comma practice appear, referring with those used in

to this standard, in Indian Standard

they should the current

( , ) has been used as a decimal marker, while is to use point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in a-ccordance with the standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off. it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS
IS0

13881 : 1983 7516 - 1984

lndian Standard

INSTANT
Q introduction

TEA IN SOLID FORM -

SAMP~LING

Being a natural product, instant tea may exhibit variable characteristics associated with the season of manufacture and/or the source of leaf material. In addition, variable manufacturing characteristics, such as bulk density, powder flowability and particle size, are critically important. For these reasons, it is desirable that a sample of any lot or consignment is prepared at the factory and forwarded to the customer for approval prior to the instant tea being dsspatched from the `factory. ln order to confirm that~a given consignment of instant tea conforms to a contract specification, a buyer may wish to sample a representative number of boxes on arrival at his Fremises. However, instant tea in solid form is generally packed and transported in bulk in sealed bags of moisture-resistant material ( i. e. an irnmediate container ), protected by an outer container. Owing to the hygroscopic nature and friability of the product, special precautions need to be taken in order to ensure that the taking of samples does not adversely affect the sample itself or the remainder of the lot. 1 Scope and field of application

2.1 consignment : The quantity of instant tea dispatched or received at one time and covered by a particular contract or shipping document The consignment may be ~made up of one or more lots or parts of lots. 2.2 lot; break : A defined quantity of instant tea, presumed to be of uniform characteristics, taken from a consignment and allowing the quality to be assessed. 2.3 primary sample") : A small quantity of instant tea, taken at one time from one point in a single immediate container, or, where appropriate, the whole contents of one immediate container in the lot [ in the case of containers containing less than 1 kg of instant tea ( see 4.3.5 ) 1. NOTE - A series
different positions of primary in the lot. samples is taken from

2.4 bulk sample : The quantify of instant tea obtained by bringincj together the primary samples taken from different positions in the lot and which is representative of the quality of the lot. 2.5 laboratory sample : A prescribed quantity of instant tea taken from fhe bulk sample, representative of the quality of the lot and intended for analysis or other examination. 2.6 point of manufacture : The point in the factory at which the instant tea is being poured into its first immediate container up to the time when the immediate container is sealed. 2.7 immediate container : The container that is in contact with the instant tea; it may be surrounded by an outer container or outer containers. Examples of immediate containers are:

This lnternationai Standard specifies methods oi sampling instant tea in solid form ( hereins`:!er referred to as "instant tea" ) it applies s:zes. to sampling from containers of ail

Separate methods are described for sampling at the point of manufacture, samplng at subsechain and qtient stages in the distribution sampling of retail packs. In addition, for sampling at some of these locations, different procedures or special precatitions are specified depending on whether the samples are to be used for examination of characteristics ( for example bulk particle density, flowability, particle size ) or compositional characteristics ( for example moisture content, ash ). 2 DefiGtions For the purpose of this International Standard tie following definitions shall app1y.l) _..___~_
1 The terms

a) a sealed bag in which tea is transported in bulk, protected by an outer container such as a fibreboard box; and b) a glass jar or sealed bag in a box in which the instant tea is packed usuaily for retail sale. 2.8 retail pack : Any package in which the immediate container contains less than 1 kg of instant tea.
of but are not identicai with those in IS0 3534

statistics *) 1!1 IS0

and definitions in this Vocabulary and symbols.

clause

take cognizance concept

3534 the term increment

is used for this

but this

term is not used

in sampling

in the tea trade.

1

IS 13661 : 1993 IS0 7516 - 1964 3 General conditions of sampling

.

3.1 Sampling shall be carried out by persons appointed by buyers and/or sellers and, if desired, in the presence of the buyer ( or his representatives ) and the seller ( or his representatives ). 3.2 Sampli-ng shall be carried out in a covered place, in such a manner that the samples of instant tea, the sampling apparatus and the sample containers are protected from adventitious contamination and other factors likely to affect the samples, for example moisture, dust, etc. Special care is necessary to ensure that the sampling instruments are clean and dry. and do not impart any taint or contamination to the sample. 3.3 Handling of the sample ( for example combining of primary samples into the bulk sample, packaging of the sample) shall be carried out with care in order to avoid changing the original characteristics of the instant tea. 3.4 If it is obvious from the visual appearance of the primary samples that the lot is not uniform within the definition of "lot" (see 2.2), the sampling shall be discontinued and reference made back to the person who ordered the sampling to be carried out. 4 Sampling 4.1 Number sampled from immediate of immediate containers containers to be

4.1.2 Immediate containers containing more than 1 kg of instant tea

n&

In the case of immediate containers containing not more than 1 kg of loose instant tea, the minimum num-ber of containers to be sampled from a lot shall be as shown in table 2, nrovided that the mass specified ,for each laboratory sample is obtained. Table
Number of immediate containers in lot -~ Up

2 7
Number :ontainers of immediate to be sampled

to

25
100 300 500

3 5 7
10 15 20 + 25

26 to
101 to 301 to

501 to 1 000 1001 3001 to 3 000 and over

4.1.3 Immediate 20 kg of instant

containers tea

containing

1 @3

The minimum number of immediate containers to be sampled from a lot shall be that shown in table 1 or table 2, according to agreement between the interested parties. 4.2 Procedwre for random sampling

Unless otherwise tract, the number be sampled shall

specified in 4.3 or in a conof immediate containers to be as given in 4.1.1 to 4.1.3. containing more

4.1.1 Immediate -containers than 20 kg of instant tea

The containers to be sampled shall be taken at random, and, for this purpose, use should be made of random number tables. If such tables are not available, the following procedure may be used: Let IV be the number of immediate containers in the lot and n be the number of immediate containers to be taken. Starting from any immediate container, count the immediate containers in -order as 1, 2, etc., up to r, where r = /V/n ( If N/n is not a whole number, take r as the integral part of it ) Select the rth immediate container, until the required number of immediate containers has been taken. In the case of immediate containers containing not more than 1 kg of instant tea, if the containers are packed in outer cases, cartons or crates containing a convenient number of units, approximately 20% ( but, not fewer than two ) of these outer packages shall be taken at random. From these, immediate containers shall be taken in equal numbers, at random,
3

in the case of immediate containers ing more than 2 kg of loose instant ininimum number of containers to be irom a lot shall be as snown in table Table __.~
Number of immediate containers in rot __P----2to 11 to IO

contain tea, the sampled 1.

1
of Immediate to be sampled

1 Number
container

\
2

25

3 5
7

26 to 100
101 and over

IS `13861: 1993 ISd 7516 - 1984 SO as to rnake up the required number of immediate containers to be sampled, as speclfied in 4 1.2. 4.3 P-rimary samples 4.3.1 General Use the primary samples sample ( see 4.4). 4.3.3 Method 4.3.3.1 B to obtain a bulk

Apparatus

The method of taking primary samples depends on the point in the manufacturing and distribution chain at which sampling is to be undertaken and can depend on the methods of analysis that wii~l be made on the samples. When sampling at the point of manufacture, method A ( see 4.3.2) shall be used. The samples so obtained may be used for any determination. When sampling at any point after the point of manufacture, provided that the instant tea is not packed in retail packages. -- method B (see 4.3.3 ) shall be used when the samples -are required for determinations of bulk density, flowability and particie size. The samples shall not be used f~or the determination of moisture content but may be used for any other determinations. - method C ( see 4.3.4 ) shall be used when the samples are required for the determination of moisture content. The samples shall not be used for determinations of bulk density, flowability and particle size but may be used for any other determinations. `When sampling retail packs, method D ( see 4.3.5 ) shall be used. The samples so obtained may be used for any determination. 4.3.2 Method 4.3.2.1 A

The following -

apparatus
bags

is required: at least equal in tea is

volume to those in which the instant
received from the manufacturer scoop bag ( large enough samples ) heat sealer powder

polyethylene

-

- polyethylene all the primary 4.3.3.2 polyethylene Procedure

to hold )

( optional

The number of immediate containers to be sampled from a given lot or consignment sha!l either be subject to prior agreement between the interested parties, or, in the absence eF such agreement, in accordance with 4.1. The required number of immediate containers shall be withdrawn from the lot or consignment according to a system of random nutbers. Operating preferably in an air-conditioned room, open completely one of the outer containers and the immediate container inside it. Gently pour at full flow the entire contents of the immediete container into a polyethylene bag so that the contents are mixed and any layers destroyed. Using the scoop, take a primary sample frosci the top surface of this bag and p!ace it in another polyethy!ene bag ( i e. the bag which will contain the bulk sample ). Place the filled bag in its outer container and seal it using the heat sealer or other effective method of sealing. Repeat the procedure on all the other immediate containers to be sampled. Use the primary samples sample ( see 4.4 ). 4.3.4 Method 4.3.4.1 C to obtain a bulk

Apparatus apparatus
scoop

The following -

is required:

powder

polyethylene bag ( large enough all primary samples ) 4.3.2.2 Procedure

to hold

Using the scoop, take a pri~mary sample from each immediate container ( in the lot f as it is being filled or when filled but before it-is sealed. Place the primary samplesin the polyethylene bag. Minimize the risk ofiake up or loss of moisture by keeping the polyethylene bag holding the primary samples closed except when inserting further samples, and with as little .air inside as possible.

Apparatus apparatus trier bag ( large enough samples ) heat sealer to hold ) is required:

The following a suitable

- polyethylene all the primary polyethylene

( optional

IS 13881: 1993 IS0 7518- 1984 4.3.4.2 Procedure The number of immediate containers to be sampled from a given lot or consignment shall either be subject to prior agreement between the interested parties, or, in the absence of such agreement, in accordance with 4.1. The required number of immediate containers shall be withdrawn from the lot or consignment according to a system of random numbers. Open each outer container and its immediate container, causing as little damage as possible. Using the trier, take a primary sample from the immediate container and place it in the polyethylene bag. Reseal the immediate container using the heat sealer or other effective method of sealing and reseal the outer container. Minimize the risk of take up or loss of moisture by keeping the polyethylene bag holding the primary samples closed except when inserting further samples, and with as little air inside as possible. Repeat the procedure on all the diate containers to be sampled. Use the primary samples sample ( see 4.4 >. 4.3.5 Mefhod 4.3.5.1 D to other obtain immea bulk

.

container and pour out about 50 g of instant tea into the polyethylene bag. Minimize the risk of take up or loss of moisture by keeping the polyethylene bag holding the primary samples closed except when inserting further samples, and with as little air inside as possible. Repeat the procedure on all containers to be samgled. Use the primary samples sample ( see 4.4) . 4.4 Bulk sample and other to immediate a bulk

obtain

laboratory

samples

4.4.1 The bulk sample, formed by combining primary samples of loose material, shall be well mixed and shall then `18 divided rapidly into the required number of labor=tory samples, taking precautions to avoid": `echanicai damage to, and take up or loss of moisture by, the samples.
NOTE - Replicate samples will be often required, fo: example as duplicate or reference samples, and, i Igeneral, the number and size of th4 laboratory samp:es, to be taken for examination and arbitration should COPform to recognized trade practices, unless otherwise agreed.

4.4.2 The size of each iaboratory sample sha!! be not less than 1 litre, unless otherwise agreed.
NOTE - 1 Iilre of low density instant tea weighs abouL 100 g and 1 litre of high density instant tea weighs about 500 g.

Apparatus apparatus is required: to hold 4.4.3 Each laboratory sample shall be packeci in a polyethylene bag which shall be sealeti using a heat sealer or other effective methoc of sealing, with as little air inside as possible
to the hygroscopic character of instari NOTE -Owing tea as well as its ability to pick up taint, it is cssc~!;s~ that the laboratory samples be transferred to theic polyethylene bags as prompt, as possible.

The following

- polyethylene bag ( large enough all the primary~samples ) 4.3.5.2 Procedure

The number of immediate containers to be sampled from a given lot orconsignment shall be subject to prior agreement between the interested parties, or, in the absence of such agreement, in accordance with 4.1. The required number of immediate containers shall be withdrawn from the lot or consignment according to a system of random numbers. If the amount of instant tea in each immediate does not exceed 50 g, each container shall constitute a primary sample. ( The containers shall be opened and Itheir contents collected together and treated as the bulk sample ).
container

5 Packaging sample 5.1 Packaging

and iabeiling of samples

of laboratory

The laboratory samples contained in sealed polyethylene bags shall be packed in clean, rigid moistureodour-free, opaque, dry, resistant containers with close-fitting lids, oi such a size that they are~almost completely filled by the sample. 5.2 Labelling of samples

if the amount of instant tea in each immediate container exceed 50 g, invert the container several times to mix the contents. Open the 4

Each sample container shall carry a iabel marked with full details of the place and date of sampling, the name of the manufacturer or marketer, the invoice and lot number, the name of the sampler and any other important particulars relating to the consignment, togethe:

IS 13i61 : 1993 IS0 7516 - 1984 with a statement B, C or D ). 6 Despatch of the sampling method ( A, d) names and descriptions personnel and witnesses; of sampling ( i. e, to the a note deteron the

of laboratory

samples

Sampfes shall be despatched as soon as possible and only in exceptional circumstances more than 48 h after sampiing has been completed, non-business days excluded. 7 Sampling report

e) identification of the method used A, B, C or D ), and any modifications technique described; together with of any restrictions concerning any minations which shall not be made sample;

Pf a sampling report is prepared, it is recommended that reference should be made to any unusual appearance of the containers of product, and all the circumstances that may have influenced sampling. It shall include the foilowing details: 1 a) plac. If sampling;

f) nature and number of unitsconstituting the lot and reference to relevant documents and details of marking; g) number of samples and their identification ( markings, batch number, etc ); h) destination j) condition and of samples; of packages and surroundings;

Cs) date of sampling; c) time of sampling, and time of subsequent sealing of sample containers;

k) whether the premises were air-conditioned during sampling and, if required, the atmospheric conditions during, sampling, including relative humidity,

5

Standard Mark

Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Zndiah made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards,
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

The use of the Standard

__.

_ __._ __.~.__ _

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bur~.au of Indian SWdards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious developmen of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments QT edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions' Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference; Dot : No. FAD 23 ( 342 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue z Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices i Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1/I4 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone I 331 01 13 75 31 31 84 99, 37 8.5 61 37 86 26, 37 86 62 I 53 38 23 43, 84 235 02 16,
I 235 15 19,

53 16 40 235 04 4" 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

632 92 95, { 632 78 91,

BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COTMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. JAIPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

