UAT AAP IS 19022: 2023 
Indian Standard 


fris aard! — dir ba 
vals — fare 


Medical Textiles — Barrier 
Face Covering — Specification 


ICS 11.040.59;080.01 


© BIS 2023 


UR AAG SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS UA, 9 ag ME opd HPT, Ay facet - 110002 
we Ef MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 7 


Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee, TXD 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Technical 
Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division Council. 


A barrier face covering is a non-medical mask, also called fabric mask, community mask or face covering, is 
neither a medical device nor personal protective equipment. The common uses of barrier face covering are as 
follows: 


a) General population in public setting such as shops, shared workplaces, schools, worship places, 
restaurants, gyms, etc or in enclosed settings such as public transportation; and 
b) For households, in indoor settings, when there is a visitor who is not a member of the household. 


Barrier face covering are intended to be used to minimize the transmission of aerosol mediated disease 
transmission among general public. This standard has been formulated to address the performance of barrier face 
covering designed to protect others from exposure to wearer’s respiratory droplets, saliva, sputum or respiratory 
secretions when talking, sneezing, coughing and breathing heavily. 


This standard does not cover the requirement of surgical face masks which are meant for use at healthcare setting 
and a separate standard ‘IS 16289 : 2014 Medical textiles — Surgical face mask — Specification’ has been 
published on surgical face mask. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 19022 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MEDICAL TEXTILES — BARRIER FACE COVERING — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the minimum reguirements 
for single use or reusable barrier face coverings 
intended for use by the general public to minimize 
the transmission of aerosol mediated disease 
particularly in epidemic or pandemic situations. 
Barrier face covering shall not be used by healthcare 
personnel and other people showing symptoms of 
viral or bacterial infection. 


1.2 Barrier face covering is not applicable for 
children below the age of 5 years due to chances of 
suffocation or overheating hazards. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated in Annex 
A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following 
terms and definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Bacterial Aerosol — A suspension of articles 
containing biological agents which have been 
dispersed in the gas. 


3.2 Barrier Face Covering — Cloth based face 
covering that covers mouth, nose and chin with no 
gaps and with head or ear attachment and shall not 
incorporate any inhalation and/or exhalation 
valve(s). The barrier face covering is neither a 
medical device nor personal protective equipment, 
hence cannot be used by healthcare personnel. 


3.3 Differential Pressure/Delta P — It is the 
pressure drop across a face covering under specific 
conditions of air flow, temperature and humidity. 
This is an indicator of the breathability of the face 
covering. 

3.4 Healthcare Personnel (HCP) — Refers to all 
paid and unpaid persons serving in healthcare 


settings who have the potential for direct or indirect 
exposure to patients or infectious materials, 
including body substances (for example blood, 
tissue, and specific body fluids); contaminated 
medical supplies, devices, and equipment; 
contaminated environmental surfaces; or 
contaminated air. These HCP may include, but are 
not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, 
nurses, nursing assistants, physicians, technicians, 
therapists, phlebotomists, pharmacists, students and 
trainees, contractual staff not employed by the health 
care facility, and persons (for example clerical, 
dietary, environmental services, laundry, security, 
maintenance, engineering and facilities 
management, administrative, billing, and volunteer 
personnel) not directly involved in patient care but 
potentially exposed to infectious agents that can be 
transmitted among from HCP and patients. 


3.5 Manufacturer — Natural or legal person with 
responsibility for the processing of raw material or 
inputs in any manner that results in the emergence 
of a new product having a distinct name, character 
and use. 


3.6 Particle Filtration Efficiency (PFE) — It is the 
effectiveness of a material to filter aerosol droplets 
containing bacteria of a specified particle size range 
3.0 um. This is expressed as a percentage of a 
quantity that does not pass through the material. 


4 MANUFACTURE AND WORKMANSHIP 


4.1 The barrier face covering shall be made from 
suitable textiles material that is not prohibited for 
use for the purpose under any applicable 
law/regulation in force so that the product made out 
of this meets the requirements specified in this 
standard. 


4.1.1 The fabric used for the manufacturing of 
barrier face covering shall be a single or multi- 
layered textile structure made of woven or non- 
woven (spunlace or spunbond or combination of 
spunbond and meltblown) or knitted structure. 
NOTE — The manufacturer of the product should 


use sustainable materials to reduce the environmental 
impact. 


IS 19022 : 2023 


The fabric used for manufacturing barrier face covering 
should not cause irritation to the user. 


4.2 The barrier face covering shall be clean and free 
from substances liable to cause tendering during 
storage. The product shall be free from sharp point, 
sharp edge, toxic and harmful substances. The 
general guidelines (for information only) for good 
manufacturing practice to maintain hygiene 
requirement at manufacturing facility are given in 
Annex C of IS 17514. 


5 TYPES AND SIZE 


5.1 The barrier face covering has been classified in 
two categories: i) single use ii) reusable or multiple 
use. 


5.2 The size of barrier face covering shall be as per 
agreement between the buyer and the seller. The 
design of the product shall have proper fitting over 
the nose, mouth and chin of the wearer which shall 
ensures that the face covering fits closely to the face 
and allow normal activities and movement of head. 


6 WASHING, DRYING AND HANDLING 
INSTRUCTION 


The manufacturer shall provide the washing, drying, 
handling and storage instruction on every packet of 
reusable barrier face covering to ensure proper use 
and care by the consumer. Reusable barrier face 
coverings shall withstand at least 5 washing and 
drying cycles when tested at 40 °C using a normal 
wash procedure as specified in IS 15370. 


7 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 The raw material/fabric used for manufacturing 
the reusable barrier face covering shall meet the 
following requirements (initially and after declared 
wash cycles) as specified in Table 1. 


7.2 Flammability (Optional) 


The barrier face covering shall not present a danger 
for the wearer and shall not be of highly flammable 
nature. The face piece shall not continue to burn 
after removal from the flame when tested in 
accordance with A-5 of IS 9473. 


8 FASTENING MECHANISM 


The barrier face covering shall have suitable device 
for fastening the product for secure use for example, 
laces, elastic strips, fabric tie etc. or any other 


suitable material as agreed between buyer and seller. 
If adjustments to the fit are possible either by design 
or by using additional elements such as back of head 
clips, adjustment instructions shall be included in the 
instructions for use. The product shall meet the 
requirement of attachment strength as specified in 
Table 2. The material used for the fastening 
mechanisms shall not cause harm to skin and shall 
not be abrasive when the product is used. 


9 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


9.1 The barrier face covering shall meet the 
following requirements (initially and after declared 
wash cycles) as specified in Table 2. 


10 MARKING 


10.1 Each piece of barrier face covering shall be 
legibly marked with the following information: 


a) Name of the product; 

b) Manufacturer’s name, initials or trade- 
mark, if any; 

c) Month and year of manufacture or 
Batch/Lot No; 

d) Type of face covering: single use or 
multiple use; 

e) Size; 

f) Use and care instructions; 

g) Warning instruction on the product that’s 
this is neither a PPE nor a medical/surgical 
face mask; 

h) Instruction for safe disposal of the product; 

j) Declared life cycle/wash cycle; 

k) Additional features of flammability (if 
applicable); 

m) Country of origin; and 

n) Any other statutory requirement as 
required by the law in force or as agreed 
between buyer and seller. 


10.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


11 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


11.1 Lot 
All he barrier face covering of the same material and 


size produced under similar conditions of 
manufacture shall constitute a lot. 


IS 19022 : 2023 


Table 1 Colour Fastness and Dimensional Stability Requirements of Raw Material/Fabric (Reusable Face 
Covering Only) 
(Clause 7.1) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, Ref to 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Colour fastness to rubbing: IS/ISO 105- X12 
a) Dry 4 or better 
b) Wet 4 or better 

ii) Colour fastness to perspiration (acidic and alkaline): IS/ISO 105-E04 
a) Colour Change 4 or better 
b) Staining 4 or better 

iii) Colour fastness to washing (AIS): IS/ISO 105-C06 
Colour Change 4 or better 
Staining 4 or better 

iv) Dimensional stability to washing, percent, Max Annex C of IS 16394 

(Length and width) +3 


Table 2 Performance Requirements for Barrier Face Covering 
(Clauses 8 and 9.1) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Tests 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Differential pressure, Pa/cm? < 60 Annex B 
ii) Particulate filtration efficiency > 70 Annex C 
(at 3.0 um), percent 
The sample shall not break before 
Tie and attachment strength, N, 
si Min Single use - 10 
iii) (apply axial tensile force for 10 Multiple use -50 aS Ae eet) 
s) 


11.1.1 Each lot shall be tested separately for 
ascertaining the conformity of the lot. 


11.1.2 Unless otherwise sampling plan is specified 
in the contract or order, the number of barrier face 
covering to be selected from the lot shall depend on 
the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with 
column 2, 3 and 5 of Table 3. 


11.1.3 These barrier face coverings shall be selected 
at random from the lot. For this purpose, reference 
may be made to IS 4905. 


11.2 Number of Tests and Criteria for 


Conformity 


11.2.1 All face coverings selected as per column 3 


IS 19022 :2023 


of Table 3 shall be examined for manufacture, 
workmanship and size (see 4 and 5). 


11.2.1.1 Any face covering failing in one or more of 
the above requirements shall be termed as defective. 
The lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
above requirements, if the total number of defectives 
found in the sample is less than or equal to the 
acceptance number given in column 4 of Table 3. 
Otherwise, the lot shall be rejected. 


11.2.2 Out of the sample already found satisfactory 
according to 11.2.1.1, a sub-sample as per column 5 
of Table 3 shall be taken. This sub-sample shall be 
further tested for the remaining requirements. 


11.2.3 The lot shall be considered as conforming to 


the requirements of the specification, if the total 
number of defective face coverings found in the 
sample (see 11.2.2) is less than or equal to the 
acceptance number as given in column 6 of Table 3. 


12 PACKING 


The barrier face coverings shall be packed securely 
so as to allow normal handling and transport without 
tearing and exposing the contents. Details of the 
packing shall be as agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller. Packaging of the product shall be such as 
to maintain the integrity of the product throughout 
its shelf life. 


Table 3 Number of Barrier Face Covering to be Selected 
(Clauses 11.1.2, 11.2.1, 11.2.1.1, 11.2.2 and 11.2.3) 


DENS: Lot ie Non-Destructive Testing Destructive Testing 
| 
i \ ! i 
No. of Face Covering Acceptance No. of Face Acceptance 
to be Selected Number Covering to be Number 
Selected 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Up to 280 13) 1 8 0 
ii) 281 — 500 20 2 8 0 
iii) 501 — 1200 32 3 13 0 
iv) 1 201 —3 200 50 5 13 0 
v) 3 201 — 10 000 80 7 20 1 


IS No. 


IS 4905 : 2015 


IS 9473 : 2002 


IS 16289 : 2014 


IS 16394 : 2015 


IS 17514 : 2021 


IS 1969 (Part 2) : 
2018 ASO 
13934-2 : 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Random sampling and 
randomization procedures 
(first revision) 


Respiratory protective 
devices — Filtering half 
masks to protect against 
particles — Specification 
(first revision) 


Medical textiles — Surgical 
face mask — Specification 


Textiles — Woven shirting 
made of cotton, man-made 
fibres/filaments and their 
blend — Specification 


Reusable sanitary 
pad/sanitary napkin/period 
panties — Specification 


Textiles — Tensile 
properties of fabric's: Part 2 
Determination of maximum 


IS No. 


IS 15370 : 2020 
/ISO 6330 : 2012 


IS/ISO 105-C06 
:2010 


IS/ISO 105-E04 : 
2013 


IS/ISO 105-X12 
: 2016 


IS 19022 : 2023 


Title 


force using the grab method 
(fourth revision) 


Textiles — Domestic 
washing and drying 
procedures for textile testing 
(first revision) 


Textiles — Tests for colour 
fastness: Part C06 Colour 
fastness to domestic and 
commercial laundering (first 
revision) 


Textiles — Tests for colour 
fastness: Part E04 Colour 
fastness to perspiration (first 
revision) 


Textiles — Tests for colour 
fastness: Part X12 Colour 
fastness to rubbing (first 
revision) 


IS 19022 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
[(Clause 9.1, Table 2, SI No. ul 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF BREATHABILITY (DIFFERENTIAL PRESSURE) 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


A device which measures the pressure differential 
required to draw air through a measured surface area 
at a constant air flow rate is used to measure the air 
exchange pressure of the face covering material, as 
shown in Fig.1. Water-filled manometers (Mi and 
M2) are used to measure the pressure differential. A 
flow meter is used for measurement of the air flow. 
An electric vacuum pump draws air through the 
apparatus and a needle valve is used to adjust the air 
flow rate. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 Flow Meter, capable of measuring an air 
flow of 8 litre/min. 


B-2.2 Manometers, M1 and M2. 
B-2.3 Electric Vacuum Pump 


B-2.4 Valve 


B-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


Test specimens shall be complete face covering or 
shall be cut from face coverings. Each specimen 
shall be able to provide five different circular test 
areas of 2.5 cm in diameter. The number of 
specimens that shall be tested shall be five. 


B-4 PROCEDURE 


B-4.1 The test specimen is placed across the 2.5 


1 Air inlet 

2 Flow meter 

3 Manometer Mi 
4 Filter material 


cm diameter orifice (total area 4.9 cm2) and 
clamped into place so that the tested area of the 
specimen will be in line and across the flow of air. 


B-4.2 The pump is started and the flow of air 
adjusted to 8 litre/min. 


B-4.3 The manometers Mi and Mb) are read and 
recorded. 


B-4.4 The procedure described in steps B-4.1 
through B-4.3 is carried out on five different areas 
of the face covering and the readings averaged. 


B-5 CALCULATION OF DIFFERENTIAL 
PRESSURE 


For each test specimen, calculate the differential 
pressure, A P as follows: 


A P = (Xm: - Xm2)/4.9 
where 
Xm, = water pressure, in mm, manometer 1, 
mean of five test areas, low pressure side of the 
material; 
Xm = water pressure, in mm, manometer 2, 
mean of five test areas, high pressure side of the 
material; 


4.9 = area of the test material, in cm”; and 


A P = pressure differential per cm? of test 
material expressed as mm of water. 


5 Monometer M2 
6 Valve 
7 Vacuum pump 


FIG. 1 APPARATUS FOR MEASURING AIR RESISTANCE 


B-6 TEST REPORT 


The test report shall include the following 
information: 


IS 19022 : 2023 


a) Flow rate during testing; and 
b) Differential pressure for each test specimen. 


ANNEX C 
[(Clause 9.1, Table 2, SI No. ui 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF PARTICULATE FILTERATION 
EFFICIENCY 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


Filtered and dry air is passed through an atomizer to 
produce an aerosol containing suspended latex 
spheres. This aerosol is then passed through a charge 
neutralizer. The aerosol is then mixed and diluted 
with additional pre-conditioned air to produce a 
stable, neutralized and dried aerosol of latex spheres 
to be used in the efficiency test. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


Aerosol test system consisting of clean, dry 
compressed air supply, high-efficiency particulate 
air (HEPA) filters, aerosol generator capable to 
generate aerosol size of 3.0 microns, charge 
neutralizer, humidifier, test filter holder and duct 
assembly, pressure drop measuring device, air flow 
rate measuring device, temperature and humidity 
detectors and optical particle counters. 


C-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


C-3.1 Prior to test, the specimens shall be 
conditioned to moisture equilibrium in the standard 
atmosphere of temperature 27 °C + 2 °C and relative 
humidity of 65 percent + 2 percent. When the test 
specimens have been exposed to standard 
atmosphere for at least 6 h in such a way to expose 
as far as possible, all portions of the specimens to the 
atmosphere, they shall be deemed to have reached 
moisture equilibrium. 


C-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


C-4.1 Set main airflow, dilution airflow and aerosol 
generator airflow to test conditions. Establish 
airflow controls at required test face velocities as to 
have air dilution (drying) for aerosol generation of 2 
: 1 or greater. Purge main airflow for 10 min to 15 
min. Warm up optical particle counter (OPC) for 15 
min to 30 min. After OPC warm up, check built in 
calibration signal or OPC output signal on an 
oscilloscope for stable gain on photo-multiplier tube 
or other optical detectors. Switch the OPC into main 
airflow and balance OPC airflow against the main 
airflow. Observe OPC count data. 


C-4.2 Set-up the aerosol generator with a nominal 
volume of the distilled water to be used in the latex 
dilutions (preferably 1 : 1 000 or 1 : 10 000) capable 
of generating 10 000 to 15 000 particles at 28.3 litre 
per minute (LPM). Without a material specimen in 
the test system, establish the main system airflow 
and the OPC sampling airflow for the upstream 
sampling probe. Sample the upstream and 
downstream airflow for 1 min each. Verify complete 
drying of the aerosol droplets by comparing these 
counts to count obtained in C-4.1. Run this drying 
test for 1 h, sampling every 15 min for upstream and 
downstream counting and record aerosol stability 
and system relative humidity. Measure the water 
consumption of the aerosol generator. Record any 
dilution airflow and the required air pressure for the 
aerosol generator. 


C-4.3 Fill the aerosol generator with the desired 
dilution of latex suspension. Without a filter media 
sample in the test specimen, close the system and 
establish the required system airflows. Stabilize the 
system airflow with the aerosol suspension for 
approximately 5 min, then begin successive 1 min 
upstream and downstream counts for 15 min or 
until reproducible counts are established. Verify that 
counting is within a 10 percent coincidence of the 
OPC. 


C-4.4 Install the material specimen in the test system 
and re-establish the required airflows. Monitor the 
OPC airflow and adjust for the added material 
specimen on the sample flow. Sample and record the 
upstream and downstream aerosol counts for a 
minimum of 5 counts at each position using a | min 
sampling time. If the downstream count is less than 
100, extend the test until 100 counts are obtained. 
However do not count longer than 5 min to avoid the 
loading the specimen. 


C-4.5 Monitor the upstream counts; if these counts 
fall outside 100 percent + 1 percent penetration 
average with a coefficient of variation of 3 percent, 
stop the test and check the system for aerosol 
generation instability. 


IS 19022 : 2023 


C-5 CALCULATION following definition: 
Average the upstream counts and the downstream Efficiency = 1 — (average downstream counts) 
counts, then calculate the decimal efficiency by the (average upstream counts) 


IS 19022 : 2023 
ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications, TXD 36 


Organization 
The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore 


3 M India Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Indian Medical Devices (AiMeD), New Delhi 


All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Cologenesis Healthcare Pvt Ltd, Salem 


Defence Research & Development Establishment (DRDE), 


Gwalior 


DGAFMS, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi. 


DGQA (Ministry of Defence), New Delhi 


Dima Products, Mumbai 


Director General of Health Services, New Delhi 


Dispoline India Private Limited, Bangalore 

Dr. Sabharwals Manufacturing Labs Pvt Ltd, Panchkula 

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry, 
New Delhi 

Ginni Filaments Limited, Noida 


Govt Medical College & ESI Hospital, Coimbatore 


Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Johnson & Johnson Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


DR PRAKASH VASUDEVAN (Chairperson) 


SHRI KULVEEN SINGH BALI 
SHRIMATI PRABHA HEGDE (Alternate) 


DR G. D. AGARWAL 
SHRI JITENDRA SACHCHADE (Alternate) 


DR VIJAYDEEP SIDDHARTH 
DR ANOOP DAGA (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RITIKA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRIR KRISHNAKUMAR 
SHRI K. RAMPRASAD (Alternate) 


DR VIKAS B. THAKRE 
SHRI SURAJ BHARATI (Alternate) 


COL RAMESH CHANDRA 
SURG LT CDR KOTIAN V. GOPAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SENTHIL KUMAR 
SHRI ARNAB DAS (Alternate) 


SHRI NIRAV MEHTA 


DR NARESH PANCHAL 
DR B. S. CHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT MARWAH 


SHRI MANISH SABHARWAL 
SHRI DHRUV SABHARWAL (Alternate) 


DR SANJIIV REHLAN 
Ms TULSI (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMOD SHARMA 


DR N. TAMILSELVEN 
DR K. KULENDAIVELU (Alternate) 


DR CHANDRA SHEKHAR 


PROF ASHWINI AGARWAL 
PROF BIPIN KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ANUP RAKSHIT 
SHRI MAHESH KUDAV (Alternate) 


MS ROOCHA KHEDKAR 


IS 19022 : 2023 


KOB Medical Textiles Pvt Ltd, Palladam 


Livinguard Technologies Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


Medline Healthcare Industries Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Ministry of Textiles (NTTM), New Delhi 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Nobel Hygiene, Mumbai 


Office of the Drug Controller (CDSCO), Delhi 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


PGIMER, Chandigarh 


Procter and Gamble Co., Mumbai 


Surgicotfab Textile Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 

The Pad Project (NGO) India, New Delhi 

The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore 

The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General (TXD) 


SHRI ARUN BUCHADE 
SHRI T. BALAJI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP NIKAM 
SHRI VIRENDER MADIYAR (Alternate) 


DR PAWANINDRA LAL 
DR BHARTI WADHWA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANTHONY DCOSTA 
SHRI DHAVAL GHUGE (Alternate) 


DR MUKESH KUMAR SINHA 


DR SANJAY YADAV 
DR SHANKAR G. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMAL JOHARI 
SHRI JOY DEVASSY (Alternate) 


DR RAVIKANT SHARMA 
SHRI ARVIND HIWALE (Alternate) 


SHRI SIVAKUMAR S. 
SHRI NARROTAM KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ ARORA 


SHRI PRASHANT JADHAV 
SHRI GIRISH PARHATE (Alternate) 


SHRI PARESH PATEL 


SHRI KARTIKEYAN DHANDA 
DR P. RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ARUNA APTE 
SHRIMATI TANYA MAHAJAN 


SHRI S. SIVAKUMAR 
DR E. SANTHINI (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI S. S. DONGRE (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. GUPTA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (TEXTILES) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex —officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DHARMBEER 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(TEXTILES), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 36 (19626) . 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


