IS 11315 ( Part 12)

: 1992

(Reaffirmed 2001)

QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIESIN ROCK MASSMETHODS
PART 12 DRILL CORE STUDY

UDC 624'121 : 550'347'4 : 620'191

0 BIS 1992

-BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Croup 4 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI
..b

Augusz 1992

Rock

Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

CED 48

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. In view ofthe advancement in the Field of Rock Mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of the rocks and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses in particular those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontined, with the discontinuities largely determining It is therefore essential that structure of a rock mass and the nature of the mechanical behaviour. its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified descriptions of rock mass and discontinuities, and it may be possible in design engineering structures in rock with a minimum of expensive in-&u testing. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak The ten bedding planes, weak schistocity planes, weakness zones. shear zones and faults. parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number of sets, and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. This standard
of discontinuities

This standard Following

( Part 12 ) is one of the series of standards published on the quantitative description in rock mass. This covers description of discontinuities from drill core study. is based on suggested method of International Society of Rock Mechanics. on core drilling and core study have also been published information by the Bureau: and core description in

standards

IS 4464 : 1985 Code of practice for presentation of drilling foundation investigation (first revision ). IS 5313 : 1980 Guide for core drilling observations

(first revision).

IS 11315 ( Part 12 ) : 1992

Indian Standard QUANTTTATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS METHODS
PART 1 SCOPE 1.1 The standard covers the method of quantitative description of discontinuities from drill core study. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian adjuncts to this standard:
IS No.

12

DRILL

CORE

STUDY during remain

zone marked `F' in Fig. 1, is not recovered drilling the main defect of the rock will unassessed.

Standards

are necessary

Title

5529 (Part l),: 1985 5529 (Part 2) : 1985 11315 (Part 4) : 1987 11315 (Part 5) : 1987

Code of practice for in-situ permeability test: Part 1 Test in overburden @first revision)
Code of practice for in-situ permeability test: Part 2 Test in Bedrock (first revision)

Method for the quantitative description of discontinuities in rock mass: Part 4 Roughness Method for the quantitative description of discontinuities in rock mass: Part 5 Wall strength

4.2 For quantitative descriptions of Ihe discontinuities NX dia (54 mm) size cores shall be used. Recovery of high percentage of cores, irrespective of the nature of rock (hard, soft or highly fractured) depends on the techniques of drilling, applied pressure and the efficiency level of the drilling personnel. Generally good core recovery may be assured by adopting correct drilling techniques and special coring equipment. In this connection the use of double or triple tube core barrel with bottom discharge bits would be found useful in ensuring the maximum possible core recovery in soft rock or fractured hard rock. Special drilling techniques in such cases may call for short runs of drilling and judicious control of water supply and speed of drilling. Core recovery may be ruined by drilling too fast, over drilling a run, or dropping core and grinding it, or not pulling out the tools when the barrel is jammed and thereby grinding the core. This also damages the bit. Vibration in the drill string causes poor core recovery, diamond losses in bits and shells, wear and tear on drills and loss of footage. 4.3 Colour photographs provide a useful ient method of recording, the appearance are of considerable value as a permanent means of rapid reference. The photograph box should incorporate a suitable metric with the entire length of the box. and convenof cores and record land of each core scale along

Method for the quantitative 11315 (Part 10) : 1987 description of discontinuities in rock mass: Part 10 Block size Method for the quantitative 11315 (Part 11) : 1985 description of discontinuities in rock mass: Part 11 Core recovery and rock quality 11358 : 1987 Glossary of terms and symbols applicable to rock mechanics

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definition terms given in IS 11358 : 1987 shall apply. 4 GENERAL 4.1 Very high (nearly cent percent) core recovery is necessary for accurate quantitative assessment of the discontinuity in a rock mass. This fact is illustrated by Fig. 1, 2 and 3 showing nearly cent percent core recovery in all the three drill holes. Suppose there is no core recovery for the zone `X' (extremely broken cores) and `Y' (shattered cores) in Fig. 2 and 3 respective!y and if quantitative measurements are done only on the remaining portions of cores (with few discontinuities), it will show a different picture. Even if the 1 of

4.4 The drill core can first be described by means of the following parameters : total appearance core recovery (R), discontinuity frequency (F), and rock quality designation (RQD). However, these patameten alone do not usually provide sufficient information for design purposes. 4.5 Drill cores (and drill holes) represent line samples of the rock mass. Structural features such as discontinuity orientation, spacing and the number of sets camlot normally be adequately studied from one hole. 4.6 Carefully planned and executed core drilling followed by detailed core description and hole inspection can provide approximate information about many of the ten specific rock mass parameters. 4.7 Attitudes of the discontinuities in quantitative terms with reference the drill core. In case the&ill hole corrections are necessary in the nyay be measured to the long axis of is inclined, some measured values

IS 11315( Part 12 ) : 1992 depending upon the inclination of the drill holes or prior knowledge of the attitudes of the discontinuity from rock outcrops. 4.8 Measuring tape of at least 3 m length calibrated in mm divisions and protractor or similar or similar scale shall be used for measuring lengths and angles between the core axis and the discontinuities. 4.9 Measurements in drill holes for collecting information on the discontinuities from drill core informations, require the use of borehole periscope, camera and TV camera. Water level measurements and water percolation tests conducted at regnlar intervals in the drill hole also provide proper information of the nature and intensity of discontinuity at depths. 5 PROCEDURE 5.1 At the beginning, the major geological features like the rock types, lithological boundaries and the geological structures should be examined. The details of the discontinuity in each run and in each rock type may then be carefully recorded. The nature of the discontinuity should also be identified. 5.2 Total core recovery (R) defined as the summed length of all pieces of recovered core expressed as a percentage of length drilled should be accurately measured. When the core is highly fragmented the length of such portions is estimated by assembling the fragments and estimating the length of core that the fragments appear to represent [see IS 11315 (Part 11) : 19851. 5.2.1 The cores in the box should be kept with proper care so that it represents the actual order of recording with reference to depths. Cores of each run should be kept separately using wooden blocks. The drill cores thus arranged in the core boxes should not be disturbed during transportation or by routi handling. 5.3 Frequency (F) defined as the number of natural discontinuities intersecting a unit length of recovered core, should be counted for each metre of core. The procedure given in 5.4.1.1 may be followed to differentiate natura-1 discontinuity from artificial one. 5.4 Rock quality designation (RQD) is a modified core recovery percentage in which all the pieces of sound core over 10 cm long are Gounted as recovery, and are expressed as a percentage of the length drilled. The smaller pieces resulting from closer jointing, faulting or weathering are discounted [see IS 11315 (Part 11) : 19851. 5.4.1 RQD values should be determined for variable rather than fixed lengths ofcore run. Values of individual beds, structural domains, weakness zones, etc, should therefore be logged separately, so as to indicate any inherent variability, and provide a more accurate picture of the location and width of zones with low or zero RQD values. 2 5.4.1.1 When estimating frequency or RQD from drill core it is necessary to discount artificial breaks (fractures) caused by the drilling process, or handling when fitting-core into the core boxes. The following-criteria are suggested:

a) b)

A rough brittle surface with fresh cleavage planes in individual rock/minerals indicates an artificial fracture. A generally smooth or somewhat weathered surface with soft coating or infilling materials such as talc, gypsum, chlorite, mica or calcite obviously indicates a natural discontinuity. In rocks showing well developed foliation, schistosity, cleavage or thin bedding theoores may split easily during drilling or by wrong handling. It may be difficult to distinguish between natural discontinuities and artificial fractures. It is suggested that the questionable breaks should be counted as natural features, to be on the conservative side. Depending upon the drilling equipment and nature of rock formation part of the length of core being drilled may occassionally rotate with the inner barrels in such a way that grinding of the surfaces of discontinuities and fractures OGCUIS. In weak rock types it may be very difficult to decide if the resultingrounded surface represent natural or artificial features. When in doubt the conservative assu<uption should be made to assume that they -are natural. It may be useful to keep a separate record of the frequency of artificial fractures (and associated lower RQD) for assessing the possible influence or blasting on the weaker sedimentary and foliated or schistose metamorphic rocks.

4

4

4

5.4.1.2 ._.The degree of fracturing of the core during the drilling process may be partly a function of core diameter in the weaker rock types. As suggested in 4.2, NX dia (54 mm) cores should be drilled to minimise fracturing. Smaller dia like BX (41 mm) or AX (29 mm) causes more fractures and more core loss. 5.4.1.3 The different types of measurements for core lengths have been illustrated in Fig. 4. A tip to tip measurement, `X' may give double counting. The measure `Y' which includes the total length of the full surface core `Z' and half of the splitted portion may be adopted so that the total core recovery for all the~pieces together is equal to the total recovery of the run. Then length, `Z' alone may be considered for a conservative estimate. 5.4.1.4 The results of core logging (frequency and RQD), can be time dependent and moisture content dependent in the case of certain varieties of shales and mudstones having relatively weakly developed diagenetic bonds and containing sulphide minerals. A frequent problem is `discing', in which an initially intact core separates into discs on incipient places

IS 11315( Part 12 ) : 1992 after exposure to nature. The phenomena are experienced in several different forms as follows: been illustrated in Fig. 5. In generallow RQD indicates high fracture frequency or close spacing of discontinuities and if high order seepage/permeability is observed at same depth in the water injection test, it is indicative of open nature of fracture apertures (see Fig. 5). 6 ORIENTATION 6.1 Effortshould~be made to log the apparent orientation of discontinuities intersecting the core, using a protractor to measure the acute angles of intersections (0) relative to core axis (0 2 SO). If the relevant hole is vertical the angles (900- 9) will represent the true dip of the discontinuities, but without orientated core the dip direction will remain unknown. 6.2 If two or more non-parallel drill holes have been drilled in a rock mass where there are recognisable markers such as bedding or foliation, the dip direction and dip of these features canbe deduced using graphical techniques. But it may not be possible to measure true dips of all the fractures by this technique. 6.3 If existing surface mapping has already indicated the approximate orientation of certain joint sets, then carefully orientated drill holes can be used to check the orientation of these features at depth. In the case of anticipated vertical and horizontal jointing it is helpful to drill steeply inclined holes (that is, 60") in preference to 45O, so that the differently orientated sets can be recognised during core logging by their different core intersection angles. 6.4 The true orientation of discontinuities (dip direction and dip) may be obtained from a single drill core if orientation devices are employed during the~drilling process, several methods are available:

a) Stress

relief cracking (and swelling) by the initially rapid release of strain energy in cores recovered from areas of high stress, especially in the case of shally rocks. Dehydration cracking experienced in the weaker mudstones and shales under atmospheric condition, may reduce RQD from 100 percent to 0 percent. Slaking cracking experienced by some of the weaker mudstones and shales when subjected to wetting.

b)

4

5.4.1.5 ,The phenomena described in 5.4.1.4 make core logging of frequency and RQD unreliable. Whenever such conditions are anticipated core should be logged by an engineering geologist. An added advantage is that the engineering geologist can perform mechanical index tests such as the point load-or Schmidt hammer test, while the core is still in a saturated state. 5.5 Subsequent to the general procedure for logging total core recovery (R), frequency (F), and rockquality designation (RQD), the following supplementary procedures are suggested for determining as much quantitative data as possible concerning the following ten parameters: a) Orientation, b) Spacing, c) Persistence, d) Roughness, e) Wall strength, f) Aperture, g) Filling, h) Seepage, j) Number of sets, and k) Block size 5.6 Of the above parameters mentioned in 5.5, spacing, roughness, wall strength and number of sets are measurable from the drill cores. The filling may be examined if the filled materials are recovered by the hole or if the recovery of the drill cores is cent percent as illustrated in Fig. 1 and 3. The other paramters like orientation, persistence, aperture, seepage and block size are best studied fromthe rock outcrops or in drift, adit or tunnel rocks; but use of borehole periscope, borehole camera or TV camera and water injection tests help measurement of these parameters in drill cores or in drill holes. 5.7 There is distinct relation of seepage/permeability with apertures. It is suggested to study results of water percolation tests in consideration of the core recovery percentage, RQD, spacing and frequency of discontinuities. This will help to understand the openness of the apertures, seepage, intensity and persistence of the discontinuity at depth in the drill holes. This fact has 3

a)

Orientation of the core based on the measured orientationineachrun(Cracliusmethod). This method works well if adjacent pieces of core can be matched. Zones of core loss and perpendicularly intersected discontinuities reduce the effectiveness of the method locally. Orientation of the core by means of a hardened steel groove scriber and compass photo device. Integral sampling method in which the cores that are recovered have previously been reinforced with a grouted bar whose azimuth is known from positioning rods. The reinforcing bar is co-axially covered with a larger diameter coring crown.

b)

4

6.5 The orientation of discontinuities (dip direction and dip) may be obtained by drill hole inspection using special television cameras and periscopes, TV cameras may be oriented such that a discontinuity plane shows as a straight line on the CRT screen. The dip direction and dip may be readily determined. Cameras may be used to depths of 400 m, though generally 150 metres is seldom exceeded due to

IS 11315 (Part

12 ) : 1992

water pressure problems. Minimum cameras is generally 76 mm.

hole size for the

6.6 The borehole periscope may be used in smaller holes, but due to distortion of the optical path the depth is usually limited to about 30 m. 7 SPACING 7.1 In rock with marked foliation or bedding features it should be possible to match the individual core pieces such that the actual spacing of obliquely intersected foliation joints, bedding joints or other regular intersecting joint sets may be estimated. The spacing (S) will depend on the length (L) measured along the core axis between~adjacent natural discontinuities of one set, and the acute angle (0) that these features subtend with the core axis. Thus: S = L sin 0 7.2 The angles (0) between the core axis and the individual joints of a given set will be inherently less reliable than these recorded from observations of rock exposures due to the possibility ofjoint undulation and roughness. 7.3 When a joint set is intersected perpendicularly by the drill hole, spacing can obviously be measured directlysince (S) is equal to (L). Thus a drill hole will measure accurately the spacings of horizontal discontinuities. 7.4 When the rock has no consistent or clear marker features, such as foliation or bedding, the estimation of spacing for any given set of joints will depend on the degree to which the core pieces can be matched. Zones of core loss will clearly frustrate this objective. However, if the joints that intersect the core have markedly different core intersection angles (0) and/or markedly different surface features (that is, mineral coatings, roughness) it may be possible to estimate the relevant spacings in a sufficient number of places along the core to make the exercise worthwhile. 7.5 Borehole viewing devices that may be oriented (Periscope, TV Camera) shall clearly increase the reliability of spacing measurement. 8 PERSISTENCE 8.1 Unless holes are drilled in a very closely space pattern, as may be the case for operations such as grout curtain injection, it shall usually not be possible to access the persistence from drill core or drill hole observations. If closely spaced holes are available, very carefnl correlation of discontinuities shall be required before any reliable conclusions is drawn concerning the persistence of a given discontinuity or set. But persistence of certain major discontinuities like fault or shear zones or a contact of two rock units may be traced from the cores of several drill holes of the same locality. 9 ROUGHNESS 9.1 Gross features of discontinuity wall roughness and corresponding full scale shear strength may not 4

obviously-be assessed by means of drill core along. However, it is usuallypossible to assign to a surface some degree of planarity (planer, curved, irregular) and suggested procedure is broadly consistent with the roughness description in IS 11315 (Part 4) : 1987. 9.2 Roughness in core piece may be well studied from the surface of the natural fractures by visual observations and comparison with the standard chart (forexample, Barton's chart) to measure the roughness by fixed number. 9.3 Drill hole inspection with periscope or TV cameras shall not generally provide an improved picture of roughness unless the rock type is so weak and/or the drilling so poorly performed that grinding of the core pieces has occurred.
10 WALL

STRENGTH

10.1 The individual methods for describing wall strength like weathering grade of rock mass, weathering grade of rock material, manual index tests and Schmidt hammer test in accordance with IS 11315 (Part 5) : 1987 may also be applied to the description of drill core. 10.2 Since the drill core provides a readymade line samples of rock mass, such features as the depth of penetration of weathering into the discontinuity walls can be directly observed and therefore decribed quite accurately. Furthermore, the drill core pr J.fides readymade samples for mechanical testing (that is, Schmidt hammer testing of rigidly clamped core pieces for describing wall strength or point load testing across the core diameter for describing material strength). Logging the point load strength index (I,) simultneousy with recovery of the core from the core barrels provide reliable estimates of in-situ strength. 10.3 When assessing wall strength, care should be taken to check if the relevant core pieces fit together. Lack of fit may indicate lost filling material, shear displacement, or partial grinding away of strongly weathered walls during the drilling process. 11 APERTURE
11.1 The aperture of discontinuities are not preserved in rock cores and as such this parameter is not possible to measure unless undisturbed samples are available which will require special sampling techniques.

11.2 Drill hole inspection using TV cameras or periscopes should be successful in distinguishing between the above tight and open categories, although it is unlikely that the apertures of the finest joints can be measured accurately. From the point of view of seepage potential the open discontinuities are most important, so this limitation should be important where highly permeable rock masses are concerned. Methods are available for estimating the theoretical smooth wall apertures of

IS 11315 ( Part waterconductingdiscontinuities by statistical analysis of water injection tests. However, the real apertures may be several times the theoretical smooth wall apertures due to wall roughness and tartuesity effects. 11.3 The most important factor for design purposes is the nature of aperture with respect to its openness. The water injection test results if considered with other factors like RQD and fracture frequency [as discussed in 5.7 and illustrated in Fig. 5) may be used to assess whether the apertures arc open or tight. 12 FILLING

12 ) : 1992

tests [see IS 5529 (Part 2) : 19851 tracer tests, piezometer measurements) for estimating rock mass permeability, and for estimating the hydraulic conductivity of individual discontinuities also provide estimate of seepage along set of discontinuities. The logging and presentation of any available Lugeon values give important supplementary data, which may. be presented as a log, parallel with that for total core recovery frequency and RQD, etc (see Fig. 5). 14 NUMBER OF SETS

12.1 Unless the integral sampling method or best quality drilling equipment is used (that is, double or triple tube core barrels, split inner tubes, and controlled flushing the softer filling materials are unlikely to be recovered in significant amounts. Possibly only traces of clay minerals shall be visible on the discontinuity walls sampled by conventional drill core. Both traces and larger amount of recovered filling should be described as to width, minerology and strength. The interpretative nature of these descriptions should be made clear. 12.2 Where total core recovery is less than 100 percent and is suspected that significant amounts of filling or weathered material has been lost in the drilling process attempts should be made to assess the thickness, location and orientation of the suspected filled zones. The drillers log describing the rate of advance and water loss, type of cutting and colour of flushing fluid may be invaluable here. 12.3 The uncertainties surrounding the parameter filling and its extreme importance where deformation, stability and water seepage are concerned, strongly justify the use of special recovery techniques and the use of borehole viewing techniques. 13 SEEPAGE 13.1 Observations of drill core may provide indirect evidence of water seepage levels. Reddish-brown iron (Fe3+) staining usually indicates the zone of rock mass that lies above the mean ground water level. Oxidation in discontinuity walls lying beneath the ground water level may also occur, but at a greatly reduced rate. Frequently the strongest iron staining is found in the zone where the ground water level commonly fluctuates. 13.2 Drill holes obviously provide the means of checking ground water levels directly using simple battery operated electrical contact devices which are lowered into the holes. Additional information on standing water levels should be obtained from the drillers log for each drill hole. Drill hole walls may be surveyed for seepage horizons using periscopes and TV cameras. 13.3 Testing performed in drill holes that is falling head test [see IS 5529 (Part 1) :1985], Lugeon Packer 5

14.1 The amount of information obtainable from drill core and drill hole observation will obviously depend on the orientation of the holes relative to the joint spacings. If existing surfaces mapping has already indicated the approximate orientation of certain discontinuity sets, then carefully oriented holes may be used to check the number of sets at depth. Drill core observation shall be easier if holes are. drilled to intersect the different sets at recognisably different angles. Usually at least two non-parallel~holes shall be required. 14.2 The number of sets observed at the surface is likely to be more than the number observed at depth. Comparison of surface observations with tunnel excavations suggests that this is not just due to the limitations of drill hole sampling. 15 BLOCK SIZE

15.1 The term block size is a compnsitc description of rock mass which is influenced by spacing, number of sets, persistence and orientation. A log of block size produced from observations of rock core may clearly only give an approximate picture of the true block size from drill core. It is desirable to select by eye several typical pieces of core and take their average dimensions (+ 10 percent). Each rock unit or domain may be assesse.d in this way. If the relevant hole is orientated such that all sets present are intersected (that is, a diagonal hole in the case of a cubic joint system) then these average core pieces shall roughly represent the block size index (I,) as defined in IS 1131.5 (Part 10) : 1987. A depth log showing the variation of this index may be very useful supplement to drill core description. 16 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS

16.1 Core log format should be based on the specific requirements of the rock engineering project for which the core study is being done. Following should be used as check list, so that relevant information is included, but irrelevant data excluded. 16.2 The following information should generally hc furnished. This information may be written at the top of the log sheet/chart:

a) b)

Name of the Project. Drill hole No. Degree of inclination of the hole with direction in case of inclined hole.

c>

IS 11315( Part 12 ) : 1992

)EPTH (ml

ROCK TYPE

0

RECOVERY LO 60 20 I

% 80 I

100 II

6

RQ LO 20 I 1

0 60 II

60

100 1

FRACTURE FREQuECY ,519

), 50 190

WATER LOSS ILUGEON) ( $0 2,o 3p ql

1

_I

INDEX I;\;:tl GNE1S.s m]
ACLINOLtTE BIOLITE SCHIST jzj TALC SCHIS

REPRESFNTA~ON OF RICKTYPE WITH TRACE OFFOLIATION DIP, FIG. 5 A DIAGRAMMA~C CORE RECOVERY, RQD, FRAUWRE FREQUENCY AND WATER TRANSMITTAESILIT~ INLUGEONS THROUGH THE FRACT~RES/DISCONTINUTIES INROCKS OF `IHE DRILL HOLE ATDIFFERENT DEPTHS

8

Standard

Mark

Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian and Regulations made-thereunder. The Standard Mark eon . products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the USC of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards, The use of the Standard
Standards Acr. 1986 and the Rules

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the hreau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development. -of, t_b activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and atten+ to connect:: matters in the country. .Copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details. such as symbols and sizes, type or grade Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. designations.
Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference :
Dot : No. CED 48 ( 4284 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I 10002 Telephoner : 331 01 31. 331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eartern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northorn : SC0 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanntha ( Common to all ~Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 37 85 61, 37 86 62

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

53 38 43, 53 16 40, 1 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 04 42, { 235 15 19, 235 23 15 612 92 95, I 632 78 91, 632 78 58, 632 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATOKE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printradc. New Delhi, India

