IRRI HAF IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


UM 2 Sarat Weert SUTURA ATA 
( TET IRIETTT ) 


General Requirements for Silos 
for Grain Storage 


Part 2 Grain Handling Equipment and Accessories 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 55.220; 67.060 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 4 


Foodgrains, Allied products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Foodgrains, Allied products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Food and Agriculture Divisional Council. 


Handling and storage of grain in structures like silos requires the use of mechanical and electrical equipment, such 
as elevators and conveyors and accessories, like drying equipment, aeration equipment and fumigation pumps. 
The mechanical and electrical equipment is generally housed in a head house attached to a silo. Therefore, this 
standard, covering the requirements for mechanical and electrical equipment and accessories generally used for 
handling of grain in silo, has been formulated to assist the planning and construction of silos. It is felt that such a 
readily available guide would expedite the execution of various silo projects in the country. 


This standard was originally published in 1969 and this revision is being taken up to update the provisions 
given in the standard in view of the latest practices being followed in this area. This standard is a necessary 
adjunct to IS 5503 (Part 1) ‘General requirements for silos for grain storage: Part 1 Construction requirements”. 


This standard is not intended to restrict the initiative and ingenuity of design and construction engineers. 


In this standard, it has been assumed that the work of installation of various equipment would be according to the 
prevalent codes for installation and, therefore, the engineering practices ordinarily observed in the installation if 
these equipment have not been covered. However, wherever it has been considered desirable to elaborate on any 
such practices, care has been taken to include such elaboration in this standard. 


The Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SILOS 
FOR GRAIN STORAGE 


PART 2 GRAIN HANDLING EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 


( First Revision ) 
1 SCOPE IS No. Title 
This standard (Part 2) deals with the important types 5503 (Part 1) : General requirements for 
of mechanical and electrical equipment and accessories 1969 ` silos for grain storage: Part 1 


used in a silo for handling of grain in bulk. It also 
prescribes safety precautions to prevent dust explosions 
and to minimize fire-hazards. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
1641 : 2013 


Title 


Fire safety of buildings 
(general): General principles of 
fire grading and classification — 
Code of practice (second 
revision) 


1891 (Part 1): 
1994 


Conveyor and elevator textile 
belting — Specification: Part 1 
General purpose belting (fourth 
revision) 


2190 : 2010 Selection, installation and 
maintenance of first-aid fire 
extinguishers — Code of 


practice (fourth revision) 


2925 : 1984 Specification for industrial 


safety helmets (second revision) 


3594 : 1991 Code of practice for fire safety 
of industrial buildings: General 
storage and warehousing 
including cold storages (first 


revision) 


4240 : 1984 Glossary of conveyor terms and 


definitions (first revision) 


Construction requirements 


IS/IEC 62305-3: Protection against lightning: 


2010 Part 3 Physical damage to 
structures and life hazard 
IS/TEC 62305-4: Protection against lightning: 
2010 Part 4 Electrical and electronic 
systems within structures 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terminology 
given in IS 5503 (Part 1), IS 4240 and the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Aeration — A process by which a small quantity 
of air under pressure is moved through grain. 


3.2 Drying — A process by which moisture content 
of grains is reduced. 


4 GRAIN HANDLING EQUIPMENT 


4.0 General — Hoppers, conveyors and elevators form 
an important unit for receipt, conveying, storage and 
issue of grains in a silo. The hoppers feed the grain by 
direct spouting or through conveyors to elevators, which 
carry the grain to automatic cleaning and weighing 
machines and finally to the conveyor in the distribution 
gallery, where the grain is diverted to various bins. 


4.1 Choice of conveyors — There are various types 
of conveyors in use, common among them being 
belt, chain, screw and pneumatic type conveyors. The 
choice of conveyors depends upon the type of grain 
to be handled in bulk, type of duty to be performed, 
distance to be conveyed, handling capacity required, 
availability of space, number and position of charging 
and discharging points, and the capital and operating 
costs. These factors are discussed in the following 
clauses. 


IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 


4.1.1 Type of Duty Performed — All type of 
conveyors, such as belt, screw, chain, or pneumatic 
may be used for horizontal straight conveying. The 
belt conveyor may be worked up to an inclination of 
15° to the horizontal. The screw conveyor may be 
worked at an inclination, but the capacity would be 
reduced proportionately to the degree of inclination; 
an inclination at 15° and 25° may reduce the capacity 
to 70 and 40 percent, respectively. For stiff inclination 
the helix should have a short pitch and the through may 
be made tubular. Chain designed may be worked at 
any inclination and even in vertical positions restricted 
to 45°. The pneumatic conveyor may be worked for 
horizontal, vertical and inclined conveying. Where 
permanent installations of conveyors. The drive may 
be by electric motor or by petrol or diesel engine, if 
electricity is not available. 


4.1.2 Distance to be Conveyed — Belt conveyors 
may be employed for conveying on long distances. 
Screw conveyors may be restricted to distances up to 
30 m to 40 m. In case of the chain conveyors, the 
distance depends upon the tensile strength of the 
chain, and is normally less than 30 m. The capacity 
of pneumatic conveyors falls rapidly with increase in 
distance, and its use for distances over 50 m should be 
carefully considered. 


4.1.3 Handling Capacity Required — For small 
handling capacities up to about 80 tonnes per hour, 
screw conveyors may be used. For high handling 
capacity, the belt chain or pneumatic conveyor may be 
used. 


4.1.4 Availability of Space — Where the space available 
is limited, the use of screw, chain, or pneumatic 
conveyors may be considered, whereas, if sufficient 
space is available, the use of belt conveyors may be 
considered. 


4.1.5 Number and Position of Charging and 
Discharging Points — In the case of belt, chain, and 
screw conveyors, the charging and discharging may 
be done at several points, while in case of pneumatic 
conveyors, the charging and discharging points are 
normally at one place, which may be shifted from place 
to place. 


4.1.6 Capital and Operating Cost — The belt conveyor 
is the most economical, since running expenditure is 
less compared to other type of conveyors. The screw 
conveyor is more expensive than belt conveyor. The 
initial cost is higher in case of chain conveyors, which 
also need more of the running and maintenance cost. 
The initial cost, running and maintenance expenditure 
are the higher in case of pneumatic conveyors. 


4.2 Elevators — Generally, separate elevators should 
be employed for receipt and issue of grain into and 


from the bins or other storage structures. Elevator has 
a leg with boot for receiving the grain at the bottom 
and elevator head for discharging the grain at the top. 
The bucket type of elevator is the most common, and 
is quite economical and efficient with the least running 
and maintenance expenditure. The buckets carrying the 
grain may be made of mild steel, and may be either 
carried on a chain or a flat belt of synthetic textile and 
rubber. 


4.2.1 The bucket elevators may be self-supporting 
type to sustain all working loads and self weight 
unless installed in a head house, where they shall be 
adequately supported. 


4.2.2 Leg casings and connecting spouts shall be dust- 
tight. 


4.2.3 The elevator boots shall be above the floor rather 
than in pits and be provided with adequate clean-out 
doors. However, if the pits are necessary, ample room 
shall be provided for cleaning, oiling and repairing 
boots. Pits shall be adequately lighted with fixed 
lights and be accessible by permanent iron ladder or 
stairways. 


4.2.3.1 The elevator boots shall be so constructed as 
to minimize the probability of chokes and be provided 
with covered hoppers into which spill and clean-up can 
be shovelled back into the boot. Choke switches or any 
other in-built mechanism to avoid choking of elevators 
may be made available. 


4.2.4 Aspiration system shall be installed in the 
head and the boot of the elevator to avoid dust 
concentration. 


4.3 Layout of Conveyors — While considering 
the layout of the different type of conveyors, it is 
advisable to find the shortest course with minimum 
possible bends. The free flow of the grain from one 
conveyor to the other, or to the portions where gravity 
flow is made, should be given consideration. All 
possible restrictions and choking points should be 
considered and layout for a smooth flow should be 
decided.it is necessary that all gravity flows through 
spouting have adequate cross-sections and suitable 
inclinations with the horizontal. Hoppers or garners 
should be introduced wherever there is possibility of 
accumulation of grain in the flow. 


4.4 Requirements for Installations 


4.4.1 All structural members, whether of reinforced 
cement concrete or steel or of any other construction, 
employed in conveyors, as well as those supporting 
them shall have adequate strength, considering all 
static and dynamic loads to which they may be 
subjected. 


4.4.2 The belt conveyors [see IS 1891 (Part 1)] and 
bucket elevators shall have tensioning arrangement of 
the screw type or of the gravity type. 


4.4.3 All the parts of the installations shall be 
accessible for maintenance and inspection. 


4.4.4 There shall be sufficient space all round the 
machinery and also clear head-room for working 


purpose. 
5 ACCESSORIES 


5.0 General 


Besides the main handling equipment as given in 4, 
cleaning machines, drying equipment, aeration fans, 
fumigations pumps, manlift and temperature detecting 
devices form essential accessories to the handling 
equipment. 


5.1 Cleaning Machines 


The grain brought from field may contain a variety of 
foreign materials, like straw, insects, stones and dust. 
Cleaning machines should generally be employed to 
clean the grain by sieving and should be connected with 
large dust collectors, which remove the dust by suction. 
Overall capacity of the cleaning machines may match 
the capacity of the elevators. 


5.1.1 All cleaning, or other grain processing machinery 
shall be of non-combustible construction. 


5.2 Drying Equipment 

Grain with more than 14 percent moisture is not 
recommended for storage in silo. When the grain with 
high amount of moisture is received, it shall be dried 
either in sun or, if the moisture content of grain is high, 
drier should be used. The drying equipment should 
be generally housed in a drier house attached to a silo. 
It may consist of a chamber in which the grain should 
be allowed to fall in a zig-zag fashion through baffles 
placed in a line and hot air blown from the sides of the 
chamber. It may be a continuous process allowing the 
grain to pass through it several times depending upon 
the amount of moisture to be removed. 


5.3 Temperature Detection Equipment 


The deterioration of grain is shown by development of 
hot spots at different places in a bin. It is, therefore, 
necessary to provide for a temperature detection 
equipment in order to detect any rise in temperature at 
different points and pitch. The system shall consist of 
temperature sensing devices placed vertically inside the 
bins from bottom to top at vertical intervals of 1.5 m. 
At least one sensing device should be provided for a 
radius of 3 metres in the horizontal plane. The device 
shall be connected by cables and led to reading 
instruments suitably located outside the bins. The cable 


IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 


insulation inside the bin shall be resistant to abrasions, 
moisture and chemicals. 


5.4 Aeration Equipment 


The grain in storage may require periodical aeration 
to keep it in satisfactory condition to prevent increase 
in temperature and development of hot spots on grains. 
The process may consist of blowing air through grain 
either from below or from above. The floor of the bin 
should be perforated and the chamber below the floor 
be used as a plenum. Alternatively, air may be blown 
through a tunnel having a number of ducts leading to 
all directions at the floor level, or aeration vents may 
be provided to hopper-bottom bins. The net area of 
perforations may normally be about 15 percent of the 
gross floor area. The air required for aeration shall be 
roughly calculated on the basis of 75 ml/litre/min. 


5.5 Fumigation 


Fumigation of stored grain may be necessary to 
protect it from insects. Fumigation of grain may be 
done either by tablets through applicators or pouches 
which may be placed on the conveyor belt or in the 
head space of the silo, provided with air circulation 
system to ensure uniform distribution of fumigant 
inside the grains. Silo fumigation may also be done 
using phosphine generators. . 


5.6 Weighing and Bagging Machines 


It is necessary to have arrangement of weighing 
machines for weighing incoming grain, in the head 
house. They ma generally be installed close to cleaning 
machines may also be installed at the issue point. 
Similarly, bagging and stitching machines may also be 
installed in the silo. 


5.7 Man Lift 


Normally, the mechanical and electrical installations 
and the accessories of silo require frequent trips of 
staff for maintenance, repairs and inspections. An 
electrically operated man lift with a capacity of two 
to three passengers may be necessary. The lift shall be 
installed in the head house which should go up to the 
last stage of the head house. 


5.8 Communication Devices 


Ina silo installation, where a number of conveyors work 
in a line, it is frequently required to be communicated 
from a control room with the staff posted at different 
stations. For this purpose, telephone, mobile or a walky- 
talky may be provided. However, where, for economic 
considerations, provision of telephone, mobile or 
walky-talky may be considered difficult, a system of 
sounding hooters or sirens may be arranged. This may 
help to warn people to be on the guard as the conveyors 
and other equipment, on which they are working, are 


IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 


started. The telephone, mobile or walky-talky may also 
be necessary for calling outside help in emergency. 


5.9 Fire-fighter equipment 


It is necessary to provide for fire-fighting equipment 
in a silo. Selection of the equipment depends upon 
the type of conveyors to be handled. Arrangement 
of right type of fire extinguishers should be made (see 
IS 3594). It may be advisable to have provision of one 
or two types of fire extinguishers supplemented by 
fire-hydrants running throughout the area of the silo. 
The following information may be useful in selecting 
the right type of fire extinguishers (see IS 1641 and 
IS 2190): 


Material 


Fire Extinguishers 


Paper, wood, rubber and 
general articles requiring 
cooling and quenching 


Soda-acid and foam 
type extinguishers 


Burning liquid, such as 
gasoline, paint, oil or grease, 
requiring smothering for 
quick extinguishment 


Carbon dioxide, as 
also chemical type 
extinguishers or foam 
type extinguishers 


Live electric wires from 
motors, electric appliances, 


Carbon dioxide, as 
also chemical type 


etc, where non-conducting | extinguishers 
extinguishing agent is 
needed 


5.10 Control Room 


A large silo installation, where the grain is handled 
by a number of conveyors working in a line, requires 
provision of a control room, suitably located with an 
illuminated board by which the flow of the grain taking 
place at any time in a particular way, can be reflected 
on a panel. It is also called a ‘mimic indicator’ and is 
especially necessary when there are a number of silo 
bins to be filled or emptied simultaneously, so that the 
control room operator would have full control over 
the machines. An automatic audio-visual bin-level 
indicator may also be considered as a good adjunct to 
a silo installation. 


5.11 Safety Precautions 


Safety precautions in regard to the dust pollution 
and operation of various mechanical and electrical 
equipment, described above, shall be observed strictly, 
and inspection and necessary cleaning of the whole 
structure shall be carried out periodically to avoid 
fire-hazards, explosions and other accidents, which 
may result in loss of valuable grain, equipment and 
human life. The following safety precautions shall be 
observed. 


5.11.1 Dust pollution of atmosphere and dust 
explosion 


High concentration of dust in air may catch a spark or 
fire at any place and may cause simultaneous ignition 
of particles and finally an explosion. Hence, it is 
important that dust should, as far as possible, be kept 
under control. 


5.11.1.1 All feeding and discharging points where dust 
is likely to be raised, aspirators with dust catching 
cyclones shall be provided in order to minimize the 
nuisance. 


5.11.1.2 The area all round the machinery and the 
conveyors shall be kept clean. 


5.11.2 All electrical wirings, fittings, fixtures and 
electric drive motors installed in dust-laden atmosphere, 
except in the open and in offices and similar locations 
so occupied and segregated as to be reasonably free 
from dust, shall be flame-proof. In case of electric 
motors installed in open, the same may be of totally 
enclosed type. 


5.11.3 Trailing cables of all portable type of conveyors 
shall be closed by flexible metal conduits throughout 
and rigidly fixed at both ends. All portable motors shall 
be connected to two distinct earths. 


5.11.4 All fast moving parts of the installation shall be 
protected by guards or covers, while the running belt of 
a belt conveyor need not be provided any protection. 
All bucket elevators shall 


be provided, wherever necessary, with automatic back- 
stop arrangement, so that in case of power failure 
during the full load, running of the elevator in the 
reverse would not be possible. Pull cord switches shall 
be provided for belt conveyors and belt sway switches 
shall be provided for elevator belts. 


5.11.5 All elevators shall be equipped with an automatic 
mechanical or electrical tamper-proof device to shut 
off driving power leg, in case leg belt slows down. 
An interlocked device should simultaneously shut off 
power on all contributory screw or belt conveyors 
which feed the elevators. 


5.11.6 The possibility of a choke-up arises when the 
grain flows in a number of conveyors in line. It I, 
therefore, essential that all the conveyors working in a 
line shall be interlocked so that the stoppage of any one 
but the first conveyor will make all the conveyors after 
it, inoperative. 


5.11.7 A distinctive alarm or signal shall notify operator 
in case of shut down. 


5.11.8 Spouts introducing grain into bins shall be 
arranged, where possible, to prevent grain stream 
striking the side of bin on account of the possibility of 
tramp iron striking a spark on contact with side. 


5.11.9 Boards prohibiting smoking and use of naked 
lights shall be fixed at all prominent places in the area 
of silo installation. 


5.11.10 Adequate hygienic precautions shall be taken 
for handling grains in all types of conveyors. 


5.11.11 Protection against lightning shall be provided 
in accordance with IS/IEC 62305 (Parts 3 and 4). 


5.11.12 In case the silo is located near airways, 
the aviation obstruction lights shall be provided in 
accordance with the Civil Aviation Standards. 


IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.11.13 While handling fumigants, precautions as 
prescribed by the suppliers and the manufacturers shall 
be exercised. 


5.11.14 Workers shall be provided with masks, when 
they have to work in a dust-polluted air. 


5.11.15 Staff and workers shall also be provided with 
industrial safety helmets (see IS 2925). 


5.11.16 Main storage of lubricating oil and grease 
shall be outside. Storage of lubricating oil and grease 
in the head house shall be limited to a maximum of 
5 barrels and shall be in an oil-room of non-combustible 
construction. 


5.11.17 Lift installation shall be in accordance with the 
applicable Lift Acts in the country. 


IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 


( Foreword ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Composition of Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


Organization 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 
Agriculture, New Delhi 


Centre of Excellence for Soybean Processing, CIAE, 
Bhopal 


All India Food Processors’ Association, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 


Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & 
Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana 


ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack (formerly 
CRRD 


ICAR-Central Tuber Crop Research Institute (CTCRI), 
Thiruvananthpuram 


Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), New Delhi 

CONCERT, Chennai 

Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry (CIFTI)- 
FICCI, New Delhi 

Confederation of Indian Industries (CH), New Delhi 

Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 

Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 

Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training and 
Empowerment (CREATE) 

Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore 

ICAR - Indian Institute of Maize Research (IIMR), 
Ludhiana (formerly DMR) 

Directorate General of Supplies and Transport, Delhi 

Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad 

Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine & Storage, 
Faridabad 

Food Corporation of India (FCI), New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


J. S. (MARKETING) AND AGRICULTURAL MARKETING 
ADVISOR (Chairman) 


Dr PUNIT CHANDRA 
Dr S. K. Giri (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAM BAGGARRY 
Ms Jyoti Soni (Alternate) 


Dr M. S. MEERA 
Dr V. B. SASHIKALA 


HEAD (DIVISION OF TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY) 
Dr D. N. Yapay (Alternate) 


DR AWADHESH KUMAR 
Dr (Mrs) PADMINI Swar (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Dr M. S. SANJEEV (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. MALHOTRA 
SHRI SIDHARTH RATH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SANTHANAM, IAS (RETD.) 
SHRI G. SANTHANARAJAN (Alternate) 


Ms PARNA DASGUPTA 
Ms PRIYANKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


Mr ManisH WHORRA 
Mr AROMAL JKOSHI (Alternate) 


Mrs Do tty A JANI 

Dr Aninpita Menta (Alternate) 
DR SITARAM DIXIT 

Dr M. S. Kamaru (Alternate) 
MR K. SURESH KANNA 

SH R. PONNAMALAM (Alternate) 


Dr G. K. SHARMA 
Dr A. D. SemwaL (Alternate) 


Dr R. Sar KUMAR 
Dr DHARAM PAUL CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Cor S. C. JosHr 
MAJ SONALI DUDHANE (Alternate) 


Dy AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISOR 
SMO (Stp.) (Alternate) 


PLANT PROTECTION ADVISER 
Suri R. V. SINGH (Alternate) 


Mr A. S. ARUNACHALAM 
MR Sacar (Alternate) 


Ms APRAJITA VERMA 


Organization 


G.B. Pant University, Food Science Division, Pant Nagar 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


Indian Grain Storage Management and Research Institute, 
Hapur 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT), 
Thanjavur 


Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship & 
Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat 


National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad 


National Sugar Institute (NSI), Kanpur 


Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of 
India (PFNDAD) 


Vasantdada Sugar Institute (VSI), Pune 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA), New Delhi 


IS 5503 (Part 2) : 2020 


Representative(s) 
Dr SatisH K. SHARMA 
Dr Sweta Rat (Alternate) 
Dr S. C. KHURANA 
Suri I. C. CHADDHA 


DIRECTOR 
Dr C. ANANDHARAMAKRISHNAN 


Mr DEEPAK KHEDKAR 
Mr MADHAB CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr SUBHASH GUPTA 
Dr S. C. BansaL (Alternate) 


Dr AsHUTOSH UPADHYAY 
Dr RuresH CHAVAN (Alternate) 


Dr K. BHASKARA CHARY 
Dr V. SuDERSHAN Rao (Alternate) 


Dr V. P. SRIVASTAVA 


Dr SHATADRU SENGUPTA 
Dr Jasvir SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr RAJEEV V. DANI 
Dr SANIJEEV V. PariL (Alternate) 


Dr RADHEY KRISHNA TRIPATHI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 16 (14866). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


