(Reaffirmed 2003)

IS :11927- 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR NETTING AND FIBRE ROPE LOAD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS IN SURFACE TRANSPORT

Cordage
Chairman SERI R. M. TELAN~ Members

Sectional

Committee,

TDC

14

Kcprescnling Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. Bombay

SEBI K. N. RAMACHANDRAN ( Alternate to Shri R. M. Telang ) Directorate General of Sup lies & Disposals SHRI A. T. BASAK ( Inspection Wing ), New b elhi COLA. K. BEATTACEABYA Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta S-1 S. K. MVKEERJEE ( Altsmatr ) Saab D. K. DUTTA Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta Neomer Limited, Vadodara SHRI G. D. GANJKHANE Ministry of Defence ( DPIN ) &RI T. N. GHAB~V SHRI A.MUKHERJEE( AIIernate) National Teat House, Calcutta SHBI A. Gaosa Eskaps ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta Snar SEKEAR GU~A SHEI N. B. SENQUPTA ( Allernale ) Shalimar Rope Woks Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. K. JEUNJHUNWALA SHRI A. K. SAHA ( Ahrnale) M. M. Tayebally, Calicut SHRI TAHER S. M. KHANDAN SHrtt SHABB~R S. M. KHANDAN ( Alternate ) Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay CAPT S. B. KUNDER~I Export Inspection Agency, Calcutta SHRI B. MAJUMDE~ SERI G. MI-ERA ( Ahmale ) Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) SERI A. C. MA.~FIUR SH~CI S. C. GIJPTA ( Akrrnatc) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI R. K. M~IIRA SHRI S. P. CHAKRABORTY ( Ahnnlc) Glljarat Filaments Ltd, Vadodara Saw K. N. MICRA SHWI V. M. SATRII~I ( Alternnts ) Indian Jute Industries" Research Association, DR U. MKJRHOPAD~Y~Y Calcutta SHKI S. K. BORE ( Allcrnatr ) ( Conhued on page 2 )

Q Cbpyrighl 1907
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Cofiyrighhr Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the raid Act.

I

IS

I

11927

-

1987 1)

( Continued from page

Reprtscnting Members Coir Board, Emakulam SHRI G. N. PRABEU SHRI V. ABDUL MAJEED ( Alfcrnafc) Rail India Technical & Economic Services Ltd. SHRI Y. K. RAMA RAO New Delhi SHRX P. R. MALLICK ( Altmdr ) Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay CAPT B. R. RAO Ganges Rope Co Ltd, Howrah REPBEBENTATIVE Research Designs and Standards Organization, REPRESENTATIVE Ministry of Railways, Lucknow Association, Indian Rope Manufacturers' Saab NIRMAL K. SOYANI Calcutta SBRI T. BHATTAOEARYA (Altonate) Naval Headqurterr, Ministry of Defence, New SHRI H. C. TANEJA Delhi Saw R. VIUVANATE ( Altrrnatr ) SARI KANTILAL G. TEANAWALA M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay SHRI MADHUKANT G. TEANAWALA (Alternate ) Srrar R. I. Mrnan, Director General, BIS ( Ex-oj5cio Msmbrr ) Director ( Tex ) Secretary SHRI A. R. BANERJEE Joint Director ( Tex ), BIS

2

IS : 11927- 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR NETTING AND FIBRE ROPE LOAD RESTRAINT SYSTEMS IN SURFACE TRANSPORT
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1987, after the draft finalized by the Cordage Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council.
0.2

In view of the increasing use of netting and fibre rope load restraint system in surface transport, formulation of an Indian Standard on this subject needs no emphasis. These load restraint systems can be used in road, rail or sea transport, but it is stressed that different considerations apply depending on the mode of transport in In rail and sea transport in particular, high loadings on a question. restraint system may sometimes arise. In stormy seas loadings can be operations, longitudinal as high as 5g0* and in some rail shunting loadings can briefly attain 44n*. In road transport, provided, that movement of the load relative to the vehicle is prevented, it is generally accepted that the load restraint system should be capable of withstanding acceleration, between the load and chassis of the vehicle, of 1'0 gn* (equal to the payload) forward and 0'5 gn* (equal to the half of the payload) rearward, sideways and upward. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from BS : 6451-1984 `Specification for netting and fibre rope load restraint systems in surface transport' issued by the British Standards Institution.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard prescribes the requirements for nettings made of fibre ropes or cords or of woven webbings, and for fibre rope lashings used in load restraint systems for road, rail and water transport.

l gn is

the acceleration

due to gravity.

3

IS : 1 1927

1987

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For addition the purpose of this standard, to those given in IS : 3871-1984" the following shall apply. definitions in

2.2 Border Cord - A cord or rope surrounding the net on all sides and determining the overall dimensions of the net, into which a mesh cord may be worked. 2.3 Shoulder Cord -A cord or rope extending fully around the netting parallel to the border cord, used for the attachment of ties to the anchorage points. 2.4 Tie Cord vehicle. 2.5 Harnessfor unit loads A cord or rope used to attach a net to transport

A small net or nettin g used as load which form part of a larger load. restraint one or

restraint

system

2.6 Lashing - A load rope and if necessary buckles.

system comprising a length of fibre more suitable tensioning devices or

A load restraint system in net form with or 2.7 Net and Nettingwithout attachment or tensioning devices. The mesh material may be flat woven webbing or fibre cord, twine or rope. 2.8 Restraint Netting - A netting manufactured for the purpose of securing a load to a vehicle or container and which will provide adequate restraint against any movement which might reasonably bc expected to occur during braking, cornering, etc. 2.9 Retention Netting - A netting manufactured for the purpose of containing loose bulk loads on unenclosed vehicle bodies, for example, tipping lorries, and in skip containcl~s. 2.10 Barrier Netting tlivicling tllc load space
c.olllpal-l!rlerlIs.

A netting manufactured for of a vehicle or c.ont:iiner

the purpose of into separate

IS : 11927 - 1987 3. LOAD RESTRAINT SYSTEM
shall comprise:

3.1 A load restraint
a) a lashing

system or netting,

b) any fittings to secure the rope or netting to vehicle excluding anchorage points permanently vehicle, and c) any tensioning devices.

the transport fixed to the

3.2 The design and construction of the system shall be such that, correctly applied, it will restrain a load when used in conjunction other equipment such as headboards, baulking arrangements suitable anchorage points on the transport vehicle. 4. REQVlRMENT FOR ROPE LASHING SYSTEMS

when with and

4.1 Material - Rope for lashings shall be J-strand, hawserlaid constructions of polypropylene, polyester or polyamide (nylon) in accordance with IS : 5175-1982*, IS : 11066-19847 and IS : 4572 (Part 2 )1983$ or sisal or manila in accordance with IS : 1321 ( Part 1 )-19825 and IS : 1084-198311. 4.2 Size -The nominal diameter shall be not less than 10 mm. of a rope to be used as a lashing

4.3 End Treatment - The ends of the rope shall be treated to prevent unlaying. In the case of synthetic fibre ropes heat sealing of the ends is necessary and in the case of natural fibre rope, parcelling/ whipping of the ends should be done. 4.4 Splicing - If an eye is required in the rope a splice shall be made with a minimum of three full tucks and the ends shall be left uncut for a minimum of three rope diameters from their emergence from the final tuck. 4.5 Safety Factor be 8 (see Note).

-

Safety

factor

of ropes

used

for lashings

should

NOTE- The recommendations for the use as given cular C-3 ) should be followed in choosing an appropriate
*Specification (jt31 rmisron ). $Spccification $Specification OSpecification HSpecification for polypropylene for for for for roper, 3-strand

in Appendix C ( in pnrtilashing system. and E-strand plaited

hawser-laid

polyester multifilament ropes ( hawser-laid ). polyamide multifilament ropes: Part 2 Hawser-laid ropes, sisal roper: Part I Untarred varieties (srcond ruGon ). manila ropes ( third reuisi0n ).

5

IS : 11927 - 1987 5. REQUIREMENT 5.1 Mesh Material FOR NETTING RESTRAINT SYSTEM

nettings shall be made from 5.1.1 Webbing Nettings -Webbing webbing woven from continuous filament, high tenacity polyester, polyamide (nylon ) or polypropylene yarns. The webbings shall be uniformly woven and free from any significant defect. The edges The width of the webbing shall shall have non-fray characteristtcs. bc compatible with the other components used in the assembly. Sewing threads shall be of the same fibre type as the webbing. Sewing shall be done with lock stitch. The stitches shall not cause damage to the yarn in the webbing. The stitches shall be at least 2'5 mm from the edge of the webbing. The stitches shall be flat and shall penetrate the surface of the webbing in such a way that no part of the yarn ( with the exception of the end stitches ) stands out of the surface. The locking of the stitches shall not be visible on either side of the webbing. The stitches shall be locked or back stitched so that they do not unraval in use. There shall be not more than one fault ( for example, a missed stitch, broken threads, etc ) in a seam length of 100 mm. Each fault shall be compensated for by back or over stitching for a distance of at least 25 mm. The ends of cut webbing shall be finished to avoid unravelling in use. shall be made 5.1.2 Cord or Twine .Nettings - Cord or twine nettings from polyamide ( nylon ), polyester, polypropylene continuous filaments or from polypropylene fibrilated film. When used as retention nettings the distance between opposite sides of the mesh shall not exceed 50 mm. 5.1.3 Rope Nettings Rope nettings shall be made either:

a) from 3-strand hawser-laid ropes construc,ted from sisal ( untarred ) or manila or polyamide or polyester or of polypropylene in accordance with the relevant Indian Standard specification indicated in 4.1; or b) from braided ropes made from polyamide ( nylon ) or polyester or polypropylene having linear density and breaking strength corresponding to a 3-strand, hawser-laid rope of the same fibre as indicated m the relevant Indian Standard (see 4.1 ). Cord or rope nets shall be provided 5.2 Border Cord Materialwith a border cord of not less than 10 mm diameter. The material of the net and the border cord shall be the same. Attachment of the border cord of a net to anchorage points on Ihe vehicle shall be by means of end fittings attached to the border cord, by the tie cords or by direct If end fittings arc to be used attachment to the anchorage points. ti

IS : 11927 - 1987 these shall be considered as part of the whole restraint system be included in any strength tests. The maximum distance successive attachment points shall be 1'5 m.
NOTE I- Border cords should be thicker than the net material. values are given in Table 1.

and shall between

Recommended

NOTE 2 - Shoulder cord should be included in the construction of at least the larger nets. The shoulder cord should be fitted parallel to the border cord 1'0 m to I.4 m from it and should be used alternately with the border cord for the attachment of ties to the anchorage points. The recommended values for shoulder cord sizes are same as for border cords given in Table 1.

NOTE 3 - Lashings may be fitted to a net during manufacture means of restraint.

as a supplementary

5.3

Strength

of Barrier

and Restraint

Netting

Systems

5.3.1 There shall be no damage or failure ofa restraint system when, complete with all ancillary hooks, tensioning devices, tie cords, etc, it is tested in accordance with Appendix A and the system shall restrain the test load. 5.3.2 A netting of the same type, construction and material as the netting subjected to test in accordance with Appendix A shall be deemed to comply with this standard if the requirements of 5.3.1 are satisfied by the netting tested. 5.4 Rated Assembly Strength-The rated assembly strength of a netting shall be specified by the manufacturer for each netting and, in a test carried out in accordance with Appendix A, a mass four times the rated assembly strength shall be retained within the netting.
NOTE 1 - The term `safe working load' is equivalent to rated assembly strength but is not preferred here. NOTE 2 - For braided cords the ratio of mesh cord to border cord diameters should be as given in Table 1 for corresponding materials, 1 RECOMMENDED AND

TABLE

DIAMETERS OF NETTING BORDER CORDS ( Claw 5.4,
Note

MESH

2

)
BORDER COltD mm 12 12 16 16 20 24

MES~ CORD mm 6 8 10 12 14 16

7

IS : 11927 - 1987 5.5 Strength
for any one construction, border cord, fitted. The prescribed in

Netting Materials - The material used side of the mesh, whether of single or multi-strand shall have a minimum tensile strength of 22 daN*. A having a minimum tensile strength of 200 daN* shall be tensile strength shall be tested as per the method Appendix A of IS : 5175-1982t.
nettings are not subject to the requirements of 5.2, 5.3

of Retention

NOTE -Retention and 5.4.

6. REQWREMENT

FOR HARDWARE
and sharp edges. All metal

6.1 All hardware
parts,

shall be free from burrs shall be free from ferrous corrosion.

6.2 The buckle or tensioning device shall have positive release and shall show no damage that will alter the operation mechanism when tested in accordance with Appendix B.
NOTE - N ormally no hardware, is required for rope lashings. except that permanently

action of the

fixed to the vehicle,

7. SAMPLING 7.1 Where materials forming a part of the load restraint system are produced in accordance with a specific standard, the sampling as prescribed in that standard shall apply. Sampling is not applicable for hardware.
8. PACKING

8.1 Unless otherwise procedure laid down
9. MARKING

specified, nettings in IS : 3256-1980:.

shall

be

packed

as

per

the

9.1 Webbing

Restraint Nettings - Each complete system and each part of the system, if it is intended that the parts be separable, shall be durably and clearly marked with the following mformation, either directly or on a durable attached label or sleeve situated as near as possible to a securing device and not more than 1 m from it:
a) Manufacturer's b) Date name or trade-mark,

of manufacture,

-1 daN = 1`02 kgf approximately. tspecification for polypropylene ropes ( S-strand hawser laid and !&strand plaited ) ( jirsfrevision) . tCode for inland packaging of ropes and cordage ( J%J~rcuirion ). 8

c) Rated d) Material

assembly from

strength, which

and is manufactured.

the webbing

NOTE- The following abbreviations may be used, provided the recommendations for care and use contain an interpretation of any abbreviation used. Polyamide Polyester Polypropylene PPR PAM

9.2 Ropes and Rope Restraint Nettings - Because of limited space for marking, the ropes shall be durably and clearly marked with the following information on a permanently attached label or sleeve: a) Manufacturer's b) Date c) Rated d) Material name or trade-mark,

of manufacture, assembly strength, and of rope/rope rope restraint nettings. nettings may

used in the manufacture

9.3 The webbing restraint nettings and also be marked with the Standard Mark.

NOTE- The use of the Standard Mark Q governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act and the Rules and Re ulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an In f. mn Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing end quality control Standard which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that Details of conditions under which a licence for the standard as a furthrr &guard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 10. INSTRUCTIONS FOR CARE AND USE

10.1 The manufacturer shall make available instructions concerning Any repairs that may become necessary during the life care and use. of the system shall be carried out only hy a competent person, that is, a person having such practical and thcorctical knowlcdgc of nettings as will enable him to detect dcfccts or wcakncsscs, to assess their importance in rclativn to the USC of the nettings and to effect the necessary repairs.
NOTE - It is recommended as a basis for the instructions. that the information given in Appendix C be used

IS : 11927 - 1987

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.4 )
NET A-1. Principle A-l.1 A rectangular
test to a rigid table vertical and the net the horizontal. A-2. APPARATUS

A

STRENGTH

TEST

test load secured by the restraint system under hinged at one edge is tilted until the table is inspected for damage after lowering the load to

A-2.1 A rigid table, hinged at one edge provided with a range of load attachment points and either means for raising the table from the horizontal to the vertical position or an attachment point for external raising means such as the hook of a crane. The apparatus shall include a chain or other suitable means to prevent tilting of the table beyond the vertical. A-3. Procedure

A-3.1 Secure to the centre of the table a rectangular test load corresponding to four times the rated assembly strength of the net the attachment devices of assembly and of matching size using In the case of rope nets supplied without assembly on all four sides. lashing cords or similar items the border cord may be used directly. Raise the table into the vertical position at the rate of 30"/min to 45"/ min. Maintain in the raised position for 5 min and then lower the table to the horizontal. A-4. A-4.1 TEST REPORT and report any failure or damage to the test net.

Observe

APPENDIX ( Cfause 7.2 )
DROP TEST OF

B

HARDWARE

B-l. Principle B-l.1 A ratchet
other form of-end tensioner, cam buckle, buckle containing springs fitting is dropped a specified number of times 10 or on

to a stone

or concrete

noor

trom

a speclnea

helght

the hardware

is examined.

and

the

enect

on

B-2. APPARATUS B-2.1 Means
releasing for raising a hardware item to a height of 2'5 m and it so that it falls on to a stone or concrete floor.

B-3. PROCEDURE B-3.1 Raise
the hardware item to a height of 2'5 m and release it so that it falls on to the concrete or stone floor. Repeat this for six times and examine the specimen tested for any signs of damage that might alter its operation. B-4. B-4.1 TEST Report REPORT any visible damage to the specimen.

APPENDIXC ( Chrrse 10 )
RECOMMENDATIONS C-l. C-l.1 INTRODUCTION FOR USE

Netting and rope restraint systems can be used in many transport and storage situations. The following recommendations to their use in road transport and while appJ.y, in the main, some of the more general recommendations apply throughout the fields of the use of such products, it is most important to realise that in some applications, different requirements may apply. For instance, it is likely that the requirements of system for a river barges system will be less severe than for road, rail, and sea transport where higher acceleration and deceleration forces are frecluently encountered. It is recommended that the information given in C-2 to C-5, suitably to application should be used as a basis for amended according instructions on use and care of load restraint systems (see 9 ).

C-2. PROPERTIES C-2.1

OF MATERIALS
it is resistant to

loses little strength when wet, Polyester moderate strength acid but it is damaged by alkalis. I1

IS : 11927- 1987

C-2.2 Polyamide
highly acids. resistant

may lose up to 15 percent in strength when to alkalis but it is damaged by moderate

wet, it is strength

C-2.3 Polypropylene is particularly useful where chemical resistance is an important requirement in use. Attention is drawn to the fact that some polypropylene products are likely to be susceptible to actinic degradation (loss of strength when exposed to sunlight), and it is essential that an ultraviolet stabilizer be incorporated in the polymer. Organic solvent stabilizer such as white spirit, xylene and meta-cresol may affect polypropylene ropes. C-2.4 Sisal and manila ropes are susceptible shrinking in length when wet and also to attack Ropes may be treated to resist these effects. C-3. STRENGTH OF ROPE LASHINGS and this factor should be to swelling and to by micro-organisms.

C-3.1 A safety factor of 8 should be used associated with the following assumptions: that a> the rope is in satisfactory

condition;

b) 4 d) 4 f)

that the rope is protected against friction, cutting, or damage at all points where it is in contact with sharp edges; that the surface of the anchorage point is sufficiently and smooth, so that no cutting action takes place; that the storage of the rope after manufacturer is in every way satisfactory; that ropes made from of the same material and differing are not it leaves the broad rope

materials or of differing sizes used under any circumstances; so to

that any knots are correctly made and the lashing system arranged that failure of one length of rope does not lead failure of the lashings.

C-3.2 The safe working load should be taken as equal to the breaking strength of a single part of rope divided by the safety factor used. C-4. C-4.1 the GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS

Nettings
load space into nettings are used primarily separate compartments. 12 as barriers to divide The maximum mesh

C-4.1.1 Webbing

IS : 11927 - 1987 opening is selected according to the intended ,less than the smallest item the net is expected use but should to restrain. always be

C-4.1.2 Rope nettings are primarily used to restrain whole loads, in particular loads comprising of a number of separate items, such as boxes, barrels or sacks, or for palletized loads, whereas a cord or twine net may be used for the individual pallet load. The maximum mesh size is related to the size or strengt-h of the mesh material. C-4.2 Lashings - The following while using lashing system: recommendations be properly weaken should and be met

4 b) 4 4 4

The lashing system should be checked during transit; Overtensioning, avoided; which

tensioned the system,

should be

may

should

The restraint system slackening of a single ineffective;

should be arranged so that component does not render

failure or the system

Lashings to provide forward or rearward as near horizontal as possible and never vehicle bed of mot-e than 60"; and Lashings should be protected in the vehicle or load. from contact

restraint should be at an angle to the with sharp edges

C-4.3 Lashing and Nettings - Recommendations these retraint systems are as follows:

common

to both it is in

a) Ensure that an adequate total system is used and that good condition and strong enough to secure the load; b) The nettings or lashings be manufacturer's instructions wherever necessary, to The security of movement.

tightened in accordance with the and wedges, scotches, etc, be used secure the load and prevent the load be checked:

i)
ii) iii)

Before

moving

off; in private premises and before

After negotiating ramps entering public roads; After having travelled

a few miles; road conditions, for of chamber, may have and

occassion lvhen unusual iv) On any example, a ramp or a rapid change altered the tension of the restraint; 13

IS : 11927 - 1987
v) following removal of any items from, items to the load during the journey. or addition of any

c) The nettings or lashings be protected cutting by the use of corner protectors d) Under any webbing; circumstances, knots

against abrasion and/or or protective sleeves; not be tied in the

shall

e) No attempt shall be made to increase the tension on the system by the use of levers, etc, other than those specified and supplied by the manufacturer; f) Any modifications or repairs to the netting or lashing not be carried out except by a competent person; system in their shall

g) The users be instructed of the restraint make expert advice available; and h) The information referring to fibre C.5. These

use and used

on the meaning of any type shall be supplied.

abbreviations

SPECIFIC
may,

INSTRUCTIONS

FOR ROAD

TRANSPORT
be used.

C-5.1 Suitable

anchorage for example,

points of adequate strength shall include the chassis of the vehicle.

C-5.2 Ensure that the overall restraint achieved least equal to the rated assembly strength.

by the system

is at

C-5.3 Ensure that the vehicle's load space and the condition of its load platform are suitable and adequate for the type and size of the load. C-5.4 If possible always ensure that the front of the load is in contact with the headboard of the vehicle. Where this is not possible a similar form of restraint, such as baulking fitted transversely across the vehicle platfrom and firmly attached to the chassis frame should be used.

14

