( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 2720

(Part -VII)

- 1976

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR SOILS
PART XXXVII VALUE DETERMINATION OF SAND EQUIVALENT OF SOILS AND FINE AGGREGATES

Soil Engineering
Chairman
PR~F DINESH MOHAN

Sectional

Committee,

BDC 23

Representing Central Building Roorkee Research Institute (CSIR),

Members PROP ALAna SINGH
LT-COL &TAR SINGH

University of Jodhpur Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters

MAJ R. R. SUDHINDRA (dbrnute) Cementation Co Ltd, Bombay DR A. BANERJEE SHRI S. GUPTA (Alfemate) In personal capacity (P-826 &New A&ore, Calcutta) SHRI K. N. DADINA In personal capacity [Zntef-State Equipment (P) Ltd, SHRI A. G. DA~TIDAR 3/l Loudon Street, Calcutta] Irrigation Research Institute, Khagaul, Pat& QHRI R. L. DEWAN Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi DR G. S. DHILLON Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi bu2acToR DR SHA~WI K. GULHATI (Alternate) Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Amritsar DIRECTOR RESEARCH OFFICER(GEOTECWNICAL SECTION) (Alternate) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR(CSMRS) DEPUTY DIRECTOR(CSMRS) (Alternate) Rodio Foundation Engineering Ltd; and Hazarat SHRI A. H. D~VANJI & Co, Bombay SHRI A. N. JANGLE (Altematej National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI V. G. HEGDE SHRI S. H. BALCHANDANI (Altematc) Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) JO~IN~~I~~XXOR R~IZARCH (FE), DEPUTY DIRECTOR RESEARCH, SOIL MECHANICS, RDSO (Altematc) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab SHRI 0. P. MALHOTRA Roads Wing (Ministry of Shippings & `Transport) SHRI J. S. MAaYA SHRI N. SEN (AltesnafL) (Continued on page 2) (B Copyright

1976

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION Thii publication is protected under the Zndiun Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any moans except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Ac(.

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII) - 1976
(Continuedffom page1)
SHRI G. D. MATHUR Zbpescnting Public Works Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI D. C. CHATURVEDI (Altcrturic) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI M. A. MEHTA SHRI T. M. MENON (Aliernak) CenuD$lyd Research Institute (CSIR), New SHRI T.K. NATARAJAN

Members

REPRESENTATIVE RESEARCH OFFICER SHRI K. R. SAXENA SECRETARY DEPUTY SECRETARY (Alfmate) DR SHAMSHER PR~UCASH SARI H. D. SWARMA SUPERINTENDING E NGI NEER (PLANNING & DESIGNCIRCLE)

Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Buildings & Roads Research Laboratory, Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Engineering Research Laboratory, Hyderabad Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi

University of Roorkee Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee Concrete & Soil Research Laboratory, Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras EXXUT~E ENXNEER (INCHARGE, Son MECHANICS & RESEARCH DIVISION)(Altmafe) Institution of Engineers (India), Calcutta SHRI C. G. SWAMINATHAN All India Instrument Manufacturers & Dealers SHRI H. c. VERMA Association, Bombay SHRI v. K. VASUDEVAN (Alkrnatc) Director General, IS1 (Ex-o@o Member) SHRI D. AJITHAS~MHA, Director (Civ Engg)
Secretmy

Deputy Director (Civ Bngg), IS1 Soil Testing Conzxncr PROP ALAM SINoH Procedures and Equipment Subcommittee, BDC 23

SHRIG.IGMAN

:3

University of Jodhpur

Members SHlu AbwR SINoH
LT-COL

Ckn~mr~eilding

Research

Institute

(CSIR),

AVTAR SINGH MA] R. R. SUnHn'ZmU. (&rnab) SHRI N. K. BERRY Sxim K. S. PREY (Alfemde) DR R. K. BHANDAR~

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters Beas Dams Project, Talwara Township Centimyoad Research Institute (CSIR), New

SHRI T. N. BHARGAWA SWRI A. S. BIHNOI (Akmafe) DR A. K. CHA-~~ERJEH DR B. L. DHAWAN (Al&mate)

Roads Wing (Ministry of Shipping & Transport) Public Works Department, Pradesh, Lucknow Government of Uttar (contLucsd cmposr 15)

.

2

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII)

- 1976

Indian Standard
METHODS
PART XXXVII VALUE

OF TEST FOR SOILS
OF SAND EQUIVALENT FINE AGGREGATES

DETERMINATION OF SOILS AND

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard (Part XXXVII) was adopted by the Indiaii Standards Institution on 16 February 1976, after the draft finalized 1)) the Soil Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 The term `sand equivalent' expresses the concept that most granular soils and fine aggregates are mixtures of desirable coarse particles, samd and generally'undesirable clay or plastic fines and dust. This test is not intended to replace the test covered by IS : 2720 (Part IV)-1975". 0.3 This test assigns an empirical value to the relative amount, fincncss A minimum and character of claylike material present in the test specimen. sand equivalent value may be specified to limit the permissible quantity This test provides a rapid field method of claylike fines in an aggregate. for determining changes in the quality of aggregates during production or placement. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in thiscountry. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications : A89.22A-1973 Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes : Test 22ASand equivalent of aggregate and soil using a poweroperated shaker. Standards Association of Australia. ASTM D 2419-74 of soils and and Materials. Standard method fine aggregate. of test for sand equivalent value American Society for Testing

0.5 In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960t.
*Methods of test for soils: Part IV Grain size analysis (jr~t reuision). tRules for rounding off numerical values (revised).

3

IS : 2720 (Part'XXXVII) 1. SCOPE

- 1976

1.1 Thib standard `Part XXXVIIj covers the method for the dctcrmination af sand equivalent value of 50ils. `I`hi, indicates, under standard canditiani, the rclativc proportion\ of claylikc or plastic fines and dusts This in granular soils and fine ag,grrgates that pass 4.75mm IS Sieve. mc;thod is intended to serve as a rapid field-correlation test. 2. GENERAL 2.1 Maintain
the performance

PRECAKTI-IONS
the: tcmpcraturc of this test. of the \\orking solution at 27 3: 3'C during

2.1.1 If' field conditions preclude the maintenance of the tcmpcrnturc range, frcqucnt rcferce samples should bc submittccl to a labora.tory whcrc It is also possible to c*stablish proper tcmperaturc control is possible. temperature correction curves for each material being tcstcd ~vhcrc proper temperature control is not possible. However, no gcncral correction curve should bc utilized for several matcrialS cvcn within a narrow range Samples that meet the minimum sand cquiof sand equivalent values. valcnt requircmcnt at a lvorking solution tempera.ture 1~~10~~the rccommcndcd range need not bc subjected to .referee testing. 2.2 Perform the test at a location tiee from vibration. Excessive \,ibration may cause the suspended material to settle at a greater rate than normal. 2.3 Do not expose is ncccssary. the plastic cylinders to direct sunlight any more than

2.4 Occasionall\, it may be necessary the Lvorking calcium chloride solution the flexible tubing and irrigator tube. a slimy substance in the solution. 2.4.1 sodium quantity To remove hypochlorite of water.

to remove a fungus growth from container and from the insidc of This fungus can easily be seen as

this growth, prepare a cleaning solvent by diluting solution (household chlorine bleach) with an equal

2.4.2 F,ill the solution container with the prepared cleaning solvent, allow about 1 litre of the cleaning solvent to flow through the siphon assembly and irrigator tube, then place the pinch clamp on the end of the tubing to cut oif the flow of solvent and to hold the solvent in the tube. Refill the container and allow to stand overnight. 2.4.3 After soaking, allow the cleaning siphon assembly and irrigator tube. solvent to flow out through the

2.4.4 Remove the siphon assembly from the solution container and rinse both with clear water. The irrigator tube and siphon assembly can be rinsed easily by attaching a hose between the tip of the irrigator tube and water faucet and backwashing fresh water through the tube. 4

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII)

- 1976

2.5 OccasionalIy the holes in the tip of th.e irrigator tube may become clogged by a particle of sand. If the obstruction cannot be freed by any other method, use a pin or other sharp object to force it out using extreme care not to enlarge the size of the opening. 3. APPARATUS 3.1 Graduated Cylinder-of transparent acrylic plastic as shown in Fig. 1 having an inside diameter of 32 mm, a height of 430 mm, graduations up to 380 mm at 2 mm intervals, beginning at the bottom, and a rubber stopper to fit in mouth of the cylinder. 3.2 Irrigator Tube - as shown in Fig. 1, made of 6.4 mm outside diameter stainless steel tubing with one end closed to form a wedge-shaped point. Two holes of 1 mm diameter are drilled laterally through the flat side of the wedge near the point. 3.3 Siphon Assembly - as shown in Fig. 1, consisting of a 4-litre bottle, a 5-mm outside diameter copper bent tube 410 mm long, 1 220 mm of 3-mm inside diameter rubber tubing (pure gum or equal) with pinch clamp, a blow tube consisting of 50 mm of 5-mm diameter copper tube and 50 mm of 3-n-m inside diameter rubber tube (blow hose), and a P-hole rubber stopper to fit the graduated cylinder specified in 3.1. 3.4 Weighted Foot Assembly - as shown in Fig. 1, consisting of a 6-mm diameter brass rod 445 mm long, threaded on both ends, a brass hexagnal foot of 17.5 mm side by 14 mm diameter, a cylindrical weight of 50 mm diameter and 53 mm height of cold-rolled steel and a nylon. sand reading indicator of 28 mm diameter and 15 mm height. The weight is attached to the top end of the rod to give the assembly of the weight, rod and foot a total'mass of 1 000 + 5 g. The foot is attached to the lower end of the rod. 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 3.10 3.11 Measuring Sieve Can 90 f 5 ml capacity. to IS

4,75-mm

IS Sieve, conforming mouth, for transferring

: 460 - 1962*.

Funnel -wide 4-Litre

soil into the cylinder. and working solution.

Bottles -

two, to store stock solution

Flat Pan-for Timing Sand DeviceEquivaleqt

mixing. reading Shaker in minutes mechanical and seconds. or manually operated.

175 3 2 cycles per minute.
*Specification for test sieves

3.11.1

Mechanical-having

a throw of 200 & 1 mm and operating

at

(revised).

5

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII) - 1976 + 5w--{

LDRILL h TAP Mbx0.75-6H,20 012

FOR mm

DEEP

WEIGHT
6tOs02 6 HOLE

ILL b6 GUIDE LE FOR ROLL PIN [ONE SIDE)

@j SAND

READING I 1-i

NDICATOR

DRILL

llmm

ASSEMBLY

C

@ _ ROD 1 0

FOOT

All dimensions in millimetrcs.

FIG. 1 SAND EQWALENT TEST APPAFGWUS-CO~~~

LIST

OF MATERIALS

Ai4sEiMBLYPARTNo.
A 1 4

DWXIPTION

STOCK SIZE, mm

MATERIAL

3

: 7 CO B 8 9

Siphon Assembly : Siphon tube Siphon hose Blow hose Blow tube P-hole stopper Irrigator tube Clamp Graduar~ Asscmb[y :

.

5 diameter, 410 length 3 lD, 1 220 length 3 ID, 50 length 5 diameter, 50 length To fit 4-litre bottle 6.4 OD wall, 500 length A suitable pinchcock

Copper tube (may Rubber tube, pure Rubber tube, pure CCJ~~ tube (may Stainless steel tube

be plated) gum or equivaient' gum or equivalent be plated)

Tube Base
Weighted Foot Assembly : Sand reading indicator Rod Weight Roll pin Foot Solid stocoer

38 OD, 450 length 12X100x100

Transparent Transparent

acrylic plastic acrylic plastic

c

15 NOTE 1 -

28 diameter, 15 height 6 diameter, 445 height 50 diameter, 53 height 1.6 diameter, 12 height 17.5 hex, 14 height To suit graduated cylinder

Nylon Brass (may be plated) Cold rolled steel (may be plated) Corrosion-resistant metal Brribktrnay be plated)

Assembly C -Weighted foot assembly should weigh I 000 & 5 g. NOTE 2 - Graduations on graduate to be in mm. Centimetre marks should be numerically NOTE 3 -Accuracy of scale & 0.02 mm.

designated.

FIG.~

SAND EQUIVALE'NT TEST APPARATUS

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII)

- 1976

3.11.2 Manually `Ojerated - capable of producing an oscillating motion at a rate of 100 complete cycles in 45 f 5 seconds, with a hand-assisted half stroke length of 125 & 5 mm. 4. MiVERIALs 4.1 Stock Calcium be required : Chloride Soh~tion The materials listed below will

a} 480.4 g of technical @ade anhydrous calcium chloride conforming toIS: 1314- 1967*. b) 2 179 g of glycerine (technical grade) conforming to IS : 1796 -1961 t . c) 49.7 g of formaldehyde (40 percent by volume solution) conforming to IS : 3321-1973:. 4.1.1. Dissolve the 480.4 g of calcium chloride in 2 litres of distilled water; Cool and filter through ready pleated rapid filtering filter paper. Add 2 179 g of glycerine and the 49.7 g of formaldehyde to the filtered solution, mix well and dilate to 4 litres. 4.2 Working Calcium Chloride Solution -- Prepare the working calcium chloride solution by diluting 90 ml of the stock calcium chioride solution to 4 litres with water. Use distilled or demineralized water for the normal However, if it is determined that the preparation of the working solution. local tap waLer is of such purity that it does not affect the test results, it is permissible to use it instead of distilled or demineralized water. NOTE - The effect of local tap water on sand equivalent test results may be determined by comparing the results of three sand equivalent tests uqing distilled water with the results of three sand equivalent tests using the local tap water. The six test specimens required for this comparison shall be prepared from the same sample of material and oven-dried as prescribed in this method. 5. SAMPLE PREPARATION 5.1 Obtain at least 1 500 g of material following manner. passmg 4.75-mm IS Sieve in the

5.1.1 Separate the sample on the 4*75-mm IS Sieve bv means of a lateral and vertical motion of the sieve, accompanied by a jariing action so as to keep the sample moving continuously over the surface of the sieve. Continue the sieving until not more than one percent by mass of the residue passes the sieve during one minute. The sieving operation may be performed either by hand or by a mechanical apparatus. When thoroughness of mechanical sieving is being determined, test by the hand method described above using a single layer of material on the sieve.
Specification f�pecification fSpecification for calcium chloride. fr,r crude &zsrine anrl r&x! for formaldehyde aciutior!. giycerine.

9

IS : 2720(Part XXXVII)

- 1976

5.1.2 Breakdown any lumps of material in the coarse fraction to pass the 4.75-mm IS Sieve. A mortar and rubber-covered pestle or any other means that will not cause appreciable degradation of the aggregate may be used. 5.1.3 Remove any coatings of fines adhering tp_ the coarse aggregate. These fines may be removed by surface-drying the coarse aggregate, then rubbing between the hands over a flat pan. 5.1.4 Add the material passing the sieve as obtained in 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 to the separated fine portion of the sample. 5.2 Prepare test specimens from the. material passing 4.75-mm portion of the sample by the procedure described in either 5.2.1 IS Sieve or 5.2.2.

NOTE - Experiments show that as the amount of material being reduced by splitting or quartering is decreased, the accuracy of providing representative portions is decreased. For this reason, it is imperative that extreme care be exercised when preparing the test specimens.

5.2.1 Split or quarter enough material to fill four can measures to the brim or slightly rounded above the brim in the following manner. 5.2.1.1 Ifit appears necessary, dampen the material to avoid segregation Use care in or loss of fines during the splitting or quartering operations. adding water to the sample to retain a free-flowing condition of the material. 5.2.1.2 Using the measuring can, dip out four of these measures from the sample. Each time a measure full of the material is dipped from the sample, tap the bottom edge of the measure on a work table or other hard surface at least four times and jog it slightly to produce a measure of consolidated material level-full or slightly rounded above the brim. 5.2.1.3 Determine and record the amount of material contained in these four measures either by mass or by volume in a dry plastic cylinder. 5.2.1.4 Return this material back to the sample and proceed to split or quarter the material making the necessary adjustments to obtain this predetermined mass or volume. When this mass or volume is obtained, two successive splitting or quartering operations without adjustment should provide the proper amount of material to fill the measure. 5.2.1.5 Dry each test specimen to constant mass at 105 f 5% and cool to room temperature before testing.
NOTE- Sand equivalent results on test specimens that have not been dried will generally be lower than the results obtained on identical test specimens that have been dried. As a time-saving expedient, it is permissible to test most materials without drying when the sand equivalent value is used to determine compliance with a specification giving a minimum acceptable test value. If the resulting test value is lower than that specified, however, it will be necessary to rerun the test on a dried test specimen. If the sand equivalent, determined from a test on one dried test specimen, is below the minimum specification limit, it will be necessary to perform two additional tests on dried test specimens from the same sample. The sand equivalent for a sample shall be determined in accordance with 8.

10

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII)

- 1976

5.2.2 Prepare the desired number of test specimens from the sample as follows. 5.2.2.1 Maintaining a free-flowing condition, sufficiently to prevent segregation or loss of fines. dampen the material

5.2.2.2 Split or quarter out 1 000 to 1 500 g of the material. Mix thoroughly with a hand trowel in a circular pan by stopping toward the middle of the pan while rotating it horizontally. Mixing or remixing should be continued for at least 1 minute to achieve uniformity. Check the material for the necessary moisture condition by tightly squeezing a small portion of the thoroughly mixed sample in the palm of the hand. If a cast is formed that permits careful handling without breaking, the correct moisture range has been obtained. If the material is too dry, the cast will crumble and it will be necessary to add water and remix and retest until the material forms a cast. If the material shows any free water it is too wet to test and should be drained and air-dried, mixing it frequently to ensure uniformity. This overly wet material will form a good cast when checked initially, so the drying process should continue until a squeeze check on the drying material gives a cast which is more fragile and delicate to handle than the original. If the `as received' water content is within the limits described above, the sample may be run immediately. If the water content is altered to meet these limits, the sample should be put in a pan, covered with a lid or with a damp trowel that does not touch the material, and allowed to stand for a minimum of 15 minutes. 5.2.2.3 After the minimum curing time, remix for 1 minute without water. When thoroughly mixed, form the material into a cone with a trowel. 5.2.2.4 Take the can measure in one hand and push it directly through the base of the pile while holding the free hand firmly against the pile opposite the measure. 5.2.2.5 As the can travels through the pile and emerges, apply enough hand pressure to cause the material to fill the can to overflowing. Press firmly with the palm of the hand, compacting the material until it consolidates in the can. The excess material should be struck off level with the top of the can, moving the ed,ge of the trowel in a sawing motion across the brim. 5.2.2.6 To obtain additional in 5.2.2.3 to 5.2.2.5. 6. PREPARATION test specimens, repeat the procedures

OF APPARATUS

6.1 Fit the siphon assembly to a 4-litre bottle of working calcium chloride solution. Place the bottle on a shelf 915f25 mm above the work surface.
NOTE- Instead of the 4-litre bottle, a glass or plastic vat having a larger capacity may be used provided the liquid level of the working solution is maintained between 915 and 115 mm above the work surface.

11

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII)

- 1976 bottle sand

6.2 Start the siphon by blowing into the top of the solution through a short piece of tubing while the pinch clamp is open. 6.3 When using either the mechanical or the manually operated equivalent shaker, fasten the apparatus to a firm and level mount.

NOTE - If only a few sand equivalent tests are to be performed at one location, it is possible to hold the manually operated shaker by hand on a firm mount.

7. PROCEDURE 7.1 Siphon 100 f 2 mm (indicated on the graduated calcium chloride solution into the graduated cylinder. cylinder) of working cylinder using the

7.2 Pour one of the test specimens into the graduated funnel to avoid spillage.

7.3 Tap the bottom of the cylinder sharply on the palm of the hand several times to release air bubbles and to promote thorough wetting of the specimen. 7.4 Allow the wetted specimen and cylinder to stand undisturbed for 10 & 1 minutes. 7.5 At the end of the IO-minute soaking'period, stopper the cylinder; then loosen the material from the bottom by partially inverting the cylinder and shaking it simultaneously. 7.6 After loosening the material from the bottom of the cylinder, shake the cylinder and contents by any one of the following three methods. 7.6.1 Mecha~Gzl Shaker Method - Place the stoppered cylinder in the mechanical sand equivalent shaker, set the time, and allow the machine to shake the cylinder and the contents for 45 & 1 seconds. 7.6.2 Manual Shaker Method - Secure the stoppered cylinder to the shaker and shake for 100 strokes, with half stroke length of 125 f 5 mm. 7.6.3
Hand Method

7.6.3.1 Hold the cylinder in a horizontal position and shake it vigorously in a horizontal linear motion from end to end.

7.6.3.2 Shake the cylinder 90 cycles in approximately 30 seconds using a throw of 230 5 25 mm. A cycle is defined as a complete back and forth motion. To shake the cylinder at this speed properly, it will be necessary for the operator to shake with the forearms only, relaxing the body and shoulders. 7.7 Following the shaking operation, set the cylinder upright on the work table and remove the stopper. 12

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII) 7.8 Irrigation Procedure

- 1976

7.8.1 Curing the irrigation procedure, keep the cylinder vertical and the Insert the irrigator tube in the top base in contact xvith the xvork surface. of the cylinder, rcmovc the spring clamp from the hO.SC, and rinse the material from the cylinder walls as the irriga.tor is lowered. Force the irrigator through the material to the bottom of the cylinder by applying a gentle stabbmg and twisting action while the workin.g solution flows from the This flushes the fine material into suspension a.bove the coarser irrigator tip. sand particles. 7.8.2 Continue to apply a stabbing and twisting action while flushing the Then fities upward until the cylinder is filled to the 380 mm graduation. raise the irrigator tube slowly without shutting p!f the flow so t&at the liquid level is maintained at about the 380 mm graduation whiic the irrigator tube Regulate the flow just before the irrigator tube is is being withdrawn. entirely withdrawn and adjust the final level to the 380 mm graduation. 7.9 Allow the cylinder and contents to stand undisturbed for 20 minutes & 15 Start the timing immediately after withdrawing the irrigator tube. seconds. 7.10 At the end of the 20-minute sedimentation period, read and record This is the level of the top of the clay suspension as prescribed in 7.12. If no clear line of demarcat,ion has formed referred to as the `clay reading'. at the end of the specified 20-minute sedimentation period, allow the sample to stand undisturbed until a clay reading can be obtained; then immediately read and record the level of the top of the clay suspension and the total sedimenta.tion time. If the tota.1 sedimentation time exceeds 30 minutes, rerun the test using three individual specimens of the same material. Record the clay column height for the sample requiring the shortest sedimcntation period as the clay reading. 7.11 Sand Reading Determination

7.11.1 After the clay reading has been ta.ken, place the weighted foot assembly over the cylinder and gently lower the assembly until it comes to Do not allow `the indicator to hit.the mouth of the cylinder rest on the sand. as the assembly is being low'ered. 7.11.2 As the weighted foot comes to rest on the sand, tip the assembly towards the graduations on the cylinder until the indicator touches the inside of the cylinder. Subtract 250 mm from the level indicated by the extreme top edge of the indicator and record this value as the `sand reading'. 7.11.3 When taking the sand reading, take care not to press down on the weighted foot assembly since this could give an erroneous reading. 7.12 If clay or sand readings fall between 2-mm level of the higher graduation as the reading. 13 graduations, record the

IS : 2720 (Part XXXVII) 8. CALCULATIONS 8.1 Calculate formula :

- 1976

the sand equivalent

(SE) to the nearest 0.1 using the following

J'E :
\\llClT S, =

gj x 100
T

sand reading clay reading

(see 7.11), (see 7.10).

and is not a whole whole number. number, the sand

CT8.2 When equivadent

the result of this calculation (SE) sha.11 be the next higher

Exam/de :
SE === $4 x 100 = 41.2 = 42 the

8.3 I!f it is desired to average a series of sand equivalent values, average whole number values determined as described in 8.2.

Exam/de : Calculated

SE values 41.2, 43.8, 40.9 each to the next higher whole number (see 8.2). Average of these values is

(see 8.1). After.raising they become 42, 44, 41

Since the average value is not a whole number, lent value is 43 (see 8.3). 9. PRECISION

the sand equiva-

9.1 Before

an operator is allowed to pertorm the samd equivalent test, he should be capable of obtaining consistent test results on representa.tive samples of any given material when the test is performed in accordance An operator's with the prescribed procedure for the particular method used. test results are considered to be consistent if the individual results of three tests performed by him on representative samples of the same material do not vary by more than & 4 points from the average of these tests.

14

IS : 2720(Part 2IXXVII) - 1976
(Continued from page 2) Members DEPUTY DIRECTORRESEARCH (SOIL MECHANICS)-I ASSISTANT DIRECTORREWARCH
SHRI R("LoI~dE!fANICS)-I

Representing Railway Board (Ministry of Railways)

Irrigation Research Institute, Khagaul, Patna Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECT~R'(CSMRS) DEPUTY DIREIXOR (CSMRS) (Altcmafe) Geologists' Syndicate Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI H. K. GUHA SHRI N. N. BHA~ACHARAYA (Alternate) DR S-HI K. GULHATI Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi United Technical Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. K. JAIN DR P. K. D~`(Altcmatc) SHRI 0. P. MALH&A Buildings & Roads Reseakh Laboratory, Government of Punjab DIRECTOR(Alternate) DR V. V. S. RAO In personal capacity (F-24 Green Park, New Delhi) SHRI H. C. VERMA Associated Instrument Manufacturers (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi PROF T. S. NACARAJ (Alternate)

(fib7Wtc)

15

INDIAN STANDARDS ON METHODS OF TEST FOR SOILS 1s: 2720 Methods of test for soils:
(Part (Part (Part (Part (Part (Part (Part

I)-1972 Preparation of dry soil samples for various tests (Jirsl revision) II)-1973 Determination of water content (second revrnon) III)-1964 Determination of specific gravity IV)-1975 Grain size analysis (_W r&&n) V)-1970 Determination of liquid and plastic limits (first rez%on) VI)-1972 Dete rmination of shrinkage factors (filst revision) VII)-1974 Determination of water content-dry density relation using light compaction (Jirst revision) (Part VIII)-1974 Determination of water content-dry density relation using heavy compaction (Jirst reti@) (Par;fI~j~19m7elti'termmatron of dry density-moisturecontentrelationhyconstant weight (Part X)-l973 Determination of unconfined compressive strength (Jirst revtin) (Part XI)-1971 Determination of the shear strength parameters of a specimen tested in un-consolidated undrained triaxial compression witholit the measurement of pore water pressure (Part XII)-1975 Determination of shear strength parameters of soil from consolidated undrained triaxial test with measurement of pore water pressure (Part XIII)-1972 Direct shear test (&St revision) (Part XIV)-1968 Determination of density index (relative density) of cohesionless soils (Part XV)-1965 Determination of consolidation properties (Part XVI)-1965 Laboratory determination of CBR (Part XVII)-1966 Laboratory determination permeability (Part XVIII)-1964 Determination of field moisture equivalent (Part XIX)-1 964 Determination of centrifuge moisture equivalent (Part XX)-1966 Determination of linear shrinkage (Part XXI)-1965 Determination of total soluble solids (Part XXII)-1972 Determination of organic matter (@t reoisionj (Part XXIII)-1976 Determination of calcium carbonate (fnst r&&n) (Part XXIV)-1976 Determination of cation exchange capacity (/;rst revtiion) (Part XXV)-1967 Determination of silica sesquioxide ratio (Part XXVI)-1973 Determination of H value (Jirst revision) (Part XXVII)-1968 Determination o P total soluble sulphates (Part XXVIII)-1974 Determination of dry density of soils, in-place by the sand replacement method (first revision) (Part XXIX)-1975 Determination of dry density of soils, in-place by the core-cutter method (first revision) (Part XXX) -1968 Laboratory vane shear test (Part xXx1)-1969 Field determination of California bearmg ratio (Part XxX11)-1970 North dakota cone test (Part XXXIII)-1971 Determination of the density in-place, by the ring and water replacement method (Partmz$dIV)-1972 Determination of density of soil in-place, by rubber-balloon (Part XXXV)-1974 Measurement of negative pore water pressure (Part XXXVI -1975 Laboratory determination of permeability of granular soil (constant h ead) (Part XXXVII)-1976 Determina tion of sand equivalent value of soils and fine aggregates (Part XXXVIII)-1976 COmpactiorl control test (Hilf method)

