**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7503-1 (1988) : Glossary of terms used in rubber 
industry^ Part 1: Definitions of Basic Terms [PCD 13: 
Rubber and Rubber Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1 7503 ( Part 1 ). 1988 
T J' ff^ J J ( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
RUBBER INDUSTRY 

PART 1 DEFINITIONS OF BASIC TERMS 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 001-4: 678-4 



© Copyright 1988 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 1 October 1988 



IS : 7503 ( Part 1 ) - 1988 



Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
RUBBER INDUSTRY 

PART 1 DEFINITIONS OF BASIC TERMS 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) ( First Revi- 
sion ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on 5 Tebruary 1988, after the draft 
finalized by the Rubber Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Products Division Council, 

0.2 This standard was originally formulated in 
six parts of IS : 7503 'Glossary of terms used in 
rubber industry', covering the following terms 
and definitions: 

( Part 1 ) - 1974 Definitions of general terms 
and terms pertaining to latex 
and physical chemical pro- 
perties and testing, com- 
monly used in rubber trade 
and industry 

( Part 2 ) - 1976 Terms relating to compo- 
unding process, machinery 
and vulcanization used in 
rubber industry 

( Part 3 ) - 1979 Terms relating to calender- 
ing, coating, and moulding 
commonly used in rubber, 
trade and industry 

( Part 4 ) - 1979 Terms relating to extrusion 
commonly used in rubber 
trade and industry 

( Part 5 ) - 1981 Terms relating to process 

( Part 6 ) " 1986 Definitions relating to 
cellular materials 

The various terms had been grouped together 
into the above six parts, as and when 
they came up. However, keeping in view the 
latest rationalized classification, existing in ISO 
1382- 1982, these terms have now been re- 
grouped into six parts ( Parts 1 to 6 ) afresh 
under new rationalized and amplified classifica- 
tions as follows: 

Part 1 Definitions of basic terms 

( general terms and basic terms con- 
cerning latex ) 

Part 2 Definitions of additives 

( general terms, additives relating to 
vulcanization, protective agent, fillers 
and colours, extenders and plasti- 
cizers, special chemicals and latex 
additives ) 



Part 3 Definitions relating to properties and 
testing 

( general terms., uncured properties, 
properties and testing relating to 
cure, mechanical and physical proper- 
ties, degradation properties and test- 
ing, properties and test specific for 
latex and chemical properties and 
tests ) 

Part 4 Definitions relating to processing 

( general terms, processing machine 
and processing of latex ) 

Part 5 Definitions relating to products — 
Hoses 

Part 6 Definitions relating to cellular mate- 
rials 

0,3 In the present revised standards, some of the 
terms listed below which were present in the 
original parts of IS : 7503 have now been deleted 
and some new terms have been included: 

a) Terms deleted — Accelerated ultra, anti- 
cracking agent, banding time, book, 
calender crown chalk blower, clamp, 
coefficient of vulcanization, core, density, 
die holder, dielectric, dielectric constant, 
dielectric strength, dilatancy, doubling 
machine, draw, dumb-bell test piece, 
elongation, face cloth, former, frame, gum 
dipping, haul-off equipment, impulse, 
inhibitor, insert pin, iodine number, 
micelle, modulus, mould finish, peak cure, 
pelletizer, premature coagulation, rate of 
cure, raw rubber, relative density, rubber 
hydrocarbon, separating agent, sheet 
rubber, shrink, skimmed fabric, stock, 
thixotropy, tip, treated liner, under cure, 
viscosity, vulcanizate and warming mill, 
h) Terms added — Adhesion strength, cure 
rate index, field latex, mix, Mooney visco- 
sity, stress relaxation, and visco-elasticity. 
0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assis- 
tance has been derived from the following publi- 
cations: 

a) ISO 1382-1982 Rubber vocabulary. Inter- 
national Organization for Standardiza- 
tion ( ISO ). 

b) BS 3558 : 1980 Glossary of rubber terms. 
British Standards Institution. 

0.5 In case there is any difference between the 
definitions in this glossary and those in the 
standards for individual materials, the latter 
shall prevail. 



1 



IS : 7503 ( Part 1 )- 1988 

1. SCOPE 

!•! This standard ( Part 1 ) defines the basic 
terms relating to rubber industry. 

2. BASIC TERMS 

2.1 General 

2.1.1 Elastomer — A macromolecular material 
which returns rapidly to approximately its initial 
dimensions and shape after substantial defor- 
mation by a weak stress and release of the 
stress. 

2.1.2* Extrudate — A profile produced by ex- 
trusion of a rubber compound. 

2.1.3 Master Batch — A well dispersed mix- 
ture of rubber and one or more compounding 
ingredients in known proportion for use as a 
raw material in the preparation of the final mix. 

2.1.4 Mix — An intimate mixture of rubber(s) 
with compounding ingredients. 

2.1.5 Natural Rubber — Rubber formed in a 
living plant. 

2.1.6 Reclaimed Rubber — The product re- 
covered by the treatment of vulcanized rubber, 
which is capable of revulcanization. 

2.1.7 Rubber — An elastomer which can be 
modified to a state in which it is essentially 
insoluble ( but can swell ) in a boiling solvent 
scuh as benzene, methylethylketone and ethanol- 
toluene azeotrope. A rubber in it^ modified 
state cannot i>e easily remoulded to a permanent 
shape by the application of heat and moderate 
pressure. 

A rubber in its modified state, free of dilu- 
ents, retracts within 1 minute to less than 1' 5 
times its original length after being stretched at 
normal room temperature to twice its length and 
held for 1 minute before release. 

2.1.8 Rubber Compound — An intimate mix- 
ture of rubber(s) with all the ingredients neces- 
sary for the finished article. 

2.1.9 Synthetic Rubber — Rubber prepared by 
polymerization of monomers. 



2.1.10 Vulcanization {Cure) — A process in 
which rubber through a change in its chemical 
structure ( for example cross-linking ), is conver- 
ted into a condition in which elastic properties 
are conferred or improved or extended over a 
greater range of temperature. In some cases, the 
process is carried to a point where the substance 
becomes rigid. 

2.2 Basic Terms Concerning Latex 

2.2.1 Centrifuged Rubber Latex — Latex, the 
rubber concentration of which has been increased 
by the removal of serum by centrifugal force. 

2.2.2 Coagulum — Immediate product of 
coagulation of latex consisting of agglomerates 
of rubber particles. 

2.2.3 Creamed Rubber Latex — Latex, the 
rubber concentration of which has been increased 
by creaming and removal of the separated 
serum. 

2.2.4 Evaporated Rubber Latex — Latex, the 
rubber concentration of which has been increa- 
sed by evaporation of some of the water. 

2.2.5 Field Latex — Natural rubber latex 
with or without a preservative and prior to con- 
centration or any other processing. 

Note — The preservative is added to maintain the 
original state of the latex as it catne from the tree. 

2.2.6 Latex — Colloidal aqueous dispersion of 
polymeric substance. 

2.2.7 Precoagulum — The coagulum resulting 
from partial inadvertent coagulation of a rubber 
latex. 

2.2.8 Preserved Rubber Latex — Latex treated 
to inhibit putrefaction and accompanying coagu- 
lation. 

2.2.9 Prevulcanized Latex — Latex in which 
the particles have been partially vulcanized. 

2.2.10 Serum — Dispersion medium of a 
latex. 

2.2.11 Stabilized Latex — Latex treated to 
inhibit premature coagulation. 



Printed at Svi^atantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



