#7419 HTAR IS 14216 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Pret Va Waa 1 07 =%15 
acon — wate A fe ат 


(TEA TREAT ) 


Spices and Condiments Processing 
Units — Code of Hygiene Practices 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.220.10 


© BIS 2023 


тї 9198 SALT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HM, 9 FST ME HH AT, 95 Reet - 110002 
ee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 7 


Spices and Condiments Sectional Committee, FAD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Spices and Condiments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Divisional 
Council. 


Dried, fragrant, aromatic or pungent, edible plant substances, in the whole, broken or ground form, for example, 
spices and dried culinary herbs, impart flavour, aroma or colour when added to food. Spices and dried culinary 
herbs may include many parts of the plant, such as aril, bark, berries, buds, bulbs, leaves, rhizomes, roots, seeds, 
stigmas, pods, resins, fruits, or plant tops. 


The production, processing, and packing of spices and dried culinary herbs are very complex. For example, source 
plants for spices and dried culinary herbs are grown in a wide range of areas and on many types of farms, for 
example from very small farms to large farms. Agricultural practices for growing source plants for spices and 
dried culinary herbs also vary tremendously from virtually no mechanization to highly mechanized practices. 
Drying of source plants may be performed mechanically (for rapid drying) or naturally (for example, slower drying 
under the sun for several days). The distribution and processing chain for spices and dried culinary herbs is also 
highly complex and can span long periods of time and include a wide range of establishments. Dried product 
processing generally involves cleaning (for example, culling, sorting to remove debris), grading, sometimes 
soaking, slicing, drying, and on occasion grinding/cracking. Some spices and dried culinary herbs are also treated 
to mitigate microbial contamination, typically by steam treatment, gas treatment (for example, ethylene oxide), or 
irradiation. Processing and packing/repacking may also take place in multiple locations over long periods of time, 
since spices and dried culinary herbs are prepared for different purposes. 


The safety of spices and dried culinary herbs products depends on maintaining good hygienic practices along the 
food chain during primary production, processing, packing, retail, and at the point of consumption. Spore forming 
bacteria, including pathogens such as Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens, and Clostridium botulinum, as 
well as non-spore forming vegetative cells of microorganisms such as Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, 
and Salmonella spp. have been found in spices and dried culinary herbs. The complex supply chain for spices and 
dried culinary herbs makes it difficult to identify the points in the food chain where contamination occurs, but 
evidence has demonstrated that contamination can occur throughout the food chain if proper practices are not 
followed. 


The safety of spices and dried culinary herbs can also be affected by mycotoxin-producing moulds, for example, 
those producing aflatoxin (such as Aspergillus flavus or Aspergillus parasiticus) or ochratoxin A (such as 
Aspergillus ochraceus, Aspergillus carbonarius, or Penicillium verrucosum). Chemical hazards such as heavy 
metals and pesticides, as well as physical contaminants such as stones, glass, wire, extraneous matter and other 
objectionable material, may also be present in spices and dried culinary herbs. 


This standard addresses Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) and Good 
Hygienic Practices (GHPs) that will help minimize contamination, including microbial, chemical and physical 
hazards, associated with all stages of the production of spices and dried culinary herbs from primary production 
to consumer use. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 14216 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


SPICES AND CONDIMENTS PROCESSING UNITS 
— CODE OF HYGIENE PRACTICES 


( First revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This code of hygienic practices applies to spices and 
condiments, whole, broken, ground or blended. It 
covers the minimum requirements of hygiene for 
growing, harvesting and post-harvest practices (for 
example, curing, bleaching, blanching, cutting, 
drying, cleaning, grading, packing, transportation 
and storage, including  disinfestation апа 
fumigation), processing establishments, processing 
technology and practices (for example, grinding, 
blending, freezing and freeze-drying, treatments to 
reduce the microbial load), packaging and storage of 
processed products. For spices and culinary herbs 
collected from the wild, only the measures for 
handling and post-harvest activities apply. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this Standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 2491: 2013 Food hygiene — General 
principles — Code of practice 
(third Revision) 
3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in 
IS 2491 shall apply. In addition, the following 
definitions are also given: 


3.1 Spices and Dried Culinary Herbs — Dried 
plants or parts of plants (roots, rhizomes, bulbs, 
leaves, bark, flowers, fruits, and seeds) used in foods 
for flavouring, colouring, and imparting aroma. This 
term equally applies to whole, broken, ground and 
blended forms. 


NOTE — Spices and dried culinary herbs may include 
the dried aril (for example the mace of nutmeg), bark (for 


example cinnamon), berries (for example black pepper), 
buds (for example clove), bulbs (for example dried garlic), 
leaves (for example dried basil), rhizomes (for example 
ginger, turmeric), seeds (for example mustard), stigmas (for 
example saffron), pods (for example vanilla), resins (for 
example asafoetida), fruits (for example dried chilli) or plant 
tops (for example dried chives). 


3.2 Disinfest — Process to eliminate harmful, 
threatening, or obnoxious pests, for example vermin. 


3.3 Microbial Reduction Treatment — Process 
applied to spices and dried culinary herbs to 
eliminate or reduce microbial contaminants to an 
acceptable level. 


3.4 Source Plant — Plant (non-dried) from which 
the spice or dried culinary herb is derived. 


4 PRIMARY PRODUCTION 
4.1 Environmental Hygiene 


Source plants for spices and dried culinary herbs 
should be protected, to the extent practicable, from 
contamination by human, animal, domestic, 
industrial and agricultural wastes which may be 
present at levels likely to be a risk to health. 


4.2 Handling, Storage and Transport 


Each source plant should be harvested using a 
method suitable for the plant part to be harvested in 
order to minimize damage and the introduction of 
contaminants. Plant matter that is damaged or other 
plant waste material should be disposed of properly 
and removed from the growing/harvest area in order 
to minimize the potential for it to serve as a source 
of mycotoxin-producing moulds or pathogenic 
bacteria. If possible, only the amount that can be 
processed in a timely manner should be picked in 
order to minimize growth of mycotoxin producing 
moulds and pathogenic bacteria prior to processing. 
When the amount harvested exceeds processing 
capabilities, the excess should be stored under 
appropriate conditions. 


4.2.1 Prevention of Cross-Contamination 


Specific control methods should be implemented to 


IS 14216 : 2023 


minimize the risk of cross-contamination from 
microorganisms associated with harvesting 
methods. The following should be considered: 


a) Where appropriate, the soil under the plant 
should be covered with a clean sheet of 
plastic or clean plant material such as straw 
during picking/harvesting to avoid 
contamination by dirt or plant matter that 
has fallen prior to harvesting. Plastic that 
will be reused should be easy to clean and 
disinfected. Plant material should be used 
only once. 

b) Source plant material that has fallen to the 
ground should be disposed of properly if it 
cannot be made safe by further processing. 


4.2.2 Storage and Transport from the 
Growing/Harvest Area to the Packing 
Establishment 


Spices and dried culinary herbs should be kept in 
areas where contact with water or moisture is 
minimized. Spices and dried culinary herbs should 
be stored on raised platforms or hung under a non- 
leaking roof in a cool dry place. The storage location 
should prevent access, to the extent practicable, by 
rodents or other animals and birds and should be 
isolated from areas of excessive human or 
equipment traffic. 


4.3 Drying 
4.3.1 Natural Drying 


Plants or parts of plants used for the preparation of 
spices and dried culinary herbs may be dried 
naturally, for example, air dried, provided adequate 
measures are taken to prevent contamination of the 
raw material during the process. The drying time 
depends оп the environmental conditions 
surrounding the product, that is temperature, relative 
humidity, and air velocity. 


If dried naturally, plants or parts of plants should be 
dried on clean, elevated racks, clean concrete floors, 
or clean mats or tarps or by hanging under a non- 
leaking roof and not on the bare ground or in direct 
contact with the soil. Pathways should be made in 
the drying area to prevent anyone from walking on 
the crop. The drying plant material should be 
raked/turned frequently to limit mould growth. 


Concrete floors or slabs poured specifically for 
drying source plants should be subject to an 
appropriate cleaning program and, where 
appropriate, disinfected. New concrete slabs should 
be used for drying only when it is absolutely certain 


that the new concrete is well-cured and free of 
excess water. A suitable plastic cover spread over 
the entire new concrete slabs can be used as a 
moisture barrier; however, the sheet should be 
completely flat to prevent the pooling of water. 
Suitable precautions should be taken, where 
practicable, to protect the spices and dried culinary 
herbs from contamination and damage by domestic 
animals, rodents, birds, mites, insects or other 
objectionable substances during drying, handling 
and storage. If drying outdoors, drying platforms 
should be placed under a roof/tarp free of tears, holes 
or frayed material that will prevent rewetting by 
rainfall and contamination from birds overhead. 


Drying time should be reduced as much as possible 
by using optimal drying conditions (for example, 
temperature, humidity and ventilation) to avoid 
fungal growth and toxin production. The thickness 
layer of the drying source plant material should be 
considered in order to consistently achieve a safe 
moisture level. 


4.3.2 Mechanical Drying (see 6.2.1.1) 
4.4 Packing in the Growing/Harvest Area 


Packing activities can occur in the growing/harvest 
area. Such packing operations should include the 
same sanitary practices, where practical, as packing 
spices and dried culinary herbs in establishments or 
modified as needed to minimize risks. To prevent 
germination and growth of spores, the products must 
be dried to a safe moisture level prior to packing. 


When packing spices and dried culinary herbs in the 
growing/harvest area for transport, storage, or for 
further sale, new bags/containers should be used to 
prevent the potential for microbial, physical and 
chemical contamination. When bags/containers are 
marked, food-grade ink should be used to minimize 
the potential for contamination with ink. When 
bags/containers have an open structure, such as jute 
bags, the bag/container should not be marked when 
filled with spices and dried culinary herbs to prevent 
liquid ink from contaminating the contents and 
increasing the moisture in the spices and dried 
culinary herbs. It is recommended that paper tags be 
used instead of liquid ink for marking. Removal of 
discarded plant material should be done on a regular 
basis in order to avoid accumulation that would 
promote the presence of pests. 


4.5 Cleaning, Maintenance and Personnel 
Hygiene 


Appropriate facilities and procedures should be in 


place to ensure that necessary cleaning and 
maintenance is carried out effectively and 
appropriate degree of personal hygiene is 
maintained. 


5 ESTABLISHMENT — DESIGN AND 
FACILITIES 


5.1 Location 
5.1.1 Establishment 


Potential sources of contamination need to be 
considered when deciding where to locate a food 
establishment as well as the effectiveness of any 
reasonable measures that might be taken to protect 
food. An establishment should not be located 
anywhere, where, after considering such protective 
measures, it is clear that there will remain a threat to 
food safety or suitability. In particular, an 
establishment should normally be located away 
from, 


a) Environmentally polluted areas and 
industrial activities which pose a serious 
threat of contaminating food; 

b) Areas subject to flooding unless sufficient 
safeguards are provided; 


c) Areas prone to infestations of pests; and 


d) Areas where wastes, either solid or liquid, 
cannot be removed effectively. 


5.2 Equipment 


Equipment should be installed so as to allow access 
for cleaning and to minimize transfer of dust 
particles to other pieces of equipment or to the 
environment. 


The risk of contamination from equipment should be 
assessed and controlled. Wherever possible, 
forklifts, utensils, and maintenance tools for the 
finished product and packaging areas should be 
different from those used in the “raw” material area 
(for example, prior to the microbial reduction 
treatment). 


5.3 Premises and Rooms 


Where practicable, buildings and facilities should be 
designed to provide separation, by partition, location 
or other effective means, between operations that 
could result in cross-contamination. They should be 
designed to facilitate hygienic operations according 
to the one-way flow direction, without backtracking, 
from the arrival of the raw materials at the premises 
to the finished product, and should provide for 


IS 14216 : 2023 


appropriate temperature and humidity conditions for 
the process and the product. 


Premises and rooms should be designed with a 
means of dust control, since spices and dried 
culinary herbs are likely to generate particulate 
matter that can be carried to other parts of the room 
or premises by air currents. 


5.4 Facilities for Storage 


Facilities for the storage of spices and dried culinary 
herbs should be designed and constructed to prevent 
high humidity or other conditions that could result in 
moisture levels in product that would support the 
growth of moulds. 


6 CONTROL OF OPERATION 
6.1 Control of Food Hazards 


Measures should be taken at each step in the food 
chain to minimize the potential for contamination of 
spices and dried culinary herbs by microbial 
pathogens (including mycotoxin-producing 
moulds), chemical contaminants апа other 
contaminants not intentionally added to food such as 
excreta, rodent hair, and insect fragments, which 
may compromise food safety or suitability. 


6.2 Key Aspects of Hygiene Control Systems 
6.2.1 Specific Process Steps 
6.2.1.1 Mechanical drying 


Plants or parts of plants used for the preparation of 
spices and dried culinary herbs may be dried 
mechanically (for example, forced air drying), 
provided adequate measures are taken to prevent 
contamination of the raw material during the 
process. To prevent the growth of microorganisms, 
especially mycotoxin producing moulds, a safe 
moisture level should be achieved as rapidly as 
possible. 


Mechanical drying methods should be used instead 
of natural (open) air drying, where possible, to limit 
exposure of spices and dried culinary herbs to 
environmental contaminants and to prevent growth 
of moulds. If hot air drying is used, the air should be 
free of contaminants and precautions should be 
made to prevent combustion gases from contacting 
the plant material or stored plant material in the area. 


Drying time should be reduced as much as possible 
by using optimal drying conditions to avoid fungal 
growth and toxin production. The thickness layer of 


IS 14216 : 2023 


the drying source plant should be considered in order 
to consistently achieve a safe moisture level. 


6.2.1.2 Cleaning of spices and dried culinary herbs 


Spices and dried culinary herbs should be cleaned 
properly (for example, culled and sorted) to remove 
physical hazards (such as the presence of animal and 
plant debris, metal and other foreign material) 
through manual sorting or the use of detectors, such 
as metal detectors. Raw materials should be trimmed 
to remove any damaged, rotten or mouldy material. 


Debris from culling and sorting should be 
periodically collected and stored away from the 
drying, processing and packaging areas to avoid 
cross-contamination and attracting pests. 


6.2.1.3 Microbial Reduction Treatments 


When necessary to reduce risk, spices and dried 
culinary herbs should be treated with a validated 
microbial reduction treatment prior to reaching the 
consumer in order to inactivate pathogens such as 
Salmonella. Commonly used methods involve the 
application of steam, fumigation or radiation. 
Factors that should be controlled when using steam 
include exposure time and temperature. The process 
should ensure that all of the product achieves the 
desired temperature for the full length of time 
required. A drying step may be necessary to remove 
added moisture. 


Factors that should be controlled when using 
irradiation include radiation dose and the size and 
shape of the package, as well as the penetrability of 
the packaging material to the type of radiation used. 
The process should ensure that all of the product is 
exposed to the minimum dose of radiation needed to 
provide the intended effect. 


Factors that should be controlled when using 
fumigation treatments such as ethylene oxide or 
propylene oxide include product initial temperature, 
chamber temperature, chemical concentration, 
exposure time, vacuum and/or pressure, density of 
the product, and gas permeability of the packaging 
material. The process should ensure that all product 
is directly exposed to the gas for the full length of 
time required. 


For pathogen inactivation treatments the adequacy 
of the selected control measure (thermal or non- 
thermal) and associated critical limits for processing 
should be determined, considering the increased 
heat resistance reported for Salmonella at low water 
activities and the increased resistance of spores to 
most microbial reduction treatments. 


6.2.2 Microbiological and Other Specifications 


For general recommendations, IS 2491 may be 
referred. When tested by appropriate methods of 
sampling and examination, the products should: 


a) Be free from pathogenic and toxigenic 
microorganisms in levels that may present 
a risk to health; and should comply with the 
provisions for food additives; 

b) Not contain any substances originating 
from microorganisms, particularly 
mycotoxins, in amounts that exceed the 
tolerances or criteria established by the 
regulatory authority; 

c) Not contain levels of insect, bird or rodent 
contamination that indicate that spices and 
dried culinary herbs have been prepared, 
packed or held under unsanitary 
conditions; 

d) Not contain chemical residues resulting 
from the treatment of spices and dried 
culinary herbs in excess of levels 
established by the regulatory authority; 


e) Comply with the provisions for 
contaminants, and with maximum levels 
for pesticide residues established by the 
regulatory authority. 


6.2.3 Microbiological Cross-Contamination 


Effective measures should be taken to prevent cross- 
contamination of uncontaminated spices and dried 
culinary herbs by direct or indirect contact with 
potentially contaminated material at all stages of the 
processing. Raw products that may present a 
potential hazard should be processed in separate 
rooms, or in areas physically separate from those 
where end-products are being prepared. Spices and 
dried culinary herbs that have undergone a microbial 
reduction treatment should be processed and stored 
separately from untreated spices and dried culinary 
herbs. Equipment should not be used for both treated 
and untreated products without adequate cleaning 
and disinfection before use with treated products. 


6.2.4 Physical and Chemical Contamination 


Appropriate tools and methods should be used to 
remove physical hazards such as pebbles or heavier 
stones. To separate foreign matter from the product, 
air tables or gravity separators can be used for 
particles of the same size and different density. 
Sieves of different mesh may be used to obtain the 
size required for each product and to remove foreign 
matter. 


Regardless of the type of separator used, the 
following parameters should be considered; density, 
weight and size of particle, air speed, inclination of 
the sieve plate, vibration, etc for the highest 
effectiveness of the procedure. 

Magnets/metal detectors should be used to separate 
ferrous and  non-ferrous/metallic matter from 
product or detect it in the product and remove the 
contaminated product. For good extraction, magnets 
should be as close as possible to the product. 
Magnets work more efficiently when product flows 
freely. If needed, more than one magnet should be 
placed in the line. Magnets should be cleaned 
frequently. Equipment should be designed in such a 
way as to prevent metals extracted by magnets from 
being swept by the flow of product. Spices and dried 
culinary herbs should be arranged in a fine layer to 
facilitate this operation. 


6.3 Incoming Material Requirements 


Spices and dried culinary herbs or their source plants 
should not be accepted by the establishment if they 
are known to contain contaminants which will not be 
reduced to acceptable levels by normal processing 
procedures, sorting or preparation. Precautions 
should be taken to minimize the potential for 
contamination of the establishment апа other 
products from incoming materials that may be 
contaminated. Plants, parts of plants, spices and 
dried culinary herbs suspected of being 
contaminated with animal or human faecal material 
should be rejected for human consumption. Special 
precautions should be taken to reject spices and 
dried culinary herbs showing signs of pest damage 
or mould growth because of the potential for them to 
contain mycotoxins such as aflatoxins. Raw 
materials should be inspected and sorted prior to 
processing (foreign matter, odour and appearance, 
visible mould contamination). 


6.4 Packaging 


Non-porous bags/containers should be used to 
protect the spices and dried culinary herbs from 
contamination and the introduction of moisture, 
insects and rodents. In particular, the reabsorption of 
ambient moisture should Бе prevented. 
Contamination should be prevented by the use of 
liners where appropriate. It is recommended that 
new bags or containers be used for food contact 
packaging. If reusable bags/containers are used, they 
should be properly cleaned and disinfected before 
use. All bags/containers should be in good condition 
and particular attention paid to the potential for loose 
bag fibres that can become potential contaminants. 
Secondary containment bags/containers providing 


IS 14216 : 2023 


additional protection can be reused but should not 
have been previously used to hold non-food 
materials such as chemicals or animal feed. 


Spices and dried culinary herbs, for example, dried 
chilli peppers, should not be sprayed with water to 
prevent breakage during packing. This may result in 
growth of moulds and microbial pathogens, if 
present. 


Finished products may be packed in gas tight 
containers preferably under inert gases like nitrogen 
or under vacuum in order to retard possible mould 
growth. 


6.5 Documentation and Records 


Where necessary, appropriate records of processing, 
production and distribution should be kept and 
retained for a period that exceeds the shelf-life of the 
product. Documentation can enhance the credibility 
and effectiveness of the food safety control system. 


6.6 Recall Procedures 


Records should identify the source (or lot number) 
of incoming raw materials and link the source or lot 
to the lots of outgoing products to facilitate 
traceability/product tracing. Managers should 
ensure that effective procedures are in place to deal 
with any food safety hazard and to enable the 
complete, rapid recall of any implicated lot of the 
finished food from the market. Where a product has 
been withdrawn because of an immediate health 
hazard, other products which are produced under 
similar conditions and which may present a similar 
hazard to public health, should be evaluated for 
safety and may need to be withdrawn. The need for 
public warnings should be considered. 


6.6.1 Recalled products should be held under 
supervision until they are destroyed, used for 
purposes other than human consumption, 
determined to be safe for human consumption, or 
reprocessed in a manner to ensure their safety. 


7 ESTABLISHMENT — MAINTENANCE AND 
SANITATION 


7.1 Cleaning Programmes 


A cleaning and disinfection schedule should be 
established to ensure that all areas of the 
establishment are appropriately cleaned and that 
special attention is given to critical areas including 
equipment and materials. The air handling system 
should be included in the cleaning and disinfection 
schedule. The cleaning and disinfection schedule 
should describe whether to use wet or dry cleaning. 


IS 14216 : 2023 


The presence of water in the dry processing 
environment can result from improper use of water 
during cleaning. 


Dry cleaning is the preferred means of cleaning 
establishments handling spices and dried culinary 
herbs, since the use of water can enhance the 
probability of contamination from pathogens such as 
Salmonella. Dry cleaning should collect, remove 
and dispose of residues without redistributing them 
or cross-contaminating the environment. 


Dry cleaning is especially important in older 
establishments in which, in spite of regular 
maintenance, there may be a potential for the 
presence of cracks or other harbourage sites that may 
be difficult to eliminate. Even if residues of spices 
and dried culinary herbs enter such a site, potential 
problems can be minimized if the residues and the 
sites are dry and kept dry. Once water enters the 
harbourage site, microbial growth can occur and the 
potential risk of contamination to the environment 
and eventually to the product is increased. 


Wet cleaning may be appropriate in certain 
circumstances, for example, when Salmonella has 
been detected in the environment. Wet cleaning 
should be followed by disinfection with preferably 
an alcohol-based disinfectant that will rapidly 
evaporate after contact. Suitable, alternative 
disinfectants that are not alcohol-based may be used 
where appropriate. Wet cleaning should be followed 
by thorough drying. 


7.2 Pest Control Systems 


Drains should be trapped or otherwise equipped with 
appropriate means to prevent entry of pests from 
drainage systems. 


7.3 Waste Management 


Suitable provisions shall be made for the removal 
and storage of waste. Waste shall not be allowed to 
accumulate in product handling, storage, and other 
working areas and the adjoining environment except 
so far as is unavoidable for proper functioning of the 
business. Waste stores shall be kept appropriately 
clean. Care should be taken to prevent access to 
waste by pests. 


7.4 Monitoring Effectiveness 


Verification of hygienic control measures should 
include an environmental monitoring program that 
has been designed to identify pathogens such as 
Salmonella in the processing areas. 


8 ESTABLISHMENT — PERSONAL 
HYGIENE 


8.1 Health Status 


Periodical medical examination of a food handler 
should be carried out. 


8.1.1 People known, or suspected, to be suffering 
from, or to be a carrier of a disease or illness likely 
to be transmitted through food, should not be 
allowed to enter any food handling area, if there is a 
likelihood of their contaminating food. Any person 
so affected should immediately report illness or 
symptoms of illness to the management. 


8.1.2 If clinically or epidemiologically indicated and 
immunization records maintained to ensure 
complete immunization for communicable diseases. 


8.1.3 Conditions which should be reported to 
management so that any need for medical 
examination and/or possible exclusion from food 
handling can be considered, include jaundice, 
diarrhoea, vomiting, fever, sore throat with fever, 
visibly infected skin lesions (boils, cuts, etc) and 
discharges from the ear, eye or nose and respiratory 
tract illness. 


8.2 Personal Cleanliness 


8.2.1 Food handlers should maintain a high degree 
of personal cleanliness, and where appropriate, wear 
suitable protective clothing, head covering, and 
footwear. Cuts and wounds, where personnel are 
permitted to continue working, should be covered by 
suitable waterproof dressings. 


8.2.2 Personnel should always wash their hands 
when personal cleanliness may effect food safety, 
for example: 


a) At the start of food handling activities; 

b) Immediately after using the toilet; and 

c) After handling raw food or any contaminated 
material, where this could result in 
contamination of other food items. 


8.2.3 Personnel should avoid handling ready to eat 
food, where appropriate. 


8.3 Personal Behaviour 


8.3.1 People engaged in food handling activities 
should refrain from behaviour which could result in 
contamination of food, for example, smoking, 
spitting, chewing or eating, and sneezing or 


coughing over unprotected food. 


8.3.2 Personal effects, such as jewellery, bangles, 
watches, pins or other items should not be worn or 
brought into food handling areas, if they pose a 
threat to the safety and suitability of food. 


8.4 Visitors 


Visitors to food manufacturing, processing or 
handling areas should, where appropriate, wear 
protective clothing and adhere to the other personal 
hygiene provisions. 


9 TRANSPORTATION 


Bulk transport of spices and dried culinary herbs, 
such as by ship or rail, should be well ventilated with 
dry air to prevent moisture condensation, for 
example, resulting from respiration and when the 
vehicle moves from a warmer to a cooler region or 
from day to night. Prior to bulk transport, the 
products must be dried to a safe moisture level to 
prevent the growth of moulds and pathogenic 
bacteria. 


IS 14216 : 2023 


9.1 General 


Spices and dried culinary herbs should be stored and 
transported under conditions that maintain the 
integrity of the container and the product within it. 
Vehicles should be clean, dry, and free from 
infestation. Spices and dried culinary herbs should 
be loaded, transported, and unloaded in a manner 
that protects them from any damage, contamination 
or water. Care should be taken to prevent 
condensation when unloading spices and dried 
culinary herbs from a refrigerated vehicle or while 
taking out of a cold storage. In warm, humid 
weather, the products should be allowed to reach 
ambient temperature before exposure to external 
conditions. Spices and dried culinary herbs that have 
been spilled are vulnerable to contamination and 
should not be used as food. 


IS 14216 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Spices and Condiments Sectional Committee, FAD 09 


Organization 


Spices Board India, Kochi 


AB Mauri India Private Limited, Kochi 


All India Spices Exporters Forum, Cochin 


CSIR - Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


CSIR - National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science 
and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Consumer Coordination Council, Noida 


Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 


Directorate of Arecanut and Spices Development, 
Calicut 


Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 


Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


ICAR - Indian Institute of Spices Research, Kozhikode 


ICMR - National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 


Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur 


Representative(s) 


DR A.B. REMA SHREE (Chairperson) 


SHRI PRAKASH NAMBOODIRI 


SHRI CHERIAN XAVIER 
MS PRIYAMVADA NILAYANGOD (Alternate) 


DR М. MADHAVA NAIDU 
SHRI NAGARAJAN S. (Alternate) 


DR RAGHU K. G. 


Ms NEHA AGGARWAL 
SHRI KANNAN B. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMJI BHAI MAVANI 


DR К. К. ANILAKUMAR 
SHRI DEV KUMAR YADAV (Alternate) 


DR HOMEY CHERIYAN 
DR FEMINA (Alternate) 


SHIVNANDAN DEPUTY AGRICULTURAL MARKETING 
ADVISER 
SHRI RAHUL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI WASI ASGHAR 
SHRI SHASHI PRAKASH TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


ADVISOR 


DRN. K. LEELA 
DR E. JAYASHREE (Alternate) 


DR S. SREENIVASA REDDY 
DR PARAS SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR SAJI GOMEZ 
DR SEEJA THOMACHAN PANJIKKARAN (Alternate) 


Organization 
National Institute of Food Technology 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Sonipat 
National Research Centre on Seed Spices, Ajmer 
Praveen Masalewale 


Spices Board India, Kochi 


Synthite Industries Pvt Ltd, Kolenchery 


World Spice Organization, Kochi 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 14216 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR SUNIL PAREEK 


DR S.N. SAXENA 
DR B.K. MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND CHORDIA 
MS ROHINI KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH BABU N 
Ms C.M. SRILATHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHUBU К. CHITHAJAN 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMKUMAR MENON 
SHRI PHILIP KURUVILLA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
[REPRESENTING 


HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) 
DIRECTOR GENERAL(Ex- officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI NAVITA YADAV 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard was originally published in 1994 by deriving assistance from draft on “Hygienic practices for spices 
and condiments’ (CAC/RCP 42 - 1995) by Codex Alimentarius Commission. This first revision of Indian Standard 
has been undertaken as the codex publication CAC/RCP 42 has been withdrawn by Codex and in its place a new 
guideline is in force, CXC 75-2015 ‘Code of hygienic practice for low moisture foods’. The Codex publication 
has a specific annex Ш given for spices and condiments and while drafting this first revision, considerable 
assistance has been drawn from CXC 75-2015. 


The composition of the technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed, or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 09 (19647). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


