Waa HTA IS 3913 : 2014 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


maA — Aria aaae 
Aaa at mda send 
qa orei 


(ZART JTO ) 


Hydrometry — Functional 
Requirements and Characteristics 
of Suspended-Sediment Samplers 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 17.120.20 


© BIS 2014 


mA AM Ot 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 aege WAL Art, we feeei-110002 
elie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2014 Price Group 5 


Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Hydrometry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Suspended-sediment samplers are used to collect a representative sample of the water-sediment mixture of rivers 
and streams. Ideally, the sampler should be able to collect samples that represent the mean concentration of 
suspended sediment or define the horizontal and vertical variation of suspended-sediment concentration so that 
the mean concentration can be determined. Samplers have gradually evolved from those that collect an 
instantaneous sample at one point in a stream or river to streamlined samplers that collect time and/or depth 
integrated samples. There are a number of different types of samplers available for collecting suspended sediment, 
including open containers, vertical and horizontal cylinders, bottle samplers, pumping samplers, single-stage 
samplers, point-integrating samplers and depth-integrating samplers. Some samplers have also been adapted to 
enable the collection of clean (uncontaminated) samples of trace metal and organic compounds that are commonly 
associated with suspended sediment in streams and rivers. 


This standard was first published in 1966. The first revision was done in 2005. This revision is being done to 
align it with the latest version of ISO/TS 3716 : 2006 ‘Hydrometry — Functional requirements and characteristics 
of suspended-sediment samplers’. Main changes from the ISO/TS 3716 : 2006 decided by the Sectional Committee 
are as follows: 


a) In clause 5 an additional paragraph and Table 1 have been added to give further information on 
characteristics of suspended sediment samplers. 

b) Atypical sketch of bottle type open container sampler has been added as Fig. 2 and figure on schematic 
diagram of a typical single-stage sediment sampler (now Fig. 6) has been modified. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3913 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


HYDROMETRY — FUNCTIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF 
SUSPENDED-SEDIMENT SAMPLERS 


(Second Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the functional requirements and 
characteristics of the different types of suspended- 
sediment samplers. 


NOTE — The units of measurement used in this standard are 
SI units. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provision which, 
through reference in this text constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1191 : 2003 Hydrometric determination — 
Vocabulary and symbols (second 
revision) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 1191 and the following shall 


apply. 
3.1 Isokinetic 


Intake velocity of the suspended-sediment sampler 
equals the ambient stream velocity. 


4 REQUIREMENTS OF SAMPLERS 


In order that the samples taken by a sampler are truly 
representative of the sediment concentration of a stream 
at a point of sampling, the ideal sampler should fulfil 
the following technical requirements: 


a) The sampler shall be streamlined to reduce 
drag and to minimize disturbances to normal 
sediment flow. 


b) The velocity of inflow in the mouth of the 
sampler, nozzle or sampling tube shall be 
isokinetic or as close as possible to the 
velocity of the current of water at the sampling 


c) 


d) 


e) 


2) 


h) 


D 


k) 


m) 


point, irrespective of what this velocity may 
be or irrespective of what the depth of 
submergence at this point may be. This aspect 
is most important if large sampling errors are 
to be avoided. 


The mouth/intake of the sampler shall always 
face into the current at the sampling point. 
The mouth/intake of the sampler shall be 
outside the zone of the disturbances of the 
flow set up by the body of the sampler and its 
operating gear, and the flow lines shall be 
disturbed as little as possible, especially near 
the mouth. 

Filling arrangements shall be smooth so that 
there is no sudden inrush of water-sediment 
mixture; the air escaping from the sampler 
shall not hinder the entry of the sample; this 
necessitates a separate port for air exhaust. 


The sampler shall be able to collect samples 
at the desired depth without the samples being 
disturbed or contaminated by the water- 
sediment mixture at other points while the 
sampler is being raised or lowered. 

It shall be possible to take a sample exactly 
when and where it is required, in particular 
when sampling close to the streambed. 

The sampler shall be portable, yet sufficiently 
heavy to minimize deflection of the 
supporting cable from the vertical due to 
current drag. 


The sampler shall be simple in design and 
robust in construction and shall require 
minimum care in maintenance and operation. 
The removable-type container within the 
sampler shall be easily removed, readily 
capped or sealed and easily transported to a 
laboratory without loss of contents. 
Alternatively, if the container forms part of 
the sampler, it shall be installed so as to secure 
complete drainage of the contents. 

The volume of the sample collected by the 
sampler shall be sufficient for determining the 
concentration and size distribution of the 


IS 3913 : 2014 


sediment. The minimum sample size is 
generally 0.5 1. 

n) Depth-integrating samplers should be lowered 
or raised at a uniform and slow speed, a 
fraction of the current velocity, for example, 
between 2/5 and 1/15 ( see Note). 


NOTE — Depth integration (with uniform vertical motion — 
see Fig. 1): 


A.v.t=V, assuming V=V eee (1) 
i= k. v, where k = viv Raced (2) 
a A (3) 
where 

A = area of the mouth or tube, 

v = current velocity, 

v, = velocity in the mouth/intake (nozzle) of the sampler, 

t = maximum duration of sampling, 

V = sample volume to be taken, 


i = uniform rate for sampler movement, 


k = transit rate ratio; and 
h = maximum vertical distance for sampling. 
From Equations (1), (2) and (3): 
V 
h=k— (4) 
A 
Va —1> 
<< 
— y 


For example, with A = 28.3 mm? (® 6 mm), k = 1/10 
and V = 0.5 1, the maximum depth of sampling is 1.76 
m. If the flow depth is greater, sampling should be 
done with two or more sections in the vertical. 


5 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUSPENDED- 
SEDIMENT SAMPLERS 


Since the sampling conditions encountered in streams 
vary widely, a single sampler for all the conditions 
cannot be recommended. Factors such as availability, 
cost and specific requirements of the sampling also 
influence the choice of the sampler to a great extent. 
The different types of samplers include open 
containers, vertical and horizontal cylinders, bottle 
samplers, pumping samplers, single-stage samplers, 
point-integrating samplers and depth-integrating 
samplers. All of these types of samplers can collect a 
representative sample of the water-sediment mixture 
in a river or stream under the right conditions, but many 
of them cannot be used in rivers with swift currents 
and a non-uniform distribution of sediment 
concentration. For general use in rivers and streams, 
point-integrating and depth-integrating samplers are 
recommended. The use of trade, product or firm names 
in this document is for descriptive purposes only and 


UU iddddddsddddddddddddddddddddddddddd 


Key 

A = area of the mouth or tube, 

v = current velocity, 

v, = velocity in the mouth/intake (nozzle) of the sampler, 
t = maximum duration of sampling, 

V = sample volume to be taken, 
i = uniform rate for sampler movement, and 

h = maximum vertical distance for sampling. 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF A SUSPENDED-SEDIMENT SAMPLER AND THE FACTORS AFFECTING SAMPLE VOLUME 


does not imply endorsement. 


Characteristics of suspended sediment samplers like 
type of samplers, disturbance to the flow characteristics 
intermixing for water samplers, field handling and 
adaptability, the various field conditions are 
considered. The characteristics of different samplers 
to be taken into consideration while selecting the 
sampler are given in Table 1. 


6 TYPES OF SAMPLERS 


6.1 Open Containers 


This type of sampler consists of an ordinary pail, can 
or open bottle. The sample is collected by holding the 
container under the surface of the water or by lowering 
it to the water surface with a rope or cable. The filled 
container can be sealed for transport and subsequent 
analysis or the sample can be transferred into another 
container that can be sealed. 


The limitation of these samplers is that they can only 
collect a sample at the water surface. Representative 
samples will be collected only if the water-sediment 
mixture is thoroughly mixed and free of silt and sand. 
A typical sketch of bottle open container sampler is 
given in Fig. 2. 


36 $ 


3 $ METALLIC 
WIRE 


30 $ 


E 


0°71mm THICKNESS FOR BRASS 
AND SUITABLE THICKNESS FOR 
OTHER MATERIALS 


All dimensions are in millimetres. 
Fic. 2 BoTTLE TYPE OPEN CONTAINER 


6.2 Vertical and Horizontal Cylinders 
These samplers are typically made of steel, brass or 


plastic (see Fig. 3). They are made in various diameters 
and lengths. The cylinder is lowered to the desired 


IS 3913 : 2014 


sampling point with the valves at each end of the 
cylinder in the open position. The sample is collected 
by closing the valves and retrieving the cylinder. The 
valves are actuated by an electrical impulse or by 
sending a weight down the suspension cable to trip 
spring loaded valves. The sample is typically 
transferred to another container so the cylinder can be 
reused. 


These samplers, particularly the vertical cylinders, offer 
considerable resistance to flow and are only stable at 
very low velocities. Vertical cylinders cannot sample 
close to the streambed. Horizontal samplers can sample 
near the streambed. 


Fic. 3 KEMMERER SAMPLER 
6.3 Bottle Samplers 


There are many different variations of bottle samplers. 
They generally consist of a weighted container to hold 
a 0.5 1 to 2 1 sample bottle. The sampler is lowered to 
the desired depth by a rope or cable and then the cap is 
removed from the bottle to collect the sample. Some 
models have the capability of both opening and closing 
the bottle cap so the sample is sealed and no intermixing 
of the sample with the water-sediment mixture in the 
river occurs while the sampler is being retrieved. 


These samplers offer considerable resistance to flow 
and are only stable at very low velocities. Samples 


Table 1 Characteristics of Suspended-Sediment Load Samplers 
(Clause 5) 


Sampler Type Description Disturbance to | Intermixing of Sampling Action Field Adaptability to Various Field 
No. Flow Sample with Handling Conditions 
Characteristics Water 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
Al Can or pail Ordinary can or pail Considerable Considerable | Instantaneous Not necessary | Offers considerable resistance to current. 
to transfer the | Only surface samples are taken 
contents 
A2 Vertical pipe | With a vertical cylinder or pipe forming the container. | Considerable None Instantaneous. Samples | Necessary to | Offers considerable resistance to current. 
When the sampler is lowered to the desired depth, water are not weighted | transfer into | Not satisfactory when close to stream bed. 
sediment mixture flows upward through the container. according to velocity | another Effective in still water or at very low 
Valves at either end close and trap the sample distribution container velocities. 
A3 Instantaneous | A vertical sampler with arrangement to open the sampler | Effect not None Instantaneous Necessary to |Not satisfactorily streamlined or adapted 
vertical for the instantaneous (rapid) intake of samples at the} evaluated transfer into |for use near stream bed. Effective in still 
desired time and depth another water or at very low velocities 
container 
A4 Vertical A vertical sampler with opening arrangement for slow | Effect not None Slow filling, no initial Necessary to | Allows sampling very close to stream bed. 
intake of samples at the desired time and depth evaluated inrush transfer into |Effective in still water or at very low 
another velocities 
container 
AS Bottle Consisting of a standard container held in a case with a| Considerable Considerable, | Bubbling or slow filling | Container Not capable of sampling close to stream 
device for lowering and opening at the sampling point. if not opened _ | after initial inrush with sample |bed. Has high efficiency in trapping fine 
The mouth is kept open for the minimum time required and closed at removable grade sediment and the efficiency is less 
to fill the bottle the sampling with the increase in grade 
point 
A6 Bottle Consisting of a litre capacity container fitted in a case | Considerable Considerable, | Slow filling, no initial Container Not capable of sampling close to stream 
(modified) with a device for lowering or raising and opening at the if not opened |inrush present with sample | bed 
sampling point. Provided also with separate water intake and closed at detachable 
and air exhaust device for equalizing pressure inside and the sampling 
outside the container point 
A7 Single-stage |Used for automatic collection of samples from flashy, | Inconsiderable |Inconsiderable |Slow filling, no initial Container Not capable of sampling close to stream 
suspended- intermittent streams at remote sites. The sampling unit inrush with sample |bed. Samples are usually obtained near 
sediment consists of a bottle with an intake and an exhaust tube, removable the edge of the stream. No samples are 
sampler each tube bent to an appropriate shape. Several sampling taken during the falling stages. There are 
(automatic) units are mounted one above another on a vertical two types of intake, namely, vertical and 


support. As the water surface rises in the stream, it also 
rises in the intake tube of the sampler. When water 
reaches the crown of the intake, flow starts and the bottle 
fills. 

The sampling ceases when the water level in the bottle 
reaches the inner end of the air exhaust which is kept at a 
lower level than the inner end of the intake. 


horizontal. Vertical type is used for 
sediments finer than 62um and the 
horizontal intake is used for sediments 
coarser than 62um 


Bl 


B2 


B3 


B4 


B5 


Instantaneous 
horizontal 


Point 
integrating 


Vacuum 
(suction 
developed by 
pump) 


Intermittent 


pumping 
(automatic) 


Depth- 
integrating 


With a horizontal cylinder equipped with end valves 
which can be closed suddenly to trap instantaneous 
samples at any desired time and depth 


A streamlined body with tail vanes, containing a 
sampling bottle designed to fill continuously at a given 
point over an interval of time. Therefore, it is provided 
with an opening and closing mechanism and also with a 
pressure equalizer to minimize the initial inrush of water. 
Many of these samplers are capable of being used as 
depth integrating samplers also 

The sediment mixture is sucked in through a pipe or 
hose, the intake of which is placed at the desired 
sampling point. By regulating the intake velocity an 
undisturbed sample can be obtained. 


Designed for use at sites where personnel are not 
available to take samples manually, for example, 
ephemeral and flashy streams or streams in isolated 
locations. Samples are taken from an intake in the 
stream by means of a pump. Prior to sampling the intake 
system is flushed. The sampling frequency is controlled 
on the basis of stage at the installation so that samples 
may be collected at a certain interval during low water 
and at more frequent intervals during higher stages. 
Some models also permit sampling on a time as well as a 
stage basis. 

A streamlined body with tail vanes, containing a 
sampling bottle and designed to fill continuously during 
lowering from surface to bed (as well as on the return 
trip from bed to surface). These do not have an opening 
and closing system as in the point-integrating type. The 
samplers designed to fill during lowering only are 
provided with a foot trigger which closes both inlet and 
exhaust upon contact with the bed. 


Inconsiderable 


Inconsiderable 


Inconsiderable 


Inconsiderable 


Considerable 


Inconsiderable 


Inconsiderable 


None 


None 


Inconsiderable 


Instantaneous 


Smooth-filling, minimum 
initial inrush 


Time- integrated 


Smooth filling 


Smooth-filling. 

Although the sampled 
filament will enter the 
intake nozzle at an angle, 
provisions exist for 
making inlet velocity 
essentially equal to the 
local velocity of the 


stream 


Necessary to 
transfer into 
another 
container 


Container 
with sample 
removable 


Container 
with sample 
removable 


Container 
with sample 
removable 


Container 
with sample 
removable 


Allows sampling very close to stream bed. 
Adaptable to any stream or depth 


Present design not transportable. 
Somewhat limited in use owing to 
resistance to current. Heavy sediment loss 
in pipeline may limit the use. 


As there is a difference between the 
average concentration in the stream and 
that at the intake, a correction is required 
which varies with stage and sediment. 


The sampler is transportable. More 
efficient in trapping fine sediments. As 
there is a difference between the average 
concentration in the stream and that at the 
intake, a correction is required which 
varies with stage and sediment. 


Capable of sampling close to the steam 
bed 


IS 3913 : 2014 


cannot typically be collected close to the streambed. 
The potential for intermixing of the sample and water 
sediment mixture in the river is high for those samplers 
that cannot be sealed at the sampling point. 


6.4 Pumping Samplers 
6.4.1 General 


There are two types of pumping samplers used for 
collecting suspended-sediment samples: those with a 
fixed orifice that are operated in automatic mode and 
those with a moveable orifice that are deployed from a 
boat, walkway or bridge. 


6.4.2 Fixed-Orifice Samplers 


Fixed-orifice samplers (see Fig. 4) typically are used at 
sites where personnel are not available to take samples 
manually, such as ephemeral and flash streams or streams 
in isolated locations. The orifice is typically located at or 
near the stream bank. The samplers are powered with 
line power or batteries, and samples are pumped from 
the stream to sample containers. The first phase of 
sampling is back flushing to prime the pump and flush 
accumulated sediment from the orifice line. Sampling 
frequency is controlled on the basis of both time and stage 
so that samples can be collected at one interval during 
low flow and more frequently during high flow. 


The fixed-orifice samplers are an effective method of 
collecting samples when personnel are not available 
for collecting manual samples. However, the samples 
only represent the suspended-sediment concentration 
at one point in one vertical of the stream and a 
correction factor is required to determine the mean 
suspended sediment concentration. Samples also are 
subject to evaporation until they are sealed and 
removed for analysis. 


Fic. 4 DIAGRAM OF A FIXED-ORIFICE PUMPING 
SAMPLER 


6.4.3 Moveable Orifice Samplers 


These are usually used to collect large volume samples 
for analyses of suspended sediment and other 


constituents. A pump on a boat or other platform above 
the water surface is used to create a vacuum to raise 
the water-sediment mixture to a sample container on 
the boat or work platform. An orifice line is lowered 
to the desired sampling depth to obtain the sample. 
The orifice also can be lowered during sampling to 
collect a depth-integrated sample. A submersible pump 
can also be lowered on a cable, and then the sample is 
pumped to containers on the platform or vessel (see 
Fig. 5). Some units are equipped with a velocity sensor 
to automatically adjust the pump speed to collect an 
isokinetic sample. Alternatively, it is possible to 
measure the velocity at the point of sampling by current 
meter and then manually adjust the rate of pumping to 
match the velocity of sampling with the stream 
velocity. 


These samplers are good for collecting large volume 
samples, but the combination of the orifice line and 
the weight to hold the orifice in place offer much 
resistance to flow. The vacuum pump versions of these 
samplers are limited to collecting samples to a depth 
of about 7 m because of the efficiency of vacuum 
pumps. 


Fic. 5 DIAGRAM OF THE SUBMERSIBLE-PUMP VERSION 
OF A MOVEABLE-ORIFICE PUMPING SAMPLER 


6.5 Single-Stage Samplers 


Single-stage samplers are an inexpensive and effective 
means of collecting sediment samples on intermittent 
and flash streams and at remote locations. The sampling 
unit consists of a bottle with an intake tube and an 
exhaust tube (see Fig. 6). The orifice and inverts of 
the tubes are positioned to collect a representative 
sample a few centimetre below the water surface; re- 
circulation within the bottle is prevented by the air lock 
that occurs between the inverts of the intake and 
exhaust tubes. Several units may be mounted at 
different positions on a vertical support to collect 
samples as the water level rises during a runoff event. 
After the peak passes, the bottles are removed and 
sealed for transport and subsequent analysis. 


IS 3913 : 2014 


INTAKE 


sneer EER E a nero ESA 


VERTICAL 


| 


zoe oot 
f m 


R 
Lezi eos 


All dimensions are in millimetres. 


Fic. 6 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF A TYPICAL SINGLE-STAGE SEDIMENT SAMPLER 


IS 3913 : 2014 


These samplers can only collect near surface samples 
during rising stages. Samplers are generally located 
near the stream bank for ease of servicing and to avoid 
heavy debris. Sample concentrations will only be 
representative of the mean concentration of the 
sediment in the stream if the water-sediment mixture 
is very well mixed with most particles finer than 
0.062 mm. 


6.6 Point-Integrating Samplers 


There are a number of different models and sizes of 
point-integrating sediment samplers. They generally 
consist of a bronze or aluminium, streamlined body 
with tail vanes for stability in high currents (see Fig. 7). 
They are raised and lowered in the river with a reel 
and cable assembly. Water enters through a nozzle at 
the nose of the sampler body, and the sample is 
collected in a bottle or other container within the 
sampler. Some samplers have interchangeable nozzles 
that are used depending on the flow velocity and river 
depth. The containers, which are usually 0.5 litre or 1 
litre glass or plastic bottles, are removed from the 
sampler and sealed for shipment and analysis. The 
sampler includes an opening and closing mechanism 
that allows samples to be collected at any depth after 
equalizing the pressure inside the sampler with the 
pressure at the depth of sampling to ensure isokinetic 
sampling. 


These samplers also are used for collecting depth- 
integrated samples. 


— For depths up to 5 m, the sampler can be 
lowered and raised with the valve open. 

For depths greater than 5 m, the sampler can 
be lowered and raised at different increments 
of depth and samples can be combined to 
obtain a mean suspended-sediment 
concentration for the vertical. 


For example, with a depth of 10 m, a point sampler 
can be used to collect 2 samples. Lowering and raising 
the sampler with the valve open to a depth of 5 m would 
collect the first sample; lowering the sampler to 5 m 
with the valve closed and then lowering and raising it 
between 5 m and 10 m with the valve open would 
collect the second sample. 


6.7 Depth-Integrating Samplers 


Depth-integrating samplers are very similar to point- 
integrating samplers. They have streamlined bodies 
with a nozzle at the nose and tail vanes for stability. 
They do not have a valve for opening and closing the 
nozzle. These samplers include those that are attached 
to a wading rod, those that are raised and lowered by 
hand with a rope, and those that are raised and lowered 
by a reel and cable assembly. There are two types of 
depth-integrating samplers: those that contain rigid 
containers and those that contain a plastic or 
fluoropolymer bag. The samplers that contain rigid 
containers are limited to a sampling depth of 5 m in 
order to maintain isokinetic sampling and avoid 
overfilling of the containers. 


Fic. 7 US P-61-A1 SuspENDED-SEDIMENT SAMPLER DEVELOPED BY THE FEDERAL INTERAGENCY SEDIMENTATION 
PROJECT IN THE UNITED STATES 


8 


A newer type of depth-integrating sampler has a 
plastic or fluoropolymer bag instead of a bottle for 
the samples. All the air is evacuated from the bag 
before the sampler is lowered in the river so the depth 
of sampling is not restricted by the compression of 
air in the container. The US D-96 (see Fig. 8) sampler 
developed by the Federal Interagency Sedimentation 
Project in the United States can be used for collecting 
depth-integrated samples to a depth of 15 m to 30 m 
depending on the size of nozzle used. When the 
sampler is retrieved, either the sample is transferred 
from the bag to another container or the bag is sealed 
and placed in another container for shipment to the 
laboratory. 


The depth-integrating and point-integrating samplers are 
the only samplers that will collect a representative sample 


IS 3913 : 2014 


of the water-sediment mixture in deep, swift rivers. 


6.8 Clean Samplers 


Variations of depth-integrating sediment samplers are 
special samplers for collecting water-sediment 
mixtures for chemical analyses. These samplers are 
very similar to the suspended-sediment samplers, 
except they are equipped with fluoropolymer and 
plastic components so the samples will not be in contact 
with any metal. The DH-95 sampler (see Fig. 9) uses 1 
litre fluoropolymer or plastic bottles with nozzles that 
are integral with the bottle caps. 


7 MODELS OF SAMPLERS 


Table 2 is a summary of the most widely used 
suspended-sediment samplers today. 


Fic. 8 US D-96 BAG SAMPLER DEVELOPED BY THE FEDERAL INTERAGENCY SEDIMENTATION PROJECT 


Fic. 9 US DH-95 SAMPLER DEVELOPED BY THE FEDERAL INTERAGENCY SEDIMENTATION PROJECT 


IS 3913 : 2014 


Table 2 Models of Samplers in Use in Different Countries 


(Clause 7) 
Sampler Model Name ” Countries of Use Mass in kg Method of Sample 
Type Suspension Size in 
litres 
Open Japan, India, USA Variable Hand or rope Variable 
container 
Vertical or | Kemmerer USA Rope or cable 
horizontal Rope i7 
cylinder 3 : : 
Vertical pipe India, UK Rope 1 
US WBH-96 USA Rope or cable 1 
Pumping |ISCO 1680 Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Streambank shelter 0.5 
Switzerland, USA 
Lift pump Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Cable Many 
Switzerland, USA litres 
Manning PST Streambank shelter 1 
Manning VST USA Streambank shelter 1 
Suspended water pump Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Cable Many 
Switzerland litres 
Single- US U-59 USA 0.5 
stage 
Point 03 
integrating | 4 SPEG Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland 
AYX Pressure Equalizing China 100, 150 and 300 | Cable 2.5 
Sampler 
ANX3 Bag Sampler China 100, 200, 300 and | Cable 3 
400 
Delft Bottle Netherlands Cable 
P50 India Cable 0.5 
Turbidisonde France Cable 
USA 48.5 Cable 0.5 or | 
US P-63 91.6 Cable 0.5 or | 
US P-72 18.6 Cable 0.5 or | 
Depth- APX Bottle Sampler 100 and 150 Cable 25 
integrating Cable 50010 
D49 India Cable 0.5 
Cable TE 
PWRI Japan Cable 
SGS M266 D/10 Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland Rod 1 
State Hydrological Institute Russia Cable 
Cable 
Rod 0.5 
Rope 0.5 
Rope 1 
Hand 1 
Rope 1 
Cable 0.5 or | 
Cable 2.7 
Cable 1 
USA Cable 
Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland Cable 1 


D The majority of the models listed are examples of suitable products available commercially. This information is given for the 
convenience of users of this standard and does not constitute an endorsement by ISO/BIS of these products. 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 01 (0530). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


