NAT Alan IS 17457 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Rara Tara cat Gad fra — srectactt 


Sustainable Development of 
Habitats — Vocabulary 


ICS 13.020.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 5 


Smart City Sectional Committee, CED 59 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Cities 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


The Smart Cities Sectional Committee has taken up work of formulation of standards in the area of development 
of smart and sustainable cities including indicators for sustainable development of habitats, resilient cities and 
smart cities. Also, the Committee has taken up standards development in the field of smart transportation and 
allocation of parking lots, etc. In fact, smartness acts as an accelerator to sustainable development, hence the 
various concepts and standards being evolved have to be understood from the same consideration. 


These standards involve use of various terms which need to be well and uniformly understood to help proper 
understanding and implementation of provisions of these standards in the field. This standards has, therefore, been 
formulated to define various terms relating to sustainable development of habitats. 


For developing this standard, assistance has been derived from “ISO 37100 : 2016 Sustainable cities and 
communities — Vocabulary”. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A, 


This standard is generic and is compiled to encompass the general field of sustainable development in communities, 
habitats and related subjects. The terms are arranged in the following subjects: 


a) Terms relating to sustainable development, resilience and smartness. 
b) Terms relating to organization, city and community. 

c) Terms relating to management. 

d) Terms relating to quality and conformity. 

e) Terms relating to indicators and metrics. 


f) Terms relating to infrastructure and services. 


IS 17457 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF 
HABITATS — VOCABULARY 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines terms relating to sustainable 
development of habitats. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
IS/ISO 19011 : 2018 Guidelines for auditing 
management systems 


(second revision) 


IS/ISO Guide 73 : 2009 Risk management — 


Vocabulary 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Terms Relating to Sustainable Development, 
Resilience and Smartness 


3.1.1 Sustainability — State of the global system, 
including environmental, financial, managerial, social 
and technological aspects, in which the needs of the 
present are met without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs. 


NOTES 


1 The environmental, financial, managerial, social and 
technological aspects interact, are inter dependent and are 
referred to as the five dimensions of sustainability. 


2 Sustainability is the goal of sustainable development. 


3.1.2 Sustainable Development — Development 
that meets the environmental, financial, managerial, 
social and technological needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs. 


NOTE — The description of this term may be read in 
conjunction with 3.1.1. 


3.1.3 Resilience — Adaptive capacity of an 


organization, a system, an individual being or a physical 
structure in a complex and changing environment. 


NOTES 

1 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
defines resilience as “the ability of a system and its component 
parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the 
effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner, 
including through ensuring the preservation, restoration, or 
improvement of its essential basic structures and functions”. 


2 Resilience is the ability of an organization to resist being 
affected by an event or the ability to return to an acceptable 
level of performance in an acceptable period of time after 
being affected by an event. 

3 Resilience is the capability of a system to maintain its 
functions and structure in the face of internal and external 
change and to degrade gracefully when this is necessary. 


3.1.4 Smartness — Quality of contributing to 
sustainable development and resilience, through 
soundly based decision-making and the adoption of a 
long - and short-term perspective. 


NOTES 

1 Smartness is embedded in the process of sustainable 
development, that is, sustainable development is the 
overarching process, while smartness is a characteristic. 
It implies a holistic approach, including good governance 
and adequate organization, processes and behaviours, and 
appropriate innovative use of techniques, technologies and 
natural resources. 


2 Smartness is addressed in terms of performance, relevant to 
technologically implementable solutions. 
3.1.5 Accountability — State of being answerable for 
decisions and activities to the interested parties of an 
organization. 


3.1.6 Biodiversity — Biological diversity or 
biodiversity is the term given to the variety of life on 
Earth and the natural patterns it forms. This diversity is 
often understood in terms of the wide variety of plants, 
animals and microorganisms. 


Biodiversity also includes genetic differences within 
each species, for example, between varieties of crops 
and breeds of livestock. Chromosomes, genes, and 
DNA, the building blocks of life, determine the 
uniqueness of each individual and each species. 


Yet another aspect of biodiversity is the variety of 
ecosystems, such as those that occur in deserts, forests, 
wetlands, mountains, lakes, rivers, and agricultural 
landscapes. In each ecosystem, living creatures, 
including humans, form a community, interacting with 
one another and with the air, water, and soil around 
them. 


IS 17457 : 2020 


3.1.7 Ecosystem — System of complex interactions 
between plants, animals, micro-organisms and their 
environment, which functions as a unit. 


3.1.8 Ecosystem Services — Benefits provided by 
ecosystems that contribute to the viability and quality 
of human life. 


3.1.9 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
organization or an individual operates, including air, 
water, land, natural resources, flora, fauna, humans and 
their interrelations. 


3.1.10 Environmental Impact — Change to the 
environment, whether adverse or beneficial, wholly 
or partially resulting from an organization’s or an 
individual’s environmental aspects. 


3.1.11 Hazardous Waste — Waste that is potentially 
harmful to living beings, property or the environment. 


3.1.12 Biological Oxygen Demand — Biological 
Oxygen Demand (BOD) is the amount of dissolved 
oxygen required to oxidize or neutralize biodegradable 
matter in water. 

NOTE — High BOD levels represent high amounts of 


contaminant matter, and the reduction of BOD is a common 
measure for determining the efficacy of water treatment. 


3.1.13 Life Cycle — Consecutive and interlinked stages 
of a product (or service) system, from raw material 
acquisition or generation from natural resources to final 
disposal. 

NOTE — The life-cycle stages include acquisition of raw 


materials, design, production, transportation/delivery, use, end 
of life treatment and final disposal. 


3.1.14 Life Cycle Cost — Total investment in product 


development, manufacturing, test, distribution, 
operation, support, training and disposal. 
3.1.15 Natural Disaster — Natural event, such as 


a flood, earthquake, or hurricane that causes great 
damage or loss of life. 


3.1.16 Pro-poor Growth — Economic growth for the 

benefit of poor people (primarily in the economic sense 

of poverty). 
NOTE — Pro-poor growth can be defined as absolute, where 
the benefits are from overall growth in the economy, or 
relative, which refers to targeted efforts to increase the growth 
specifically among poor people, for example, a pace and 
pattern of economic growth that helps poor women and men to 
participate in, contribute to and benefit from that growth. 


3.1.17 Solid Waste — Non-soluble, discarded solid 
materials, including sewage sludge, municipal garbage, 
industrial wastes, agricultural refuse, demolition wastes 
and mining residues. 


3.1.18 Municipal Waste — Municipal waste would 
include waste originating from households, commerce 


and trade, small businesses, office buildings and 
institutions (for example, schools, hospitals, 
government buildings). 


NOTES 
1 The definition would also include, 

a) bulky waste (for example, white goods, old furniture, 
mattresses); 

b) garden waste, leaves, grass clippings, street 
sweepings, the content of litter containers, and 
market cleansing waste, if managed as waste; and 

c) waste from selected municipal services, that is, waste 
from park and garden maintenance, waste from street 
cleaning services (for example, street sweepings, the 
content of litter containers, market cleansing waste), 


if managed as waste. 
2 The definition shall exclude, 


a) waste from municipal sewage network and treatment; 
and 


b) municipal construction and demolition waste. 


3.1.19 Sanitary Landfill — Sanitary landfill shall refer 
to a carefully designed structure which uses a clay 
liner or a synthetic liner in order to isolate solid waste 
from the surrounding environment. This isolation is 
accomplished with a bottom liner and daily covering 
of soil. 


3.1.20 Vascular Plants — Plants that can internally 
transport water and food. 


3.2 Terms Relating to Organization, City and 
Community 


3.2.1 City — Urban community falling under a specific 
administrative boundary. 
NOTES 


1 A city is usually administered by a municipality or a local 
government. 


2 The term ‘city’ includes towns also. 


3.2.2 Community — Group of people with an 
arrangement of responsibilities, activities and 
relationships. 

NOTES 

1 In many, but not all, contexts, a community has a defined 

geographical boundary. 


2 A city is a type of community. Other types of community 
could be ward, neighborhood and locality. 


3.2.3 Organization — Person or group of people that 
has its own functions with responsibilities, authorities 
and relationships to achieve its objectives. 


NOTES 


1 The concept of organization includes, but is not limited to 
company, corporation, firm, enterprise, authority, partnership, 
charity or institution, or part or combination thereof, whether 
incorporated or not, public or private. 


2 In this standard, the concept of organization refers to an 
entity/institution inside the community that is tasked with 
implementing the management system, for example, the local 
government. The community identifies an organization that it 
entrusts with the implementation of this standard. 


3.2.4 Businesses — Businesses shall refer to 
companies or enterprises. The enterprise is the smallest 
combination of legal unit, that is, an organizational unit 
producing goods or services. Business can either be 
categorized as simple (one operating entity) or complex 
(multiple operating entities). 


3.2.5 Buyer — Person who aims to get possession of 
goods, services and/or rights through providing an 
acceptable equivalent value, usually in money, to the 
person providing such goods, services and/or rights. 


3.2.6 Interested Party/Stakeholder — Person or 
organization that can affect, be affected by, or perceive 
itself to be affected by a decision or activity. 


3.2.7 Provider — Person or organization involved 
in or associated with the delivery of products and/or 
services. 


3.2.8 Voter Participation — The voter participation is 
the ratio of the number of persons that voted in the last 
election (numerator) for, say, a city, divided by the city 
population eligible to vote (denominator). 
NOTE — This indicator will only reveal the level of 
participation, not the level of satisfaction of the population. 
In some cases, high rates of participation will mean that 


the population is not satisfied with its local government's 
leadership and actions. 


3.3 Terms Relating to Management 


3.3.1 Management System — Set of interrelated or 
interacting elements of an organization to establish 
policies and objectives and processes to achieve those 
objectives. 


NOTES 


1 A management system can address a single discipline or 
several disciplines. 

2 The system elements include an organization's structure, 
roles and responsibilities, planning and operation. 

3 The scope of a management system may include the 
whole organization, specific and identified functions of 
the organization, specific and identified sections of the 
organization, or one or more functions across a group of 
organizations. 


3.3.2 Top Management — Person or group of people 
who directs and controls an organization at the highest 
level. 


NOTES 


1 Top management has the power to delegate authority and to 
provide resources within the organization. 

2 Top management is to be understood as the decision making 
body of the organization formally or informally entrusted by 
the relevant community to implement the management system. 
3 If the scope of the management system covers only part of an 


organization, then top management refers to those who direct 
and control that part of the organization. 


IS 17457 : 2020 


3.3.3 Continual Improvement — Recurring activity to 
enhance performance. 


3.3.4 Documented Information — Information required 
to be controlled and maintained by an organization and 
the medium on which it is contained. 

NOTES 


1 Documented information can be in any format and media, 
and from any source. 


2 Documented information can refer to, 
a) the management system, including related processes; 


b) information created in order for the organization to 
operate (documentation); and 


c) evidence of results achieved. 


3.3.5 Effectiveness — Extentto which planned activities 
are realized and planned results achieved. 


3.3.6 Impact — Positive or negative change to society, 
economy or the environment, wholly or partially 
resulting from an organization’s past and present 
decisions and activities. 


3.3.7 Objective — Result to be achieved. 


NOTES 

1 An objective can be strategic, tactical, or operational. 

2 Objectives relate to different disciplines 
(such as financial, health and safety, and environmental 
goals) and can apply at different levels (such as strategic, 
organization-wide, project, product and process). 


can 


3 An objective can be expressed in other ways, for example, 
as an intended outcome, a purpose, an operational criterion, as 
an objective of sustainable development in communities, or by 
the use of other words with similar meaning (for example, aim, 
goal or target). 

4 In the context of management systems for sustainable 
development in communities, objectives for sustainable 
development in communities are set by the organization, 
consistent with the policy for sustainable development in 
communities, to achieve specific results. 


3.3.8 Outsource (verb) — Make an arrangement 
where an external organization performs part of an 
organization’s function or process. 

NOTE — An external organization is outside the scope of 


the management system, although the outsourced function or 
process is within the scope. 


3.3.9 Policy — Intentions and direction of an 
organization, as formally expressed by its top 
management. 

3.3.10 Process — Set of inter-related or interacting 


activities, which transforms inputs into outputs. 
3.4 Terms Relating to Quality and Conformity 


3.4.1 Competence — Ability to apply knowledge and 
skills to achieve intended results. 


IS 17457 : 2020 


3.4.2 Compliance Obligations (Preferred Term)/ 
Legal Requirements and Other Requirements 
(Admitted Term) — Legal requirements that an 
organization has to comply with and other requirements 
that an organization has to or chooses to comply with. 


NOTES 
1 Compliance obligations are related to the management 
system for sustainable development in communities. 


2 Compliance obligations can arise from mandatory 
requirements, such as applicable laws and regulations, or 
voluntary commitments, such as organizational and industry 
standards, contractual relationships, principles of good 
governance and community and ethical standards. 


3.4.3 Conformity — Fulfilment of a requirement. 


3.4.4 Audit — Systematic, independent and 
documented process for obtaining audit evidence and 
evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to 
which the audit criteria are fulfilled. 


NOTES 

1 An audit can be an internal audit (first party) or an external 
audit (second party or third party), and it can be a combined 
audit (combining two or more disciplines). 

2 An internal audit is conducted by the organization itself, or 
by an external party on its behalf. 


3 “Audit evidence” and “audit criteria” are defined in 
IS/ISO 19011. 
3.4.5 Corrective Action — Action to eliminate the 


cause of a non-conformity and to prevent recurrence. 


3.4.6 Evaluation — Systematic process of determining 
how well individuals, procedures, systems or 
programmes have met the formally agreed objectives 
and requirements. 


3.4.7 Measurement — Process to determine a value. 


3.4.8 Monitoring — Determining the status ofa system, 
a process, or an activity. 


NOTE — To determine the status, there may be a need to 
check, supervise or critically observe. 


3.4.9 Non-conformity — Non-fulfilment of a 
requirement. 
3.4.10 Performance — Measurable result. 
NOTES 
1 Performance can relate either to quantitative or qualitative 
findings. 


2 Performance can relate to the management of activities, 
processes, products (including strategies, programmes, 
projects, plans and services), systems or organizations. 


3.4.11 Requirement — Need or expectation that is 
stated, generally implied or obligatory. 
NOTES 


1 “Generally implied” means that it is custom or common 
practice for the organization and interested parties that the need 
or expectation under consideration is implied. 


2 A specified requirement is one that is stated, for example in 
documented information. 


3.4.12 Risk — Effect of uncertainty on achievement of 
objectives. 
NOTES 


1 An effect is a deviation from the expected positive or 
negative. 


2 Uncertainty is the state, even partial, of deficiency of 
information related to, understanding or knowledge of, an 
event, its consequence, or likelihood. 


3 Risk is often characterized by reference to potential “events” 
(as defined in IS/ISO Guide 73) and “consequence” (as defined 
in IS/ISO Guide 73), or a combination of these. 


4 Risk is often expressed in terms of a combination of the 
consequences of an event (including changes in circumstances) 
and the associated “likelihood” (as defined in IS/ISO Guide 
73) of occurrence. 


3.4.13 Safety — Freedom from unacceptable risk. 


3.4.14 Snapshot — Capture of the status of a data 
resource at a given moment in time. 


3.5 Terms Relating to Indicators and Metrics 


3.5.1 Indicator — Quantitative, qualitative or 
descriptive measure. 
3.5.2 Metric — Defined measurement method and 


measurement scale. 


3.5.3 Average Life Expectancy at Birth — The average 
life expectancy at birth is the average number of years 
expected to be lived by a group of people born in the 
same year, if health and living conditions at the time 
of their birth remained the same throughout their lives. 


3.5.4 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) — Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) is an indicator of overall 
production activity and level of economic growth of a 
city, or a country, state or district. 


3.5.5 Unemployment — Unemployment refers to 
individuals without work, actively seeking work and 
currently available for work under the Usual Principal 
Status (UPS) approach. Persons who did not look for 
work but havea future labour markets take (arrangements 
for a future job start) are counted as unemployed. 
Discouraged workers or hidden unemployed shall refer 
to persons who are not actively seeking work because 
they believe the prospects of finding it are extremely 
poor or they have restricted labour mobility, face 
discrimination, and/or structural, social, and cultural 
barriers are not counted as unemployed or as part of 
the labour force. Not actively seeking work shall refer 
to people who have not taken active steps to seek 
work (that is, job searches, interviews, informational 
meetings, etc) during a specified recent period (usually 
the past four weeks). 


3.5.6 Enrolment — Number of students who were 
enrolled in a grade as on 30th September of the school 
year. 


NOTES 


1 Information on the status of enrolment is normally available 
through the annual surveys called the Unified District 
Information on School Education (U-DISE). 


2 Enrolment includes new entrants and repeaters for grade-I 
and new entrants, promotees and repeaters for Grade-II 
onwards. 


3.5.7 Full-time Enrolment — Enrolment in school for 
every full school day in a week over the entire school 
year. 


3.5.8 Part-time Enrolment — Enrolment in school for 
at least every half-day in a week over the entire school 
year or equivalent on a weekly basis. For example, a 
student is counted as enrolled part-time if he/she is 
enrolled in school for every half-day in a week, but is 
not counted as enrolled if he/she is only enrolled for 
0.25 of a day. 


3.5.9 Renewable Energy — Renewable energy shall 
include both combustible and non-combustible 
renewable. Non-combustible renewables include 
geothermal, solar, wind, hydro, tide and wave energy. 


3.5.10 Fine Particulate Matter — Particulate matter 
is a mixture of microscopic solids and liquid droplets 
suspended in air. These particulates are made up of 
a number of components, including acids (such as 
nitrates and sulphates), organic chemicals, metals, soil 
or dust particles, and allergens (such as fragments of 
pollen or mould spores). 
NOTE — In contrast to fine particulate matters, the coarse 
particles are greater than 2.5 microns and less or equal to 10 
microns in diameter and are defined as ‘respirable particulate 
matter’ or PM10. Sources of coarse particles include crushing 
or grinding operations, and dust from paved or unpaved roads. 


3.5.11 Greenhouse Gases — Greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
are gases in the atmosphere that absorb infrared 
radiation that would otherwise escape to space; thereby 
contributing to rising surface temperatures. 


NOTES 


1 There are six major GHGs: carbon dioxide (CO,), methane 
(CH,), nitrous oxide (N,O), hydro fluorocarbons (HFCs), 
per fluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF,). The 
warming potential for these gases varies from several years to 
decades to centuries. 


2 Users may also consult the IS/ISO 14064 series on 
Greenhouse Gases for further guidance. 


3.5.12 Greenhouse Gas Emission — Total mass of 
a greenhouse gas released to the atmosphere over a 
specified period of time. 


3.5.13 Debt-service Ratio — Debt-service ratio is 
the ratio of debt service expenditure as percent of a 
municipality’s own source revenue. 


IS 17457 : 2020 


NOTE — Debt-service ratio shall be calculated as the total 
long-term debt servicing costs including lease payments, 
temporary financing and other debt charges (numerator) 
divided by total own source revenue (denominator). 


3.6 Terms Relating to Infrastructure and Services 


3.6.1 Community Infrastructure — System of facilities, 
equipment and services that support the operations and 
activities of communities. 

NOTE — Such community infrastructures include, but are not 


limited to, energy, water, transportation, waste and information 
and communication technologies (ICT). 


3.6.2 Smart Community Infrastructure — Community 
infrastructure with enhanced technological performance 
that is designed, operated and maintained to contribute 
to sustainable development and resilience of the 
community. 

NOTES 

1 It is the infrastructure that is considered to be ‘smart’ in this 

standard, and not the community. 


2 Sustainable development tends to require community 
infrastructures that meet multiple, often contradictory, needs at 
the same time. 


3 Information and communication technologies (ICT) is an 
enabler but not a precondition for achieving smart community 
infrastructures. 


3.6.3 Interoperability — Ability of systems to provide 
services to and accept services from other systems and 
to use the services so exchanged to enable them to 
operate effectively together. 


3.6.4 Primary Education — Elementary school 

education that is considered to be the first stage of 

“basic education”. 
NOTE — Primary education typically covers six years of 
full-time schooling with the legal age of entrance normally 
being not younger than 5 years or older than 7 years. Primary 
education typically lasts until age 10 to 12. Primary education 
refers to children ages 5-12 years or ‘Ist grade through Sth or 
6th grade”, as defined by some local education systems. 


3.6.5 Secondary Education — Education that is 
considered to be the second stage of basic education 
and marks the end of compulsory education, where it 
exists. 
NOTE — Students usually enter between age 10 and 13 (age 
12 being the most common). Secondary education usually ends 
12 or 13 years after the beginning of primary education (or 
around age 18); however, systems can range between ending 
11 to 14 years after beginning school (or around age 17 to 20). 
Secondary education also refers to 6th grade (or 7th grade) to 
12th grade, as defined by local education systems. 


3.6.6 Tertiary Education — Education provided by 
universities and other higher education institutions 
following secondary education. 


3.6.7 Slum — A Slum is a residential area where 
dwellings are unfit for human habitation by reasons 
of dilapidation, overcrowding, faulty arrangements 


IS 17457 : 2020 


and design of such buildings, narrowness or faulty 
arrangement of street, lack of ventilation, light, or 
sanitation facilities or any combination of these factors 
which are detrimental to the safety and health. 


NOTES 


1 The above definition is adopted by Census 2011 and is 
generally applicable in most situations. However, different 
State laws might have variations in use of terms, though in 
concept and spirit, all conform to the above definition. 


2 UN-HABITAT defines a slum household as a group of 
individuals living under the same roof in an urban area who 
lack one or more of the following: 


a) Durable housing of a permanent nature that protects 
against extreme climate conditions. 


b) Sufficient living space which means not more than three 
people sharing the same room. 


c) Easy access to safe water in sufficient amounts at an 
affordable price. 


d) Access to adequate sanitation in the form of a private or 
public toilet shared by a reasonable number of people. 


e) Security of tenure that prevents forced evictions. 


3.6.8 Homelessness — Absolute (or primary) 
homelessness refers to those without any physical 
shelter, for example, those living outside, in parks, in 
doorways, in parked vehicles, or parking garages, as 
well as those in emergency shelters or in transition 
houses for women fleeing abuse. The other category 
is “secondary homelessness”, which would include 


persons with no place of usual residence who move 
frequently between various types of accommodation 
(including dwellings, shelters or other living quarters); 
and persons usually resident in long term “transitional” 
shelters or similar arrangements for the homeless. 


NOTES 


1 The above definition is used by the United Nations to define 
the homelessness [United Nations Statistical Division (UNSD; 
2008)]. 


2 In India, Census 2011 defines houseless households as 
households which do not live in buildings or census houses but 
live in the open or road side pavements, in hume pipes, under 
fly-overs and staircases, or in the open in places of worship, 
mandaps, railway platforms etc. 


3.6.9 Cyber Security — Cyber security focuses on 
protecting computers, networks, programs and data 
from unintended or unauthorized access, change or 
destruction. 


3.6.10 Transit-oriented Development — Transit- 
oriented development (TOD) is a mixed-use residential 
and commercial area designed to maximize access 
to public transport, and often incorporates features to 
encourage transit ridership. 
NOTE — A TOD neighbourhood typically has a centre with 
a transit station or stop (train station, metro station, tram 
stop, bus stop/LRT/Monorail station), surrounded by relatively 
high-density development with progressively lower-density 
development spreading outward from the centre. 


IS 17457 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G -1602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector — 61, Gurugram-122001) 


AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, New Delhi 
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 

All India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai 
Bhubaneshwar Smart City Limited, Bhubaneshwar 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 


New Delhi 


Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


Cochin Smart City Limited, Kochi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Corporation of Chennai, Chennai 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development 
Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Department of Telecommunication, Ministry of 
Communications, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry, New Delhi 


Greater Vishakhapatnam Smart City Corporation 
Limited, Vishakhapatnam 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Company Ltd, 
Ghandinagar 


Guwahati Municipal Corporation, Guwahati 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Green Building Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 


Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Jabalpur Smart City Limited, Jabalpur 


Jammu Municipal Corporation, Jammu 


Representative(s) 


Dr Supuir KrısHnA (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI ADVAIT AUNDHKAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 


SHRI DHARMESH AWASTHI 
SHRI ARUN SAHAI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri B. V. BABU 
SHRI S. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENU SEHGAL 
SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
Suri DIRECTOR (NT-IID (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT KOHALE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


REPRESENTATIVE 

Suri K. P. ABRAHAM 

Ms SHEETAL RAKHEJA 
REPRESENTATIVE 

ProF UTTAM K. BANERJEE 


Suri B. C. DATTA 
PROF KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 17457 : 2020 


Organization 
Karki Associates, New Delhi 
Ministry of Commerce Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, New Delhi 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi 
Ministry of Power, New Delhi 
Ministry of Rural Development, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 

Ministry of Transport, New Delhi 

Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, New Delhi 

Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Association of Software & Services 
Companies, Noida 


National Real Estate Development Council, 
New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


North East Space Application Centre, Umiam, 
Shillong 


Office of the Registrar General & Census 
Commissioner, New Delhi 


Ranchi Municipal Corporation, Ranchi 
Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shillong Smart City Limited, Shillong 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization, 
New Delhi 


Surat Smart City Development Limited, Surat 
Survey of India, Dehradun 


Svayam National Centre for Inclusive Environment, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI RAJNISH KARKI 
SHRI SUDHANSHU PANDEY 


Ms Kavita BHATIA 
SHrı Mayank (Alternate) 


Director (BIS) 
UNDER SECRETARY (BIS) (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJSHEKHAR 
SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIYAM (Alternate) 


Dr M. MOHAPATRA 
Dr O. P. Misura (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 


Dr A. K. TRIPATHI 
Dr G. Prasan (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 
SECRETARY 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI K. S. REJIMON 


Dr Ravı KANT BHATNAGAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI R. K. JAIN 

Suri G. C. Pati (Alternate) 
SHRI N. KISHORE NARANG 


SHRI MANOJIT BOSE 
Ms Rama VEDASHREE (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVIN RAHEJA 
Bric R. R. SıncH (Alternate) 


Dr K. VENUGOPAL 
Dr MURALIKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 

Dr Vinay MAITRI 

Dr SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI DEBASHISH Roy 


Pror K. J. NATH 
Dr N. B. MAZUMDAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA VASHISHTH 
Suri J. M. SyaL (Alternate) 


Organization 


Town and Country Planning Organization, 
New Delhi 


Jdaipur Smart City Limited, Udaipur 


a “E 


nified Traffic & Transportation Infrastructure 
(P. & Engg.) Centre, New Delhi 


niversity of Delhi, New Delhi 


Urban Development Department, Town & Country 
Planning Branch, Kolkata 


= 


Urban Governance, Administrative Staff College of 
India, Hyderabad 


V. V. Giri National Labour Institute, Noida 
WRI India, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (B-399, 2nd Floor, Meera Bagh, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110063) 


In personal capacity (Apartment No. 3203, Verona Cliff 


Avenue, Hiranandani Gardens, Powai Mumbai 
400076) 


In personal capacity (1/5 Shabd Pratap Asharam, 
Lashkar, Gwalior 474012) 


In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida) 


In personal capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, 
New Delhi 110076) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17457 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
Suri Nitin KUMAR Azan (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL 
SHRI MANISH VERMA (Alternate) 


Dr C. R. BABU 


SHRI SATANU PRASAD KAR 
Ms SANDHYATRA SAHA (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS CHARY VEDALA 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Ms PRERNA V. MEHTA 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


SHRI V. SURESH 


Suri S. P. BANSAL 


DR SANDEEP GARG 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CiVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST °C’ (CiVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Smart Cities Working Group, CED 59/WG 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (G-1602, Pioneer Park, Sector 61, 


Gurugram-122 001) 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Limited, 
Gandhinagar 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 


WRI India, New Delhi 
In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida) 


Representative(s) 


Dr Supuir KRISHNA (Convener) 
SHRI LOVLEEN K. GARG 


DR SOMNATH MITRA 

SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. 
PROF SANJUKKTA BHADURI 
SHRI DEBASHISH Roy 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate) 


Ms PRERNA V. MEHTA 


SHRI SANDEEP GARG 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 59 (15244). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


