( Reaffirmed 1998 )

IS:9153

-1978

Indian Standard
METHODS OF POLARISCOPIC EXAMINATION OF GLASSWARE
Glassware
Chairman SHRI K. D. SHABYA Members DR S. KUMAR ( Altcmafs to Shri K. D. Sharma ) SRRI C. G. AMIN SHRI V. R. BRIDE SHRI D. S. CUBHAL

Sectional

Committee,

CDC

10

Representing Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR). Calcutta

DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( CARRIAGE ), RDSO, LUOENOW Ministry of Dcfence ( R & D ) SHRI A. R. DEY SHRI L. S. BEARAJ ( Al+& ) Haffkine Institute, Bombay DR B. B. GAITONDE SHRI Y. S. NIYBKAR ( Allsrnotr ) Hindustan Pilkington Glass Works Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. P. GOPTA Development Commissioner DR V. P. MAHESEWARY ( Small Scale Industries ), New Delhi Sam K. K. SABAN AQC+ARWAL ( Alternats ) Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta SERI C. K. MEBROTRA SHRI 0. P. DHAMIJA ( Altrrnnie ) Empire Dyeing & Mfg Co Ltd ( Vitrum Glass SHRI RAJINDER SINQH Division ), Bombay SHRI R. C. SIN~HAL ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SARI G. T. BRIDE ( Alternate ) Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Bombay SERI P. R. RAO SHRI A. K. BANSAL ( AIttrnde ) Ministry of Dcfcncc ( DGI ) SBRI J. R. SACHDEVA DR S. P. SIN~H DHAKARAY ( Alternate ) Hindustan Vacuum Glass Ltd, Faridabad SHRI R. SAHAI S~ICI VINOD AHUJA ( Alternate ) ( Confinued on page 2 )

Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara Victory Flask Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay Dncctorate Gcncral of Technical Dcvelopmcnt, New Delhi STANDARDS Ministry of Railways

INDIAN

@ Copyrighr I979 STANDARDS INSTITWTlON

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9153 - 1978
( Continued from page 1 )

Members DRJ.M. SEHGAL SHRI V. P. SRARMA SHRI S. K. GUPTA ( Altcmatc ) SHRI K. SHIMIZU SRRI S. B. PRASAD ( Alternafc ) SHR1 D. V. SINoH SHRI C. K. SOMANY

Representing Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals J. G. Glass Industries Ltd, Pune Indo-Asahi Ltd, New Delhi

Glass Co Ltd, Calcutta Manufacturers' Glass and Association, Industries Ltd,

SHRI R. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI J. A. TAETAWALA Shrec Vallabh Glass Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI Cl. A. TAETAWALA ( Alternate I ) SRRI H. C. PATEL ( Altrrnotc II ) DR G. M. SAXENA, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&c Mcmbtr ) Director ( Chem )

Indian Chemical Calcutta Hind;;zzttaNational a

Deputy

SHRI

G. P. SARASWAT Director ( Chem ), IS1

Methods

of Test
Convener

for Glass and

Glassware

Subcommittee,

CDC

10 : 1
Institute

DR S. KUMAR Members SERI S. V. PEATYE DR C. R. DAS DR S. P. SINOH DHAKARAY SHRI N. C. BOSE ( Altrrntlts ) SHRI P. R. RAO SHEI A. K. BANSAL ( Alternate

Central Glass & Ceramic ( CSIR ), Calcutta Central Glass & Ceramic

`Research

Research

Institute

Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara Ministry of Defi-nce ( DGI ) Uorosil Glass Works Ltd, ) Bombay

( CSIR ). Calcutta

Indian Standard
METHODS OF POLARISCOPIC EXAMINATION OF GLASSWARE
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 December 1978, after the draft finalized by the Glassware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 The apparent temper as determined by the methods given in this standard depends primarily on the magnitude and distribution of strain in glass, the thickness of glass ( optical path ), and to a minor extent on the composition of glass. According to this standard ai`nealing is to be reported ( see 5.1 ) as the temper number, number of discs or degree of rotarion of the analyzer in accordance with the tabulations given in 3.2.1.1 and 4.2.1.1 but the iuterpretatil)u of this appare,nt temper in terms of real temper requires consideration of the above factors in addition to the practical experience with the particular ware beiug evaluated. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices prevailing This has been met by basing the standard in the field in this country. on ASTM Standard C 148-1965 ( Reapproved 1971 ) ` Methods of polariscopic examination of glass containers', issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials, USA. 0.4 In reporting the result of a standard, if the final value, observed it shall be done in accordance with test made in or calculated, IS : 2-1960:. accordance with is to be rounded this off,

1. SCOPE 1.1 This glassware
*Rules

standard prescribes methods of polariscopic for determining the relative annealing strain
for rounding off numerical values ( miscd ).

examination in them.

of

3

IS : 9153 - 1978

1.1.1 Two methods are prescribed. Method A is based on comparison with standard strain discs using a polariscope and Method B on measurement of strain using a polarimeter.
2. SAMPLING

2.1 Representative
respective material 3. METHOD

samples of glassware specification.

shall

be drawn

as specified

in

DISCS 3.1) General
evaluation

A - COMPARISON USING A POLARISCOPE

WITH

STANDARD

STRAIN
6,

- For wares having strain may be done using polarimeter

greater than temper No. ( see Method B in 4 ).

3.1 Apparatus 3.1.1 Polariscope conforming to the following requirements:

4

The high brightness of the field shall be at least 308 cd/ms at the point where glassware is held for examination and at least at the edge of the field as observed with the 171 cd/m* polarizing element and protective element in operating position; The degree of polarization less than 99'0 percent; of the field at all points shall not be of

b)
c) d)

The field shall be of sufficient size to permit the examination the whole ware 25 cm in height at one viewing; and A sensitive tint plate standardized of 565 nm shall be used. to give an optical retardation

3.1.2 Standard Strain Discs - Such discs shall be circular plates of glass between 7'5 and 10 cm in diameter and having nominal residual strain ( about 6 mm from the edge ) corresponding to not less than 21.8 nm and not more than 23.8 nm of optical retardation.
NOTE 1 -

not exceed

In standardizing 0.7 nm.

such discs for measurement

or calibration,

error

shall

NOTE 2 - A set of 5 such discs which could be useful in covering the range of annealing of commercial glass containers is generally available from the Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute ( CSIR ), Calcutta 700032.

3.2

Procedure

3.2.1 Examination of Base of Cylindrical Glassware - Rotate the analyzer so as to have its plane of' polarization perpendicular to that of the polarizer. The field should look black. Introduce the container in the field of vision and view its base through the neck. Compare the maximum broad colour pattern in the base of the container with the maximum colour in various numbers of the standard strain discs stacked
4

1s : 9153 - 1978 one on top of the other to determine whether the colour in the base is less than that in one disc, less than two; greater than two but less than three; NOTE- It is seldom possible to obtain an exact match
with the reference standards.

maximum amount of greater than one but etc.
of the colour of container

3.2.1.1 Record the temper with the following rule.

number

of the container

in accordance

Rule - When the colour of a container is greater than the equivalent number (N) of discs but less than N + 1 discs, the grade is N + 1; that is, corresponding numerically to the larger number of discs, as follows: Temper .No. 1
2 3 4 5 6

Equivalent .Number of Discs
Less than Less than Less than Less than 1 disc 2 but greater 4 but greater 5 but greater than than than than 1 disc 2 discs 3 discs 4 discs

Less than 3 but greater

Less than 6 but greater

than 5 discs

NOTE - Each disc has an optical retardation of about 22.8 nm at the calibration point about 6 mm from the edge. In practice each disc has an efkctivc maximum optical retardation of about 23.7 nm near the edge.

3.2.2 Examination of Square, Oval and Irregular Shapes - Make the polariscopic examination at the curve or corner that shows the most colour, and record the temper number in accordance with the rule given in 3.2.1.1. colour of any 3.2.3 Examination of Sidewalls - Match the maximum part of the sidewall with the maximum colour in any part of the discs, and record the temper number in accordance with the rule given in 3.2.1.1. with the 3.2.4 Examination of Coloured Waro - Using the polariscope look at the base of the container tint plate [ see 3.1.1( d ) ] removed, through the neck and select for reference the darkest area ( usually the centreof the base ), then, with the tint plate in place hold a standard disc under the base of the container so that the portion of the edge of the disc, which shows maximum colour, is underneath the reference areas. Compare the colour of the reference area as modified by the presence of the disc with the maximum colour in the edge of the base. Rotate the If this colour is container to find the point giving maximum colour. greater than the modified colour in the reference area, use two or more with the rule given discs and grade the annealing in accordance in 3.2.1.1. 5

IS : 9153 - 1978 4. METHOD B - DETERMINATION WITH A POLARIMETER 4.1 Apparatus 4.1.1 Polarimcter
conforming to the following requirements: cd/m2 at and at with the position;

OF APPARENT

TEMPER

a) The high brightness of the field shall be at least 308 the point where the glassware is held for examination least 171 cd/m* at the edge of the field, as observed polarizing element and protective element in operating b) The degree of polarization less than 99.0 percent; of the field at all points

shall not be of

c) The field shall be of sufficient size to permit the examination the whole ware 25 cm in height at one viewing; d) The source of light shall consist of 75 or 100 W incandescent lamp bulbs so arranged as to satisfy the brightness requirements stated in (a) above;

e) A quarter-wave plate with an optical retardation of 141 nm shall be inserted between the polarizer and the analyzer with its slow axis at 90" to the plane of polarization of the polarizer; and f) The analyzer shall be so mounted that it can be rotated with respect to the polarizer and quarter-plate, and the angle of rotation determined.

4.2 Procedure 4.2.1 Examination of Base of Cylindrical Glassware - Rotate the analyzer so as to have its plane of polarization perpendicular to that of the This is the zero position and the field should be black. polarizer. Introduce the container in the field of vision and view the bottom through the neck. A dark cross will appear in the field between the areas which would show colour in a tint plate polariscope. In containers with low temper number, this cross will be hazy and indistinct. Rotating the analyzer causes the dark cross to separate into two areas which proceed outward in opposite directions towards the heal of the container. As these dark areas move outward, they develop a blue-grey colour on In measuring the concave side and a brown colour on the convex side. the birefringence of a selected point in a container, rotate the analyzer until the blue-grey colour is just displaced by the brown colour at the Rotate the container itself about its own axis to deterselected point. mine if the region of maximum birefringence has been selected; if not, rotate the analyzer further to displace the blue-grey colour with the brown in the region of maximum birefringence.
6

X8:9153-1978 4.2.1.1 Convert
number as follows: the angle of rotation of the analyzer to temper

Temper No.
1

AnaZyeer Rotation, Degrees
o-0 to

7.4

2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10

7.5 to 14.9 15.0 to 22.4 22.5 to 29'9
30.0 to 37.4 37.5 to 44.9 45.0 to 52.4

52.5to 59.9
-

60-Oto 67.4
67.5 to 74.9

NOTE - One degree of rotation of the analvzer is equivalent to about 3'14 nm retardation when using a white light source as spccificd in 4.1.1(d) optical ( rffectivc wave-length approximately 565 nm ). Thus, the equivalent value is taken to be 7'5' rotation for disc as used in Method A.

4.2.2 Examination of Square, Oval and Irrs,plar Shapes - Make the examination at the curve or corner that reveals the most birefringence when examined in accordance with the procedure given in 4.2.1.
4.2.3 Examination of Sidewalls - Introduce the container in the polarimeter with its axis at 45" to the plane of polarization. No dark crosses will be apparent. Rather, broad areas of varying lightness and darkness will be visible in the container. In this case, rotate the analyzer until the dark shadows converge on and displace the last remaining light areas in the sidewalls. It may be necessary to rotate the container about its own axis to determine the areas of most birefrinConvert the degree of rotation of the analyzer to temper number gence. in accordance with 4.2.1.1. 4.2.4 Examination of Coloured Ware-Use the same procedure as in 4.2.1. It is more difficult to distinguish the end point in coloured ware, particularly in darker colours, because of the absence of the characteristic blue and brown and also because of the lower level of light intensity. In dark samples the most accurate indication of the end

7

IS : 9153 - 1978 point is obtained by averaging the rotation necessary to displace the light area with dark and the total rotation necessary to just make the light area reappear. 5. REPORT 5.1 The report shall include the temper number, strain discs, or degrees of rotation of the analyzer, for each container. number of standard as the case may be,

8

