UAT ure IS 2461 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


fermare A gag acta diu — 
fares 


( TE gf) 


Balance Beam Used In Gymnastics 
— Specification 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.220.30 


© BIS 2023 


UR AAG equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Uda, 9 IgG Wes THX AUT, Ag fae! - 110002 
VLAXLLZ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2023 Price Group 7 


Sports Goods Sectional Committee, PGD 41 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) has been adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft is 
finalized by the Sports Goods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production and General Engineering 
Division Council. 


Balancing beams are generally used in women's artistic gymnastics. The gymnast usually performs on this 
equipment by mounting the beam either by a vault or a jump and executes various movements. 


This standard was first published in 1963, which was based on the draft ISO/R 490 Balancing Beam, and had been 
prepared by ISO/TC 83 in consultation and collaboration with the International Gymnastic Federation (IGF). 


This revision has been brought out to align this with the latest rules and regulations followed by the International 
Federation of Gymnastics. In this revision, the following significant modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Manufacturing and construction requirements have been updated; 
b) Performance requirement has been updated; and 
c) Functional requirements have been included. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex C. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 


observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. 


IS 2461 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


BALANCE BEAM USED IN 
GYMNASTICS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard covers the requirements for balancing 
beams used in gymnastics for women. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Base Plane — The starting reference plane of 
the balance beam from which deflection is 
determined. It is taken as the upper surface of the 
balance beam loaded by the loading disk prior to 
any impact. 


2.2 Defection (D) — The measured distance (in 
mm) between the base plane and the bottom surface 
of the loading disk during the impact. 


2.3 Energy of Deflection — The integration value 
or calculated area under the force-deflection curve 
expressed in N-m (Newton-meter). The domain of 
integration is from the rising point to the maximum 
point of deflection on the curve. 


2.4 Force (F) — The force applied to the balance 


beam during the impact, expressed in newton. 


2.5 Friction Coefficient of Balance Beam — 
Quotient of the maximum traction force (in N) and 
the weight of the slider (in N) 


2.6 Intensity of Rebound (DrVr) — The product 
of rebound deflection and rebound velocity 
expressed in mm/s. 


2.7 Loading Disk — The part of the test 
apparatus which applies the specified load to the 
test specimen. 


2.8 Maximum Deflection (Dmax) — The maximum 


value of deflection (in mm) measured during the 
impact. 


2.9 Maximum Traction Force — The 
maximum static friction force (in N), observed at 
the beginning of the pulling movement of the slider. 


2.10 Rebound Deflection (Dr) — The maximum 
rebounding displacement (in mm) of the bottom 
surface of the loading disk, measured from the 
plane of the maximum deflection. 


2.11 Rebound Time — The difference in time (s) 
between the point of maximum deflection and the 
point of rebound deflection. 


2.12 Rebound Velocity (Vr) — The quotient of 
rebound deflection and rebound time expressed in 
mm/s. 


2.13 Slider — A test body of given mass and 
geometry for measuring frictional characteristics of 
the balance beam. The slider includes a test sole 
which is bonded to the bottom of the slider and 
made of synthetic material with defined friction 
properties. 


3 CONSTRUCTION AND WORKMANSHIP 


3.1. Balancing beam consists a beam held by a base 
consisting of two supports. The beam shall be 
straight, upper surface and axis shall be even and 
horizontal. The base design is not prescribed. 
However, its legs may not protrude beyond the 
projection of the beam in its longitudinal direction. 


3.2 The supports shall be cushioned and shall not 
increase beyond the vertical projection of the beam. 


IS 2461 : 2023 


The front part of the beam shall be cushioned by 
rounded, damping padding. The thickness of the 
cushioning of the front part of the beam shall not be 
less than 15 mm and more than 30 mm. The padding 
shall reach the top edge of the beam, however, the 
radius of the rounding must begin immediately at the 
end of the beam so that the padding will not increase 
the total length of the beam. 


3.3 The shape and dimensions of the balance beam 
shall be as given in Fig. 1. Where they are not 
specified, they are left to the discretion of the 
purchaser and supplier. 


3.4 The height of the beam shall be adjustable. It can 
be continuous or in 50 mm increments. Adjusting 
the device for the height shall be so constructed that 
the performance of the fixture shall not diminish 
during use. 


3.5 The arrangement of the fixed feet and adjustable 
leg shall be such as to ensure stability on uneven 
ground. The feet shall be provided with rubber shoes 
to reduce the possibility of sliding along the floor. 


500 x 1 


X 0.5 


20 


SIDE VIEW 


Ti 


TOP VIEW 


4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Material 


4.1.1 The walking surface of the beam shall be made 
of a suitable good quality, well-seasoned wood 
which shall not splinter easily. The recommended 
species of timber are: 


Trade Name Botanical Name 

babul Acacia arabica 

benteak Lagerstromia lanceolara 
sandan Ougeinia dalbergioides 
bijasal Pterocarpus mprsupium 
sal Shorea tobusta 

dhaman Grewia tilicefolia 

laurel Terminalia tomentosa 
axlewood Anogeissus latifolia 


E J 


4.1.2 The supports may be made of either steel or 
cast iron. 


125 +1 
12541 


FRONT VIEW 


13 x 0.5 
| |= f ES | 


max 125 
16 € 0.5 


BEAM CROSS-SECTION 


(All dimensions are in centimeters) 


FIG. 1 SHAPE AND DIMENSION OF BALANCE BEAM 


4.2 Functional Requirements 


4.2.1 The surface of the balancing beam shall have 
impact absorbent characteristics to protect the 
gymnast’s joints and limbs. It shall also have 
elasticity to support the jumps. It shall be step safe 
and elasticity shall be equally distributed. 


4.2.2. The upper surface material of the balancing 
shall not be slippery. The cover material shall not 
produce skin burns. The upper edge of the padding 
at the front parts of the beam shall not be harder than 
the surface of the beam. 


IS 2461 : 2023 


4.2.3 All protruding parts, like screws underneath 
the balance beam shall be cushioned or hidden. 


4.2.4 The balancing beam shall not vibrate in its 
supports during use. 


5 PERFORMANCE TESTS REQUIREMENTS 
5.1 Elasticity and Shock Absorption 
When tested according to the procedures described 


in A-3, the values of the measured variables shall be 
as given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Requirements for Test A — Elasticity and Shock Absorption of Balance Beams 
(Clause 5.1) 


SINo. Elasticity and Shock Absorption Dmax E D. D:Vr 
of Balance Beam 
mm N-m mm mm/s 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

(i) Mean value across impact siteslto 35<x<140 25<x<95 30<x<200 300 < x < 4800 
7 

(ii) Difference between highest and <5.0 < 3.0 < 5.0 < 2400 
lowest mean value on impact sites 
1to7 


NOTE — ‘x’ represents the mean values of the measured variables 


5.2 Top Friction 

When tested according to the procedures described 
in B-3, the mean values of the measured variables 
shall be as given in Table 2. 


Table 2 Requirements for Test B — Top Friction of Balance Beam 
(Clause 5.2 and B-3) 


SI No. Top Friction of Balance Beam Friction Coefficient of Balance 
Beam 
(1) (2) (3) 
(i) Mean value across test sites 0.35 < x < 0.60 
(ii) Difference between highest and lowest mean value on test < 0.05 
(iii) Difference between mean values of orthogonal test < 0.05 


NOTE — ‘x’ represents the mean values of the measured variables 


IS 2461 : 2023 


6 PACKING AND MARKING 
6.1 Packing 


The balance beam shall be packed as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


6.2 Marking 


6.2.1 The balancing beam shall be marked with the 
followings: 


a) Manufacturer's name and trade-mark; and 
b) Month and year of manufacture. 


6.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
product(s) may be marked with the standard mark. 


IS 2461 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.1) 


ELASTICITY AND SHOCK ABSORPTION TEST 


A-1 TEST SPECIMEN 


The test specimen submitted for testing shall consist 
of a complete balance beam as it is intended to be 
used during training and/or competition. 


A-2 TEST APPARATUS 

A-2.1 Impact Test Machine 

Any type of dynamic testing apparatus that is 
capable of impacting a test specimen using the 


prescribed loading condition and monitoring and 
recording the force-time history and deflection-time 


BALANCE BEAM 


history of the loading disk is acceptable. The impact 
test machine shall have sufficient rigidity to 
eliminate undesirable vibrations in the apparatus 
which might be recorded on the force-time curve 
and deflection-time curve. The impact test machine 
shall also be designed in such a manner that only the 
bottom surface of the loading disk contacts the test 
specimen at any time during the test procedures. 


A-2.2 Loading System 


The loading system of the impact test machine shall 
meet the following requirements (see Fig. 2). 


RUBBER SPRINGS 


LOADING DISK 
& LOAD CELL 


FIG 2: SETUP OF THE LOADING SYSTEM 


A-2.2.1 Characteristics of the Dynamic Load 


The maximum dynamic force shall be 130 0 N + 
26 N when this loading system is applied to the 
testing anvil. The time from the onset of force 
application to the time of maximum force shall be 
50 ms € 2 ms. 


A-2.2.2 Impactor 


The dropping impactor shall be 15 kg + 0.1 kg and 
shall have a flat impact face. The impactor shall have 
the shape of a thick cylinder and shall be dropped 
along a guide pipe. The decision of the size of 
outside and inside diameters of the impactor is at the 
discretion of the test laboratory, but the clearance 
between the inside hole of the impactor and the 


guide pipe shall be 2 mm + 0.2 mm. The dropping 
height of the impactor shall be 120 mm + 1 mm to 
the upper surface of the rubber springs. 


A-2.2.3 Release Mechanism 


The release mechanism shall be unattached to the 
loading disk and the guide pipe to prevent an 
additional load with the attached impactor on the 
loading disc and the test specimen before the impact. 


A-2.2.4 Loading Disk and Guide Pipe 


The loading disk shall have a diameter of 70 mm + 
0.5 mm. Total mass of the loading disk including the 
force transducer and the guide pipe shall be 
5kg +0.2 kg. 


IS 2461 : 2023 


A-2.2.5 Rubber Springs 


A set of rubber springs shall be selected to meet the 
requirements described in A.2.2.1. 


A-2.3 Recording Equipment 


The recording equipment shall meet the following 
criteria: 


A-2.3.1 Force — Time 


The selection of the specific force-time recording 
equipment, including transducers and recorders, is at 
the discretion of the test laboratory. However, the 
recording system shall have a frequency response 
adequate to measure the peak force value to an 
accuracy of + 3 percent of the true value. The total 
system, detection, and recording, shall be capable of 
measuring impact forces of up to 2 000 N at 
frequencies from 2 Hz to 1 000 Hz to an accuracy of 
+3 percent. The minimum sampling rate of the data 
acquisition system shall be 5 000 Hz. 


A-2.3.2 Displacement — Time 


The selection of the specific displacement - time 
recording equipment, including transducers and 
recorders, is at the discretion of the test laboratory. 
However, the recording system shall have a 
frequency response adequate to measure the 
dynamic displacement value to an accuracy of + 3 


1400 


percent of the true value. The total system, detection 
and recording, shall be capable of measuring the 
displacement of + 50 mm at frequencies from 2 Hz 
to 1 000 Hz to an accuracy of + 3 percent. The 
minimum sampling rate of the data acquisition 
system shall be 5 000 Hz. 


A-2.3.3 Filtering 


The signal from all transducers shall be conditioned 
with a low pass filter which complies with channel 
class 1 000 of SAE recommended practice J211. A 
fourth-order butterworth low pass filter with a cut- 
off frequency of 1 000 Hz meets this requirement. 


A-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


A specimen balance beam is impacted by dropping 
an impactor from a predetermined height onto a set 
of rubber springs and a loading disk which are 
located on the top surface of the test specimen prior 
to the impact. Transducers mounted in the loading 
disk shall monitor the force — time history and 
displacement — time history of the loading disk. This 
data shall be recorded with the aid of a data 
acquisition system. 


A-3.1 Impact Sites 
A total of seven impact sites shall be designated on 


the test specimen (see Fig. 3) for an illustration of 
the impact sites. 


2,6 : INTERSECTIONS OF BEAM AND LEGS 


(All dimensions in millimeters) 


FIG.3 IMPACT SITES ON THE BALANCE BEAM 


A-3.2 Impact Test Procedures 


A-3.2.1 Place the test specimen under the impact test 
machine on a smooth, solid, and horizontal floor 
(concrete or metal plate) and orient the loading disk 


such that the center of the loading disk contacts one 
of the designated impact test sites. 


A-3.2.2 Raise the impactor to an appropriate drop 
height such that it will impact the rubber springs and 


generate the proper dynamic load described as given 
in A-2.2. 


A-3.2.3 Release the impactor and capture the force- 
time history and displacement - time history using 
the recording equipment described in section A-2.3. 


A-3.2.4 Upon completion of a given impact test, 
raise the impactor off the loading disk. 


A-3.2.5 The duration between tests at a given impact 
site shall not be less than 120 seconds. 


A-3.2.6 Impact each of the seven impact sites five 
times. Each test specimen shall receive a total of 35 
impacts. 


IS 2461 : 2023 


A-4 CALCULATIONS 


A-4.1 Immediately following each test, record the 
following measurements: Dmax (mm), E (Nm), Dr 
(mm) and D,V, (mm/7/s). 


A.4.2 Determine the arithmetic mean values of the 
measured variables for each impact site and for the 
overall mean values of the measured variables 
across all impact sites. Determine also the 
differences between the highest and lowest mean 
values of the measured variables for each test site 
and across all test sites. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 5.2) 


TOP FRICTION TEST 


B-1 TEST SPECIMEN 


The test specimen submitted for testing shall 
consist of a complete balance beam as it is intended 
to be used during training and/or competition. 


B-2 TEST APPARATUS 
B-2.1 Measurement Device 


Any type of friction testing apparatus that is capable 
of pulling a slider on the surface of a specimen 
balance beam at the required test velocity is 
acceptable. During the test, the traction force-time 
history of the slider shall be monitored and recorded. 


B-2.2 Slider 


The slider shall have a mass of 5 kg + 0.2 kg. A 
square-shaped test sole with a thickness of 10 mm + 
0.5 mm and a size of 40 mm + 1 mm shall be bonded 
to the bottom of the slider. The thickness of the test 
sole shall be decreased to 75 percent + 5 percent of 
the original thickness at a pressure of 5 N/cm?. The 
coefficient of static friction of the test sole shall be 
0.25 x 0.03. The slider shall be pulled at a constant 
loading rate of 5 N/s + 0.5 N/s. 


B-2.3 Recording Equipment 


The recording equipment shall meet the following 
criteria: 


B-2.3.1 Force — Time 


The selection of the specific force-time recording 
equipment, including transducer and recorder, is at 
the discretion of the test laboratory. The total 
system, detection, and recording, shall be capable of 
measuring traction forces up to 100 N at frequencies 
from 2 Hz to 100 Hz to an accuracy of + 3 percent. 
The minimum sampling rate of the data acquisition 
system shall be 200 Hz. 


B-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


A slider is pulled horizontally upon the surface of a 
specimen balance beam at a defined loading rate. A 
transducer connected to the pulling string shall 
monitor the maximum traction force generated 
during the pulling movement. 


When tested according to the procedures described 
in B-3, the mean values of the measured variables 
shall be within the figures in Table 2. 


IS 2461 : 2023 


B-3.1 Test Sites and Directions 
A total of three test sites shall be designated on the 
test specimen as illustrated in Fig. 4. Four 
orthogonal test directions for the traction of the 

1250 1250 


1250 


slider shall be also designated on each test site as 
illustrated in Fig. 4. 


1250 


"T 


1 2 


| 


| 


-— 


LONGITUDINAL DIRECTION 


LATERAL DIRECTION 


(All dimensions are in millimetre) 


FIG 4: TOP FRICTION TEST SITES AND DIRECTION ON THE BALANCE BEAM 


B-3.2. Friction Test Procedures 


B-3.2.1 Place the complete test specimen on a 
smooth, solid and horizontal floor. 


B-3.2.2 Place the slider on the test specimen in such 
a manner that the centre of its sole will contact one 
of the designated test sites, and also in such a manner 
that the pulling direction of the slider will conform 
to one of the designated test directions. Just before 
putting the slider on the test specimen, magnesium 
carbonate powder of 1g shall be spread on the 
surface of the test site each time. 


B-3.2.3 Pull the slider horizontally at a constant 
loading rate of 5 N/s x 0.5 N/s and record the traction 
force — time history using recording equipment 
described in Section B-2.3 


B-3.2.4 Repeat the procedure given in B-3.2.2 and 
B-3.2.3 five times at each test site and in each test 
direction. 


B-3.2.5 Each test specimen shall receive a total of 
60 friction test procedures. 


B-4 CALCULATIONS 


B-4.1 Immediately following each test, record the 
friction coefficient. 


B-4.2 Determine the overall mean value of the 
friction coefficient across the test sites 1 to 3. 
Determine also the difference between the highest 
and the lowest mean value of the friction coefficient 
between all test sites, and the difference between the 
mean values of the friction coefficients of the 
orthogonal test directions between all test sites. 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


IS 2461 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Organization 


Sports Goods Export Promotion Council 
All India Lawn Tennis Association, New Delhi 
Anand & Anand 


Athletic Federation of India 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & 
Technology (CIPET), Murthal 


COSCO India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 

Director Equipment Sports Authority of India, 
New Delhi 

Freewill Sports Pvt Ltd, Jalandhar 

Government e Market Place, New Delhi 

Gymnastic Federation of India, Mumbai 

Hockey India 


Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, 
Technology Development Centre, New Delhi 


NELCO (India) Pvt Ltd, Meerut 


Office of Development Commissioner (MSME), 
Delhi 


Premier Enterprises, Meerut 


Process Cum Product Development Centre, Meerut 
Ranson Sports Industry, Jalandhar 


Sanspareils Greenlands Pvt Ltd, Meerut 


Shri Ram Institute For Industrial Research, Delhi 
Soccer International Pvt Ltd, Jalandhar 


Softball Association of India 


Representative(s) 
SHRI TARUN DEWAN (Chairperson) 
SHRI NAR SINGH 
SHRI ASHISH ANAND 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHTA 
SHRI GOPALA KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR S. N. YADAV 
SHRI PANKAJ JAIN 
SHRI NARINDER JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ROQUE DIAS 


SHRI RAJESH KHARBANDA 

SHRI N. K. MALHOTRA 

SHRI RIAZ BHATI 

COMMANDER R. K. SRIVASTAVA 


SHRI V. K. SINGH 


SHRI AMBER ANAND 
SHRI SUNIL GUPTA 
SHRI SUMESH AGARWAL 
SHRI KSHITIJ AGARWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI SUNIL GUPTA 
SHRI ARVIND SINGH RANA 


SHRI PUNEET ANAND 
ALOK MISHRA (Alternate) 


DR VINAY TYAGI 
MS SHAALINI GUPTA 


MS SHIBANI TAGORE 


IS 2461 : 2023 


Sports Goods Manufacturers and Exporters MS HARSHITA 
Association (SGMEA), Jalandhar 


Sports Line, New Delhi SHRI OJASVI NAGPAL 


Stag International Sports, Meerut SHRI RAKESH KOHLI 
SHRI VIVEK KOHLI (Alternate) 


Universal Sports, Jalandhar SHRI MAHESH CHADHA 
Vats Sports, Meerut SHRI LOKESH VATS 
Voluntary Organisation In Interest Of SHRIM. A. U. KHAN 


Consumer Education (Voice), New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General SHRI R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (PRODUCTION AND GENERAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(PRODUCTION AND GENERAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PGD 41 (18479). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


