( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS : 4880 ( Part VII ) - 1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTlCE FOR DESIGN OF TUNNELS CONVEYING
PART VII
Water

WATER

STRUCTURAL
Conductor

DESIGN

OF STEEL LINlNG
Committee, BDC 58

Systems Sectional
Chairman Srzitl P. M. Bombay
MANE

Ramalayam, Peddar Road
4OOG26 Members ADDITIONALDIRECTOR SHRI S. P. BHAT Snar K. R. NARAYANA ho CHIEF C~NSTR~~~ONENGINEER
DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( B & S )-I ( Alrrmak )

Representing

(FE)

Ministry

of Railways,

New Delhi Government

Public Works & Electricity Department, of Karnataka, Bangalore ( alternate ) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras Pradesh State Electricity

( DESIGN AND PLANKING ) ( Aftemofe ) Kcrala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum CHrsr ENGIX~ER( CIVIL ) SHRI K. RAUABHADRAN !%IR ( Afirm& ) Public \Vorks Department, Government of Tamil Cmer ENGINEER ( IRRIGATION ) Sadu, Madras ENGI~ER SUPERINTENDING ( D%IWC ) ( Altmurrr ) Bcas Designs Organization, Nangal Township SHRt 0. P. DA.RA SHRIJ. S. SINGHOTA ( AI&mute ) Central Water 8: Power Commission, New D&i DIRECI-OR ( HCD ) DEPUYT DIRECTOR (PH-I) (A&-mate) Irrigation & Power Department, Government of DWCXOR, LRIPRI Punjab, Chandigarh Saat H. L. SXXARMA ( Alkmatc ) Assam State Electricity Board, Shillong &tar D. N. DUITA Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Stntt R. G. GANDHI. Srim R. K. Jest-n ( Altrrnalr ) Alokudyog ScrviccsLtd, New Delhi Smtt K. C. GHOSAL SERI A. K. B~SWAS ( Altemak ) ( Continued on page 2 )

EsGINERR SUPERtNTENDlHG ( TECHNICAL~CIVIL : ( Altrrnorc ) Andhra CHIEP ENGINEER ( CIVIL ) ENGISEER SUPERINTENDING

Board, Hydcrabad

@I coppriglit 1975
INDIAN this rep&& a STANDARDS INSTITUTION blication is rotcctcd under the Indinn Co&vi@ Act (XI\' of 1957) and on in who 7e or in part by any means except wtth written permission of tic &II be deemed to be an infringem~t of copyright urdu Ihe said Aa.

ls:4880(

Part VU)-1975

Geological Survey of I&ii, Calcutta Damodar Valley Corporatson, Calcutta Irrigation & Power Department, Government of Maharaahtra, Bombay &RI S. M. BHALXRAO ( A&mate ) Natio& P.&ccts Construction Corporation Ltd, SHIU D. N. KOCHHAR &RX M. s.JNN SERI L. N. f=ABIBAJ Sxinr.8. S. tiPRB SERI K. N. TANBJA ( Akmatr) St.xm Y. G. PAUL Sxsu C. K. Cxorsix ( Atmutt S~pl A. R. RNCEUR
hRtRYARY

Pate1 Engineering

Co Ltd, Bombay

)

R. J. Shah & Co Ltd, Bombay Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi

DEP~Y SZRETARY ( 1.0. ) ( Alternutr ) Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Director General, ISI ( E.x-o$%o Member) SHRX D. AJITRA SIYHA, Director(CivEngg)

SERI G. N. TANDON

Assistant

SmtxK. K. SHARMA Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

Panel for Design of Tunnels, BDC 58 : Pl cbwcnm
Smu C. K. C%~OXSHI Pate1 Engineering Co Ltd, E Bombay

Members
Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras Central Water ik Power Commission, New Delhi &RRCl'OR ( HCD ) DHwlv DIRECTOR ( PH-I ) ( dklr ) Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, SERI 0. P. GUPTA Luchlow Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Smu M. S. Jm Irrigation k Power Department, Government of Snu B. S. -RR Maharashtra, Bombay R. J. Shah & Co Ltd, Bombay SHlUA.R.RAtCHUR Bear Designs Organization, Nangal Township SERI J. S. SUOHOTA SENO.R.MU~~A(,~~M~~)

CHXRP EN~XNRRR ( IRRX~ATX~N)

2

IS : 4880( Part VII ) - 1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN OF TUNNELS CONVEYING
PART VII STRUCTURAL DESIGN

WATER

OF STEEL LINING

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 May 1975, after the draft finalized by the Water Conductor Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The type of lining chosen for tunnels depends upon the rock properties and rock cover over the tunnel and the type of tunnel. If the tunnel has to withstand very high pressures, it will have to be steel lined. There is, so far, no generally accepted method for the design of steel lining. The purpose of this code is to outline the criteria to be adopted in the design. The tendency of modern designers, however, is to avoid any steel lining. Rock conditions will have to be determined for taking a final decision as to when and where steel lining becomes indispensable. 0.3 Steel lining is a steel plate provided to inner surface of water carrying tunnel for any or all of the following purposes: a) To resist bursting pressure of water carried by the tunnel; b) To prevent water losses; c) To provide protection from seepage of water from the surrounding mass like rock, concrete, etc; and d) To provide a smooth surf&e for flow of water. 0.4 This standard is being published in parts. are as follows: Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part v Part VI General design Geometric design Hydraulic design Structural design of concrete lining in rock Structural design of concrete lining in soft strata and soils Tunnel supports 3 Other parts of this standard

IS: 4880 (Part

VII) - 1975
on tunnels.

0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or ca%zulated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The nuniber of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960*. value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part VII ) covers the general requirements and design of steel lining of tunnels for conveyance of water from reservoirs to hydraulic turbines in hydro-power plants or vice versa in case of reversible pump turbines in pumped storage schemes or for other similar installations. 1.2 This Code does not cover wye-piece, transitions, etc. 2. GENERAL 2.1 Dimensions and Shape the design of specials like manifolds,

point of view of design and fabrication.

2.1.1 The circular section of the tunnel is most suitable for lining from Steel liner in rectangular shape is generally not provided.

2.1.2 The most economical dimensions and shape of the prsqure conduit to be lined should be decided on the basis of the economic studies. The particular size for +ich the sum of the value of power annually lost and the annual charges IS at a minimum, is selected. Provisions of 2.3.1.1 of IS : 4880 ( Part III )-1968t are applicable in this connection. 2.2 Contractiqn and EspansionTo minimize head losses and to avoid cavitation tendencies along the tunnel surface contraction and shall be designed in transitions expansion accordance with IS : 4880 ( Part III )-1968f. 23 Limiting Velocity - The velocities in a steel lined tunnel depend on the economic considerations and governing conditions of turbine. These velocities may range between 1.6 to 9 m/s.
Low velocities I\JCXE lengths in a concrete lied or desirable. normally occur when steel lining ia provided in shorter tunnel where reducing the diameter may not be pra&cable

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( m&d ). tCode of practice for derign of tunnch eonvtying water:

Part III Hydraulic dc+.

4

ls:4889(PartvII)-1975

2.4 Loss of Head -The loss of head due to d&rent worked out conforming to IS : 4880 ( Part III )-1968*.
3. DESIGN

reasons shall be

3.1 MaterialThe permissible stresses to be adopted depend upon the quality of steel to be used. For satisfactory welding, the plates shall be of fire box quality conforming to IS : 2002-1962t and IS : 2041-19623. 3.2 Design Stresses and Factor 0% Safety - The design stresses and factor of safety to be adopted depend upon the yield point stress of steel and location where steel lining is to be provided. 3.2.1 For steel lining to be provided in tunnels where sharing of internal load by rock is not to be taken into account the design stress to be adopted shall be equal to the yield point stress with a factor of safety of l-67. -3.2.2 In case of pressure tunnels passing through rock and requiring steel lining it is a general practice to assume that the rock shares the internal water pressure to some extent depending upon its quality and rock cover. Wherever rock share is considered, the allowable design stress for free shell shall not exceed 0.67 to 0.9 times yield stress of steel depending upon the type of rock and available rock cover. The rock participation shall be in accordance with 5.1.2. 3.2.3 For emergency conditions expected to exist for short period of time and at infrequent intervals, design stress equal to yield point stress of steel with factor of safety of one shall be adopted. 3.3 Joint Efficiency -Joint eihciency or weld factor assumed for purpose of design varies for different kinds of joints and different methods of inspection and testing. The joint efficiency also varies for different types of steel. 3.3.1 For all longitudinal welded joints if completely radiographed or ultrasonically tested and weld defects repaired, the joint efficiency is taken as 100 percent otherwise the efficiency is taken as 90 percent. 3.4 For all specials like manifolds, transitions, exceeding 38 mm, stress relieving shall be done. 4. DESIGN LOADS 4.1 Internal Pressure -The steel lining of a tunnel is designed for maximum internal pressure. The maximum internal pressure is the load on the pipe per unit area caused by the maximum static water head and *Code of practice for d&a
tSpecitication ~Spccification for ateel plates for boilers. for atnl plats for pressure vesck.

\

etc, and lining thickness

of tunnelsconveyingwater: Part III Hydraulic

design.

5

ISr488O(PartVII)-1975

the anticipated increase in the static head due to water hammer effect development when arresting or releasing the flow of water. The water hammer effect may be determined using the details given in the `draft Indian Standard Criteria for water hammer analysis ' ( underprej~rution ).
agreement between the concerned partia.

NOTE-Until

the above standard

is published,

tbe matter hall

be subject to

4.2 External Pressure - The steel lining shall be designed for the external water pressure which is either the difference between the ground level vertically above the tunnel and the tunnel invert level, or the maximum level from which water is likely to find its way around the steel lining. The liner should also be checked against grouting pressure during construction. 4.3 Longitudinal Stresses Caused by Radial Strain - Radial expansion of steel caused by internal pressure tends to cause longitudinal contraction with corresponding tensile stress equal to 0.303 of hoop tension in circular lining. However, this is generally negligible. 5. THICKNESS
OF LINING

5.1 The thickness of steel lining in tunnel depends upon:

aj minimum handling thickness, b) that required for internal pressure after rock participation, and c) that required for external pressure. 5.1.1 Regardless of pressure conditions, a minimum handling thickness is recommended for the shell to provide the rigidity required during fabrication. This is given by the formula: tnin = where
t mnin =

d + 50 400

minimum handling thickness in cm, and

d = internal dia of shell in cm. 5.1.2 For internal pressure, the shearing between rock and liner depends upon the modulus of elasticity of rock. The rock modulus may b determined by in situ tests and percentage of rock participation can then be calculated from 5.1.2.1. 6

5.1.2.1 formulaz

The rock participation may be worked out from the following

A= a,-P
where

E.f, at - r 1
-&(l 7 +r> ++++rt) c +& r x+P-r.`)]

x = proportion of internal pressure transferred to rock; QI = allowable stress in steel liner; E = modulus of elasticity of steel; ro = initial gap between liner and concrete caused by shrinkage and creep of concrete and temperature effect; I = inside radius of steel liner;

c.

P = internal pressure in tunnel; E, = modulus of elasticity of rock;
P = Poisson's ratio of rock;

E c= modulus of elasticity of concrete;
'e =

outside radius of concrete lining; and

d = radius to the end of radial fissures in rock, that is, where the natural compressive stresses in the rock are .j,t exceeded by the tensile stresses caused by internal pressure. 5.1.3 The thickness of steel lining should be determined for hoop stresses and checked for combined hoop and longitudinal stresses. 5.2 The thickness of circular steel lining for internal pressure should be worked out by formula:
t =A!?_ S.C

where t = shell thickness in cm, P = maximum internal pressure after rock participation kg/cm23 R I inner radius offinished surface of tunnel in cm, s=dcsignstressinkg/cm',and c e &ciency of longitudinal with 33. joint to be in in

accordance

7

IS:4886(PartViI)-1975 5.3 Shell Thickness Dmc to External Water Pressure - As regards to steel lining provided in tunnels the question of designing the steel shell for external pressure arises when water pressure develops around steel shell. Due to plastic yield in the rock, which may continue for considerable time, it is possible that a gap may be developed between steel and concrete or rock and concrete after tunnel is emptied releasing internal pressure. The gap between the liner and concrete or concrete and rock also depends on the initial gap due to shrinkage of concrete, temperature variation and plastic deformation of liner concrete and rock. Even though the rock would be grouted for some depth all around the periphery of the tunnel, the probability of water seeping through and accumulating in the cavity around the steel lining cannot be ruled out. Such water will be under pressure and would cause external pressure on steel lining. The shell thickness should be designed for external pressure or anchors can be provided. 5.4 Designing the Shell for External Pressure - The design thickness of the shell is worked out by the formulae given at 5.4.1 and 5.4.2. However, a factor of safety of at least l-5 shall be allowed over the calculated critical external pressure. Permissible critical external pressure can be increased by providing suitable anchors on the liner. 5.4.1 Barrot's formula: K 63 1 -?- 2 -I- IcH'< Xz )

13 rj--+2p, where

PC2

Fe

(

2PJ_?+$7-O

P, = critical external pressure in kg/cm2, E = modulus of elasticity in kg/cm*,

J = gap between steel lining and concrete in cm,

R' = external radius of curvature in cm, F, = yield point stress in kg/cm*, and
t = thickness of shell in cm. 5.4.!2 dtuk's equation:

8

I!3: 4880 ( Part VII ) - 1975
where

.fa = J = =
3i

allowable stress in material,

E
l--B* gap between steel liner and concrete, Young's modulus of elasticity, external radius of curvature in cm, t

E
R'

R-3 t= f'. *

R1 '
thickness of shell in cm,

fi -1 --@-I@' P = critical external pressure in kg/cm*, f Y= yield stress of material, and fJ= Poisson's ratio. 4

5.5 Protection - Inner surface of the steel lining shall be provided with adequate protection against rusting by applying suitable paint. 6. DESIGN OF ANCHORS/STIFFNER EXTERNAL PRESSURE RINGS FOR RESISTING

6.1 In the present context anchors have a restricted role of resisting external pressures only. The anchors provided can be continuous along These can be made of the circumference and placed at certain intervals. either angle irons or latticed structure depending on the strength required. Stiffening provided should be simple and should not interfere with construction and proper placing and compaction of concrete.. Contact between the concrete and the steel lining should be complete. However, the liner thickness may be designed to resist the external pressures and not to provide any anchors or stiffener rings, since these hinder proper concreting and leave pockets behind the liner. 6.1.1 Spacing of anchors along the periphery of circular steel lining of a given thickness can be worked out by Backte's formula. The formula is as follows:

L = 2a.R ( F,, )V* . E .
a "--p-6/2 c R4

t"

where

L = spacing of anchors/stiffner rings in cm,
Fe, = stress at lower yield point of steel in kg/ems, 9

ISt488O(PartVIl)-1975 E = modulus of elasticity of steel in kglcms, # = thickness of shell in cm,

P, = critical external pressure on the lining in kg/cm2, and R = internal finished radius of tunnel in cm.
6.1.2 There is no method by which anchorjstiffner longitudinal direction can be determined. Hence, same as that along the circumference. 6.2 Size of Ancbors/Stiffntr Rings ring spacing in the this is also kept the

6.2.1 The function of anchorlstiffner ring is to sew the steel lining into concrete and thereby increase the number of bulges the steel lining shell should take due to external pressure. 6.2.2 Anchorsjstiffner rings should therefore be strong enough not to be sheared off, should the steel lining shell try to slip along the concrete and should not allow all the inward bulges to concentrate at a single location. 6.2.3 As a rough guide the anchors should be 25 to 40 mm in diameter and about 300 to 500 mm in length. 7. BANDS OVER STEEL LINING SHELLS

7.1 It may not be possible to provide steel lining for the designed thickness according to 6 due to availability of steel plates of required thickness or limitations due to fabrication difficulties. Steel bands are provided to share the load in steel shell, under such circumstances. Bands can also be used with advantage for strengthening the fabricated steel lining when rock at a particular location is found to be weaker than anticipated, after excavation. 8. CHANGE IN THE THICKNESS OF STEEL LINING

8.1 The thickness of steel lining at different locations depends upon various Especially when the pressure tunnel or ictors enumerated in 6.1 to 6.4. shaft passes through different layers of the rock, such as good medium or bad, the steel thickness provided in bad or medium layer of the rock is extended into next better layer of the rock for a length equal at least to one diameter of the pressure tunnel or shaft. Beyond this the thickness is reduced in steps of not more than 5 mm each till the smaller thickness required for better rock is reached. These steps are kept at individual shells of fabricated smallest length. When the- lining emerges from the tunnel it should be designed for full internal water pressure and due care should be taken of stress concentrations occurring in the surrounding rock.

10

