(Reaffirmed 2003)

Indian Standard CRANES -TEST CODE AND PROCEDURES

ICS !53.020.20

0 BIS 1997

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
NEW

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 2 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

May 1997

Cranes, Lifting Chains and~lts Related Equipment Sectional Committee,

HMD 14

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 4310 : 1981 `Cranes -Test code and procedures', issued by International Organization for Standardization (tSO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Cranes, Liiing Chains and Its Related Equipment SectionaKommittee,and approval of the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Whereverthe words'lnternational as `Indian Standard'. Standard'appear referring to this standard, they should be read

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal maiker while in Indian Standards, to use a full stop ( . ) as a decimal marker.

the current practice is

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 14470 : 1997 IS0 4310 : 1981

Indian Standard CRANES -TEST CODE AND PROCEDURES

1

Scope-and

field

of application

c) should "vendor"

be established

by

mutual

agreement

between

the

and the "purchaser".`)

This International Standard specifies the tests and procedures to be followed in order to verify that a crane conforms to its operational Where specifications and is capable of lifting rated loads. by stability, a test procedure that permit stability margins to be rated loads are governed

2.3

Cranes which leave the manufacturing or finally assembled

factories ready for

service shall be tested in these factories prior to delivery; cranes which are mounted shall be tested at their places of use beat these places unless other agreements

and test load are specified easily verified. The following Standard a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h)

tween the vendor and the purchaser are made. by-this International

crane types are governed

:
travelling cranes;

3 3.1

Test procedures Conformity tests
to specifications, tests

overhead travelling

bridge cranes; When cranes are tested for conformity according parameters shall be performed and the following to the crane load characteristics, shall be verified

portal cranes; mobile cranes and crane-excavators; tower cranes; railway cranes; cable cranes; others to be determined.

:

-

mass of crane (where practical); distance from axis of rotation to the balance edge; load lifting height; hook approaches; load lifting speed; precision load lowering crane travelling speed; crab traversing slewing speed; derricking time; telescoping time; necessary); speed; speed;

2 Types samtiles 2.1
Three

of

test

procedure

and

number

of

-

types

of test procedure

are to be used to acStandard

-_ .-

complish the aims of this International a) testing of cranes for conformity

:
as set

to specifications

forth in 3.1; b) c) visual inspection as set forth in 3.2; testing as set forth in 3.4, 3.5

-

load lifting competence

cycle time (where functioning

and 3.6. of limiting devices; for example, motor

2.2

All cranes shall be required to satisfy the test procedures inthe case of serially manufactured

stipulated above; however,

cranes, the sample number of cranes to be tested under al and

performance of driving medium, currents under test load conditions.

11 In legal terms, the "vendor" and the "purchaser" are understood to be the parties who have signed the contract. The "vendor" is the party plying the crane. The "purchaser" is the party who receives the crane according to the contract.

SUP-

1

IS 14470: 1997 IS0 4310: 1981

3.2

Visual

inspection

3.3.1.3

The test load shall be 1,25 P for all cranes unless a

Visual inspection should include checking for compliance with specifications and/or condition of all vital components such as

higher value is required by national regulations or specified in the purchase contract, where P is defined as follows : a) for mobile cranes

:
I-

: the load on the hoisting mechanism,
of the payload and the weight of the

including the weight mechanisms, brakes, controls, electrical equipment, safety devices, and lighting and signalling systems; b) for other cranes

hook assembly and rigging attachments;

: the rated capacity for the equipment
Rated capacity does not part of which is a permanent

-

crane metal structures

and their connections,

ladders,

as specified by the manufacturer. include any lifting attachment the crane in its working condition.

means of access, cabins, platforms;

-

all guardings; hook or other load-handling attachments and their con-

3.3.2

Dynamic

tests

nections;

-

ropes and their fastenings; sheave blocks, their pivots and fastening details, and

3.3.2.1 Dynamic tests are conducted primarily for the purpose of verifying the functioning of crane mechanisms and brakes. The test shall be considered to be successful if the components concerned have been found to perform subsequent their functions and if of any parts is necessary visual inspection the mechanisms to the test reveals no damage to and no connection

jib linkage elements. It shall not be inferred that dismantling during this inspection cluded, for example,

but opening of covers which would be limit switch covers.

or structural components,

required for normal service and inspection purposes shall be in-

has loosened or been damaged. During performance of the test, the crane shall be controlled and and

The inspection tificates

procedure

shall include verification

that all cer-

required have been submitted

and checked.

according to the rules specified in the operating manual, care must be taken to limit accelerations, decelerations, speeds to those appropriate to normal crane operation.

3.3

Load lifting

tests
testing shall include the following

3.3.2.2 Dynamic tests shall be performed separately for each crane motion or, if stated in the specifications of the crane, for

Load lifting competence

:

concurrent

crane motions in such positions and configurations loading on the mechanism(s). and stopping Tests starting for each motion

as will impose maximum

-

static tests; dynamic tests: stability tests (where applicable)

shall include repeated throughout

the range of the motion and shall continue for 1 h

minimum under consideration of the duty cycle. The tests shall include a mid-air start with the test load suspended. No back running should cumstances. occur with the test load under these cir-

3.3.1

Static tests
3.3.2.3 The test load shall be I,1 P unless a higher value is reStatic tests are conducted competence for the purpose of quired.

3.3.1.1

demonstrating components.

the structural

of the crane and its 3.3.3

Stability tests
The purpose of the stability test is to check crane to be successful if no

The test shall be considered manent deformation, function

to be successful if no crack, per-

paint flaking or damage which affects the

-3.3.3.1
stability.

and safety ot the crane is tiisible and no connection

The test shall be considered

has loosened or been damaged.

crane tipping occurs when the crane's hook is statically loaded.

_

3.3.1.2
hoisting

Static

tests shall be performed and for concurrent

separately operation

for each of hoisting

3.3.3.2

Stability

test loads for mobile cranes shall be deterto the formula

mechanism

mined according 1,25P

: . . . (1 I
G or fly jib weight g re-

mechanism, if permitted by the crane specification, in such positions and configurations as will impose maximum rope loads, maximum bending moments :and/or maximum axial forces, as applicable, The test load, in the major crane components. shall be lifted 100 to

+ 0.1 F;

where Fi.lF, or F2) is the jib weight

duced to the head of the jib or that of the fly jib. built up progressively, 200 mm from the ground and suspended for a period necessary for the test but not less than 10 min unless a higher value is required. Where jib weight G is very high and the fly-jib is designed for to formula (11, lifted on the head

relatively

light loads, the stability test shall not be performed

with the test load, according

2

.

IS 14470 : t997 IS0 4310 : 1981

of the fly-jib. Such stability requirements shall be verified by calculation. NOTE-1.25 P may alter where a higher value is required. F,

j and k - radii for jib and fly jib; m and n radii of centres of gravity for jib and fly jib.

is calculated as follows : F, = mG+g j+k (j+n) . (2)

.The figure shows the side elevation for a typical crane giving the designations of the parameters to be considered. L and I - lengths of jib and fly jib (for telescopic jibs, L will relate to the jib length under consideration); (X, YJ and fx, y) - co-ordinates of centres of gravity for jib and fly jib;

For cranes equipped only with a jib, k = n = g = 0 and F, ="G j

Figure -

Designation

of parameters

for determination

of stability test loads

3

IS 14470 : 1997 IS0 4310 : 1981

For cranes equipped

with a jib and a fly jib, if the load is lifted

4.2

Cranes travelling

on rail tracks shall be tested

on rails

on jib head, k = 0 and

manufactured cations.

and laid in conformity

with the crane specifi-

mG+g(j+n)
F, = ___-~-

4.3 If thee load is lifted on fly jib head,

When

testing

cranes

on

pneumatic

tyres

or crawler

equipment, the appliance shall be placed on a firm level surface (within + 0.5 %).

F2

=

_____~

mG+g(j+nl

j+k
NOTE - Values of P, G, g and co-ordinates of centres of gravity (X, YI and Is, )`I shall be specified in the crane documentation for each of the lengths L and 1. 3.3.3.3 For cranes other than mobile cranes, special stability

4.4

At the time of test, wind speed shall not exceed 8,3 m/s but this should not be construed as requiring that

(30 km/h),

the crane be oriented so as to receive the most unfavourable effect of wind unless otherwise specified in the purchase contract.

4.5

When

testing

pneumatic

tyred

equipment

while + -3 %

tests may not be required. 3.3.3.4 The tests shall be carried out in those positions within the specified If different working or

operating

on tyres, the tyres shall be inflated to within by the manufacturer,

of the pressure stipulated configurations area for which

and all wheels

shall be in the ahead position. NOTE - Supporting conditions for the tyres are to align with manufacturers requirements.

stability is at a minimum.

loads are specified for dif-

ferent positions or working

areas, tests shall be carried out to

check the stability for a selection of those conditions.

3.4

Test report
of the tests outlined the crane tested, in 2.1, a report shall be

4.6

For conducting tests of cranes with outriggers in the "on outriggers" condition, the crane shall be level within f 0.5 %.

On completion

prepared listing the conclusions and findings of the tests. The report shall identify and shall give the date proand location of the tests and the name of the test supervisor. It shall be specific as to the loads, positions, configurations, cedures and findings in each case. For cranes that are subject to the requirements abbreviated crane, date and location of inspection, breviated report. of 2.1 b) only, an

4.6.1

When

outriggers

are used

in the

course

of testing

pneumatic

tyred cranes, the crane shall be raised by the outrig-

gers so as to provide clearance between the ground and all the wheels or to relieve all wheels of the weight of the crane unless the vendor specifies otherwise.

form of report may be used. The identity of the name of inspector and

4.6.2

When

outriggers

are used

in the

course surface.

of testing

crawler cranes, the crane shall be installed so as to provide firm bearing of the outriggers on the supporting

the findings for each item inspected shall be included in an ab-

4.6.3

Other cranes shall be set up as specified or contract.

by national

4

Test conditions

regulations

4.1 For the purpose of testing, the crane shall be equipped with working equipment suitable for operation with the rated load in accordance with specifications.

4.7 The fuel tank shall be between l/3 and 213 full. Coolant, lubricating oil and hydraulic fluids shall be at operating levels specified by the vendor.

4

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. IlMD 14 (0409 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 3237617 323 3841 I 337 84 99, 337 85~61 1 337 86 26, 337 86 62 60 38 43 I 60 20 25 23502 16,2350442 1 235 15 19,23523 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 I 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. COIMBATORE. FARlDMAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Prmtcd at New Indm hmting

Press, Khwp, India

