NAT HA IS 11327 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


asiaa HAT ESTER TRE 


(GU GRE) 


Requirements for Refrigerant 
Condensing Units 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 97.130.20 


O BIS 2022 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 7 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1985 and subsequently revised in 2007. 


The experience gained over a period as well as the change in usage conditions, refrigerant changes, etc. has 
necessitated this revision. 


The purpose of this standard is to provide guidelines for positive displacement condensing units. The major 
additions in this revision are as follows: 


a) Definitions; 

b) Constructional/safety requirements; 

c) Testing requirements; 

d) Rating/minimum data requirements for published ratings; 

e) Operating requirements; 

f) Marking and nameplate data; and 

g) Conformance conditions. 
In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following International 
Standards: 

ANSI/AHRI 520-2004 Performance rating of positive displacement condensing units 


IEC 60335-1 : 2020 Safety of household and similar electrical appliances — Part 1: 
General requirements 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised y. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11327 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS FOR 
REFRIGERANT CONDENSING UNITS 


(Second Revision ) 
none IS No. Title 
1.1 This standard cover requirement of condensing 
units built with electric motor driven by fixed speed and 996 : 2009 Single phase a.c. induction 
variable speed positive displacement compressors for motors for general purpose 
commercial and industrial applications. The condensing (third revision) 
units could be air cooled or water cooled, having single 3615 : 2020 Glossary of terms used 
stage and two stage compressor of open type, hermetic in refrigeration and air 
and semi-hermetic construction, conditioning (second revision) 
1.2 The standard is applicable to condensing units 10617 : 2018 Hermetic compressors — 
operating on the vapor compression cycle using Specification (second revision) 
boa casa HEHE, nn eh A2L/A3 11329 : 2018 Finned type heat exchanger 
refrigerants. e requirements o igh-pressure for room air Conditioner 


refrigerants like R744 and ammonia are not covered in 
this standard. 


1.3 The requirements of following applications are not 
part of this standard: 


a) Household refrigerators and household freezers; 
b) Comfort and automotive air-conditioners; 

c) Dehumidifiers; 

d) Evaporative cooled condensers; 

e) Condensing units without the compressor; and 
f) Units supplied with evaporator. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revisions, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


302 (Part 1): 2008 Safety of household and 
similar electrical appliances: 
Part 1 General requirements 
(sixth revision) 


(first revision) 


16451 : 2018/ 
ISO 7010 : 2011 


Graphical symbols — Safety 
colours and safety signs — 
Registered safety signs 


16678 (Part 2) : Refrigerating systems and 
2018/1850 5149 heat pumps — Safety and 
(Part 2) : 2014 environmental requirements: 

Part 2 Design, construction, 
testing, marking and 
documentation 

IS/IEC 60335-2-40 Household and similar 
: 2018 electrical appliances  — 

Safety: Part 2-40 Particular 
requirements for electrical heat 
pumps, air-conditioners and 
dehumidifiers 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions and definitions of IS 3615 shall apply. 


3.1 Manufacturer — For this standard, the 
manufacturer is the company or organization, which 
evidences its responsibility by affixing its name or its 
nationally registered trademark or trade name, to the 
condensing unit. 


IS 11327 : 2022 


3.2 Electrically Driven Open Type Compressor 
Water Cooled Condensing Unit — A unit consisting 
ofacompressor, adrive motor, awater-cooledcondenser, 
a drive assembly and other features as specified by the 
manufacturer with interconnecting piping mounted on 
a common base or any other arrangement. 


3.3 Electrically Driven Open Type Compressor Air 
Cooled Condensing Unit — A unit consisting of a 
compressor, an air-cooled condenser, a fan, compressor 
drive motors (fan drive arrangement, if required) and 
other features as specified by the manufacturer with 
interconnecting piping. (The condenser with the fan 
and a fan drive can be installed remotely depending 
upon the capacity and the design). 


3.4 Electrically Driven Semi Hermetic and Hermetic 
Type Compressor Water Cooled Condensing 
Unit — A unit consisting of a compressor, and 
other features as specified by the manufacturer with 
interconnecting piping all mounted on a common base 
or any other arrangement. 


3.5 Electrically Driven Semi Hermetic and Hermetic 
Type Air Cooled Condensing Unit — A unit 
consisting of a compressor, an air-cooled condenser, a 
fan and other features as specified by the manufacturer 
with interconnecting piping all mounted on a common 
base for indoor and outdoor usage. 


3.6 Coefficient of Performance (COP) — A ratio of 
the cooling capacity in watts (W) to the power input 
values in watts (W) at any given set of rating conditions 
expressed in watts/watt [W/W]. 


3.7 Energy Efficiency Ratio, (EER) — A ratio of the 
cooling capacity in btu/hour to the power input values 
in watts (W) at any given set of rating conditions. 


3.8 Published Rating — The term published rating 
includes the all performance characteristics shown on 
the unit or published in specifications or other literature 
controlled by the manufacturer, at stated rating 
conditions. 


3.8.1 Application Rating — The term application 
rating includes all the performance characteristics at 
conditions other than standard rating as declared by the 
manufacturer. 


3.9 Rating Conditions — A set of operating 
conditions under which a single level of performance 
characteristics defined/published, and which causes 
only that level of performance to occur. 


3.9.1 Standard Ratings Conditions — Rating conditions 
used as the basis of comparison for performance 
characteristics. 


3.10 Refrigerating Capacity — The product of the 
mass flow rate of the refrigerant in the evaporator and 


the difference between the enthalpies of the refrigerant 
entering and exiting the condensing unit is the 
refrigeration effect (kW). 


3.11 “Shall” or “Should” — “Shall” or “should” shall 
be interpreted as follows. 


3.11.1 Shall — Where “shall” or “shall not” is used for 
a provision specified, that provision is mandatory if 
compliance with the standard is claimed. 


3.11.2 Should — “Should,” is used to indicate 
provisions which are not mandatory, but which are 
desirable as good practice. 


4 COMPONENTS 


4.1 Basic Components 


Manufacturer shall define the scope of components 
that would get into assembly of the condensing unit. 
The following are the guidelines for understanding 
and selecting the components that would go into the 
assembly of the condensing units considering the end 
application. 


A condensing unit shall comprise of the following basic 
components: 


a) Hermetic sealed, semi-hermetic sealed or open 
type compressor with relevant accessories; 


b) Drive arrangement for open type and variable 
capacity compressors; 


c) Condenser air cooled or water cooled; 
d) Condenser fan (applicable to air cooled type); 


e) Water connections/fitting for 
condensers; 


water cooled 


f) Interconnecting pipe and fittings; 

g) Name plate; 

h) Mounting frame; and 

j) Provision for connecting electrical supply. 


4.2 Auxiliary Components 


The following items may be included on specific 
requirement; however, this is not complete list of items 
that can be added or deleted: 


a) System protectors like liquid line refrigerant 
filter drier, suction line strainer, oil separator, 
accumulator, receiver; 


b 


= 


Protection devices like oil pressure switch, 
solenoid valve, thermostat, HP/LP cut-out, 
safety valve or any other pressure relief device, 
thermostats; 


Cc 


ma 


Controlling devices like drive for variable speed 
compressor or open type drive, expansion device, 
electronic control board/controller, pressure 
controllers, fan speed regulators; 


d) Structural components like mounting base, 
guards/shroud for unit as well as fan; and 


e) Indicating instruments like pressure gages. 


The scope of supply shall be defined by the manufacturer 
in the form of bill of material/technical specifications. 


5 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 


These are the general guidelines which would help the 
manufacturers/customer/end users to identify the design 
aspects which are of importance considering the end 
application. The scope of supply shall be as per bill of 
material/technical specification. 


5.1 Unit shall be constructed to withstand normal 
handling during transport and servicing. A validation of 
transport worthiness of the system should be carried out 
by the manufacturer. 


5.2 The units meant for outdoor usage should qualify for 
the following: 


Salt spray evaluation for the sheet metal components, 
base frame, structure etc. shall be as per 7.4.5.2 of 
IS 11329 for 72 h. If the intended application requires 
vigorous requirement (higher salt spray test hours than 
72 h) it must be agreed between manufacturer and buyer. 


5.3 Pipes and connections to moving or resiliently 
mounted parts neither transmit vibration excessively nor 
foul adjacent parts. The unit shall not make excessive 
vibration and noise during normal operation. 


5.4 Each unit with the refrigerating/cooling capacity equal 
to one or more than 2 kW, at standard rating conditions 
should be considered for providing with safety measures 
against high and low pressure. The arrangement may be, 
pressure relief valve, bursting disc, fusible plug, soldered 
joint, special terminals, high/low pressure cut-out etc. or 
other suitable means. 


5.5 Parts that need servicing or attention should be made 
easily accessible for for example, filter drier, pressure cut 
outs, electrical controls, power supply connection etc. 


5.6 The hermetic compressor shall comply with the 
requirements of IS 10617. 


5.7 Fan motors above 10 watts output shall be 
protected from overloading by thermal protector or any 


IS 11327 : 2022 


other arrangement sensitive to motor winding temperature 
or current or both. 


5.8 The units to be operated with flammable/mildly 
flammable refrigerant (A3 and A2L). For safety 7.104, 
11.2.3, and 22.119 as per ISEC 60335-2-40 shall apply. 


5.9 In case of units operating with variable speed 
compressor, the drive ratings, voltage and frequency 
ratings used for publishing the system ratings should be 
specified by the manufacturer. 


5.10 The specification for moisture content and the 
cleanliness level (residue level) in the system should be 
defined by the manufacturer as a part of the specification. 
Receivers, condenser receivers, oil separators and 
suction accumulators (tank type components) must have 
a positive holding charge of dry air or nitrogen having a 
dew point of-40 °C or lower. Pressure vessels shall meet 
the criteria of strength pressure test as per 9.3. 


5.11 All openings into refrigerant circuits must be 
adequately sealed to prevent entry of dirt, moisture or 
other foreign objects, to protect threaded fittings against 
damage and to prevent damage to ends of tubing of sweat 
fittings. 


5.12 A positive pressure or holding charge inside the 
condensing unit is required to be maintained. 


5.13 Fan motor of induction type shall comply with 
IS 996. 


NOTE — For other types of fan motors, the requirements of 
IS 996 is not aplicable. 


6 TESTING AND STANDARD RATING 
CONDITIONS 


6.1 The condensing unit can be classified based on 
the evaporating temperature range as given in Table 
1. The precise limits of the evaporating temperatures 
shall be according to the declared condensing unit 
specifications. Classification in Table 1 is indicative 
only. 


6.2 Rating and Test Conditions 


The performance of the condensing unit shall be 
specified at the standard rating conditions. Standard 
ratings shall be established at the conditions mentioned 
in Tables 2, 3, and 4. 


Table 1 Classification of Condensing Units 
( Clause 6.1 ) 


SI No. Category Applications/Usage Evaporating Temperature Range 
Dew point (°C) 
a) 2) 3) (4) 
1) Low Back Pressure (LBP) Refrigerating and freezing of commercial and —40 to — 10 
industrial applications 
1i) Commercial Back Pressure or Refrigerating and cooling of commercial and —25 to+10 
Medium Back pressure (CBP/LBP) industrial applications 
111) High Back Pressure (HBP) Chilling and Industrial applications -510+25 


IS 11327 : 2022 


Table 2 Normal Load Conditions LBP 


( Clause 6.2 ) 
SINo. Category Units LBP(A) LBP(B) 
0) (2) 3) (4) (5) 
i) Evaporating temperature! °C -23.3 -35 
ii) Air inlet temperature to °C 35 35 
condenser (Dry bulb) 
iii) Suction superheat K 27.7 10 
iv) Return gas temperature? °C 4.4 -25 
v) Subcooling temperature? K 0 0 
vi) Voltage V 230V ~ 1 Phase 
400V ~ 3 Phase 
vii) Frequency Hz 50 Hz 


Table 3 Normal Load Conditions CBP/MBP 


( Clause 6.2 ) 
SI Category Units MBP(A) MBP(B) 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Evaporating temperature! 26 —6.7 -10 
ii) Air inlet temperature to °C 35 35 
condenser (Dry bulb) 
iii) Suction superheat K 11.1 10 
iv) Return gas temperature? °C 4.4 0 
v)  Subcooling temperature? K 0 0 
vi) Voltage V 230V ~ 1 Phase 
400V ~ 3 Phase 
vii) Frequency Hz 50 Hz 
Table 4 Normal Load Conditions HBP 
( Clause 6.2 ) 
SINo. Category Units HBP(A) HBP(B) 
a) (2) O @) (5) 
i) Evaporating temperature! °C +7.2 +5 
ii) Air inlet temperature t °C 35 35 
condenser (Dry bulb) 
iii) Suction superheat K 11.1 15 
iv) Return gas temperature? °C 18.3 20 
v) Subcooling temperature? K 0 0 
vi) Voltage V 230V ~ 1 Phase 
400V ~ 3 Phase 
vii) Frequency Hz 50 Hz 


For water cooled condensing units, the inlet water 


temperature is 29 °C/outlet water temperature is 35 °C. 


! Evaporating temperature: In case of Azeotropic Mixtures dew point 
and midpoint evaporating temperature are same, for the refrigerants 
having glide more than 2K manufacturer shall state clearly in the 
declaration/specifications about midpoint temperature or dew point 
temperature considered, for midpoint calculation refer Annex B and D. 


? For external drive or accessible hermetic type condensing units return 
gas temperature of 18 °C shall be used. 


*In case of variable speed condensing unit, compressor speed required to 
be mention by manufacturer for rated capacity declaration. 


6.2.1 Correction Factors 


The correction factors applicable to only cooling 
capacity data relating to superheat in Tables 2, 3, 
and 4 shall comprise: 


a) Change in refrigerating cooling capacity as a 
function of superheat; and 


b) Change in power absorbed is not a function of 
superheat. 


Conversion factors or calculation method for different 
values of superheat shall be based on following formula 
data. 


TM corrected = (1 E {O atea IV eaea) E 1}) zs M ated 


where 


= Refrigerant mass flow rate at suction 
corrected ER 
conditions, kg/s; 


saca Refrigerant mass flow rate at rated 
superheated conditions, kg/s; 


v = Specific volume at suction conditions 
corrected 
m’/kg; 


= Specific volume at rated suction conditions 
m’/kg; and 

= Volumetric efficiency correction factor, 
the correction factor will vary based on 
volumetric efficiency of compression 
technology being used, a value of (1) 
can be used for approximation. The 
manufacturer to provide precise value. 


6.3 Standard Ratings 


Standard ratings consists of reference points defined in 
subsequent Tables 2, 3, and 4, the following data shall 
be given: 
a) Refrigerating capacity/cooling capacity; 
b) Total power absorption including fan motors other 
factory supplied components; and 
c) Co-efficient of performance (COP). 
The following further information shall be provided 
upon request: 
1) Application limits related to ambient air/water 
temperature (minimum and maximum); and 


2) For water cooled condensing units: Water 
mass flow rate and pressure drop. 


6.4 Application Ratings 


These are the additional ratings which may be required 
considering the end application. For deriving the 
application ratings either manufacturer will define the 
operating conditions based on the intended usage or 
shall be as agreed upon with the end user. 


Application ratings can be determined based on the 
testing or by estimated based on the published test data. 


These ratings should made available upon request of 
the end user. 

The parameters to be published generally should 
include above in 6.2 or any other parameters as agreed 
upon with the end user. 


6.5 Tolerances 


Following tolerances in Table 5 can be applied to 
manufacturer’s published performance in relation to 
measured data obtained at the standard rating points 
according to Annex C. 

Table 5 Tolerances 


( Clause 6.5 ) 


SINo. Item LBP MBP/CBP HBP 
9) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Refrigerating —90 -90 -92.5 
capacity percent percent percent 
ii) Power +112:5 +110 + 107.5 
absorbed percent percent percent 
111) EER/COP +90 +90 +90 
percent percent percent 
iv) Voltage +/-1.5 
percent 
v) Frequency +/-1 
percent 


7 SPECIFICATIONS/DATA PUBLICATION 


7.1 Performance Data 


Published performance shall be based on data obtained 
from tests performed accordance with Annex C. 


Manufacturer shall declare mean evaporating 
temperature or dew point temperature used to publish 
the performance data. 


Manufacturer can choose to rate the condensing unit at 
dew point temperature even for refrigerants with glide. 


Performance data to be given in either tabular form or 
graphical form or both, shall consist of following: 
a) The refrigerating capacity/cooling capacity of 
condensing units; 
b) Power consumed by condensing units; 


c) Evaporating temperature (mean/dew point), at 
intervals not greater than 5 K; 


d) Ambient temperature, at intervals not greater than 
5K; 

e) Open compressors at rated speed; and 

f) Motor compressors at rated voltage and frequency. 


Please refer to Annex A for definition of evaporating 
temperature, ambient temperature and average air 
temperature measurements. 


IS 11327 : 2022 


7.2 Part Load Performance Data (for Variable 
Speed or Multi Compressor) 


Published performance shall be based on data obtained 
from tests performed accordance with Annex C. 
The performance data with capacity control shall be 
presented for the following: 


a) All capacity control steps for condensing units 
with 2 to 4 control steps, example for blocked 
suction, condensing units with more than one 
compressor or multi speed compressor; and 


b 


wm 


Condensing units with more than 4 steps or other 
variable capacity (example variable speed or 
stepless) at maximum, minimum and at least one 
additional control step inside the control range. 


NOTE — Regardless of the speed, the published data and 
measured data must be within the tolerance specified in 6.5. 


8 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS 


8.1 Each unit shall have a name plate on which 
following information shall be marked in permanent 
and legible manner by manufacturer at an easily visible 
place within the unit: 


a) Name of manufacturer; 

b) Country of origin; 

c) Type or model and serial number of the unit (shall 
be numerical and barcode for traceability); 

d) Rated voltage phase and frequency — The product 
rated for dual voltage/dual frequency to be marked 
as dual voltage and dual frequency; 

e) Refrigerant or refrigerant group; 

f) Maximum working pressure; and 

g) When flammable refrigerants are used, the flame 
symbol according to W021 of IS 16451/ISO 7010, 
shall be displayed with a minimum height of 
10 mm, and the symbol need not be in color. 


8.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


8.3 Each condensing unit shall be accompanied on 
delivery by instructions for its use and maintenance 
printed on strong paper, cardboard or similar material. 
These instructions shall at least provide following 
information relating to: 


a) Installation requirements; 


b) Conditions of operation (starting, stopping); 


IS 11327 : 2022 


c) Use of various control devices (thermostat, 


defrosting, etc.); and 


d) Maintenance and cleaning the product. 


9 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


9.1 Tests 
a) Type Test — The type tests shall consist of the 


b 


) 


tests that would be necessary to check up the 

performance and characteristics of the units and 

components. 

1) Provision for earthing [see 27 of IS 302 
(Part 1)]; 

2) Electrical strength test [see 13.3.2 of IS 302 
(Part 1)]; and 

3) Running overload test for the fan motor 
[see 11.5 or 19.9 of IS 302 (Part 1)]. 

Routine Test — These shall consist of routine tests 

that would be conducted on each and every unit 

during production. 


1) High voltage at 1.5 kV and 5 m A leakage 
current for 1s; 


2) Leak test: Min 1 Mega Pascal, No leak 
[see IS 16678 (Part 2)/ISO 5149-2]; and 


3) Fan on/off test to ensure fan is rotating basis 
Input power and no touching with other mating 
parts to avoid damage/touching noise while in 
operation. 


9.2 Pressure vessels to meet the criteria of strength 
pressure test as per 4.4.2. Strength-pressure test for 
components as per IS 16678 (Part 2)/ISO 5149-2. 


9.3 Protection Against Moving Parts 


All moving parts (for example, fan blades, blower 
wheels, pulleys, and belts) that if accidentally 
contacted, could cause bodily injury shall be guarded 
against accidental contact by an enclosure or a screen 
requiring the use of tools for removal or permanently 
attached. 


IS 11327 : 2022 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 7.1) 
DEFINITIONS 


A-1 EVAPORATING TEMPERATURE 


Temperature at which a fluid vaporizes at a given 
pressure. 


A-2 AMBIENT TEMPERATURE 


Average Air temperature around the condensing unit. 


A-3 AVERAGE AIR TEMPERATURE 
ENTERING THE CONDENSER 


Average air temperature of all temperature measuring 
media (thermocouple etc.) located at condenser. 


Developed length of coil 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 6.2 ) 
DETERMINATION OF EVAPORATING TEMPERATURE 


( Normative ) 


B-1 DETERMINATION 
TEMPERATURE 
MIXTURES 


OF EVAPORATING 
WITH REFRIGERANT 


For refrigerants with glide the evaporating temperature 
is the arithmetic mean of the evaporator inlet temperature 
and dew point temperature at the condensing unit inlet 
pressure with the following assumptions: isenthalpic 
expansion from condensing unit outlet temperature to 
the condensing unit inlet pressure, isobaric evaporation, 
no suction line pressure drop and temperature changes 
of the refrigerant are linear with the enthalpy during 
evaporation and effects of oil circulation are ignored. 


The determination of the inlet temperature in the area 
of two phases is done by linear interpolation between 
dew point and bubble point temperature at evaporating 
pressure, via the enthalpy at the expansion device inlet. 


= Lor Hop 
om 2 (1) 
Igy —h 
bo = Log + (tp = Log ) i — = E 
oD oB (2) 


where 


is the arithmetic mean evaporating 
temperature, expressed in degree 
Celsius (°C); 

is the temperature at the inlet of the 
evaporator at unit inlet pressure, 
expressed in degree Celsius (°C); 


is the temperature of the evaporating 
dew point at unit inlet pressure, 
expressed in degree Celsius (°C); 


is the temperature of the bubble point at 
unit inlet pressure, expressed in degree 
Celsius (°C); 

is the enthalpy at the expansion device 


inlet, expressed in Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg); 

= 1s the enthalpy at the bubble point 
at condensing unit inlet pressure, 
expressed in Joule per kilogram (J/kg); 


oB 


is the enthalpy at the dew point 
at condensing unit inlet pressure, 
expressed in Joule per kilogram (J/kg). 


oD 


IS 11327 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 6.5, 7.1, and 7.2 ) 
TESTING METHODOLOGY OF CONDENSING UNITS 


C-1 TESTING SCHEMATICAND PROCEDURE 


The refrigerant flow is determined using either a 
volumetric or a mass flow meter inserted into the 
liquid line. The flow meter is connected to the liquid 
line between the condensing unit outlet and expansion 
device. 


a) CIRCUIT DIAGRAM 


KEY 
1 CONDENSER 
2 SUB-COOLER 
3 LIQUID FLOW METER 
4 COMPRESSOR 
5 EXPANSION DEVICE 
6 EVAPORATOR 


The cooling capacity calculation is product of Mass 
flow measured and relative enthalpy difference 
inlet/outlet of condensing unit. Minimum stabilized 
data for 30 min should be considered for capacity, 
power and COP declaration. 


b) PRESSURE VS ENTHALPY DIAGRAM 


Fic. 1 TESTING SCHEMATIC OF CONDENSING UNIT 


IS 11327 : 2022 


C-2 MEASURED DATA AND PERMISSIBLE 


DEVIATION 
SI Measured Quantity Permissible Measuring/Controlling Accuracy of Location of 
No. Deviation Instrument Instrument Measurement 
Instrument 
(0) (2) 6) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Gauge Pressure at 1 percent U/Bourdon tube/diaphragm 1 percent 6”+/1” (15.24 + 
inlet and outlet of manometers/pressure transducers 2.54 cm) at inlet and 
condensing unit outlet of condensing 

unit 

ii) Refrigerant +-3 °C Thermocouples +/-0.5°C 6”+/1” (1524 + 
temperature at inlet 2.54 cm) at inlet and 
of condensing unit outlet of condensing 

unit 
iii) Airinlettemperature +/-1.5°C of Thermocouples +/-0.5 °C Refer figure 
to condenser temperature at 
mentioned rated 
conditions 

iv) Nominal +/-1 percent 
compressor speed 

v) Nominal electrical +/-1.5 percent Integrating instrument +/-0.5 Electric/control box 
voltage of nominal percent of condensing unit 

voltage at rating 
conditions 

vi) Nominal electrical +/—1 percent Integrating instrument +/-0.5 Electric/control box 
frequency percent of condensing unit 

vii) Refrigerant flow - Liquid refrigerant flow meter +/-1 Outlet ofcondensing 
percent unit and before 
Evaporating device 
viii) Water flow +/-1.5 percent Liquid/water flow meter +/-1 
percent 
ix) Liquid temperature +/-1°C Thermocouples +/-0.5°C 64/1” (15.24 + 


at condensing unit 
outlet 


Ensure instruments are caliberated. 


2.54 cm) at inlet and 
outlet of condensing 
unit 


IS 11327 : 2022 


ANNEXD 


CYCLE PROCESS 


(Informative ) 


C-1 CYCLE PROCESS azeotropic mixtures. As shown, the evaporating and 
condensing processes occur at fixed temperatures to 


For reference, Fig. 2 shows a typical single stage cycle and t, respectively. 


recommended for single component refrigerants and 


PRESSURE 


ENTHALPY 


FIG. 2 CYCLE PROCESS 


10 


C-2 SYMBOLS AND SUBSCRIPTS 


Bubble point at condensing process; 


Point where the refrigerant enters the 
compression process; 
Point where the refrigerant leaves the 


compression process; 


Enthalpy of the refrigerant at bubble point of 
condensing process; 


Enthalpy of the subcooled refrigerant liquid 
entering the expansion process; 


Enthalpy of the refrigerant gas entering the 
compression process; 


Refrigerant mass flow rate; 


= Compressor suction dew point pressure; 
= Compressor discharge dew point pressure; 


Condensing temperature; 


PRESSURE 


11 


IS 11327 : 2022 


Bubble point 
process; 


temperature at condensing 


Dew point temperature at condensing process; 
Mean condensing temperature; 


Temperature at which the subcooled liquid 
exits the expansion process; 


Temperature at which the subcooled liquid 
enters the expansion process; 


Temperature of the refrigerant entering the 
compression process; 


Evaporating temperature; 
Dew point temperature at evaporation process; 


Temperature at the outlet of the expansion 
process and inlet to the evaporation process; 


Mean evaporating temperature; 


Refrigerant subcooling; and 


Refrigerant superheat. 


SUPERHEATING 


ENTHALPY 


IS 11327 : 2022 


ANNEXE 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Blue Star Ltd, Mumbai 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 


Chennai 


Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurugram 
Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 


Emerson Climate Technologies (India) Pvt Ltd, 
Karad 


Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Ltd, 
Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers, Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand, Bengaluru 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Refrigeration & Airconditioning Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


PROF (Dr) Ravi KUMAR (Chairman) 


SHRI G. K. PRASAD 
SHRI J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (A/ternate) 


SHRI VIJAYA KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI ANAND BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
SHRI D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Suri A. R. RAvI KUMAR 
SHRI GUJJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
SHRI K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate I) 
Suri M. N. S. V. KIRAN Kumar (Alternate II) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
SHRI D. P. DESPANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI BURZIN J. WADIA 
SHRI ABHIJIT A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dr NITIN Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr Supe K. Das (Alternate) 


DR JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI MITTAKOLA VENKANNA 
SHRI JEYAPRAKASH GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
SHRI C. M. PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
SHRI RAJAT SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. K. JHA (Alternate) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
SHRI R. K. Menta (Alternate) 


12 


IS 11327 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 
Sierra Aircon Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI DEVESH MUDGAL 
The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
SHRI NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Voltas Ltd, Mumbai SHRI SRINIVASU MOTURI 
SHRI A. D. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 
Voluntary Organizationn in Interest of Consumer SHRI H. WADHWA 
Voice, New Delhi SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 
In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 


Mayur Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 
In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) Suri J. K. AGRAWAL 


BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (13986). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


