IRA AAF IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


maa a — Alea TA At 


TÜYO TAGE 
AUT 3 TANG aa uttaror Tasha — 
Get eTq vel sia era AU 


Automotive Vehicles — Vehicle 
Dynamics Measurements 
Test Procedure 


Part 3 Transient Response Test Procedure — 
Open Loop and Closed Loop Test 


ICS 43.020 


O BIS 2021 


anda HAH YO 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ANA NGA, 9 SEERNE TH AMİ, ay Rei - 110002 


— EE MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 14 


Automotive Braking Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


The dynamic behaviour of a road vehicle is a most important part of vehicle safety. Any given vehicle, together 
with its driver and the prevailing environment, forms a unigue closed-loop system. The task of evaluating 
dynamic behaviour is therefore very difficult since, there is a significant interaction between these driver-vehicle- 
environment elements, each of which is complex in itself. A complete and accurate description of the behaviour 
of the road vehicle must necessarily involve information obtained from a number of tests of different types. Since, 
they guantify only a small part of the complete vehicle handling characteristics, the results of these tests can only 
be considered significant for a correspondingly small part of the overall dynamic behaviour. 


Less data is acguired to obtain relationship between overall vehicle dynamic properties versus actual driving 
patterns. 


The basic purpose of the standard is to understand the vehicle characteristic under controlled standard test 
conditions. 


Test and tyres conditions have a strong influence on test results. Only vehicle dynamic properties obtained under 
identical test and tyre conditions are comparable. 


Therefore, it is not recommended to use this standard for regulatory purposes. 
This Indian Standard is published in five parts. The other parts in this series are: 


Part 1 General test conditions 

Part 2 Steady state test procedures 

Part 4 Ride comfort measurements 

Part 5 Subjective evaluation — Vehicle ride, handling, steering and tyre evaluation. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following International 
Standards: 


a 


— 


ISO 4138 : 2004 Passenger cars — Steady state circular driving behaviour — Open loop test methods 

b) ISO 7401 : 2003 Road vehicles — Lateral transient response test methods — Open loop test methods 

c) ISO 7975 : 2006 Passenger cars — Braking in a tum — Open loop test method 

d) ISO /TR 8725 : 1988 Road vehicles -- Transient open loop response test method with one period of 
sinusoidal input 

e) ISO /TR 8726 : 1988 Road vehicles — Transient open loop response test method with pseudo-random 
steering input 

f) ISO 9815 : 2003 Road vehicles — Passenger car and trailer combinations — lateral stability test 

g) ISO 12021-1 : 1996 Road vehicles — Sensitivity to lateral wind — Part 1: Open loop test method using 

wind generator input 


ISO 15037-1 : 2019 Road vehicles — Vehicle dynamics test methods — Part 1: General conditions for 
passenger cars 


h 


wm 


j) ISO 17288-2 : 2004 Passenger cars — Free steer behaviour — Part 2: Steering pulse open-loop test method 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — VEHICLE DYNAMICS 
MEASUREMENTS TEST PROCEDURE 


PART 3 TRANSIENT RESPONSE TEST PROCEDURE -- 
OPEN LOOP AND CLOSED LOOP TEST 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian standard (Part 3) defines and specifies 
open-loop and closed loop test methods for determining 
the transient driving behaviour in frequency and time 
domain. The parameters, such as steering wheel angle, 
steering wheel torque, roll angle, yaw rate, body side 
slip angle, lateral acceleration, longitudinal velocity, 
pitch angle, damping and response time etc. are used to 
evaluate the vehicle response and controllability during 
transient maneuvers tests. 


1.2 The maneuvers included in this standard may 
not represent the real driving conditions but they are 
useful for obtaining the vehicle response and control 
parameters in controlled environment with specified 
test conditions. This standard is applicable for M1 
category of vehicles as defined in IS14272. 


1.3 This standard provides guidelines for various test 
methods used to evaluate transient response behaviour 
in controlled environment with specified test conditions. 
Test and tyre conditions have a strong influence on 
test results. Only vehicle dynamic properties obtained 
under identical test and tyre conditions are comparable. 


Therefore, it is not recommended to use this standard 
for regulatory purposes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS/ISO No. Title 


14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 


Terminology (first revision) 


17128 (Part 1): 
2019 


Automotive vehicles — Vehicle 
dynamics test methods: Part I 
General test conditions 


IS/ISO No. Title 
ISO 15037-1: Road vehicles — Vehicle dynamics 
2019 test methods — Part 1: General 
conditions for passenger cars 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Open Loop System — For the purpose of vehicle 
characterization, only the open loop system is used. 
Open loop refers to vehicle response to the particular 
steering inputs without any driver's feedback. 


3.2 Closed Loop System — Vehicle stability and 
controllability is the measure of vehicle and driver 
combination. Test driver along with the vehicle forms a 
closed loop system. Driver observes vehicle direction/ 
position and accordingly corrects the input (steering, 
brake and accelerator) to achieve the desired path. 
Normally path feedback is used in closed loop system. 
The test results may vary based on the test driver's 
response to the closed loop system. 


In future intelligent systems may perform the closed 
loop test without human intervention. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


4.1 Test Methods 
4.1.1 Closed Loop 


Method I that is, severe lane-change maneuver is used 
for closed loop test. 


4.1.2 Open Loop 


Following methods are used for closed loop test: 


a) Method 2 — Lateral transient response test 
methods 
b) Method 3 — Braking in a turn 
c) Method 4 — Quantification of on-center 
handling 


d) Method 5 — Free-steer behaviour 


Severe lane change is closed loop path tracking test 
method determine road-holding ability of passenger 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


cars. Since test performed on the severe lane-change 
track quantifies only a small part of complete handling 
characteristics, the results obtained on this test track can 
only be considered significant for a correspondingly 
small aspect of overall vehicle-dynamics behaviour. 
In closed loop the driver has a great influence on test 
results. 


Open loop methods yield lateral, longitudinal and 
straight line behaviour of the vehicle. open-loop 
test method determine the free control stability 
of a passenger car measured during the transient 
behaviour. 


5 VARIABLES 


5.1 Reference System 

The provisions for reference system are given in 
IS 17128 (Part 1). 

5.2 Measurement 


List of parameters to be measured is provided in 
Table 1. Measure the variables given in Table 2. 


6 MEASURING EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Description 


The variables selected for test purposes shall be 
measured using appropriate transducers and the data 
recorded on a multi-channel recording system having a 
time base. Typical operating ranges, and recommended 
maximum errors of the transducer and recording system 
are given in Table 1 of IS 17128 (Part 1). 


6.2 Transducer Installation 
The transducer installation shall comply with 4.2 of 
IS 17128 (Part 1). 


Install gyro at vehicle's reference point, the vertical 
gyro axis should be coincident or parallel to the 
vehicle's vertical (Z) axis. In case of any doubt, test 
equipment instruction manual to be referred. 


6.3 Data Processing 


The provisions given in 4.3 of IS 17128 (Part 1) shall 
apply. 


Table 1 Transient response test (Open and Closed Loop Test) 
( Clause 5.2 ) 


Transient Response Test (Open and Closed Loop Test) 


Test Name Test Method Options Test Parameters to be Measured 
Condition 
1 Severe lane-change | Closed loop Double lane-change At different Steering wheel angle, Steering torque, roll 
Obstacle avoidance speeds angle, roll rate, yaw rate, lateral 
2 Lateral transient | Open loop Time domain At different Steering-wheel angle, lateral acceleration, 
response test Step input speeds yaw velocity, longitudinal velocity, roll angle, 
methods pimp sideslip angle, lateral velocity, steering wheel 
Sinusoidal torque 


Frequency domain 


Random input 


Pulse input 


Continuous sinusoidal 


3 Braking in a turn Open loop Standard radius of At different Moment of brake application, steering-wheel 
30m deceleration | angle, lateral acceleration, longitudinal 
rates acceleration, longitudinal velocity, yaw 
velocity, sideslip angle, lateral velocity 
4 Quantification of Open loop Weave test At constant Steering-wheel angle, lateral acceleration, 
on-centre handling velocity and | yaw velocity, longitudinal velocity, steering 
different lateral | wheel angular velocity, steering wheel 
acceleration 
Transition test Steering-wheel angle, lateral acceleration, 
yaw velocity, longitudinal velocity, steering 
wheel angular velocity, steering wheel 
9 Free-steer behaviour | Open loop Steering-release At different Longitudinal velocity, lateral acceleration, 
speeds yaw velocity, steering wheel angle 


Steering-pulse 


Steering wheel angle, yaw velocity, 
longitudinal velocity, lateral acceleration 


Freguency band width in the entire measurement 
system including sensors and recording devices should 
be 10 - 100 Hz. 


7 TEST CONDITIONS 


Test conditions shall be in accordance with IS 17128 
(Part 1) (Annex B). General data on the test vehicle 
shall be recorded as specified in IS 17128 (Part 1) 
(Annex A). 


The tyre type, tyre brand, any special equipment on the 
test vehicle, any deviation in type or operating condition 
of components from the manufacturer's specification, 
the odometer reading at the beginning and end of the 
test, any other condition that may affect test results 
shall also be recorded on the test report for general data 
as specified in IS 17128 (Part 1) (Annex B). 


8 TEST PROCEDURE 


8.1 Warm-up 

The warm-up shall be carried out in accordance with 
6.1 of IS 17128 (Part 1). 

8.2 Initial Driving Condition 


The conditions shall be 
IS 17128 (Part 1). 


in accordance with 6.2 


8.3 General Test Description 


All necessary variables shall be recorded throughout 
the maneuver. The method chosen shall be noted in 
the section for test method specific data on the test 
report for test conditions IS 17128 (Part 1) (Annex B). 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Longitudinal velocity increments can be reduced at 
higher level of acceleration based on vehicle stability. 


The test should be repeated several times so that the 
results can be examined for repeatability and averaged. 


8.4 Method 1 Closed Loop Test — Severe Lane- 
change Maneuver 


Following two options are available: 
a) Double lane change, and 
b) Obstacle avoidance. 


Severe lane change is closed loop path tracking test 
method determine road-holding ability of passenger 
cars. Since, test performed on the severe lane-change 
track quantifies only a small part of complete handling 
characteristics, the results obtained on this test track can 
only be considered significant for a correspondingly 
small aspect of overall vehicle-dynamics behaviour. 
In closed loop the driver has a great influence on test 
results. 


8.4.1 Option I — Severe Lane Change Maneuver : 
Double Lane Change 


8.4.2 Description 


The severe lane change maneuver is a well-known 
test method which is generally used for subjective 
evaluation of vehicle dynamics. Since test performed 
on the severe lane change track quantifies only a small 
part of complete handling characteristics, the results 
obtained on this test track can only be considered 
significant for a correspondingly small aspect of overall 
vehicle-dynamics behaviour. 


Table 2 Variables, Typical Operating Ranges and Recommended Maximum Errors 
( Clause 5.2 ) 


Variable 


Typical Operating Range? 


Recommended Maximum Error of 
Combined System” 


a) (3) 
Steering-wheel angle +50 40.1? 
Steering-wheel torque +0,1 Nm +0.1N.m 
Yaw velocity X 10 ?/s +0.1°/s 
Longitudinal velocity 0 m/s to 50 m/s +0.5 m/s 
Lateral acceleration + 5 m/s? + 0.1 m/s? 
Steering wheel angular velocity + 100 °/s = ]°/s 


Transducers for measuring some of the listed variable are not widely available and are not in general use. Many such instruments are 
developed by users. If any system error exceeds the recommended maximum value, this and the actual maximum error shall be stated in the 


test report (see ISO 15037-1, Annex A). 


? These transducer ranges are appropriate for the standard test conditions and might not be suitable for non-standard test conditions. 


9 The values for maximum errors are provisional until more experience and data are available. 


NOTE — The method chosen to determine lateral acceleration could require the measurement of additional variables (yaw velocity, 


vehicle roll angle, or sideslip angle) for use in the computation. 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


NOTE — The severe lane change maneuver test method was 
previously described in a Technical Report (ISO/TR), and 
until now has not been dealt with in an International Standard. 
The reason for this was that the driver has a great influence 
on test results. The test method itself has now been placed in 
an informative annex, permitting the specification for the test 
track to be published as an International Standard. No closed- 
loop test has so far been specified in an International Standard 
for the purpose of investigating vehicle dynamics. 


8.4.3 Dimensions of the Double Lane Change 
Assessment Zone 


Figure 1 shows the assessment zone for the double 
lane change layout. However, overall test track length 
to be ensured before start of the test based on entry 
and exit speed of the test vehicle as well as the vehicle 
capability to accelerate and brake within the safe 
limit. 


8.4.4 Marking of the Double Lane Change Track 


The double lane change track shall be marked with 
cones of minimum height 500 mm, suitable cones 
are depicted in Fig. 2. The cones shall be placed at 
points specified by Fig. 3, and the track limits shall be 
tangential to the base circles of the cones. 


8.4.5 Procedure 


The recommended speed of entry into section 1 is 
(80 4 3) km/h. Higher or lower speeds may be used. 
The speed of entry shall be mentioned in the test report. 
Over the test course the throttle position shall be held 
as steady as possible. Further constraints, such as steer 
strategy used, may be applied. The speed of exit from 
section 5 shall be stated in the test report. 


Some typical uses of this test are to: 


a) evaluate, with respect to time, the steer input or 
motion parameters; 


b) evaluate driver-control strategies; and 
c) subjectively evaluate the vehicle. 


8.4.5.1 General 


Only skilled drivers shall be allowed to perform the 
test. A passage is faultless when none of the cones 
positioned as specified in Fig. 3 have been displaced. 
The measuring distance, for instance to evaluate the 
average speed, starts at the beginning of section I and 
finishes at the end of section 5. The gear or selector 
position engaged during the test shall be stated in the 
test report. 


7 


Key 

1 driving direction 4 section 1 7 section 4 
2 land offset 5 section 2 8 section 5 
3 width 6 section 3 9 section 6 


SECTION LENGTH LANE OFFSET WIDTH 
EE] A. AX VEHICLE WIDTH + 025 


[2 İs | 


3 s 135.  [12XVEHIGLE WIDTH + 028 


EEN — EMME 
piss — — |13XVEHIGLE WIDTH + 025 


is — [7 | 13XVEHICLE WIDTH + 0.25 


All dimensions are in meters 


Fic. I DOUBLE LANE-CHANGE TRACK AND DESIGNATION OF SECTIONS 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


> 500 


0185 


Key 
1 base circle of cone. 


All dimensions are in millimetre. 


FIG. 2 CONE USED FOR MARKING DOUBLE LANE CHANGE TRACK 


3 | 
a b c g h i j k E 
E 
1 3 
e vE T d e f — e o 9 8 
a b c g h i j k 
d' e' f 
Key 
1 driving direction 4 section 1 7 section 4 
2 land offset 5 section 2 8 section 5 
3 width 6 section 3 9 section 6 


FIG. 3 PLACING OF CONES FOR MARKING THE DOUBLE LANE CHANGE TRACK 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


8.5 Method 2 — Obstacle Avoidance Maneuver 


8.5.1 Dimensions of the Double Lane Change 
Assessment Zone 


Figure 1 shows the assessment Zone for the double 
lane change layout. However, overall test track length 
to be ensured before start of the test based on entry 
and exit speed of the test vehicle as well as the vehicle 
capability to accelerate and brake within the safe 
limit. 


8.5.2 Marking of the Obstacle Avoidance Track 


The obstacle avoidance track shall be marked with 
cones of a minimum height of 500 mm (see Fig. 5). 
The cones shall be placed at the points shown in Fig. 
6, and the track limits shall be tangential to the base 
circles of the cones. 


8.5.3 Procedure 


a) Enter section 1 with the highest gear position 
that guarantees a minimum engine speed 
of 2 000 r/min (for vehicles with automatic 
transmission, place selector lever in the drive 
position, D). 


6 —— 


N 
RS N 


WWW 


b) At 2 m after entering section I (see Fig.7), release 
the throttle and drive the remaining distance in the 
throttle-released position. 


In order to keep the test procedure as reproducible as 
possible, the initial longitudinal velocity of the vehicle 
is to be measured at the end of section I and mentioned 
in the test report. 


8.5.4 Limitations 


Owing to driver influence (driving strategy) in this 
closed loop test, there is no possibility of an objective 
measurement of vehicle dynamics data; only subjective 
evaluation is recommended. 


The different paths followed in different tests bring 
about a considerable scatter in measured velocities. 
Although longitudinal dynamics are restricted (throttle- 
off after entering section 1), this does not lead to the 
desired minimization of the measured velocities. 
Therefore, no ranking on the basis of the vehicle 
velocity and no minimum velocity limit for vehicles is 
permitted. 

NOTE — Because of these limitations, this standard defines 

only the dimensions of the test track for the subjective 

evaluation of vehicle dynamics. 


G 
N 
pr. 


Key 
1 section 1 4 section 4 7 lane offset 
2 section 2 5 section 5 
3 section 3 6 driving direction 
Section Length Lane offset Width (b) 

1 12 — 1.1 x vehicle width + 0.25 

2 13.5 — — 

3 li 1 Vehicle width + I 

4» 12.5 — — 

5 12 — 1.3 x vehicle width + 0.25, but less 

than 3 m 
D To ensure high lateral accelerations at the end of the track, section 4 is shorter than section 2. 


NOTE — All dimensions are in millimetres. 


FIG. 4 OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE TRACK WITH DESIGNATION OF SECTIONS 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


2 500 


40 Ll ua lU EE 
| 1 
285 
0185 e 


Key 
1 base circle of cone. 


All dimensions are in millimeter. 


FIG. 5 CONE USED FOR OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE TRACK DELIMITATION 


a b c d e k F m n o 
eo MEN 
6—— b 
d f g' h' i j 
a b c de ee © © © | k | m n o 
2 
"990009 3 
fg hi j 
Key 
1 section 1 4 section 4 7 lane offset 
2 section 2 5 section 5 
3 section 3 6 driving direction 


NOTE — Letters indicate placement of individual cones. 


FIG. 6 PLACING OF CoNES FOR MARKING OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE TRACK 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


E 


ES 


JE K, 


"999 
Key 
1 section 1 4 section 4 7 measurement of the longitudinal velocity 
2 section 2 5 section 5 8 driving direction 
3 section 3 6 throttle off 


All dimensions are in millimeter. 


Fic. 7 THROTTLE-OFF AND MEASUREMENT OF VEHICLE LONGITUDINAL VELOCITY 


8.6 Open Loop Test Method 2 — Lateral Transient 
Response Test Methods 


Following two options are available: 
a) Option 1 : Time domain 
1) Step input, or 
2) Sinusoidal. 
b) Option 2 : Frequency domain 
1) Random input, 
2) Pulse input, or 
3) Continuous sinusoidal. 


8.6.1 Description 


The method of data analysis in the frequency domain 
assumes that the vehicle has a linear response. This is 
unlikely to be the case over the whole range of lateral 
accelerations of interest. 


The standard method of dealing with such a situation 
is to restrict the input to a sufficiently small range such 
that linear behaviour can be assumed. If necessary, 
testing can be performed with several ranges of inputs 
that, together, cover the entire range of interest. The 
primary object of these tests is to determine the transient 
response behaviour of a vehicle. Characteristic values 
and functions in the time and frequency domains 
are considered necessary for characterizing vehicle 
transient response. 


Important characteristics in the time domain are: 


a) time lags between steering-wheel angle, lateral 
acceleration and yaw velocity; 


b) response times of lateral acceleration and yaw 
velocity; 


c) lateral acceleration gain (lateral acceleration 
divided by steering-wheel angle); 


d) yaw velocity gain (yaw velocity divided by 
steering-wheel angle); and 


e) overshoot values. 


These characteristics show correlation with subjective 
evaluation during road driving. Important characteristics 
in the frequency domain are the frequency responses, 
that is, amplitudes and phases of : 


a) lateral acceleration related to steering-wheel 
angle, and 


b) yaw velocity related to steering-wheel angle. 


8.6.2 Test Methods 


There are several test methods for obtaining these 
characteristics in the domains of time and frequency, 
the applicability of which depends in part on the size of 
the test track available. 


These test methods are optional, but at least one of each 
domain type should be performed. The methods chosen 
shall be indicated in the general data specified in Annex 
A and in the presentation of test results specified in 
Annex B. 


It is possible that the characteristic values of lateral 
acceleration gain and yaw velocity gain, obtained by 
the different test methods, may not be comparable, 
owing to one or more of the following circumstances: 


a) linear versus non-linear vehicle behavior; 


b) periodic versus 
condition; and 


non-periodic steady-state 


c) steady state versus dynamic vehicle behaviour. 
8.6.3 Variables 


8.6.3.1 The following variables shall be determined: 
a) steering-wheel angle, 
b) lateral acceleration, 
c) yaw velocity, and 
d) longitudinal velocity. 


8.6.3.2 The following variables may be determined: 
a) roll angle, 
b) sideslip angle, 
c) lateral velocity, and 
d) steering-wheel torque. 


These variables, defined in 17128 (Part 1), are not 
intended to comprise a complete list. 


8.6.4 Measuring Equipment 
Please refer 4 of IS17128 (Part 1). 


8.6.5 Step Input 


8.6.5.1 Test procedure 


Drive the vehicle at the test speed in a straight line. The 
initial speed shall not deviate by more than 2 km/h from 
the test speed. Starting from a 0°/s + 0.5°/s yaw velocity 
equilibrium condition, apply a steering input as rapidly 
as possible to a preselected value and maintain at that 
value for several seconds after the measured vehicle 
motion variables have reached a steady state. In order 
to keep the steering input short, relative to the vehicle 
response time, the time between 10 percent and 90 
percent of the steering input should not be greater than 
0.15 s. No change in throttle position shall be made, 
although speed may decrease. A steering wheel stop 
may be used for selecting the input angle. 


Take data for both left and right turns. All data shall be 
taken in one direction followed by all data in the other 
direction. Alternatively, take data successively in each 
direction for each acceleration level, from the lowest to 
the highest level, this being preferable with respect to 
tyre wear and symmetrical vehicle stress. Record the 
method chosen in the test report (see Annex A). 


Data shall be taken throughout the desired range of 
steering inputs and response variable outputs. 


Determine the steering-wheel angle amplitude by 
steady-state driving on a circle the radius of which 
gives the preselected steady-state lateral acceleration 
at the required test speed. The standard steady-state 
lateral acceleration level is 4 m/s?. Additional levels of 
2 m/s? and 6 m/s? may be used. 


Perform all test runs at least three times. 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


8.6.5.2 Data analysis 


8.6.5.3 Response time 


The transient response data reduction shall be carried 
out such that the origin for each response is the time 
at which the steering-wheel angle change is 50 percent 
complete. This is the reference point from which all 
response times are measured. Response time is thus 
defined as the time, measured from this reference, for 
the vehicle transient response to first reach 90 percent 
of its new steady-state value (see Fig. 8). 


8.6.5.4 Peak response time 


The peak response time is the time, measured from 
the reference point, for a vehicle transient response to 
reach its peak value (see Fig. 8). 


In some instances, system damping can be so high that 
a peak value cannot be determined. If this occurs, data 
sheets should be marked accordingly. 


8.6.5.5 Overshoot values 

The overshoot values are calculated as a ratio, the 
difference of peak value and steady-state value divided 
by steady-state value. 

8.6.5.6 Data presentation 


General data shall be presented in accordance with 
Annex A. 


8.6.5.6.1 Time histories 


The time histories of variables used for data evaluation 
shall be plotted. If a curve is fitted to any set of data, 
the method of curve fitting shall be described in the 
presentation of results in Annex B. 


Plot the time histories of steering-wheel angle, lateral 
acceleration and yaw velocity for each measured lateral 
acceleration level in the form, as shown in Fig. 31. 


8.6.5.6.2 Time response data summary 


Record the following values in accordance with Table 
10 for each combination of test speed and lateral 
acceleration: 


a) steady-state yaw velocity response gain; 

b) lateral acceleration response time; 

c) yaw velocity response time; 

d) lateral acceleration peak response time, Max; 
e) yaw velocity peak response time, Max; 

f) overshoot value of lateral acceleration; and 
g) overshoot value of yaw velocity. 


8.6.6 Sinusoidal Input 


8.6.6.1 Test procedure 


Drive the vehicle at the test speed in a straight line. 
The initial speed shall not deviate by more than 2 km/h 
from the test speed. Starting from a O ?/s 4 0.5 ?/s yaw 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


velocity equilibrium condition, apply one full period 
sinusoidal steering-wheel input with a frequency of 
0.5 Hz. An additional frequency of 1 Hz should also 
be used. The amplitude error of the actual waveform 
compared to the true sine wave shall be less than 5 
percent of the first peak value. No change in throttle 
position shall be made, although speed may decrease. 


Take data while the steering-wheel is rotated, initially 
both to the left and to the right. All data shall be taken 
in one direction followed by all data in the other 
direction. Alternatively, take data successively in each 
direction for each acceleration level, from the lowest to 
the highest level. Record the method chosen in the test 
report (see Annex A). 


Increase the steering-wheel input stepwise up to a 
magnitude sufficient to produce the desired lateral 
acceleration. The standard lateral acceleration level is 
4 m/s?. Additional acceleration levels of 2 m/s? and 


a 
1 
2 
d 
4 
b 
c 
Key 
1 steering-wheel input a 50% level 


2 vehicle response time 
x time 


b response time ; t 


6 m/s? and up to the adhesion limit as given in IS 17128 
(Part 1) may be used. Perform at least three test runs for 
each combination of speed and steering. 


8.6.6.2 Data analysis 


a) Lateral Acceleration — Lateral acceleration in this 
test is defined as the first peak value of the lateral 
acceleration time history, corrected for vehicle roll 
angle. 


b 


wm 


Yaw Velocity —Yaw velocity in this test is defined 
as the first peak value of the yaw velocity time 
history. 


c 


— 


Time Lags — The time lags between the variables 
steering-wheel angle, lateral acceleration and yaw 
velocity are calculated for the first and second 
peaks by means of cross-correlation of the first 
and second half-waves, respectively (positive and 
negative parts of the time history). 


d 9096 steady state 
e steady state 


c peak responce time ; tmax. 


FIG. 8 RESPONSE TIME AND PEAK RESPONSE TIME 


d) Lateral Acceleration Gain — Lateral acceleration 
gain is calculated as the ratio of the lateral 
acceleration [in accordance with 8.6.9.2 (b)] to the 
corresponding peak value of the steering-wheel 
angle. 

e) Yaw Velocity Gain -- Yaw velocity gain is 

calculated as the ratio of the yaw velocity 

[according to 8.6.9.2 (c)] to the corresponding 

peak value of the steering-wheel angle. 


8.6.6.3 Data presentation 


General data shall be presented in accordance with 
Annex A. 


The time histories of variables used for data evaluation 
shall be plotted. If a curve is fitted to any set of data, 
the method of curve fitting shall be described in the 
presentation of results in accordance with Annex B-2 


8.6.6.4 Time histories 


Plot the time histories of steering-wheel angle, lateral 
acceleration and yaw velocity for each measured lateral 
acceleration level as shown in Fig. 32. 


Time response data summary 


Calculate the following test data (see Table 11) as mean 
values 4 standard deviation: 


a) time lags between steering-wheel angle and lateral 
acceleration: 


1) first peak, or 
2) second peak. 


b) time lags between steering-wheel angle and yaw 
velocity: 


1) first peak, or 
2) second peak. 
c) lateral acceleration gain, and 


d) yaw velocity gain. 


8.6.6.5 Data as functions of lateral acceleration 


If optional lateral acceleration levels are measured, 
it is useful to present data as functions of lateral 
acceleration. 


8.6.7 Random Input 


8.6.7.1 Test procedure 


Make the test runs by driving the vehicle at the required 
test speed, while making continuous inputs to the 
steering-wheel, up to predetermined limits of steering- 
wheel angle. 


The test shall cover a minimum frequency range of 0.2 
Hz to 2 Hz. Optionally, the frequency range may also 
be extended above and below these limits. 


Do not use mechanical limiters of the steering-wheel 
angle, if existing, because of their effect on the 
harmonic content of the input. It is also important that 


11 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


the input be continuous, as periods of relative inactivity 
will seriously reduce the signal-to-noise ratio. 


To ensure adequate high-frequency content, the input 
should be energetic. To ensure enough total data, 
capture at least 12 min of data, unless confidence 
limits indicate that a shorter time is sufficient. Ideally, 
all data should be accomplished in a continuous run, 
but practical considerations can prevent this for two 
reasons. Firstly, the test track could be insufficiently 
long to permit a continuous run of such a length at 
the reguired test speed. Secondly, the computer used 
to analyse the data might not be large enough to 
handle all the data at once. In either case, data may 
be captured using a number of shorter runs of at least 
30 s duration. 


For each test run, maintain the longitudinal velocity 
within a tolerance of 43 km/h of the desired test speed. 


Determine the steering-wheel angle limits by steady- 
state driving on a circle, the radius of which gives 
the preselected steady-state lateral acceleration at the 
reguired test speed. The standard steady-state lateral 
acceleration level is 3 m/s? or less, as necessary to 
remain within the range in which the vehicle exhibits 
linear properties. Optionally, higher lateral acceleration 
levels may also be used, provided the vehicle remains 
in the linear range. 


8.6.7.2 Data analysis 


The data processing can be carried out using a multi- 
channel real time analyzer or a computer with the 
appropriate software. 


8.6.7.2.1 Preliminary analysis 


A Fourier analysis shall be made of the steering-wheel 
angle time history. The result shall be displayed as a 
graph of the input level relative to that at the lowest 
frequency versus frequency, as shown in Annex B. 


This graph shall be examined to ensure adequate 
frequency content. The recommended ratio between 
maximum and minimum steering-wheel angle should 
be not greater than 4:1 (12 dB). If this ratio is greater, 
the results may be discarded or, if used, the extent 
of the ratio shall be recorded in the test report (see 
Annex B). 


Further data processing The data shall then be processed 
using equipment appropriate for producing the transfer 
function amplitude and phase information together with 
the coherence function for the following combinations 
of input and output variables: 


a) lateral acceleration related to steering-wheel 
angle, and 
b) yaw velocity related to steering-wheel angle. 
If data has not been captured in a continuous run, 


calculate the auto and cross-spectral densities for each 
run. 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


The results of individual runs shall then be averaged. 
The averaging function used shall be recorded in the 
test report (see Annex A). 


8.6.7.2.2 Data presentation 


General data shall be presented in accordance with 
Annex A. 


Ifa curve is fitted to any set of data, the method of curve 
fitting shall be described in accordance with Annex B. 


8.6.7.2.3 Frequency response functions 


For each pair of input and output variables, the frequency 
response ( that is, gain and phase-angle functions) shall 
be presented on a graph as shown in Fig. 33. The figure 
shall be completed with the number and length of the 
data sequences, the averaging function, the digitizing 
rate and the windowing function used. 


The coherence function shall also be presented on the 
graph (see Fig. 33). This coherence function quantifies 
the amount of correlated information in relation to 
noise present in the data. To obtain close confidence 
limits, it is necessary to have high coherence levels and 
a large number of averages. 


Experience shows that coherence for yaw velocity 
related to steering-wheel angle shall be above 0.95 in 
the range from 0.2 to 2 Hz for reproducible and reliable 
test results. 


8.6.8 Pulse Input 
8.6.8.1 Test procedure 


Drive the vehicle at the test speed in a straight line. 
The initial speed shall not deviate by more than 2 km/h 
from the test speed. Starting from a 0 ?/s + 0.5 °/s 
yaw velocity equilibrium condition, apply a triangular 
waveform steering-wheel input, followed by 3 s to 5 s 
neutral steering-wheel position. No change in throttle 
position shall be made, although speed may decrease. 


Use a pulse width of 0.3 s to 0.5 s. Make efforts to 
minimize the overshoot of the steering-wheel angle 
and the differences between zero references before 
and after the steering-wheel input to values <5 per 
cent of the peak input level. The zero reference is the 
steady-state value before and after the steering-wheel 
input. 


Determine the amplitude of the steering-wheel input 
by steady-state driving on a circle, the radius of which 
gives the preselected steady-state lateral acceleration 
at the required test speed. The standard steady-state 
lateral acceleration level is 4 m/s? or less as necessary 
to remain within the range in which the vehicle exhibits 
linear properties. Optionally, higher lateral acceleration 
levels may also be used, provided the vehicle remains 
in the linear range. Perform all test runs at least three 
times. 


12 


8.6.8.2 Data analysis 


The data processing can be carried out using a multi- 
channel real time analyser or a computer with the 
appropriate software. 


8.6.8.2.1 Preliminary analysis 


A fourier analysis shall be made of the steering-wheel 
angle time history. The result shall be displayed as a 
graph of the input level relative to that at the lowest 
frequency versus frequency as shown in Annex B. 


8.6.8.2.2 Further data processing 


The data shall then be processed using appropriate 
equipment to produce the transfer function amplitude 
and phase information together with the coherence 
function for the following combinations of input and 
output variables: 


a) lateral acceleration related to steering-wheel 
angle, and 


b) yaw velocity related to steering-wheel angle. 


The transfer functions of at least three test runs shall 
be averaged. 


8.6.8.2.3 Data presentation 


General data shall be presented in accordance with 
Annex A. Time histories of variables used for data 
evaluation shall be plotted. If a curve is fitted to any set 
of data, the method of curve fitting shall be described in 
the test report in accordance with Annex B. 


8.6.8.2.4 Frequency response functions 


For each pair of input and output variables, the frequency 
response ( that is, gain and phase-angle functions) shall 
be presented on a graph, as shown in Fig. 34. The graph 
shall be completed with the number and length of the 
data sequences, the averaging function, the digitizing 
rate and the windowing function used. 


The coherence function shall also be presented on 
the graph (see Fig. 34). This function quantifies the 
amount of correlated information in relation to noise 
present in the data. To obtain close confidence limits, it 
is necessary to have high coherence levels and a large 
number of averages. 


8.6.9 Continuous Sinusoidal Input 


8.6.9.1 Test procedure 


Drive the vehicle at the test speed in a straight line. The 
initial speed shall not deviate more than 2 km/h from the 
test speed. Starting from a 0 ?/s + 0.5 ?/s yaw velocity 
equilibrium condition, apply at least three periods of 
sinusoidal steering-wheel input with the predetermined 
steering-wheel angle amplitude and frequency. No 
change in throttle position shall be made, although 
speed may decrease. 


Increase the steering frequency in steps. The test shall 
cover a minimum frequency range of 0.2 Hz to 2 Hz. 


Optionally, the frequency range may also be extended 
above and below these limits. 


Determine the steering-wheel angle amplitude by 
steady-state driving on a circle the radius of which 
gives the preselected steady-state lateral acceleration 
at the required test speed. The standard steady-state 
lateral acceleration level is 4 m/s?. Additional levels of 
2 m/s? and 6 m/s? may be used. 


8.6.9.2 Data analysis 


a) Amplitude — The amplitude of the steering- 
wheel angle, lateral acceleration and yaw velocity 
is defined as the mean value of the amplitudes 
following the first period. 


All amplitudes shall be taken during the maneuvers 
when the vehicle is in a periodic steady-state 
condition. 


b) Lateral Acceleration Gain — Lateral acceleration 
gain shall be calculated as the ratio of the lateral 
acceleration amplitude to the steering wheel angle 


amplitude. 


x 


C 


— 


Yaw Velocity Gain — Yaw velocity gain shall 
be calculated as the ratio of the yaw velocity 
amplitude to the steering-wheel angle amplitude, 
both amplitudes being in accordance with IS 
17128 (Part 1). 


8.6.9.3 Phase angle 


Phase angles between the steering-wheel angle and 
the lateral acceleration and yaw velocity shall be 
determined from the time histories after the first period, 
when the vehicle is in a periodic steady-state condition. 


8.6.9.4 Data presentation 


General data shall be presented as given on the summary 
form in Annex A. 


Time histories of variables used for data evaluation 
shall be plotted. If a curve is fitted to any set of data, 
the method of curve fitting shall be described in the 
presentation of results as in Annex B. 


Frequency response functions for each pair of the 
input and output variables, lateral acceleration. and 
yaw velocity, the frequency response ( that is, gain and 
phase-angle functions) shall be presented on a graph as 
shown in Fig. 34. 


8.7 Method 3 — Braking in a Turn 


8.7.1 Description 


The purpose of this test 1s to examine the effect of 
braking on course holding and directional behaviour of 
a vehicle. Specifically, the method determines how the 
steady-state circular response of a vehicle is altered by 
braking action only. 


13 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


The initial conditions are defined by constant 
longitudinal velocity and by a circle with a given 
radius, as specified by the constant-radius test method 
of IS 17128 (Part 1). The steering-wheel angle required 
for the steady-state circular run shall be constantly 
maintained during the entire test. During the test, the 
driver input and the vehicle response are measured 
and recorded. From the recorded signals, characteristic 
values are calculated. 


8.7.2 Variables 


8.7.2.4, Measure and determine the 


variables: 


following 


a) brake application time (0); 

b) steering-wheel angle (8H); 

c) lateral acceleration (aY); 

d) longitudinal acceleration (aX); 
e) longitudinal velocity (vX); 

f) yaw velocity (dv /dø); and 


g) sideslip angle (B) and/or lateral velocity (vY). 


NOTE — Strictly speaking, test results based on lateral 
acceleration. should not be used for comparison of the 
performance of different vehicles. This is because lateral 
acceleration is measured at right angles to the intermediate 
X-axis and not perpendicular to the vehicle path. To 
overcome this difficulty, lateral acceleration can be corrected 
for vehicle sideslip angle, which gives the centripetal 
acceleration. However, the extent of this correction is 
not likely to exceed a few percent and may generally be 
neglected. 


8.7.2.2 It is recommended that the following variables 
be determined: 


a) pressure at master cylinder output or in the brake 
circuit which activates at least one of the front 
wheel brakes (pB); 

b) wheel rotation speed (œl — c4); 

c) contact switch mounted directly on the brake 
pedal; and 

d) sensor for the brake pedal force. 


The variables are defined in IS 17128 (Part 1), except 
for stopping distance and the moment of brake 
application, /0, which is the instant at which the brake 
pedal is operated. The actuation of the brake pedal may 
be determined by the use of a contact switch mounted 
directly on the brake pedal or a sensor for the brake 
pedal force which set a trigger signal when the brake 
pedal force exceeds 10 N. 


8.7.3 Measuring Equipment: 
8.7.3.1 Description 


Table 1 of IS 17128 (Part 1) shall apply with the 
following additions as given in Table 3: 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


8.7.4 Test Procedure 


8.7.4.1 Run-in program for newly installed brakes 
(pads/shoes) 


The brake linings (pads/shoes) shall be conditioned 
following the recommendations of the vehicle 
manufacturer. If manufacturer's recommendations are 
not available, the brake linings shall be conditioned 
using one of the following procedures: 


8.7.4.1.1 For vehicles with disc/disc braking systems, 
a total of 60 brake applications shall be performed. 
From an initial vehicle speed of 100 km/h, the vehicle 
shall be decelerated to approximately 20 km/h at the 
following approximate deceleration rates: 


a) 2 m/s? for the first 15 brake applications; 

b) 3 m/s? for the next 15 brake applications; and 

c) 5 m/s? for the final 30 brake applications. 
8.7.4.1.2 For vehicles with disc/drum or drum/drum 
braking systems, a total of 200 brake applications 
shall be performed. From an initial vehicle speed of 
100 km/h, the vehicle shall be decelerated to 


approximately 20 km/h at the following approximate 
deceleration rates: 


a) 2 m/s? for the first 50 brake applications; 

b) 3 m/s? for the next 50 brake applications; and 

c) 5 m/s? for the final 100 brake applications. 
During these brake applications, brake disc and/or 
brake drum temperatures must not exceed 200 “C. The 


tyres used for running in the brakes must not be used 
for subsequent braking distance measurements. 


8.7.4.2 Warm-up 


The warm-up shall be carried out in accordance with 
6.1 of IS 17128 (Part 1). 


In addition to warming up the braking system, five 
full stops should be performed from an initial speed of 
about 100 km/h. In each of these stops, brake actuation 
should be sufficient to cause the anti-lock braking 
system to be active throughout the majority of the stop. 
To avoid excessive strain on the brakes, the temperature 
of the brake discs (drums) should be below 120?C at 
the beginning of each single stop. 


8.7.4.3 Brake temperature 


The temperature of the front brake discs (drums) shall 
be between 80?C and 120?C, and the rear brake discs 
(drums) shall be less than 120 ?C before each test 
run. If necessary, the brakes shall be cooled between 
runs. The installation of reliable temperature sensors is 
recommended to monitor the brake temperatures. 


8.7.4.4 Initial driving condition 


The initial driving conditions shall be in accordance 
with 6.2 of IS 17128 (Part 1). 


The initial driving conditions for a steady-state circular 
run, as specified in 7.2 of ISO 15037-1 shall apply with 
the initial conditions according to the combinations 
of radii and lateral acceleration given in Table 4. As 
it is known that the significance of the results and the 
discrimination between different vehicles increase with 
increasing test speed, the standard radius of this path 
shall be 100 m. Additional radii ranging from 30 m to 
200 m may be used and shall be noted in the figures 
of Annex A. Because of the importance of the initial 


Table 3 Variables, Typical Operating Ranges and Recommended Maximum Errors 
( Clause 8.7.3.1 ) 


SI No. Variable Typical Operating Recommended Maximum Error of the 
Range Combined Transducer/Recorder System 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Brake application time = 0.05 s 
ii) Pressure of braking system 30 MPa? 40.3 MPa 
iii) Wheel rotation speed 0 per second to 200 per second +2 per second 
9 I MPa = 10 bar = 106 N/m’. 
Table 4 Initial Test Condition 
( Clauses 8.7.4.4 and 8.7.4.5 ) 
Condition Radius Lateral Acceleration Corresponding Longitudinal Velocity 
m m/s? tolerance, percent km/h tolerance, percent 
Standard 100 5 +10 81 +5 
Optional 30 to 200 5 +10 44 to 114 t5 


driving conditions, especially for brake tests, the 
throttle position shall be observed. For the time interval 
from 41 to 2 (see Fig. 2 of ISO 15037-1) the standard 
deviation of the throttle position shall not exceed 10 per 
cent of its mean value. 


NOTE — Results of different radii are not comparable. 


The initial combination of one radius and one lateral 
acceleration given in Table 2 could be widened by 
additional test runs with lateral accelerations other than 
5 m/s?, mainly by steps of 1 m/s?. 


8.7.4.5 Performance of the braking procedure 


When the initial steady-state driving condition has been 
reached, the steering wheel is fixed by a mechanical 
device or, alternatively, is firmly held by the driver. The 
accelerator pedal shall be released and brakes applied 
as quickly as possible. 


For vehicles with manual transmission, the test shall 
be performed in the highest gear compatible with the 
conditions of the test speed given in Table 4. The clutch 
may be disengaged immediately or at the end of the 
test run. The option chosen (gear position and clutch 
disengagement) shall be indicated in the test report 
(see Annex C). 


For vehicles with automatic transmission, the 
standard drive mode shall be used. The position of the 


«04 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


transmission lever and the selected driving programme 
shall be recorded in the test report (see Annex C). 


Cars with adaptive gear selection or CVT may use 
different gears or ratios at a given speed. For such 
cars, engine speed shall be recorded for the purpose of 
determining gear ratio. It shall be recorded in the test 
report. 


The actuation ofthe brake-pedal or the brake light switch 
is considered as the moment of brake application, 40. 
During braking, the pressure in the braking system or 
the brake-pedal force or the brake-pedal travel shall be 
kept as constant as possible (an adjustable stop under 
the brake-pedal may serve) and the steering wheel shall 
be fixed until the test run is finished. 


The test runs for a combination of radius and lateral 
acceleration defined in Table 4 shall be made at 
increasing levels of longitudinal acceleration, until on 
vehicles with conventional braking system, lock up of 
at least one of the front wheels occurs (if possible). The 
test may be continued beyond this point resulting in 
further wheels locking until lock up of all wheels has 
occurred, but testing under these conditions may result 
in rapid and large changes of tyre characteristics, which 
may cause wide variations in test results. On vehicles 
equipped with an antilock braking system, the test shall 
be continued until the peak value of mean longitudinal 
acceleration at time / (see Fig. 9) is detected. 


ma 


X time, t(s) 
y longitudinal acceleration (per cent) 
a time interval for evaluation (see 9.4.1) 


on 


Fic. 9 DEFINITION OF TIMES 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


The minimum braking action shall correspond to a 
mean longitudinal acceleration of 2 m/s? and shall be 
increased by increments of not more than 1 m/s?. If the 
results vary rapidly with the longitudinal acceleration, 
smaller increments should be selected. 

NOTE — Depending on the conditions of load, there could be 


a certain risk of rollover. If necessary, some safety device is 
recommended. 


8.7.4.6 General test description 


All necessary variables shall be recorded throughout 
the maneuver. Data shall be taken for both clockwise 
and anti-clockwise steering turns. 


For tests utilizing discrete increments of speed, radius 
or steering-wheel angle, all of the test data may be 
taken in one turn direction followed by all the data in 
the other turn direction, as experience has shown that 
this minimizes data scatter. However, to obtain more 
even tyre wear and reduced tyre heating, data may be 
taken in alternating turn directions at each test speed/ 
radius/steering-wheel angle. 


8.7.4.7 Data analysis and presentation of results 


8.7.4.7.1 General data on the test vehicle shall be 
presented on a summary form using the general 
data test report contained in Annex A. The general 
test conditions shall be presented using the test 
conditions contained in Annex B of IS 17128 
(Part 1). 


X time, t 
y longitudinal acceleration, - ax 


8.7.4.7.2 Time histories 


For every test run, time histories of the variables listed 
in 5 of IS 17128 (Part 1) shall be presented. Apart from 
their evaluation purposes, the time histories serve to 
monitor correct test performance and functioning of 
the transducers. 


8.7.4.7.3 Braking action 


8.7.4.7.4 Reference point in time, t, 


The reference point in time, #, for the following 
characteristic values is the moment of the brake-pedal 
actuation. 


8.7.4.7.5 Definition of times and requirements for 
standard evaluation 


Figure 10 shows the pattern of longitudinal acceleration 
during braking versus time. 


For the correct performance ofa test run, the rise time of 
the longitudinal acceleration shall not exceed 0.4 s. The 
longitudinal acceleration at 1 s after time f, is evaluated 
by taking the mean value during the time interval 0.9 s 
to 1.1 s after ¢,. The rise time is defined as the difference 
between the reference point in time /, and time 90. 
Time 190 is the time when the longitudinal acceleration 
reaches 90 percent of the value at I s after time /.. 


The time #f is defined as the time when the longitudinal 
acceleration reaches the value zero at the end of the 
braking actuation. 


Fic. 10 LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION, 4X, VERSUS TIME 


8.7.4.7.6 Mean longitudinal acceleration, — a X 


The mean longitudinal acceleration is the average value 
of longitudinal acceleration measured during each 
brake application. 


This average value may be obtained by either of the 
following methods: 


a) measuring the distance needed by the vehicle 
to stop from instant (0, in which case the mean 
longitudinal acceleration is given by: 


2 


Vott 


dy 


2X Ser 


where, 
54 The actual stopping distance, in metres; 


Vr” The actual initial velocity, in metres per 
second; 


b) taking the mean value of the longitudinal 
acceleration during the time interval 4, to ¢, (see 
Fig. 10). 


The method used to determine the mean longitudinal 
acceleration shall be recorded as the test conditions 
contained in Annex B of IS 17128 (Part 1). 


8.7.4.7.7 Mean longitudinal acceleration, Ax, Tn, until 
time tn 


The mean longitudinal acceleration at any time ¢, after 
brake application is defined as the value during the time 
interval #, to ¢, of the longitudinal acceleration (see 
Fig.10). 


8.7.4.7.8 Evaluation of characteristic values 


a) The characteristic values shall be determined and 
presented as a function of the mean longitudinal 
acceleration or the mean longitudinal acceleration 
at time / (see 8.7.4.7.6 and 8.7.4.7.7). The 
characteristic values in the steady-state condition 
are defined as mean values during the time interval 
-1.3 s to -0.3 s before brake application. The other 
characteristic values are determined during an 
observation period beginning at t, and ending with 
the standstill of the vehicle. The representative 
values at # shall be calculated by taking the mean 
value during the time interval 4 — 0.1 s to + 0.1 s. 
For standard evaluation, the recommended value 
of time is £ = f, + 1 s, but £ may also assume 
additional values. If values for t, in addition to 
t + I sare chosen for evaluation ofthe characteristic 
values, the values of #, shall be recorded on the 
plots of the characteristic values (see Annex A). 


For each set of initial conditions, calculate and 
plot the characteristic values listed below. The 
reference values of yaw velocity and lateral 
acceleration used in some of the formulas are 


17 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


those values which would be obtained at time / and 
longitudinal velocity v,, t, had the initial radius R, 
been maintained by the vehicle. They are defined 
as follows: 


Reference yaw velocity: 


X,t 


Vn, UR 


Reference lateral acceleration: 


2 
MT 
Y,Ref,t © 

R, 


a 


b) Lateral acceleration 


Steady-state levels of lateral acceleration in case 
of method 1), or centripetal acceleration in case of 
methods 2), 3) and 4), may be obtained by any one 
of the following four methods: 


1) The output of an accelerometer, corrected for 
vehicle roll angle and for the distance of the 
sensor from the origin of the reference system. 

2) The product of the yaw velocity, corrected 

for vehicle roll angle, and the longitudinal 

velocity, corrected for sideslip angle. 

3) The square of the longitudinal velocity, 

corrected for sideslip angle, divided by the 

path radius. 

4) The product of the square of the yaw velocity, 

corrected for vehicle roll angle, and the path 


radius. 


The method used to determine lateral acceleration 
shall be noted in the test report. 


The ratio of the value of the yaw velocity at time f, 
to the value of the reference yaw velocity at time 
t, (see Fig. 35): 


Yi, _ 


E fi (- dy NA ) 
V Ret, & 

d) The ratio of the maximum value of the yaw 
velocity attained during braking to the reference 
value of the yaw velocity at time #,,,, the instant 
when the maximum value of the yaw velocity is 
reached (see Fig.36): 

V max eed 
-= = Cay) 
V Ret, ix 
e) The difference between the values of the 


instantaneous yaw velocity at time / and the 
reference yaw velocity at time £, (see Fig. 37): 


— y dm — 
= Vt, == 


Ayt, syt, —Wret 1, R 
0 


LCA.) 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


f) The maximum value of the difference between 
the yaw velocity during braking and the affiliated 
reference yaw velocity (see Fig. 38): 


| = f,(-ay) 


` B s ` Vy 
AY max =[y, =V get, r İmax = yt- R 


0 


g) The instantaneous value of the yaw acceleration 
at time tn. The yaw acceleration may be computed 
by differentiating the yaw velocity (see Fig. 39): 


"n = 
AV, ail = fila, ) 


h) The ratio of the value of the lateral acceleration 
at time ¢, to the reference value of the lateral 
acceleration at time f, (see Fig.40): 


_ K _ 
R, 


1, 
n 


ay å 


far) 

Ay Ref t, 
J) The maximum value of the sideslip angle during 
observation period and the time tom (Beta-Max), 
expressing the time passed after #, until the 
maximum was reached (see Fig. 41): 


Baal, = fri 4) 


bom = fia (-ay) 


he difference between the values of the sideslip 
angle at time f, and the initial steady-state value of 
the sideslip angle (see Fig.42): 


B. - By = 4r.) 


The difference between the values of the 
instantaneous yaw velocity at time /, and the 
calculated yaw velocity at time / (see Fig. 43): 


k 


wm 


m 


— 


Ay, 


B, =V, 
v 


E Jayn) 


X, ty 


where f' is the sideslip angle velocity uncorrected 
for the effects of the sideslip angle itself and the 
deceleration. It gives information on the vehicle's 
yaw stability. 


n 


— 


The path deviation at time /,, defined as the radial 
distance of the reference point and its initial 
circular path (see Fig.44): 


As, ho Joay, ) 


The path deviation is calculated by the path of the 
reference point in the earth fixed axis system (see 
Fig. 11).The coordinates of the reference point can be 
determined for example by transforming the vehicle 
fixed velocity vectors v^X and vY into the earth fixed 
axis system and subsequent integration. 


18 


8.8 Method 4 — Quantification of on Centre 
Handling 


8.8.1 On-Centre Handling Weave Test 


8.8.1.1 Description 


On-centre handling represents that part of the straight- 
line directional stability characteristics of the vehicle 
existing at lateral acceleration levels, typically, no 
greater than I m/s?. On-centre handling is concerned 
primarily with features that directly influence the 
driver's steering input, such as steering system and tyre 
characteristics. Thus test schedules for the evaluation 
of on-centre handling behaviour seek to minimize other 
factors that influence the wider aspects of straight-line 
directional stability, such as disturbance inputs due to 
ambient winds and road irregularities. 


This part defines a test schedule that involves driving 
the vehicle in a nominally straight line at a constant 
forward speed. During the test, driver inputs and 
vehicle responses are measured and recorded. From the 
recorded signals, characteristic values are calculated. 


8.8.1.2 Variables 


When using this test method, the following variables 
shall be measured in addition to the variables given in 
the Tables 5 and 6. 


a) steering-wheel angle, 6,,; 
b) steering-wheel torque, M,,; 
c) yaw velocity, E ; and 
d) longitudinal velocity, v... 
The following variables should be measured: 
a) leteral acceleration, a,; and 


; . dö 
b) steering-wheel angular velocity, T 


8.8.1.3 Test procedure — Weave test 


The weave test is an open-loop procedure conducted on 
a test track that follows a straight-line path. The vehicle 
is driven at a nominally constant longitudinal velocity. 
Different longitudinal velocities can be arrived based 
on vehicle capability. The standard test velocity is 100 
km/h. These should be decremented or incremented by 
20 km/h from the standard velocity. 


The transducer signals shall be recorded throughout 
the initial driving condition, if applicable, and for the 
duration of the test. In order to ensure that the required 
data are not affected by the instrumentation system, 
recording should be continued for a further 1s after the 
test runs. 


The weave test procedure requires the steering-wheel 
to be subjected to an oscillatory input. The preferred 
steering input waveform is nominally sinusoidal, 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


key 
1 path deviation 
2 vehicle referenced point 
3 initial circular path 
4 path of reference point 


Ro initial radius 


FIG. 11 DEFINITION OF PATH DEVIATION 


Table 5 Variables, Typical Operating Ranges and Recommended Maximum Errors 
( Clause 8.8.1.2 ) 


SI No. Variable Typical Operating Range” Recommended Maximum Error of Combined System? 


(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Steering-wheel angle +50 +0.19 
ii) Steering-wheel torque +01N-m +0.1N.m 
iii) Yaw velocity = 10 ?/s x 0.1 °/s 
iv) Longitudinal velocity 0 m/s to 50 m/s + 0.5 m/s 
v) Lateral acceleration +5 m/s? +0.1 m/s? 
vi) Steering wheel angular velocity + 100 °/s +£ 1 °/s 


Transducers for measuring some of the listed variable are not widely available and are not in general use. Many such instruments are 
developed by users. If any system error exceeds the recommended maximum value, this and the actual maximum error shall be stated in the 


test report (see ISO 15037-1, Annex A). 
D) These transducer ranges are appropriate for the standard test conditions and might not be suitable for non-standard test conditions. 


2) The values for maximum errors are provisional until more experience and data are available. 


19 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 6 Estimation Scale for Wind Intensity for Observer without Measuring Instrument 
(Beaufort Scale) 


( Clause 8.8.1.2 ) 


but other steering input waveforms (for example, 
triangular) may be used. The frequency of the steering 
input shall be 0.2 Hz +10 percent. The amplitude of the 
steering input shall be sufficient to produce the required 
peak value of vehicle lateral acceleration + 10 percent. 
To ensure that good and adequate test data are available 
for analysis at lateral acceleration levels of 1 m/s? and 
that the vehicle and its subsystems are working outside 
of hysteresis effects, the standard peak value is 2 m/s?, 
but lower values and values up to 4 m/s? may also be 
used. 


Throughout the test, both the peak amplitude of the 
steering angle and the angular velocity of the steering 
wheel through the centre position shall be as near 
constant as possible. In addition, variation in the position 
of the accelerator pedal shall be kept to a minimum, 
consistent with maintaining vehicle longitudinal 
velocity within required limits. The longitudinal 
velocity during the test sequence or sequences to be 
used for data analysis shall not vary from the nominal 
value by more than 3 percent. Choice of data used for 
analysis is based upon consistency of steering input and 
of vehicle longitudinal velocity relevant to that data. 
A minimum of four consistent cycles of steering input 
and of vehicle response is required for subsequent data 
analysis. 


The steering input for this test may be made manually 
or with a steering robot machine. Where manual 
input is used, in order to obtain the minimum number 
of cycles required for analysis the test should be 
performed for a minimum continuous duration of 40 
s, sufficient to capture at least eight cycles of data. 
Where proving ground space limitations prohibit a run 
of this duration, and consequently the reliable capture 
of a sufficiently long sequence of consistent data, it is 
permissible to perform a series of shorter runs and to 
combine the data for analysis. In this event, a nominal 
20 cycles of data should be captured and statistical 
methods used during analysis. The use of a steering 
robot offers the possibility of enhanced consistency of 
steering input and hence of test data, allowing fewer 
test cycles. 


20 


Wind intensity 0 1 2 3 4 
(Beaufort Scale) 
Name Calm Light air Light breeze Gentle breeze Moderate breeze 
Velocity m/s 0 to 0.2 0.3 to 1.5 1.6 to 3.3 3.4 to 5.4 5.5 to 7.9 
Identification Smoke rises Wind direction only Leaves rustle, Leaves and thin Moves twigs and thin 
Sign vertically in a by smoke Wind felt in face twigs move branches, dust rises 
straight line 


8.8.1.4 Data analysis and presentation of results 


8.8.1.4.1 Time histories 


Time histories serve to monitor correct test performance 
and functioning of the transducers. In particular, the 
time histories of steering angle amplitude, steering- 
wheel angular velocity, vehicle longitudinal velocity 
and vehicle lateral acceleration are examined to 
identify valid data for evaluation. A minimum of four 
consistent cycles, for which the control criteria are best 
met, shall be selected for data analysis. Time histories 
of the variables listed in 5 shall be presented for the 
data selected for analysis. 


8.8.1.4.2 Calculated lateral acceleration 


Instead of using measured lateral acceleration, aY, 
in the derivation of several of the characteristic 
values identified in 9.4, the parameter "calculated 
lateral acceleration" may be used. Calculated lateral 
acceleration, aYc, is calculated as the product of yaw 
velocity, dP/dt (in radians per second) and longitudinal 
velocity, vX, and is expressed in units of metres per 
second squared: 


8.8.1.4.3 Characteristic values 


The recorded variables are taken in pairs and plotted 
one against the other on Cartesian co-ordinates. 
For each pair of variables, this produces a series of 
hysteresis loops laid one over another, the number 
of loops corresponding to the number of data cycles 
analyzed. 


The hysteresis loops should be “averaged” by some 
suitable method. The recommended method is to make 
a polynomial curve fit to the combined data over the 
range A for each of the upper and lower sides of the 
combined hysteresis loops, where, A is an appropriate 
percentage of the peak-to-peak abscissa range of the 
data (see Fig. 1). The recommended order for the 
polynomial curve fit is 3, and the recommended value 
for A is between 50 per cent and 70 per cent. The value 


: LA 
gradient - > 


Key 
1 ordinate deadband 
2 abscissa deadband 
A range of polynomial curve fit 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Fic. 12 DEFINITION OF PARAMETERS 


chosen for A should be sufficiently large to adequately 
cover the range of data of interest, but sufficiently 
restrictive to avoid end effects from the limits of the 
loops. 


The recommended method for evaluating a gradient is 
to make a best straight line fit to the polynomial in the 
region of interest. For an average gradient this would 
be over a specified range (as detailed below), and for 
an “instantaneous” gradient this would be over a small 
interval around the point of interest, typically the size 
of the interval would correspond to that defined by a 
lateral acceleration of 0.1 m/s’. 


Other methods may be employed for analysing and 
averaging the data. For example, straight line rather 
than polynomial curve fitting may be used. Each 
hysteresis loop may be analysed individually and the 
characteristic parameters, yielded from all the loops 
averaged to obtain overall results. 


The actual procedures and details used will depend 
upon the analysis software package employed and the 
nature of the data, and shall be stated in the test report. 


From the polynomial curve fits to the combined 
hysteresis loops, the following parameters are 
evaluated: 


a) ordinate deadband; 
b) abscissa deadband; and 
c) gradient. 


21 


The pairs of variables to be plotted (ordinate given first) 
and the characteristics that can be evaluated are : 


a) Steering-wheel torque versus steering-wheel 
angle (M, Vs ò) 


Steering stiffness: average gradient over 
range + 79, where x = 10 percent of peak steering 
angle. 


Steering stiffness at zero steer: gradient evaluated 
at zero steering angle. 


Steering friction: ordinate dead band. 
Angle hysteresis: abscissa dead band. 
b 


wm 


Yaw velocity versus 
(dy/dt Vs à,) 

Yaw velocity response gain: average gradient over 
range + x°, where y = 20 percent of peak steering 
angle. 


steering-wheel angle 


Yaw velocity time delay: time delay of yaw 
velocity with respect to steering angle input. 
c) Yaw velocity versus steering-wheel torque 
(dy/dt Vs M,) 
Response dead band: abscissa deadband. 
d) Lateral acceleration versus 
angle (a, Vs 6,,) 


steering-wheel 


Steering sensitivity: average gradient over 
range + x°, where y = 20 percent of peak steering 
angle. 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Minimum steering sensitivity: minimum 
instantaneous gradient evaluated within range 
+ I m/s’. 


Steering sensitivity at I m/s”: gradient evaluated at 
1m/s? while steering away from centre. 


Lateral acceleration deadband: ordinate deadband. 
Angle deadband: abscissa deadband. 


Steering hysteresis: area bounded by hysteresis 
loop and ordinate values 1 m/s”, divided by 2 m/s? 
(equivalent to average angle deadband). 


Lateral acceleration time delay: time delay of 
lateral acceleration with respect to steering angle 
input. 
NOTE — The evaluation of lateral acceleration time delay 
is invalid where lateral acceleration is calculated rather than 
measured. 
e) Steering-wheel torque 
acceleration (M,, Vs a) 


versus lateral 


Torque at 0 m/s: + torque levels at zero m/s? 


Torque at 1 m/s: + torque levels at + 1 m/s? while 
steering away from centre. 


Lateral acceleration at 0 N m: + lateral acceleration 
levels at O N.m. 


Torque gradient at 0 m/s”: gradient evaluated at 
0 m/s. 


Torque gradient at 1 m/s” gradient evaluated 
1m/s? while steering away from centre. 


Torque hysteresis: ordinate deadband. 
Lateral acceleration hysteresis: abscissa deadband. 


8.8.2 On-Centre Handling Transition Test 


8.8.2.1 Transition Test Procedure 


The transition test is an open-loop procedure and is 
conducted from an initial straight-line path. The vehicle 
is driven at a nominally constant longitudinal velocity. 
Different longitudinal velocities can be arrived based 
on vehicle capability. The standard test velocity is 
100 km/h. These should be decremented or incremented 
by 20 km/h from the standard velocity. 


Details shall be recorded in the test report. The 
transducer signals shall be recorded throughout the 
initial driving condition and for the duration of the test; 
to ensure that the required data are not affected by the 
instrumentation system, it is recommended to continue 
recording for a further Is after the test run. 


Whereas the weave test examines the outer edge of 
the response hysteresis loop, this test examines the 
transition from straight line running to the edge of the 
hysteresis loop. 


Continuing from the initial driving condition specified 
in 8.2, the steering-wheel shall be subjected to a ramp 
input (that is one that increases in amplitude with a 


22 


nominally constant angular velocity). To ensure a 
smooth transition of the vehicle path from the straight- 
ahead condition onto a curve of diminishing radius, the 
steering input shall be applied with an angular velocity 
that increases smoothly from zero up to the nominally 
constant value. Commencing at time #, the steering 
input shall be applied for a minimum duration of 
3 seconds, and at an angular velocity not exceeding 
5 degrees/second, until the lateral acceleration achieved 
by the vehicle reaches a minimum of 1,5 m/s. The test 
shall be performed a sufficient number of times in each 
turn direction using, nominally, the same steer input 
profile. 


Details of the steering input, angular velocity and 
duration of application shall be recorded in the test 
report. The longitudinal velocity during the test runs 
to be used for data analysis shall not vary from the 
nominal value 


8.8.2.2 Data analysis and presentation of results 


Data analysis and presentation of results shall be as 
specified in 8.8.1.4. 


On each Cartesian plot, a separate best straight-line fit 
is made to the data for each turn direction (see Fig. 13). 
Each straight-line fit should exclude either data that is 
severely non-linear, such as that in the on-centre region 
(typically that obtained in the lateral acceleration range 
+ 0.5 m/s’), or data obtained at lateral accelerations 
in excess of + 1.2 m/s”. The data range that is used to 
make each straight-line fit shall be recorded in the test 
report (see ISO 15037-1, Annex B). 


NOTE — The upper bound of 4 1.2 m/s? is advisory. If linear 
characteristics are not apparent at lateral accelerations below 
this value, then an alternative data range may be chosen 
following prudent examination of the characteristic shape. 


8.9 Method 5 — Free Steer Behaviour 


8.9.1 Steering Release — Description 


This test is intended for evaluating the ability of a 
vehicle to return to a straight path following steering- 
wheel release from a steady-state turn. 


The initial conditions are defined by a steady-state 
circular motion. During the test, the driver releases 
the steering wheel. The steering-wheel angle and the 
vehicle response are measured and recorded. From the 
recorded signals, characteristic values are calculated. 


8.9.2 Variables 

Measure the following variables (see Table 7): 
a) Longitudinal velocity (v,); 
b) Lateral acceleration (a, ) 


c) Yaw velocity (y); and 
d) Steering-wheel angle (6,,). 


Key 


BEN > 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


FIG. 13 CARTESIAN PLOTS OF DATA OBTAINED FROM SEVERAL TEST RUNS 


straight-line fit to right-turn data 
straight-line fit to right-turn data 
ordinate threshold 

abscissa deadband 


gradient = y/x 


Fic. 14 DEFINITION OF PARAMETERS 


23 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 7 Variables, Typical Operating Ranges and Recommended Maximum Errors 
( Clause 8.9.2 ) 


SI No. Variable Typical Operating Range Recommended Maximum Error of Combined 
transducer-recorder system 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Longitudinal velocity 0 m/s to + 50 m/s + 0.3 m/s 
ii) Lateral acceleration -15 m/s? to + 15 m/s? + 0.1 m/s? 
iii) Yaw velocity -50°/s to +50°/s + 0.3°/s 
iv) Steering-wheel angle -360° to + 360° + 2° for 16H 1 < 180° 


8.9.3 Test Procedure 


The starting condition for the test is a steady-state 
circular motion at a prescribed level of lateral 
acceleration, aY. 


The steady-state circular motion shall be in accordance 
with IS 17128 (Part 1), except for the following: 


a) for the time interval from f, to £, the standard 
deviation of the lateral acceleration shall not 
exceed 3 percent of its mean value or 0.2 m/s’, 
whichever is the higher. 

b) The standard longitudinal velocity shall be 

100 km/h, it may vary by steps of 20 km/h. 


Where possible, the test should be conducted 
performing alternating left and right turns. The 
initial prescribed level of lateral acceleration aY, 
of 1 m/s? shall be incremented in steps of, 
nominally, I m/s’, until a limiting condition is 
reached. 


c) 


d) From each starting condition, the driver shall 
suddenly release the steering wheel at the 
reference point in time, ¢, while maintaining the 
throttle constant and placing the vehicle in free 
control, so that its response is determined by its 
dynamic characteristics. 

e) Record test data from time /, for 1 s after the 
steering oscillation is completely damped or until 


t= 5 s, whichever is the shorter. 


Thetest should be repeated from starting conditions 
at incremented levels of lateral acceleration until 
vehicle response becomes divergent, or the limit 
of lateral adhesion is reached in the starting 
condition. 

NOTE — It is recommended that the steering-wheel angle be 
measured using transducers in conjunction with the original 
steering wheel of the vehicle. Alternatively, a replacement 
instrumented steering wheel may be used. In either event, care 
should be taken to avoid changing the mass centre, inertial 
properties or friction of the steering system. 


24 


+ 49, otherwise 


8.9.4 Data Analysis 


8.9.4.1 Ratio between second and first peak of a given 
variable after steering-wheel release. 


For each of the variables (see Fig. 15) namely, Side 
slip angular velocity, Yaw velocity and steering-wheel 
angle: 


a) evaluate the function (a y0) = peak 2/peak 1, at 
each level of initial lateral acceleration ay0; 


plot the function fla y0) vs ay0; 
compute the linear regression (see Fig. 16): 


calculate m, the slope of the linear regression; 
and 


calculate q, the value of the linear regression at a 
lateral acceleration of 4 m/s”. 


NOTE — Sideslip angular velocity is usually calculated by the 
formula: 


a, (t) — w(t) 
Bl = 
vy (f) 
where, 
a = Lateral acceleration of the vehicle; 
vy = Longitudinal velocity of the vehicle; and 
y = yaw velocity of the vehicle. 


8.9.4.2 Value of second peak of a given variable after 
steering-wheel release 


For each of the variables (see Fig. 15), namely, side 
slip angular velocity, Yaw velocity and steering-wheel 
angle: 


a) 


evaluate the function f(a y0) = peak 2, at each 
level of initial lateral acceleration ayo; 


plot the function f (a y0) vs a y0; 
compute the linear regression (see Fig. 16); 
calculate m, the slope of the linear regression; and 


calculate q, the value of the linear regression at a 
lateral acceleration of 4 m/s”. 


o» 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


t (seconds) 


Wd, 


t (Seconds) 


peak 1 
peak 2 


Fic. 15 PEAKS OF VARIABLES AFTER STEERING- WHEEL RELEASE 


f (a yo) 


4 ay, (m/s?) 


FIG. 16 TvPiCAL ASPECT OF FUNCTIONS OF LATERAL ACCELERATION 


25 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


8.9.4.3 Delay of first peak of a given variable after t50 
(see Fig. 17) 


For each of the variables (see Fig. 15)), namely, 
steering-wheel angle and lateral acceleration: 


a) evaluate the function f(ay0) - time delay of 
peak 1, at each level of initial lateral acceleration 
ayo; 

b) plot the function f (ay0) vs a y0; 

c) compute the linear regression (see Fig. 16); 

d) calculate m, the slope of the linear regression; and 

e) calculate q, the value of the linear regression at a 
lateral acceleration of 4 m/s?. 

8.9.5 Steering Pulse — Description 


This test is intended to evaluate the ability of the 
vehicle to return to a straight path following a steering 


Å 


öy (degrees) 


a 50% of the initial level 


pulse input from a straight ahead, steady state driving 
initial condition. 

Oscillation of the vehicle is initiated by the application 
of a single pulse steering input. This is followed by 
release of the steering wheel and a period during which 
the steering wheel is free. The steering-wheel angle 
and the vehicle response are measured and recorded. 
From the recorded signals, characteristic values are 
calculated. 


8.9.6 Variables 

Measure the following variables (see Table 8) 
a) longitudinal velocity (v); 
b) lateral acceleration (a, ); 
c) yaw velocity (y); and 


d) steering-wheel angle (5,,). 


t (seconds) 


t (seconds) 


i des 


Fic. 17 DELAY or FIRST PEAK OF STEERING- WHEEL ANGLE AND LATERAL ACCELERATION 


26 


8.9.7 Test Procedure 


The starting condition, for the test is steady-state ahead 
running motion at a prescribed longitudinal velocity vx. 


The test shall be conducted for a minimum of three 
longitudinal velocities. These shall include the standard 
longitudinal velocity of 100 kmph, and other velocities 
varied in steps of 20 kmph 


From each starting condition, the driver shall apply the 
steering pulse input to a predetermined value and release 
the steering wheel immediately to place the vehicles 
in free control with its response determined by its 
dynamic characteristic. The throttle shall be maintained 
constant, even though velocity can decrease. 


The test shall be conducted with an amplitude of 
steering wheel angle sufficient to produce the initial 
lateral acceleration (ay) of 1 m/s”. The test shall be 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


repeated with incremented amplitude on steering wheel 
angle peak, such that lateral acceleration is incremented 
in steps of not more than 0.5 m/s? up to a level of at 
least 5 m/s? (see Fig. 16 and Fig. 17). 


Referring to the example time history of steering 
wheel angle shown in Fig. 18, ¢, is the time in seconds 
and amplitude if steering wheel angle first exceeds 
10 percent of its maximum amplitude, and tp is the time 
of maximum amplitude at which the steering wheel is 
released. The rise time of pulse input (t.- t,) shall be 
0.2 s +/- 0.005 s. Test data are recorded from time 
t - 0.5 s until 1 s after the steering oscillation is 
completely damped or until 4, + 5s - whichever is 
shorter. 


Where possible, test should be conducted in both left 
and right turning directions. 


Table 8 Variables, Typical Operating Ranges and Recommended Maximum Errors 
( Clause 8.9.6 ) 


SI No. Variable Typical Operating Range Recommended Maximum Error of Combined 
Transducer-Recorder System 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Longitudinal velocity 0 m/s to + 50 m/s + 0.3 m/s 
ii) Lateral acceleration -15 m/s? to + 15 m/s + 0.1 m/s? 
iii) Yaw velocity -50°/s to +50°/s + 0.3?/s 
iv) Steering-wheel angle -360° to + 360° + 2° for 1 ô, 1x 180° 
+ 4°, otherwise 
5 
Hp 
0.1°Hp 
£,-t5-0.2 s +0.05 s 
KEY 
t time 6 


5H. maximum amplitude of steering-wheel angle 


a free steer control 
b 0.5sto0.8s 


FIG. 18 STEERING WHEEL ANGLE INPUT 


27 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


8.9.8 Data Analysis 


The recorded time history of the following variables 
shall be displayed and examined visually. Result not 
considered to be representative shall be discarded: 

a) Yaw velocity; 

b) Steering-wheel angle; and 

c) Sideslip angular velocity. 


NOTE - Sideslip angular velocity is usually calculated by the 
formula: 
a, (t) 
BO) = 


- yt) 
vy (Ü) 

where, 

v, = Longitudinal velocity of the vehicle; 

y = Yaw velocity of the vehicle; and 


a,= Lateral acceleration of the vehicle. 


8.9.8.1 Damping and damping time of yaw velocity 


Referring to the example time history of yaw velocity 
shown in Fig. 19, all amplitudes starting with the 
second peak shall be determined. Calculate the 


mean value of the amplitude rations, 7, using 
equation (2): 
sl [his hom he, trad 
n-2|lV,t*V, W +W, Va FW Via tV, 
Q) 


NOTE — Each amplitude, y, . is an absolute value. 


Va FW, Shall be at least 10 percent of V, +Y, or V, 
shall be the last amplitude of the recorded time period 
of 5 s. 


When the amplitude of third peak, V, is too small to 
be determined clearly, or Y, is smaller than 10 percent 
of Y, , calculate 7 using Equation (3): 


på 
V; 


(3) 


Calculate the damping of yaw velocity D, using 
equation (4): 


InT 


pa e 
x? +(Int) 


(4) 


Calculate the damping time of yaw velocity, T, , 
which indicates the duration of yawing oscillation (for 
example, the time period required to decrease the yaw 


28 


velocity within 10 percent level of peak 1) — using 
Equation (5): 


. Ino 5 
"Le G) 
where 
T (n —1) 
er (6) 


t, -tNI- D° 
For each of the variables, namely, damping of yaw 
velocity and damping time of yaw velocity: 
a) Evaluate the functions f(a,,) = D and fap) = T, 
at each level of initial lateral acceleration a,,: 
b) Plot the functions f(a,,) Vs a,,: 
c) Compute the linear regression between 3 m/s? and 
5 m/s? (see Fig. 20 and 21); 
d) Calculate q, the value of the linear regression at a 
lateral acceleration of 4 m/s’; 


ME 


e) Calculate m, the gradient of the linear regression, 
using; 
m= (4,-4)/2 
f) Plot q and m Vs longitudinal velocity (see Fig. 22, 
23, 24 and 25). 
8.9.8.2 Ratio between second and first peak of a given 
variable after steering wheel release 


This method of data analysis may be used when 
observed free control behavior is not oscillatory enough 
to calculate the damping. 


EXAMPLE — Test at low longitudinal velocity. 
For each of the variables: 
a) Yaw velocity, 
b) Steering-wheel angle, and 
c) Sideslip angular velocity, (see Fig. 26 and 27): 
1 


— 


Evaluate the function f (a,,) = peak 2/peak 1, at 
each level of initial lateral acceleration as 


2) Plot the function f (a, ) vs a, ; 

3) Compute the linear regression between 3 m/s? 
and 5 m/s? (see Fig. 11); 

4) Calculate ‘q’, the value of the linear regression 
at a lateral acceleration of 4 m/s?; 

5) Calculate “m”, the gradient of linear regression, 
using equation (8): 

m=(q,—4,)/2 (8) 

6) Plot g and m vs longitudinal velocity (see 

Figures 29 and 30). 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


W 
ay 
Ayo 
t 
KEY 
t time 5 


VU yaw velocity 


ay lateral acceleration 


FIG. 19 DETERMINATION OF AMPLITUDE 


29 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


KEY 
lateral acceleration m /s? 


D damping time of yaw velocity 
g value of linear regression 


Fic. 20 TYPICAL ASPECT OF DAMPING TIME VS 8 


yo 


KEY 

ay, lateral acceleration m/s? 

Toy, damping time of yaw velocity 
g value of linear regression 


Fic. 21 TYPICAL ASPECT OF DAMPING TIME Vs ay 


30 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


60 80 100 120 140 160 V, 
KEY 


Vx longitudinal acceleration, km/h 
D damping of yaw velocity 
q value of linear regression 


Fic. 22 q or DAMPING VALUE Vs LONGITUDINAL VELOCITY 


60 80 100 120 140 160 V, 


KEY 
Vx longitudinal acceleration, km/h 
To, damping time of yaw velocity 
g value of linear regression 


Fic. 23 q oF DAMPING VALUE Vs LONGITUDINAL VELOCITY 


31 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


D 
m 
0 
A 
60 80 100 120 140 160 Vy 


A 


KEY 


"x longitudinal velocity km/h 


D damping of yaw velocity 
m gradient of linear regression 


Fic. 24 m or DAMPING VALUE Vs LONGITUDINAL VELOCITY 


60 80 100 120 140 160 V, 


KEY 


YX longitudinal velocity km/h 
Ty, damping time of yaw velocity 
m gradient of linear regression 


FIG. 25 m oF DAMPING VALUE VS LONGITUDINAL VELOCITY 


32 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Sy 4 
U 
t 
| 4 
KEY 
t time s 
yaw velocity 
ö, steering-wheel angle 
a peak1 
b peak 2 


Fic. 26 PEAKS OF VARIABLE AFTER STEERING-WHEEL RELEASE-STEERING - WHEEL ANGLE, YAW VELOCITY 


KEY 
t time,s 

B  sideslip angular, velocity 
a peak1 
b peak2 


FIG. 27 PEAKS OF VARIABLE AFTER STEERING- WHEEL RELEASE-STEERING - SIDESLIP ANGULAR VELOCITY 


33 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


KEY 
: 2 
ay, lateral acceleration,m/s 


5,  steering-wheel angle 
W yaw velocity 
B sideslip angular, velocity 


FIG. 28 TYPICAL ASPECT OF FUNCTIONS OF LATERAL ACCELERATION VS a, 


60 80 100 120 140 160 v, 


KEY 
YX longitudinal velocity, km/h p sideslip angular, velocity 
6, steering - wheel angle q value of linear regression 


V yaw velocity 


Fic. 29 q or RATIO BETWEEN THE SECOND AND FIRST PEAK Vs LONGITUDINAL VELOCITY-STEERING-W HEEL ANGLE, 
Yaw VELOCITY, SIDESLIP ANGULAR VELOCITY 


34 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


60 80 100 120 140 160 V, 


KEY 
YX longitudinal velocity km/h Ba 
B  sideslip angular velocity 


5,  steering-wheel angle 
y, yaw velocity m gradient of linear regression 


Fic. 30 m or RATIO BETWEEN THE SECOND AND FIRST PEAK Vs LONGITUDINAL VELOCITY-STEERING-W HEEL ANGLE, 
YAW VELOCITY, SIDESLIP ANGULAR VELOCITY 


35 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX A 


( Normative ) 


TEST REPORT: GENERAL DATA 


A-1 VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION 


a) Make, year, model, type: 
b) Vehicle identification number: 
c) Steering type: 
d) Suspension type: 
e) Engine size, optical equipment: 
f) Tyres: make, size, date, condition: 
g) Tyre pressure: 

1) Cold: 

2) Hot, after test (if measured): 
h) Tyre tread depth: 

1) Before test! 

2) After test: 


j) Rims: Wheelbase: 


k) Track: Front mm 


m) Overall steering ratio: 
n) Other data (in particular, relevant Suspension settings): 


A-2 VEHICLE LOADING 
Left 
a) Vehicle kerb mass: Front : kg 
b) Vehicle kerb mass Rear : kg 
c) Loading condition and location: Left 
Front: kg 
Rear: kg 


A-3 TEST CONDITIONS 


a) Test surface description: 
b) Weather conditions: 

c) Temperature : 

d) Wind speed : 


e) Test method chosen for evaluation (see “IMPORTANT”, Clause 3) 


f) Time domain : 


g) Frequency domain : 


A-4 TEST PERSONNEL 


a) Driver: 
b) Observer: 
c) Data analyst : 


A-5 GENERAL COMMENTS: 


36 


Front 
Front 
kPa 
kPa 
Front 
mm 
mm 

Rear 

Right 

Front: kg 

Rear: kg 

Right 

Front: kg 

Rear: kg 


Rear 
Rear 
kPa 
kPa 
Rear 
mm 
mm 

mm 

Sum 

kg 

kg 

Sum 

kg 

kg 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 
ANNEX B 
( Normative ) 
TEST REPORT : PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 


B-1 STEP INPUT 


Test number: oase hee uu SANG 


y 2100kmh |... eee km/h 
a =4 m/s? BE EE m/s? 
d o 
I 
VO 
Ko 
© 
C 
G 
© 
Q 
c 
3 
© 
= 
D 
D 
0 
Time İr S 
N 
2 
E 
£ 
O 
c 
Q 
w 
© 
® 
o 
o 
© 
E 
° 
© 
— 
Time t, S 
D 
SE 
o 
‘> 
> 
© 
2 
© 
> 
z 
G 
> 
Time t, S 


FIG. 31 STEP INPUT — TIME HISTORIES 


37 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 9 Step Input — Response Data Summary 
( Clause B-1 ) 


Parameter Symbol Unit Left Turn Right Turn Average 
Steady-state yaw velocity response gain (IS). s! 
Lateral acceleration response time Ty s 
Yaw velocity response time 1, S 
Lateral acceleration peak response time T y max s 
Yaw velocity peak response T,, max s 
Overshoot value of lateral acceleration WU. - 
Overshoot value of yaw velocity U - 


38 


B-2 SINUSOIDAL INPUT 


Testnumber:....................... 


v=100kmh 1 


a =4m/s? 1 
f=0.5 Hz I 

"o 

I 

VO 

D 

Oo 

cC 

O 

© 

© 

= 

3 

D 

& 

o 

2 

[ P) 


Lateral acceleration ay, m/s? 


Yaw velocity W “Is 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Time f, S 


Time t. S 


Time t, S 


Fic. 32 SINUSOIDAL INPUT (ONE PERIOD) — TIME HISTORIES 


39 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 10 Sinusoidal Input (One Period) — Response Data Summary 
( Clause B-1 ) 


Parameter Symbol Unit Left Turn Right Turn Average 
Time lag between steering wheel angle and lateral T(H- a) Mean Standard Mean Standard 
acceleration vaule deviation value deviation 
Peak 1 T(H- a), ms 
Peak 2 T(H-Y), ms 
Time lag between steering wheel angle and yaw velocity T(H - y) 
Peak 1 T(H- a,), ms 
Peak 2 T(H - y), ms 
Lateral acceleration gain a, m/s? 

H 

yaw velocity gain y s! 


B-3 RANDOM/PULSE? INPUT 


Test number: is EE irri IER seeks 


— 
© 


= 
N 


© 


o 
o 
— 


0.2 0.3 0.5 1 2 3 4 
Freguency, HZ 


Steering wheel angle Ou, dB 
Li 
O 


= 
N 


-18 


Optional is a linear scale for the frequency (X-AXIS) 


Fic. 33 RANDOM/PULSE INPUT — HARMONIC CONTENT OF STEERING- WHEEL ANGLE 


40 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


B-4 RANDOM/PULSE/CONTINUOUS? SINUSOIDAL INPUT 


Test numbers 2s ere eoo Ee han 


Vc kk, | Essen km/h 
a,=4 m/s? MEER EE m/s? 
TENE 
a 1 20 3 0.5 
5 | 3 
8 | 3 
© 
0.4 
0.3 
0.5 -90 
0.2 
0.1 
0 å 0 
od 01 02 0.3 0.5 1 2 


Frequency, Hz 


Optional is a linear scale for the frequency (X-Axis) 


Fic. 34 RANDOM/PULSE/CONTINUOUS SINUSOIDAL INPUT — TRANSIENT RESPONSE TO STEERING- WHEEL ANGLE 


41 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Normative ) 
C-1 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 


The characteristic values of the vehicle dynamic reaction shall be presented as functions of mean longitudinal 
acceleration, as shown in Fig. 35 to Fig. 44. 


0 11X 


Vehicle 
Initial radious: 


Time, İn 


X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - Ay, tn (m/s?) i 


Y tn 


Y Ratio of actual to the reference yaw velocity — 
Ref İn 


FIG. 35 THE RATIO OF THE VALUE OF THE YAW VELOCITY, wt, AT TIME t, TO THE VALUE OF 
THE REFERENCE YAW VELOCITY Vrap İç AT TIME t ASA FUNCTION OF THE MEAN 
LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION - à , f 


x? n 


42 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11X 


Vehicle 
Initial radious: 


X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - Ay (m/s?) 


Y Ratio of the maximum yaw velocity to the ref. value at 
Time Í max y max 


Ref’fnax 


FIG. 36 THE RATIO OF THE VALUE OF THE YAW VELOCITY ATTAINED DURING BREAKING, V... AT TIME TO 


max 


THE REFERENCE YAW VELOCITY V, , Å AT TIME ASA FUNCTION OF THE MEAN 


Ref max max 


LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION - a, 


43 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Vehicle 
Initial radious: 
Time, tn 


X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - Ay ,fn (m/s?) 


Y Difference between the actual and the reference yaw 
velocity- Wt, -P Refit, (° Is) 


9 10 


11 X 


FIG. 37 AT TIME f, TO THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE VALUE OF THE YAW VELOCITY, Wt, 


AND THE REFERENCE Y AW VELOCITY y 
MEAN LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION - å , f. 


44 


kep ly AS A FUNCTION OF THE 
ef? n 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


, LTTTTTTTTET 
AS PEN 
EE EE EENS ENE 
5 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 


8 9 10 11X 


VEHICLE 
INITIAL RADIUS: 


X MEAN LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION, - åx (m/s?) 


Y MAXIMUM DIFFERENCE BETWEEN YAW VELOCITY AND 
REFERENCE YAW VELOCITY, A WY max(//s) 


FIG. 38 THEMAXIMUM VALUE OF THE VALUE OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE YAW VELOCITY, yi, 
DURING BREAKING AND THE ÅFFILATED REFERENCE YAW VELOCITY yi, „p AS A FUNCTION OF 
THE MEAN LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION - â, 


45 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 19 


0 
| Vehicle 


Initial radius: 
TIME, İn 


X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - Ay, (m/s?) 
Win (CIs?) 


Y Instanteaneous yaw acceleration 


11 X 


FIG. 39 THE INSTANTNEOUS VALUE OF THE Y AW ACCELERATION, Wt, AT TIME í , ASA 


FUNCTION OF THE MEAN LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION - å , f. 


46 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11X 


Vehicle 

Initial radius: 

Time, İn 
X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - 8 (m/s?) 

n 
a 
Y Ratio of the actual to the reference lateral acceleration 2" — 
y,Ref,tn 


Fic. 40 Y RATIO OF THE ACTUAL TO THE REFERENCE LATERAL ACCELERATION, W t AT TIME f, TO THE 
REFERENCE VALUE OF THE LATERAL ACCELERATION, a, 


, Ref, tn _ 
OF THE MEAN LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION, =a f, 


47 


AT ACTUAL TIME t ASA FUNCTION 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11X 


0 
| Vehicle 


Initial radius: 
Time, in 


X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - Bye g, (m/s?) 


AU 


o 


Y Maximum value of the sideslip angle B max 


t 
Fic. 41 MAXIMUM VALUE OF THE SIDESLIP ANGEL P, | (©) DURING THE OBSERVATION PERIOD, 
0 - 
AL ACCELERATION - à, Å, 


AS A FUNCTION OF THE MEANLONGITUDIN 


48 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 X 
| Vehicle 

INITIAL RADIUS: 

TIME, İn 


X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - à, (m/s?) 


Y Difference between the actual and initial 
sideslip angle B, - Bo (°) 


Fia. 42 AT TIME f, THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE VALUE OF THE SIDESLIP ANGEL f» 


AND THE INITIAL STEADY-STATE VALUE OF THE SIDESLIP ANGLE, Bo AS A FUNCTION 
OF THE MEANLONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION - å, f 


Xn 


49 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


4 
; LLL LL TE LLL 
m RNENSE RS 
(LLL TITT TT TT 
LLL LL LLL LL 


,LLLLLLLLLLL: 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 310 11X 


Vehicle 
Initial radious: 


Time, İn 
X Mean longitudinal acceleration, - à , fn (m/s?) 
Y Actual sideslip angle velocity Bı, (Uncorrected) (°/s) 


Fic. 43 AT TIME £, THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE VALUE OF THE YAW VELOCITY, ýt, 
AND THE CALCULATED Y AW VELOCITY, AS A FUNCTION OF THE MEAN LONGITUDINAL 
ACCELERATION - 8 , f. (UNCORRECTED SIDESLEEP VELOCITY) 


50 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11X 


Vehicle 
Initial radius: 


Time, fn 
X Mean longitudinal acceleration, “je, (m/s?) 


Y Path devition of the reference point As yd (m) 


Fic. 44 AT TIME 7,, THE PATCH OF THE DEVIATION OF THE REFERENCE POINT As y, t, 
AS A FUNCTION OF THE MEAN LONGITUDINAL ACCELERATION - å, f. 


51 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Braking Systems, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 04 


Organization 


National Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure 
Project (NATRAX), Indore 


Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, 
New Delhi 


Automotive Component Manufacturers Association 
of India, New Delhi 

Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Bosch Chassis Systems India Limited, Pune 


Brakes India Pvt Ltd, Chennai 


Central Farm Machine Training & Testing Institute, 
Budni 


Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Continental Automotive Components (India) Pvt Ltd, 
Manesar, Gurugram 


Daimler India Commercial Vehicles (P) Ltd, Chennai 


Denso International India Pvt Ltd, Manesar, 
Gurugram 


Force Motors Ltd, Pune 


Federal Mogul VSP (India) Ltd, Kancheepuram, 
Tamil Nadu 


General Motors India (P) Ltd, Pune 


Global Automotive Research Centre, Tamil Nadu 


Representative(s) 


Dr N. KARUPPAIAH (Chairman) 


SHRI D. BALAKRISHNAN 
SHRI VED PRAKASH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDRABABU 
Suri ULHAS BABU (Alternate) 


Suri UDAY HARITE 
SMT SEEMA BABBAL(Alternate) 


SHRI Å. AKBAR BADUSHA 
Suri P. D. BETGERI (Alternate) 


SHRI R. NARASIMHAN 
SHRI ÅRVIND KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUHAS S. PATIL 
SHRI MILIND KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. VENUGOPAL 
SHRI S. SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI J. J. R. NARWARE 
SHRI C. V. CHIMOTE (Alternate) 
SHRI PRAMOD YADAV (Young Professional) 


SHRI S. N. DHOLE 
SHRI SANTOSH GUTTE (Alternate) 
Suri D. H. PENDHARKAR (Young Professional) 


SHRI P. V. PRADEEP KUMAR 
SHRI SUDESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL MARE 
SHRI RAGHAVENDRA HARIHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDERSON S. V. 
SHRI PRABHU R. (Alternate) 
SHRI ANTONY KURIAN (Young Professional) 


SHRI NOEL ALEXANDER PETERS 
SHRI ALOK KUMAR (Alternate) 
Ms ALKA SHARMA (Young Professional) 


SHRI ANIRUDDHA KULKARNI 
Suri R. M. KANITKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATESH SANKARAN 
SHRI R.VENKAT (Alternate) 


SHRI A. TAJUDEEN 


Suri M. V. RAMACHANDRAN 
SHRI S. PERUMAL (Alternate I) 
MOHAMMAD SUHAIL (Alternate IT) 


Organization 


Hero Motocorp Ltd, Dharuhera 


Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India Pvt Ltd, 
Gurugram 

ICAT, Manesar 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 

Knorr-Bremse Systems for Commercial Vehicles 


India Pvt Ltd, Pune 
Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nasik 


Mahindra Trucks & Buses Ltd, Pune 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


Department of Heavy Industries, New Delhi 

NATRIP, Indore 

Ordinance Factory Board, Jabalpur DGOA 

PCA Motors Pvt Ltd, Chennai 

Rane TRW Steering Systems Ltd, Trichy 

Renault Nissan Tech & Business Centre, Chennai 

Representing Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways, New Delhi 

Society of Indian Automobile Mfrs, New Delhi 


Sundaram Brake Linings Ltd, Chennai 


SML Isuzu Ltd (Swaraj Mazda), Ropar 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Toyota Kirloskar Motors Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 


Tractor Maunfacturers Association, New Delhi 


TVS Motor Co Ltd, Hosur 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI FEROZ ALI KHAN 
SHRI PryUsH CHOWDHRY (Alternate) 
MOHAMMAD DANISH GAZALI (Young Professional) 


SHRI SURAJ AGARWAL 
SHRI VIPIN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI GAVENDRA SINGH 
SMT VIJAYANTA AHUJA (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. SHUKLA 
SHRI SUNIL PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN BISHT 


SHRI S. RAGHUPATHI 
SHRI DEVINDER TANGRI (Alternate) 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR PRASAD (Young Professional) 


SHRI V. G. KULKARNI 


SHRI VIVEK TRIVEDI 
SHRI GURURAJ Ravi (Alternate) 
Suri RAJ KUMAR Dwiweni (Young Professional) 


SHRI R. K. JAISWAL 


Dr P. P. CHATTARAJ 
SHRI SAGAR BENDRE (Alternate) 


SHRI UMESH KUMAR 
SHRI VIKASPURWAR (Alternate) 
Cor RAJEEV CHAWLA (Young Professional) 


SHRI SUDHIR DESHPANDE 


Suri R. M. THIRUPATHI 
Suri K. V. BANUPRASATH (Alternate) 


SHRI N. BALASUBRAMANIAN 
Suri K. THANGARAJ (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (Technical) 


SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMIT KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR J. GOPALAKRISHNAN 
Suri R. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP AGARWAL 
SHRI MOHIT GUPTA (Alternate) 
SHRI ABHINAV SHARMA (Young Professional) 


SHRI P. GOWRISHANKAR 
SuRI UDAY SALUNKHE (Alternate) 


SHRI REVADI CHANNAPPA 
Suri RAJU M. (Alternate) 


SHRI S. LAKSHMIPATHY 
Suri K. KANNIBARAN (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. ANAND KUMAR 
SHRI R. NAGARAJAN (Alternate) 


53 


IS 17128 (Part 3) : 2021 


Organization 
Vehicles Research & Development Establishment, 
Ahmednagar 
VE Commercial Vehicles, Pithampur 
Volvo Buses India (P) Ltd, Bangalore 
Wabco India Ltd, Chennai 


ZF Steering Gear India Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


54 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR 
SHRI SAM SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHYAM BUTE 

SHRI Monan KUMAR MUTHUSAMY (Alternate) 
SHRI PRAMOD KUMAR HUGAR 

SHRI ATUL KUMAR KATT! (Alternate) 
SHRI S. V. DESHMUKH 

SHRI PRABHAKARAN DURAIRAJ (Alternate) 
SHRI CHANDRAKANT K. DANGE 

SHRI SAMSON BORDE (Alternate) 


SHRI R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (TED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-Officio ) ] 
(Member Secretary) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enguiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (12599). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


