anda HAF IS 232 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


oes marae — mh Wi 
( TERT JATT ) 


Glossary of Textile Terms — 
Natural Fibres 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.59; 59.060.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 11 


Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TXD 01 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1958 and subsequently revised in 1967 and 1985. In 2012, revised version 
of ISO 6938 ‘Textiles — Natural fibres — Generic names and definitions’ was published. Though IS 232 is more 
exhaustive in dealing with terms related to natural fibres, it was found that it is at variance with the ISO standard 
on the subject. The present revision has been undertaken to align with latest version of ISO 6938. A section is 
added about the types of natural fibres. Many natural fibres mentioned in ISO 6938 were not available in the 
IS 232. These have been included in this present revision. Also, common names for these fibres, wherever 
applicable have been incorporated. 


The other related standards on glossary of terms pertaining to different fields are listed below: 
IS 1324 : 1966 Glossary of textile terms relating to man-made fibre and fabric industry (first revision ) 
IS 2364 : 1987 Glossary of textile terms — Woven fabrics ( second revision ) 
IS 3871 : 2013 Fibre ropes and cordage — Vocabulary ( third revision ) 
IS 9603 : 1980 Glossary of terms pertaining to textile processing 
IS 11265 : 1985 Glossary of terms pertaining to defects in yarns made from natural fibres 
IS 14466 : 1997 Fabrics — Description of defects — Vocabulary 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS — NATURAL FIBRES 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes definitions of terms commonly 
used in the textile industry and trade relating to natural 
fibres. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TYPES OF NATURAL FIBRES 


Natural fibres are fibres which occur in nature. They 
can be categorized according to their origin into animal, 
vegetable and mineral fibres. 


3.1 Animal Fibres 
These include in particular: 


Fibres from silk glands, secreted by some insects, 
particularly by larvae of the lepidopter order, in the 
form of two filaments of fibroin cemented together by 
sericin; 

Fibres secreted by some molluscs; and 


Fibres from hair follicles, with multicellular structure, 
composed of keratin, forming the fleece, the coat, the 
mane or the tail of certain animals. 


3.2 Vegetable Fibres 
These include in particular: 


a) Fibres from Seed — Single-cell structure, 
generated by the epidermal cells of the seed, 
almost entirely constituted of cellulose. 


b) Fibres from Bast — composite fibres obtained 
from the bast of certain plants, mainly constituted 
of cellulose and accompanied with incrusting 
and intercellular materials (pectin bodies, 
hemicellulose, lignin). 


c 


Ww 


Fibres from Leaf — Composite fibres obtained 
from leaves, constituted chiefly of cellulose plus 
incrusting and intercellular materials, consisting 
of lignin and hemicelluloses. 


d) Fibres from Fruit — Composite fibres obtained 
from fruit, constituted chiefly of cellulose plus 


incrusting and intercellular materials, constituting 
of lignin and hemicelluloses. 


3.3 Mineral Fibres 


Mineral fibres are obtained from rocks of fibrous 
structure, constituted principally of silicates. 


4 DEFINITIONS 
A 


Abaca — Fibres from the leaves of Musa textilis 
( see Manila hemp ). 


Absolute Humidity — The mass of water vapour 
present in unit volume of air. This is expressed in g/m? 
(see also relative humidity). It can also be expressed as 
vapour pressure in Pascal. 


Absorbent Cotton — Cotton fibre chemically treated 
after removing as completely as possible all fatty and 
other non-cellulosic ingredients, to render it adequately 
absorbent. Absorbent cotton may be sterilized for 
certain end uses, for example, medical purposes. 


Abutilon — Fibre from the bast of Abutilon angulatum, 
Abutilon avicennae and Aubtilon theophrasti. It is also 
known as Chinese jute, Chingma. 


Akund — Fibre from the seed of Calotropis gigantea 
and Calotropis procera. 


Alapat Yarn — See Coir yarn (a). 


Alfa — Fibre from the leaves of Stipa tenacissima and 
Lygeum spartum. It is also known as Esparto. 


Aloe — Fibre from the leaves of Furcraea gigantea. 
This is also known Mauritius hemp. 


Alpaca Fibre (Hair) — Fibre from the fleece of the 
semi-domesticated animal of the same name, alpaca 
Lama pacos, which inhabit the high mountain regions 
of South America. It is soft, lustrous, of various colours 
and of fine quality with a length of 18 to 30 cm. 


Ambhar Charkha — A simple hand-operated wooden 
frame contrivance for spinning yarn from natural 
fibres, working on principle of ring spinning with roller 
drafting. 


Anaphe — Fibre extruded by the silkworm Anaphe. 


Angle of Wind — The angle contained between a wrap 
of yarn on the surface of a package and the diametrical 
plane of the package. 


NOTE — Other angles are yarn crossing angle and yarn-reversal 
angle (see Fig. 1). 


IS 232 : 2020 


A— Angle of wind 
B — Angle of crossing 


C — Angle of reversal 


Fic. 1 ANGLES MADE BY YARN WRAPS ON THE SURFACE OF A PACKAGE (CHEESE) 


Angola 
a) Yarn — A yarn spun on the woollen system from a 
mixture of wool and cotton or other fibres. 
b) Fabric — A plain or twill fabric made from a 
cotton warp and an angola-yarn weft. 
Angora — Fibre from angora rabbit Oryctolagus 
cuniculus. 


Angora Goat — An ancient breed of goats Capra 
hircus aegagrus originally from Asia Minor but now 
largely grown in Texas, Turkey and South Africa. They 
range from 35 to 60 kg in mass and grow a long curly 
fleece which often reaches the ground. The commercial 
name for the fibre is Mohair. 


Angora Yarn — An extremely soft yarn made from the 
hair of the angora rabbit. In most cases, it also contains 
a proportion of other fibres, the amount of which is 
limited to that which is necessary to facilitate spinning 
and shall not be greater than 7 percent of the materials. 


Anjengo Yarn — See Coir Yarn (b). 
Aratory Yarn — See Coir Yarn (c). 


Artic Fox — Fibre from artic fox Vulpus lagopus, 
Canis isatis. 


Asbestos — A naturally occurring mineral of fibrous 
natural silicate. 


Asbestos Yarn — A twisted assemblage of: 
a) asbestos fibre; 
b) asbestos and other fibres; 
c) asbestos, other fibres and wires; and 


d) asbestos and other fibres with an insert of cotton or 
other yarn. 


Ashtamudy Yarn — See coir yarn (d). 


Assortment (Jute) — The selection and classification 
of raw jute according to grades prior to packing or 
baling (see grading of jute). 


Atmospheric Conditions for Testing (Standard) — 
The atmosphere in which physical tests on textile 
materials are performed. It has a relative humidity 
of 65 + 2 percent and a temperature of 27 + 2 °C 
(see IS 6359). 


B 


Back Beam — A beam from which yarn is fed during 
the sizing process. 


Back Warp (or Weft), Backing Warp (or Weft) — 
Additional warp (or weft) on the back of a fabric, bound 
or stitched to the ground structure so that it does not 
interfere with the appearance of the face, giving greater 
weight, thickness, warmth, etc. 


Bagging (Wool) — Sewing a piece of cloth along the 
selvedge before milling. 


Balanced Twist — The twist in a plied yarn (or cord) is 
said to be balanced if the yarn or cord does not twist on 
itself when held in the form of an open-loop. 


Bale — A compressed package of defined quantity or 
textile material in a form convenient for transit. 


Bale (KUTCHA) (Jute) — A package of raw jute 
consisting of various heads (or MORAHS), usually 
weighing 150 or 130 kg and sometime only 55 kg. It 
is compressed in a hand or steam-operated press and is 
bound with jute ropes. 


Bale (PUCCA) (Jute ) — It is hydraulically pressed 
bale of raw jute usually bound with jute ropes. Its 
standard size is 120 x 45 x 50 cm and its nominal net 
and gross mass are 180 and 185 kg respectively. 


Bale (Loose) or BORASHA — A partly-pressed (also 
called half-pressed) package containing textile material. 


Bale (Silk) — A defined quantity of raw silk carefully 
packed in a cotton ‘shirt’ and gunny cloth. 


Ball Top — A cross-wound self-supporting sliver 
package produced on the worsted system. 


Ball Warp — Parallel threads in the form of a leased 
twistless rope wound into a large ball by hand or by a 
mechanical balling machine. 


Ballooning ( Yarn ) —The appearance of the curved 
paths of running yarns during spinning, doubling, or 
winding on, or while they are being withdrawn over- 
end from packages under appropriate yarn-winding 
conditions, for example, when yarn is withdrawn 
through a guide (often called a ballooning eye) placed 
above and in line with the axis of the package at an 
adequate distance from it. The yarn (travelling at 
sufficient yarn-winding speed) assumes the appearance 
of a balloon shape as it revolves during withdrawal 
from the package. The package may be stationary or 
rotated in the opposite direction from that of the original 
winding of the packages. 

NOTE — The shape of the balloon is determined by several 

factors, among which are: 

a) air-resistance of the passage of yarn around a package; 

b) centrifugal force exerted on the revolving yarn; 

c) the count and type of yarn; 

d) yarn-winding speed; and 

e) the length of the balloon. 
Bamboo — Fibres from the basts of bamboo Bambusa 
textilis. 


Banana Fibre — Fibres obtained from pseudostem of 
banana Musa sapientum and Musa paradisiacal. These 
fibres come under the category of leaf fibres. These 
lingo-cellulosic fibres are coarse and strong. 


Bands — Straps tightly bound round a bale or case to 
keep it secure. 


Bassinas — The waste silk obtained from the residue 
cocoon after reeling. 


Bast Fibre — Composite fibre obtained from the bast 
of various plants, mainly constituted of cellulose and 
accompanied with incrusting and intercellular materials 
(pectin bodies, hemicellulose and lignin). 


Bast Liquor — A bath liquor prepared by acidifying 
soap solution that has been used for degumming of 
silk. It is used in silk dyeing as it greatly facilitates the 
production of a level shade (an artificial bast liquor is 
prepared from a solution of gelatin in soap). 


Batch Process — A process in which a treatment is 
given to a textile material and stored for a specific 
period prior to further processing. 

Batch (Jute) — A quantity of raw jute which has been 
selected from various assortments and is intended to 
be mixed together to produce yarn of desired type or 
quality. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Batching (Jute) — The process of selection into 
batches and treating jute fibres with oil-in-water 
emulsion and piling it, if needed, prior to carding. 


Batt: Batting — An American term used to denote 
superimposed carded webs of the fibre in sheet form, 
for example, wadding. 


Battens — Wooden slats put on the bales and held in 
place by means of bands to keep the shape of the bale 
intact. 


Bave (Silk) — The bifilar thread spun by the silkworm. 
It consists of two filaments ( brins) that are cemented 
together by gum or sericin. 


B-Bottom (Jute) — Indicates a quality of raw jute (see 
grading of jute). 
Beach Yarn — See coir yarn (e). 


Beam — A long piece of wood or metal used for 
supporting warp yarn wound on it. 


Beaming — The operation of winding the warp yarn 
on to a beam preparatory to slashing or weaving. The 
operation includes winding of the cloth on to the beams 
in wet processing. 


Bear — Fibre from bear Ursus arctos. 

Bearded Motes — See motes. 

Beaver — Fibre from beaver Castor canadensis. 
Belani — See CHARKHA Gin. 

Beypore Yarn — See coir yarn (f). 


Bias Binding — A strip of material cut from a woven 
fabric at an acute angle to the warp (usually 45°) and 
sometimes folded along one or both edges. 


BIMLI — Genetic name for the fibre is Kenaf. It is a 
substitute for jute. It is generally inferior and coarser 
than jute, and is obtained from the bast of Hibiscus 
cannabinus. Chemically the fibre Bimli is different 
from jute mainly in its lower lignin content. 


Bit Mats — See mats (a). 
Blaze — See floss silk. 
Blending 
a) General — A process of mixing fibres of different 
lots, types and varieties to produce yarns having 
desired characteristics; and 
b) Wool for Market — A process of mixing small 
lines of similar type and yield of wool fibres 
having desired characteristics. 
Bloom — Brightness and lustre in raw cotton. 
Blowing — A type of crabbing wherein steam is blown 
through the material after it is wound on a perforated 
roller. 
Blow Room Droppings — Waste mainly consisting of 
seeds, motes, leaves, stalks, seed coats, burrs, besides 


short and entangled fibres resulting from the blow— 
room treatment of cotton (see also gutter fly). 


IS 232 : 2020 


Bluish Dogbane — Fibre from the basts of Apocynum 
androsae mifolium, Apocynum cannabinum. 


Boiled-off-Liquor — See bast liquor. 


Boiling-off — The process of removing sericin from 
silk or other gummy material from fibres like ramie. 


Boll — The fruit of cotton plant, generally it has 3 to 5 
loculi, each of which contains about 6 to 10 seeds, the 
seeds being ‘covered with cotton fibres. 


Bombay-Hemp — Genetic name is Sunn. It is a soft 
fibre obtained from the bast of the plant Crotalaria 
juncea. The plant reaches a height of 3 to 4.5 m and 
gives long and lustrous fibres fairly similar to jute. 


Book (Silk) — A compressed package of raw silk 
weighing about 5 kg and containing a suitable number 
of skeins. 


Book-Silk — See tsatlee silk. 


Bottom (Jute) — Indicates a quality of raw jute (See 
grading of jute). 


Bourre (French) (Silk) — See gum waste. 
Bourettee (French) (Silk) — See noils (b). 
Bow 


a) A device on a shuttle tip to separate the warp threads 
when they are likely to stick or hang together, or 


b) A device for opening cotton. 


Braid — The product of the braiding process. Certain 
types of narrow fabrics produced on the loom or on 
trimming machinery are sometimes described as braids. 


Braiding: Plaiting — The process of interlacing three 
or more threads in such a way that they cross one 
another and are laid together in diagonal formation. 
Flat, tubular, or solid constructions may be formed in 
this way. 


NOTES: 


1 There are diametrically opposed opinions between sections 
of the industry regarding the exact meanings of ‘braiding’ 
and ‘plaiting’. It is suggested therefore, that as generic terms, 
‘braiding’ and ‘plaiting’ should be considered synonymous. 

2 Fabrics made by this process may be constructed with or 
without core, gut, filler, or stuffing threads, which are not 
interlaced in the fabrics. For some applications, the core may be 
of insulated or uninsulated wire, or of rubber or other material. 
The tubular fabrics can be used as sheaths or surrounds. 


3 In the cordage trade, the term braided denotes a particular 
form of cordage manufacture. In solid-braided cordage, carriers 
usually travel in one direction but the movement provides for 
interlocking between the strands. In a sense, this cord is more 
of an interlocked twisted cord than a plaited cord. 
Break Factor — A number obtained by multiplying 
the breaking load of skein of yarn by the count of yarn 
expressed in an indirect system (that is, cotton count 
x pounds). This is also known as count strength product 
(CSP). 
NOTE— A statement of the break factor of the skein must 
indicate the circumference and number of wraps in the skein, 


if this is not otherwise apparent, without information on the 
number of wraps and circumference, a statement of the break 
factor is not correct. 
Breaking Length — The length of a specimen whose 
mass is equal to the breaking load. Breaking length 
expressed in kilometers is numerically equal to the 
breaking tenacity expressed in g/tex. 
NOTE — Breaking tenacity is expressed in Newton/tex. The 
Newton is the SI unit of force. It is that force which when 
applied to a body having a mass of one kilogram, gives it an 
acceleration of one meter per second square (1 kgf = 9.81 N). 
Breaking Load — The load that develops the breaking 
tension. It is generally expressed in Newtons. 
NOTE — The breaking load, if expressed in gram weight or 
kilogram weight will vary from place to place depending on 
the value of the acceleration due to gravity (g). 
Breaking Stress —The maximum stress developed in 
a specimen stretched to rupture. The force is usually 
related to the area of cross-section of the unstrained 
specimen. If the actual stress, defined in terms of the 
area of cross-section of strained specimen is used, then 
its maximum value is called the actual breaking stress. 


Breaking Tension — The maximum tension developed 
in a specimen stretched to rupture. It is expressed in 
Newtons. 


NOTE — Breaking tension, as defined, is independent of the 
acceleration due to gravity (g). 


Breaking Tenacity — See tenacity. 


Bright Silk — Thrown silk completely boiled-off or 
dyed or both (see throwing). 


Brin — The ultimate filament of silk as emanating 
from each gland of the silkworm. Two brins (one from 
each gland on either side of the body of silkworm) are 
cemented together by gum or sericin at the spinneret of 
the silkworm to emerge as bave or silk strand. 


Bristle Fibre 


a) General — A generic term for a short, stiff and 
coarse fibre; and 


b) Specific — A restricted term for the hair of the 
hog. 
Broad (Wool) — Wool that has no natural crimp or 
elasticity, particularly straight fibres. 


Broom — Fibre from the basts of broom Cytisus 
scoparius and Spartium junceum. 


Brush Mats — See mats (b). 


Brushing (Silk) — Act of transferring newly hatched 
silkworms from the egg sheets or muslin cells on to the 
rearing trays, or act of removal of floss from the cooked 
or boiled cocoons for collection of ends for reeling. 


Bulked Yarn — A yarn that has been prepared in such 
a way as to have greater covering capacity, or apparent 
volume than that of conventional yarn of equal linear 
density and of the same basic material with normal 
twist. 


Bump Yarn — Very coarse condenser yarn. The linear 
density normally ranges from 260 to 1250 tex. 


Bundle (Yarn) — Skeins or hanks of yarn of definite 
length made up into a package of definite mass. 


Burrs (Wool) — Dry seeds of certain weeds which get 
entangled in the fibrous coat of the sheep before it is 
shorn. 


Burry Wool — Raw wool containing burrs. 


Bursting Strength — The force required to rupture 
a fabric by distending it with pressure applied at right 
angles to the plane of the fabric. It is expressed in terms 
of force per unit area. 


Byssus — Fibre extruded from some molluscs Pinna 
nobilis. 


C 


Cable Twist — A cabled yarn, cord or rope construction 
in which each successive twist is in the opposite 
direction to the preceding twist, as S/Z/S or Z/S/Z 
construction. 


Cabled Yarn — A composite yarn produced by twisting 
together two or more plied yarns. The individual plied 
yarns have the same nominal length and tension (See 
also cable twist and hawser twist). 


Caddis (Jute) — The short jute fibre droppings from 
different machines (such as preparatory machines and 
looms) during processing. 


Camel Hair — The hair of camel Camelus bactianus. 
There are two types: 


a) the strong, coarse outer hair, ranging in length 
from 13 to 15 cm; and 


b) the soft undercoat, light tan in colour and ranging 
in length from 4 to 5 cm. 


Camouflage — Net used for camouflage purposes 
made from hard and soft twisted coir yarns with mesh 
size of 5 cm square or larger. 


Candy — One of the units of mass (355.6 kg) used in 
cotton trade in India. 


Carded Sliver — The long continuous twist less strand 
of fibres produced by the carding machine. 


Carded Yarn — Yarn made from cotton or other fibres, 
which has been carded but not combed. 


Carding — The separation and partial cleaning by 
processing of a tangled or matted mass of fibres to a 
filmy web by working the fibres between two closely- 
spaced, relatively moving surfaces, clothed with 
pointed wire, pins, spikes or saw teeth. 


Carrier (Fibre or Yarn) — A fibre or yarn introduced 
at some stage of processing to support the main 
component, generally as an aid to further manufacture. 


CARUVA Yarn — See coir yarn (d). 


Case Cord — A cord consisting of two or more yarns 


IS 232 : 2020 


twisted together, each yarn consisting of a cotton yarn 
covered in a long spiral by several rayon yarns. The 
resultant cord is soft and pliable. 


Cashmere Wool — The fine soft wool fibre which 
forms the downy undercoat of Cashmere goat Capra 
hircus laniger. 


Castor — Fibre from the basts of Ricinus communis. 
Centre Root (Book Chal) (Jute) — The hard bark 


present in the middle part of the jute fibre strand. It 
occurs due to faulty retting. 


Centre Selvedge — See patent selvedge. 


Cerite — Nett silk from which natural gum has been 
completely removed. 


Chain (Coir) — Warp yarn in a coir matting, 
Chapands (French) — Waste silk from native reeling 
skin to CHARKHA silk waste. 

Chaple Silk Yarn — Silk yarn spun from inferior 
cocoons and silk spinners’ waste. 

CHARKHA (Cotton) — A simple hand-operated 
contrivance for spinning yarn from natural fibres. 


CHARKHA Cotton — Cotton ginned with the aid of 
CHARKHA gin (also called Belni), which is worked 
invariably by hand. 

CHARKHA (Gin) — A simple 
contrivance used for ginning of cotton. 
CHARKHA (Silk) — A simple 
contrivance for reeling raw silk. 


CHARKHA Silk — Raw silk reeled on CHARKHAS. 


CHARKHA Yarn — Yarn produced from natural fibres 
on CHARKHAS. 


CHASSUM (Silk) — A term popular in West Bengal, 
to denote the silk waste obtained during reeling of 
cocoons, from polyvoltine races, for examples, Bengal 
Chassum. 


CHAVARA Yarn — See coir yarn (g). 


Cheese — A cylindrical package of yarn usually cross- 
wound on a flangeless tube of wood, paper or other 
material. 


hand-operated 


hand-operated 


Chemical Cotton — Chemically purified cellulose 
from cotton or cotton linters intended for use in the 
cellulose industries. 


Chemicking — A process of bleaching non-protein 
fibre materials by means of a dilute hypochlorite 
solution. 


Chesting — A process for compacting cloth in which 
the material after passing between all the bowls, 
usually 5, of a calendar from bottom to top, is wound 
upon itself or either of the two upper bowls and later 
stripped there from. 


Chiffon Twist — Hard-twisted, single, raw silk thread 


IS 232 : 2020 


having about 2 000 to 4 000 tpm; used for making 
chiffons, ‘mousseline do seie’ (French), etc. 


Chop — A trade-mark or ticket on a book of raw silk 
indicating its grade and name of the producer or shipper. 


Cleanness Defects — Defects found in raw silk, such 
as waste, slugs, bad casts, knots, corkscrews, loops and 
loose ends. 


Cleanness (Raw Silk) —The degree of cleanness of 
raw silk panels, determined on the basis of incidence of 
cleanness defects classified in super major, major and 
minor defects by using official standard photographs 
for cleanness. Cleanness is expressed as a percentage. 


Cloth — See fabric textile. 
Clothes — Things worn to cover the body. 


Cloudy Web — Generally refers to card web giving a 
patchy appearance due to uneven distribution of fibres. 


Cobbler — A piece returned for redyeing due to off- 
shade. 


Cockled Yarn — Yarn with lumpy places in it. 


Cocoonage (Silk) — Appliance used for mounting 
mature silkworms to enable them to spin cocoons, also, 
known as CHANDRIKE. 


Coccon (Silk) — The silken shell spun by the silkworm 
larvae for their protection in the pupal stage. 


Cohesion (Silk) — The degree of agglutination of 
cocoon filaments forming raw silk thread, determined 
by subjecting the raw silk threads to friction in a 
cohesion tester and counting the number of strokes 
required to spread and open out constituent filaments. 


Coir — A fibre retted or mechanically directly removed/ 
obtained from husks of the coconut (Cocos nucifera). 


Coir Fenders — A spherical or cylindrical bundle of 
coir ropes or twisted yarns used as a shock absorber 
at the side of ship, or boat for protecting it against the 
piers. 


Coir Rugs — Matting pieces with or without bristles 
cut to the required sizes and finished at the edges. 


Coir Yarn — Yarn spun from coir fibres by hand or 
machine usually 2-ply. Different varieties of coir yarn 
are as follows: 


a) ALAPAT Yarn — Superior quality yarn spun by 
hand or machine and having soft twist. 


b) ANJENGO Yarn — Yarn made of clean natural 
coloured and hard twisted coir with smooth 
appearance and good wearing properties. 


c) ARATORY Yarn — Yarn made of clean, natural 
coloured hard twisted coir with reasonable smooth 
appearance and ‘being slightly hairy. 


d) ASHTAMUDY or CARUVA Yarn — Yarn made 
from soaked fibre with medium twist and 
reasonable thickness, its runnage varies from 100 
to 200 ft-lb. 


e) Beach Yarn — Yarn spun from fibres of unsoaked 
or partly-soaked coconut husk. It is of light to 
dark brown colour with varying quantities of pith 
adhering to the fibres. 


f) BEYPORE Yarn — Hand-spun yarn having 
substantial amount of pith adhered to the fibres. 


g) CHAVARA Yarn — Yarn produced from partly- 
soaked husk, hand spun, having medium twist and 
is pithy. 

h) MANGADAN Yarn — Hard-twisted machine- 
spun yarn. It is used for the manufacture of floor 
covering, ropes and for agricultural purposes. 

j) Roping Yarn — Thick hand-spun yarn used in the 
manufacture of ropes, also known as ‘VANNUM 
yarn’. 

k) T-VYCOME Yarn — Yarn similar to vycome yarn 
spun from shaving bits of yarn collected during 
spooling or rehanking process for baling. 


m) VYCOME Yarn — Yarn which is comparatively 
clean, light in colour, even in twist, and is soft. 


Combing — Straightening and parallelizing fibres and 
removing short fibres and impurities by using a comb 
or combs assisted by brushes and rollers, pins and 
sometimes by knives. 


Combing Wool — Long wool suitable for the 
manufacture of worsted yarn. 


Comeback Wool — The wool produced by crossing 
two breeds of sheep to produce a cross-bred, then 
crossing the cross-bred with one of the original breeds, 
thus a comeback to the original. 
NOTE — This term is usually used in the trade for wools 
which have bred back towards the marino. 
Commercial Allowance — An arbitrary value 
equivalent to the commercial moisture regain plus an 
approved allowance for finish, formally adopted for use 
with the oven-dry mass when calculating: 


a) the linear density, or 


b) the commercial or legal mass of a shipment or 
delivery of any specific textile material. 


Commercial Mass — The calculated mass that a 
consignment of textile material would have if either the 
commercial moisture regain were added to the dried 
mass of the material or the commercial allowance were 
added to the extracted and dried mass of the material. 


Commercial Moisture Regain — The agreed value 
to be added to the mass of a defined material (after 
drying it using prescribed methods) in order to obtain 
its commercial mass, linear density or mass per unit 
area. It is expressed as a percentage of the mass of the 
extracted and dried material. 

NOTE — The ‘commercial moisture regain’ and the 


‘commercial allowance’ are sometimes referred to as the 
“conventional allowance’. 


Condenser Yarn — Yarn spun from sliver which has 
been consolidated from strips of card web by rubbing 
aprons. 


Conditioned Mass — The mass of a textile material 
conditioned in the standard atmosphere for testing. 


Conditioning — To allow textile materials 
(raw materials, slivers, yarns and fabrics) to come 
to hygroscopic equilibrium with the surrounding 
atmosphere or with the standard ‘atmosphere for testing 
(see IS 6359 ). 


Cone 
a) Aconical support on which yarn is wound; and 
b) A conical package of yarn wound on a conical 
support. 
Continuous Filament Yarn — A yarn composed of 


one or more filaments that run the whole length of the 
yarn. 
Convolution — Natural twist in cotton fibre. 
Cooking (Silk) — The process by which the silk 
cocoons are treated in boiling water for a short time 
with a view to softening the gum (sericin) for easy 
unwinding during the subsequent reeling process. 
Cop — A package of yarn, tapered at one or both ends, 
produced on spinning frames or weft winders. The cop 
from spinning frame is either re-wound or directly used 
as weft in shuttles. 
Cord — A term applied loosely to a variety of textile 
strands including: 

a) cabled yarns; 

b) plied yarns used in tyres; and 

c) structures made by plaiting or braiding for 

example, parachute cords (see also cabled yarn). 

Cordage — All kind of ropes, lines, cords and twines 
manufactured from natural or man-made fibres. 
Cordonnet Silk —Thick soft silk yarn consisting of 
two or more strands twisted together in one direction, 
each strand being made of a number of singles loosely 
twisted in the opposite direction. 
Correct Invoice Mass — The mass of a consignment 
of a textile material which is declared on the invoice. It 
is usually numerically equal to the commercial mass. 
Corridor Mats — See Mats (c). 


Cortex — The principal body of wool fibre made up of 
elongated cortical cells. 


Cotted Wool — Wool fibres which have felted together 
to form a cotted fleece. Also known as matted wool. 
Cotton — Unicellular seed hairs of the Genus 
gossypium. 


Cotton Count —The linear density of cotton yarn 
expressed as number of 840-yd hanks/Ib. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Count of Yarn, Yarn Count, Yarn Number, Yarn 

Linear Density (n) — A number indicating the mass 

per unit length or the length per unit mass of a yarn. 
NOTE — Various counting systems, using different units of 


mass and length, have been in use, so the system used must be 
stated. The SI recommended system is tex. 


YARN COUNT SYSTEMS 


a) Direct systems 


System Unit of Unit of Conversion 
Mass Length Factor to Tex 

Tex gram kilometer 1 
Denier gram 9000 metres 0.111 11 
Linen Pound 14400 yards 34.45 
(dry spun), ( spyndle ) 

hemp, jute 

Silk dram 1000 yards 1.938 
Woollen Pound 14400 yards 34.45 
(Aberdeen) 

Woollen grain 20 yards 3.543 
(American 

grain) 

b) Indirect System 
System Unit of Unit of | Conversion 

Length Mass Factor to 
Tex 

Asbestos 100 yards pound 4 960 
(American) (cut) 

Asbestos 50 yards pound 9921 
(British) 

Cotton bump yard ounce 31 000 
yam 

Cotton 840 yards pound 590.5 
(British) (hank) 

Cotton kilometer yz 500 
(Continental) kilogram 

Glass 100 yards pound 4 960 
(USA and 

Great Britain) 

Linen 300 yards pound 1 654 
(wet spun) (lea) 

Metric kilometer 1 000 

kilogram 
Spun silk 840 yards pound 590.5 
(hank) 
Woollen 11520 yards 1 033 
(Alloa) ( spyndle ) 
24 pound 

Woollen 300 yards pound 1 654 
(American cut) (cut) 


IS 232 : 2020 


System Unit of Unit of Conversion 
Length Mass Factor to 
Tex 
Woollen 100 yards ounce 310.0 
(American run) 
Woollen yard ounce 31 000 
(Dewsbury) 
Woollen 300 yards 24 ounce 2 480 
(Galashiels) (cut) 
Woollen 300 yards 26 2 687 
(Hawick) (cut) ounce 
Woollen 256 yards gram 1 938 
(Yorkshire) (skein) 
Woollen yard dram 1938 
(Yorkshire) 
Worsted 560 yards pound 885.8 
(hank) 
Conversions 


a) Direct System — To find the count in tex, given 
that in another system, multiply the given count 
by the conversion factor. To find the count in any 
system, given that in tex, divide the count in tex by 
the conversion factor. 


b) Indirect Systems — To find the count in tex, given 
that in another system divide the conversion factor 
by the given count. To find the count in any other 
system, given that in tex, divide the conversion 
factor by the tex value. 


c) General Conversions — To convert the count in 
one system to that in another, convert to tex and 
then convert to the second system by means of the 
above rules. 


Count (Jute) — See grist. 

Count of Reed — See reed number. 

Count Strength Product — See break factor. 
Cow — Fibre from common ox Bos taurus. 
Creel Mats — See mats (d). 


Crepe-de-Chine (French) Yarn — Hard twisted yarn, 
usually with 1 600 to 2 800 tpm generally made from 
3 to 5 raw silk threads. It is used as weft in crepe-de- 
chine. 


Crepe-Georgette Yarn — Twisted yarn usually with 
2 000 to 3 600 tpm, generally made of two threads of 
raw silk. 


Crepe Yarn — Highly twisted yarn generally with 
1200 to 4000 tpm, used for producing crepe effect in 
woven or knitted fabrics. 
Crimp 

a) Fibre —The waviness of fibre. 


NOTE — This fibre characteristic may be expressed 
numerically by reference to the number of waves or crimps per 


unit length or by the difference in distance between points on 
the fibre as it lies in an unstretched condition and the same two 
points when the fibre is straightened under suitable tension, 
expressed as a percentage of the unstretched length. 

b) Yarn — The waviness or distortion of a yarn due 
to interlacing in the fabric. 
NOTES: 
1 In woven fabrics, the crimp is measured by the relation 
between cloth length and the corresponding length of yarn 
when it has been removed from the cloth and straightened 
under suitable tension. 


2 Crimp may be expressed numerically as (a) percentage 
crimp, which is 100 x difference between yarn and cloth length 
divided by cloth length; or (b) crimp ratio, which is the ratio of 
yarn length to cloth length. 


3 This definition could logically by apply to knitted fabrics 
or fabrics of pile construction, but it is preferable to employ 
special terms, such as, ‘stitch length’, ‘take-up,’ and ‘terry 
ratio’. 
Croisure — A technique of twisting raw silk over itself 
in the process of reeling with the object of consolidating 
the different filaments constituting raw silk, rounding 
off the angularities of the thread and squeezing off the 
extra moisture and gum. 


Crop-End (Jute) —The hard bark at the tip part of the 
jute strand. It occurs due to defective retting. 


Cropping — A process of shearing the protruding 
fibres from the surface of the cloth in order to give the 
cloth an improved appearance. 


Cross-Bred Wool —Wool obtained from the cross- 
bred sheep. 


Cross-Bred Yarn — Yarn made from cross-bred wool. 


Crutchings — Wool removed from the back portion 
of the thigh of the sheep a month or two before final 
shearing. 

Cuticle — See epidermis. 


Cut Marks (or Keel) — Marks made at intervals of 
definite length on warp during sizing. 

Cuttings (Jute) — Hard and barky portions of jute 
strand cut off from the root end or crop end of the raw 
jute strands. 


Cuttle 
a) To place cloth in loose transverse folds, usually in 
open width. 
b) To fold finished cloth down the middle and place 
it in transverse folds of pre-determined length. 


NOTE — Folding finished cloth down the middle is termed 
‘rigging’ in the wool trade. 


Cut (Yarn) 


a) A length of warp required to weave a piece of 
cloth; or 


b) In the jute and flax trade, a skein measuring 274 
m. 


D 


Daggings — Locks of wool clotted with earth or dung 
removed from fleece sometimes prior to final shearing. 


DAISEE Jute — See Jute. 


DALA or Tray — Local term to denote the receptacles 
to hold the silk-worms during the period of rearing. 


Dead Cotton — An extreme form of immature cotton 
with a very thin fibre wall. 


Dead Wool — Wool taken from sheep that have died 
from natural causes (see skin wool). 


Decitex — One tenth of a tex unit (see tex). 


Decortication — A process of separating fibres from 
other vegetable material especially in the case of leaf 
fibres and coconut husk. 


Deer — Fibre from deer Genus cervus. 


Deformation — A change in the shape of a specimen, 
for example, the increase in length produced as a result 
of the application of a tensile load or force. 


Degreasing (Wool) — The removal of grease, suint 
and extraneous matter from wool by an aqueous or 
solvent process. 


Degumming — See boiling-off. 


Denaturation — The conversion of the protein of silk 
gland into insoluble silk filament. 


Denier — The unit for expressing the linear density of 
manmade fibres and silk filaments and yarns, weight in 
grams per 9 000 m of material. 


Dent — The unit of a reed comprising a reed wire and 
the space between the adjacent wires. 


Doffing — An operation of removing filled packages 
from a machine and usually followed by the operation 
of replacing them with empties. 


Dollop (Jute) — A specified weight of jute fibres 
to be spread on the feed cloth of a breaker card or a 
hackling machine, as the case maybe, in a given time 
usually indicated by the revolution of a clock hand of 
the machine. 


Double Cocoon — A cocoon jointly built by two 
silkworms, it serves as protective shell for both the 
worms during their pupal stage of existence. Such 
cocoons are readily distinguished by their size and 
toughness. 


Doubling (Drawing) — A number of slivers, slubbings, 
rovings or laps fed simultaneously into a machine for 
drafting into a single end. 


Draft — The amount of attenuation of textile material 
at different stages of spinning process, for example, 
1 m of material delivered as 5 m, it is said to have 
undergone a draft of 5. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Drafting 


a) The process of attenuating laps, slivers, slubbings 
and rovings to decrease the mass per, unit length 
(see Drawing); and 


b) The order in which threads are drawn through the 
heald eyes before weaving (see drawing-in). 


Draft Plan — The order of drawing warp threads 
through the eyes of healds or cambs. 


Drawing — Operations by which slivers are blended 
(or doubled), levelled and by drafting reduced to the 
stage of roving. In the cotton textile industry the term 
is applied exclusively to processing by the draw frame. 


Drawing-in — An operation of drawing warp threads 
through the eyes of the healds or cambs and the dents 
or slits of the reed, in the order as indicated by the draft 
plan. 
NOTE — In automatic weaving, this operation includes the 
drawing of warp threads through the eyes of the closed-end 
drop wires whenever used. 
Dressing (Jute) — A process of treating warp yarns 
with size prior to weaving. 


Dressing (Silk) — In the spun silk industry, the process 
of sorting out fibres into groups of different lengths. 
Neps and noils are also removed during the process. 


Dressing (Warp Preparation) — The operation of 
assembling on a beam, yarns from ball warp, beam, or 
chain immediately prior to weaving. 


Dry Spinning — A method of spinning used for flax 
tow, hemp, jute, etc. The essential feature is that the 
‘reach’ must be quite long to prevent breaking of fibres. 
Usually the dry spinning frames are of flyer type. 


Dumping Mats — See mats (e). 
Dupion (French) — Silk reeled from double cocoon, 
also ‘known as ‘Duppione’ ( Italian ). 


E 


Ecru Silk — Thrown silk that has been washed in tepid 
soap solution to remove dirt, the original gum content 
being retained. 


Elongation — Increase in length; extension. The 
increase may be expressed in units of length, percentage 
of initial length or fraction of initial length. 


Elongation at Break — The elongation corresponding 
to the breaking load, that is, the maximum load. 


ENDI (Silk) — Silk of white or brick red colour 
obtained from a species of domesticated lepidopteron 
insect/silkworm (Phylosamia ricini) belonging to the 
family Saturnidae. It feeds on castor leaves and is 
mostly a habitant of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and Andhra 
Pradesh. This silk is also known as Gem. It is a non- 
mulberry wild silk. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Ends 
a) 
b) 
c) 


Spinning — An individual strand; 
Weaving — An individual warp thread; 


Fabric — A length of finished fabric less than a 
customary unit; 


d) Piece — Length (in certain districts a half-piece); 
and 
e) Finishing 


1) Each passage of a length of fabric through a 
machine, for example, in jig-dyeing; and 
2) A joint between pieces of cloth due, for 
example, to damage or short lengths in 
weaving or damage in bleaching, dyeing and 
finishing. 
Epidermis — In mammalian hair fibre, the outside or 
surface layer of the fibres consisting of flat, irregular, 
horny cells or scales. 


ERI (Silk) — See ENDI. 
Ermine — Fibre from ermine Mustela eminea. 


Etching Silk — A hard-twisted silk sewing thread used 
for outlining embroidery. 


Evenness 


a) The uniformity of any textile material in terms of 
thickness or diameter or mass per unit length, and 


b) See also unevenness. 


Evenness (Silk) — The degree of evenness of raw silk 
panels within approximately the same length as the 
sizing skeins, determined on the basis of incidence of 
evenness defects by using official standard variation 
photographs. Evenness defects are those portions of 
raw silk which show stripes caused by the variation 
in the size of raw silk to such a degree as is easily 
noticeable by visual inspection. Evenness is expressed 
as the number of stripes for 20 panels, categorized as, 
evenness I, II and III depending on the intensity of the 
stripes. 


Extension — See elongation. 


F 


Fabric Textile — A planer structure consisting of yarns 
or fibres. 


Fabric Woven — A planer structure produced by 
interlacing two or more sets of yarns, fibres, rovings, or 
filaments where the elements pass each other essentially 
at right angles and one set of elements is parallel to the 
fabric axis. 


Face — That side of a fabric which is meant for outer 
appearance when woven. 


Fancy Yarn — A yarn that differs significantly from 
the normal appearance of single or plied yarn due to the 
presence of irregularities deliberately produced during 
its formation. In single yarns, the irregularities may be 


10 


due to the inclusion of’ knots, loops, curls, slubs and 
the like. In plied yarns, the irregularities may be due to 
a variable delivery of one or more of its components or 
to twisting together dissimilar single yarns. 


False Twist — Turns inserted in opposite directions 
and in equal numbers in adjacent elements of yarn, 
sliver or similar aggregations of fibres or filaments, 
characterized by their temporary nature. 


NOTES: 


1 The extreme ends of the yarn or sliver are prevented from 
rotating, and the false-twisting element, through which the 
yarn or sliver passes, is situated between these ends. 


2 At the start of the operation, turns of twist are inserted by the 
revolution of the twisting element (one turn in each direction 
on either side of the twisting element) but, as the yarn or sliver 
passes through the twisting element, each turn of twist carried 
through from one side cancels a turn present on the other side. 


3 The amount of twist actually inserted depends not only on the 
relative speeds of the twisting element (rev/min) and yarn or 
sliver (m/s), but also on the effectiveness of the means adopted 
in the twisting element to resist rotation, and on the restoring 
torque exerted by the twisted yarn or sliver. 


4 False twist may be used: 


a) To produce effects, for example; 1) ‘the entanglement 
‘of fibres while false-twisted, 2) a measure of 
permanence to the twisted form, by heat-setting the 
false-twisted yarns; and 


b) To assist processing for example, 1) the passage of 


sliver from Noble comb to can, 2) the attenuation of 
rovings on a condenser ring frame. 
False Twisting — A process by which equal amounts 
of a twist are inserted and removed from successive 
sections of a textile strand (see also bulked yarn). 


Fastness — The property of resistance to the agency 
named (for example, washing, light, rubbing, crocking, 
gas-fumes). 


Feel — See handle. 


Felling Marks — Marks in the form of a few pieces 
of yarn usually coloured, woven into fabrics at certain 
intervals to indicate where one piece finishes and 
another starts. 


Felting — The matting together of fibres during 
processing or wear. 


Fibre — A unit of matter characterized by flexibility, 
fineness and high ratio of length to thickness. 


Fibre Fineness — See fineness fibre. 
Fibre Length 


a) Crimped Length — The extent [see (b)] of a 
crimped fibre substantially freed from external 
restraint, measured with respect to its general axis 
of orientation; and 


b) Fibre Extent — The distance in a given direction 
between two planes (each perpendicular to the 
given direction) that just enclose the fibre without 
intersecting it. 


NOTES: 


1 If the fibre is in a sliver (or yarn, roving, etc) and the direction 
of the extent is not specified, the ‘given direction’ is to be taken 
as the axis of the sliver. 
2 It should be noted that the extent of a fibre is a variable 
quantity which differs from the straightened length of the fibre 
according to circumstances; thus, in a card web, for example, 
where the fibres are in a state of considerable same disarray, 
the extent of a fibre is markedly different from the extent of 
the same fibre after it has been passed through one or more 
drawing processes. If, for any reason, a fibre is subject to a 
stretching force, its extent in the direction of the force may be 
greater than its straightened length. 
c) Staple Length — A quantity by which a sample of 
fibrous raw material is characterized as regards its 
technically most important fibre length. 
NOTE — The staple length of wool is usually taken as the 
length of the longer fibres in a hand-prepared tuft or ‘staple’ 
in its naturally crimped and wavy condition (see crimp). With 
cotton, on the other hand, the staple length corresponds very 
closely to the model or most frequent length of the fibres when 
measured in a straightened condition. 
Straightened Length — The length of a fibre when 
tensioned sufficiently to remove crimp or other 
axial -deformation. 
NOTE — Ideally, this dimension should be the length of the 
curving axis of the fibre when free from all restraint, but in 
practice it can be measured conveniently only after a small 
load has been applied. The application of a load sufficient to 
remove all crimp may in some cases result in an elongation 
of the fibre axis. Hence the most appropriate load to use will 
vary according to the form and properties of the fibre under 
examination. 


Fibre Maturity Count — See maturity count, fibre. 
Fibre Mats — See mats ( f ). 


Fibre Strand (Jute) — The bast fibre in the jute plant 
situated between the outer bark and the central woody 
core and running the whole length of the stem as a lace 
work sheath usually several layers thick. 


d) 


Fibre Strength — Average breaking load of a single 
fibre (see strength ). 


Fibre Tenacity — See tenacity. 


Fibril (Cotton) — Thread-like aggregate of cellulose 
molecules constituting a morphological unit in cotton 
fibre. The fibril has a thickness of about 1 um and 
is visible under a light microscope when the fibre is 
swollen in certain chemical reagents. 


Fibrillation (Cotton) — The process of separation 
of fibres into fibrils by chemical-cum-mechanical 
treatment. 


Fibril (Silk) — Fibrils are globules of fibroin formed 
in silk gland, but which subsequently did not fuse into 
the fibroin core during spinning of the filament by the 
worm and, as such appear as tiny specks on the surface 
of the filaments. 


Fibrillation (Silk) — The formation of fibrils on the 
silk filament. It is responsible for the defect known as 
‘lousiness’ in dyed silk yarn. 


11 


IS 232 : 2020 


Fibroin (Silk) — The fibre material of raw silk thread 
which is a protein not soluble in boiling water. 


Filament — A fibre of indefinite length. 


Filature — An establishment for the production of raw 
silk from cocoons, employing modern techniques, such 
as, steam for heating and power for driving the reels. 


Filling 
a) A synonym for weft yarn; and 


b) Non-substantive and generally insoluble material, 
such as, china clay and gypsum, added to fabrics 
together with starches or gums during finishing to 
add weight to modify the appearance and handle 
of fabrics. 


Fine End (Silk) — Yarn which is thinner than the rest 
of yarn in a hank, also called thin end. 
NOTE — This is produced when reelers fail to cast filaments 
from the required number of cocoons. 
Fineness Fibre — A measure related to the transverse 
dimensions of the fibre, like cross sectional area, 
diameter, linear density, expressed in a variety of units. 


Finishing — The processing of fabrics to impart to 
them the desired appearance and feel by means of 
bleaching, dyeing, printing or in any other manner. 


Fique Fibre from the leaves of Furcraea 


macrophylla. 


Flaggings — See strings. 


Flat Packed — Describes bales or trusses packed in a 
flat condition. 


Flax — Fibre from the bast of flax Linum usitatissimum. 


Flax Green: Natural Flax — Scutched flax produced 
from deseeded straw without any intermediate 
treatment such as retting. 


Flax Fibre Bundles — The aggregates of ultimate 
fibre (see ultimate fibre) that run from the base of the 
stem up to the top of the branches of the flax straw. 
They are each composed of large numbers of ultimate 
fibres overlapping each other. 


Flax Fibre Strands — Flax fibres after removal from 
the plant, consisting in the cross-section more than one 
ultimate fibres. 


Fleece (Wool) — The entire fibrous crop shorn from a 
living sheep at one time in one piece. 


Float — That length of warp or weft yarn which passes 
over two or more weft or warp yarn, respectively. Floats 
are flaws, if they are accidental, a feature of design, if 
introduced purposefully. 


Flocks — The stripped wool fibre obtained during 
various operations of scouring, milling, cutting, raising, 
etc. 


Floss Silk — Silk from the outer part of the cocoon, it 
is of low grade and is available only in small amounts. 
It is also known as Blaze (French). The term is also 


IS 232 : 2020 


applied to soft silk yarn or singles without twist, used in 
embroidery and electrical insulation of wires. 


Fluff (or Fly) — Loose fibres which fly out into 
the atmosphere during processes, such as, carding, 
drawing, spinning and weaving. 


Fluidity — The reciprocal of the viscosity expressed in 
poises (1 cP = 1 mPas). 


Folded Yarn — Yarn composed of two or more single 
yarns twisted together. 


Fribby Wool — Short tufts of wool obtained as a result 
of second cuts during one shearing. 


Frison (French) — The silk waste brushed from the 
outer layers of cocoons prior to reeling. Such waste is 
also described as Strusa (Italian), Knubs (English) and 
JOOTH (Hindi). 


Fulling — See milling. 


Fulpat — A term used for weak, gummy and immature 
jute fibres. 


Fuzzy Motes — See motes. 


G 
Gauge Knitting 
a) A term specifying the spacing of the loop-forming 
elements in knitting and ancillary machines and 
expressed as the number of elements per unit of 
length; and 
b) Aterm specifying the physical dimensions, usually 
thickness, of loop-forming elements. 
Galettame — Waste silk from the inner part of cocoons 
(see also bassinas). 


Garnetting — A process of recovering the fibres 
from hard-twisted thread wastes, rags, clippings, etc, 
especially of wool. The object is to thoroughly break- 
up the material and return it to a fluffy fibrous condition 
so that it may be reused in blends, or in some cases 
alone. 


Gassed Yarn — A yarn that has been passed through a 
gas flame to remove protruding fibres and improve the 
yarn by making it smoother in appearance. 


Gassing — A process of burning off protruding fibre 
from the surface of yarn or cloth to obtain a smooth 
surface. Also known as singeing. 


Gauge Length Nominal 


a) The length of a specimen under specified pre- 
tension measured from nip-to-nip of the jaws of 
the holding clamps at the beginning of the test; 
and 

b) The distance between points at which the specimen 
is attached to tabs, measured while the specimen is 
under specified pretension. 

GHICHA — The yarn drawn by hand out of tasar 
cocoons without any twisting. 


12 


Gilling — An operation, preparatory to spinning, of 
passing wool or jute or flax or spun-silk fibres through 
one or more gill boxes in order to improve fibre 
parallelization. 


Ginning — A process of separating lint from seed- 
cotton. 


Ginning Percentage — The ratio of the mass of lint 
to the mass of seed cotton (KAPAS) expressed as a 
percentage. 


Ginning (Roller) — A ginning process in which the 
fibre on seed cotton are made to adhere to the roughened 
surface of a rotating leather coated roller and are pulled 
out from the seed by the action of one or more knives. 


Ginning (Saw) — A ginning process in which the 
fibres on seed cotton are gripped by saw teeth bordering 
a number of parallel discs on a rotating shaft. A suitably 
placed grid prevents the seed from advancing with the 
fibres and thus the latter get wrenched from the seeds. 


Glaze — The smooth, glossy and plane appearance of 
the surface of a fabric produced by the application of 
heat along with heavy pressure. 


Goat Fibre — Fibre from common goat Genus capra. 


Grade (Cotton) — Classification of cotton according 
to colour, foreign matter and ginning percentage. 


Grade (Silk) — Classification of raw silk of the basis 
of tests carried out according to standard methods in 
silk conditioning houses. The qualities taken into 
consideration are winding (breaks), size, tenacity, 
elongation, evenness, cohesion, maximum deviation, 
cleanness and neatness [see IS 15090 (Part 1)] 


Grade (Wool) — Classification of wool according to 
their fineness, length and yield. 


Grade (Yarn) — See yarn appearance. 


Grading of Jute — Jute fibres are grown mainly in 
different district of Assam, West-Bengal and Bihar 
and also in small quantity in Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, 
Andhra Pradesh, Tripura, etc. Because of the difference 
in climatic conditions, seeds, soil, methods used and 
availability of water in different districts, these fibre 
vary widely in quality. Fibres grown even in the same 
district vary so widely that they are usually sorted out 
into various grades, such as tops, middles, bottoms, 
B-bottoms, X-bottoms and HABIJABI, the tops being 
the best and HABIJABI the worst. 


Grain — Unit of mass and is equal to 64.79891 
milligram which can be approximated to 64.8 mg. 


Grainage — An institution where silkworm seed is 
produced and sold to rearers. 


Graineur — The person engaged in the production of 
silkworm seed. 


Grandrelle Yarn — A 2-ply yarn composed of single 
yarns which differ from each other in colour or lustre. 


Greasy Wool — Wool which has not been scoured. 


Greasy Yarn (Wool) — Yarn which has not been 
scoured. 


Green Cotton — Cotton lint obtained from bolls 
picked in an immature condition. 


Grege (French) — Raw silk produced by filatures. 


Grenadine Twist — Hard-twisted plied silk yarn with 
800 to 2400 tpm, composed of singles, which have 
been first twisted in the same direction and then have 
been twisted together in the reverse direction. 
NOTE — It is used in the warp of grenadines which have to 
withstand severe friction. 
Grey Cloth — Cloth in the loom state before it is 
scoured, bleached or dyed. 


Grist — The linear density of bast fibre yarns spun on 
jute system expressed in terms of weight in pounds of 
one spyndle (14 400 yd) of yarn (see Count of Yarn). 


Guanaco Fibre — Fibre from guanaco Lama huanaco. 


Gum (Silk) — A sticky protein material that coats 
the filaments of raw silk. This is otherwise known as 
‘sericin’. 
NOTE — The gum serves to cement together the two filament 
of silk bave and aids in the formation of the cocoon; in silk 
manufacture, the gum is useful as a natural-size in weaving and 
in the construction of fabrics such as bolting cloth. 
Gum Silk — Thrown silk from which gum or sericin 
has not been removed. 


Gum Spots — Hardened places in skeins of raw silk 
caused, when, at some stage of production, excessive 
moisture softens the gum in raw silk and the gum later 
hardens to form an aggregated mass of filaments and 
gum. 

Gum Waste — Bits of silk collected as waste in the 
re-reeling of raw silk at the filatures or during throwing 
and weaving. It is also called ‘STRAZZA’ (Indian) or 
‘Bourre’ (French). 


Gun Cotton — Raw cotton treated with a mixture 
of nitric acid and sulphuric acid having powerful 
explosive properties. 


Gut Thread — A thread incorporated in a woven, 
knitted, or braided structure, primarily for the purpose 
of limiting its extensibility. 

Gutter Fly — Very short fibres and dust taken out of 
cotton through the dust extracting cages during the 
blow room treatment; generally this is treated as a part 
of invisible loss. 


H 


HABILABI — This indicates a grade of raw jute in 
entangled form (not in MORAHS) (see grading of jute). 


Hair — Animal fibre other than sheep’s wool or silk. 
The term is also used for elongated cells growing from 
epidermis. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Hairiness — The condition of a textile material with 
numerous loose fibre ends or loops or both, projecting 
from its surface. 


Halo-Length — A measure of fibre length made on a 
halo combed out on a cotton seed. 


Handle — The subjective assessment of a textile 
material obtained from the sense of touch. 
NOTE — It is concerned with the subjective judgment of 
roughness, smoothness, harshness, pliability, thickness, etc. 


Hank 
a) Asynonym for skein; 
b) A yarn or twine in coiled form; 


c) A definite length of sliver, slubbing, roving or 
yarn, for example, 840 yards of cotton yarn, 560 
yards for worsted yarn, etc; 


d) Asynonym, for count as applied to sliver, slubbing 
or roving,for example, 2-hank roving; and 


e) The skein of a reel silk. 


Hard Twisted Yarn — Yarn having more twist than 
normal. 


Hard Waste — Yarn waste produced during spinning, 
preparatory and weaving processes. 


Hare Fibre — Fibre from hare Lepus europaeus and 
Lepus timidus. 


Hawser Twist — A cabled yarn, cord or rope 
construction in which the single and first ply twist are 
in the same direction and the second ply twist are in the 
opposite direction, S/S/Z or Z/Z/S construction. 


Head (Jute) — Bundles of jute in a bale or raw jute 
usually weighing from 2.25 to 4.50 kg. Each head is 
given a twist and folded prior to packing in the bale. 


Heavy-Conditioned Wool — Wool containing a large 
amount of yolk and foreign matter. 


Hemp — A soft fibre obtained from the inner bark 
of the hemp plant, Cannabis sativa. It is also known 
as Sireta. The fibres are steel grey to creamy white in 
colour usually occurring in narrow flat ribbons of | to 
2.5 m in length. It is used in the manufacture of ropes, 
twines and rugs. 
NOTE — The term ‘hemp’ is indiscriminately applied to a 
great many fibres, for example, Manila hemp, Sisal hemp, 
Bombay hemp and Madras hemp. 
Henequen Fibre — Fibre from the leaves of Ageva 
fourcroydes. Also known as Cuban sisal, Mexican sisal. 


Hoops — See bands. 
Horse Fibre — Fibre from horse Equus caballus. 
Hulls (Cotton) — The outer hard shells of cotton seeds. 


HUNKA (Jute) — Very hard jute strands running from 
the lower end up to practically the tip of the fibre. This 
is due to insufficient or no retting. 


13 


IS 232 : 2020 


I 
Indian Hemp — See Sunn. 


Intrinsic Strength — The value obtained by dividing 
the mean single fibre strength by the mean fibre weight 
per unit length (synonymous with tenacity). 


J 


JANGLI (Jute) — This is an inferior variety of jute 
coming mainly from some Bihar districts. 


This variety of jute is usually not properly retted or 
cleaned. 


JHURI (Silk) — Yarn spun out of tasar waste without 
subjecting it to opening processes. 


JOOTH — See frison. 


Jute — A multicellular fibre obtained from the bast of 
various species of corchorus, of which the round pod 
jute (Corchorus capsularies or white jute) and the long 
pod jute (Corchorus olitorius or Tossa or DAISEE jute) 
are the most important. The fibres are long usually 
varying from 1.5 to 3.5 m. 


K 
KAPAS — A term used for seed cotton. 


Kapok — A unicellular fibre obtained from the seed 
pods of the kapok tree, Ceiba pentandra (Eriodendron 
anfracluosum) and Bombax malabaricum. The fibres 
are about 2.5 cm in length, white or twany in colour 
and have silky lustre. Fibres are tubular with a thin cell 
wall. It cannot be spun into yarn. It is very light and is 
used mainly for stuffing purposes. 


KATIA — The yarn spun out of tasar waste after 
opening and cleaning. 


Keel — See cut marks. 


Kemp — A coarse animal fibre with a wide lattice-type 
medulla, which is shed from the skin at least once a 
year, it is often shorter than fibres of the fleece, has a 
long tapering tip and, when completely shed, tapers 
sharply towards the root end. 


NOTES: 


1 Kemp fibres are usually chalky white in appearance, but may 
be coloured either very dark brown to black or reddish. Kemps 
are usually very strongly inherited. When dyed, because the 
cortex is relatively thin, they appear even much lighter in 
colour than normal fibres. 

2 The use of this term is not necessarily confined to wool 
fibres. 


Kenaf — The fibre obtained from the bast layer of the 
plant Hibiscus cannabinus.. 


NOTES: 

1 Kenaf is commonly known as Mesta in India. Other common 
names are Ambari, Awaste hemp, Bimbli, Brazilian jute, Da 
dha da, Deccan hemp, Gambo hemp, Guinea hemp, SIAM jute, 
Stockroos, Teal. 

2 Being similar to jute in many of its properties, kenaf is used 
either as an alternative to or in admixture with jute. 


14 


Kete (Silk) — A term used for handspun tasar thread. 


Khadi — Fabric woven on handloom using handspun 
yarn. 


KHANDY — See candy. 


Kidney Cotton — A type of Brazilian cotton in which 
the seeds adhere together in clusters, making ginning 
difficult. 


Kink — A definite deflection of a portion of the length 
of a fibre or yarn from the general direction of the 
remainder. 


Kinky Yarn or Thread — See snarly yarn. 


Knop Yarn or Thread — A fancy yarn with knops 
or lumps of one or more components at regular or 
irregular intervals, 


Knot 
a) A joining by tying together, 


b) A tuft of yarn inserted in hand-made pile carpets, 
or 


c) Apackage made up of a number of skeins. 


L 


Lamb’s Wool — First clip of wool sheared off lambs 
which are less than 6 months old. 


Lap 


a) General — A sheet of fibres or cloth wrapped 
round a core with specific applications in different 
sections of the industry, for example, sheets of 
fibre wound on rollers or round endless aprons to 
facilitate transfer from one process to the next. 
NOTE — In cotton spinning, the sheets of fibre from openers 
and scutchers, sliver-lap machines and ribbon-lap machines 
are wound on the cores; in worsted preparing, the gilled fibres 
from the sheeter box are wrapped round a wide apron. 

b) Flax — An arrangement of the fibre strands in 
scutched flax pieced out of hacking or in pieces of 
hackled flax to facilitate their removal or separate 
units from built-up bundles. 
NOTE — In one method, a small bunch of fibres is separated 
from one side of the root laid across the centre of the pieces; 
the end is then folded round on to the under-side. In another 
method a half twist is inserted at the centre of the piece and 
compressed between thumb and first finger until the piece is 
placed in position in the bundle. 

Cloth — The length of cloth between the successive 

transverse folds when pieces are plaited down or 

folded. 


d) Cloth — An individual layer of cloth in roll form. 
Laying (Silk) — The entire quality of eggs laid by a 
single moth. 


Lea (Cotton) — A continuous length of yarn measuring 
120 yards in the form of coil made on 1.5 yards girth 
reel. 


Leasing — The operation of inserting a crossed 
traverse lease-cord in wraps of yarn on a reel for 


the purpose either of separating wraps into groups 
of specific numbers, for example, 120 or to prevent 
entangling of wraps of yarn during processing, for 
example, hank dyeing, to facilitate subsequent winding 
on a yarn package from hank supply after removal of 
the lease-cords. 


Lea Strength (Lea Breaking Strength) — Breaking 
load of a lea of yarn (see also breaking load). It is the 
maximum load developed rather than load at complete 
rupture of the specimen. 


Light Conditioned Wool — Wool containing a small 
amount of yolk and foreign matter. 


Linear Density — Mass per unit length. The preferred 
units of measurements are in grams and metres, or 
their multiples or sub-multiple. The tex (grams per 
kilometer) is recommended for yarns (see count ). 


Linen — Yarn, thread or fabric made from flax fibres 
(see also flax). 


Linen Count — The linear density of linen yarn 
(wet spun), expressed as number of 300 yards hanks/ 
Ib (see count). 


Lint 
a) The main fibres separated from the cotton seed by 
ginning; or 
b) A plain-weave sterilized material with a raised 


fleecy surface, being highly absorbent and of a 
type made for surgical purposes made from cotton. 


Linter — Very short fibres removed by delinting 
process from cotton seed already ginned. 


Lisle Thread — A highly-twisted, plied (usually two- 
ply), good-quality cotton hosiery yarn, spun generally 
in fine counts. All lisle threads are gassed and some 
may be mercerized (mercerized lisle). 


Lists — See selvedges. 


Llama Fibre — Fibre from the fleece of the semi- 
domesticated animal of the same name, Jlama Lama 
glama, which inhabit the high mountain regions of 
South America ( see also Alpaca). 


Lock (Wool) — A tuft of wool. 


Looming — A term covering the processes involved in 
preparing, the weaver’s beam for the loom, for example, 
drawing-in, dropper-pinning, sleying, knotting, tying, 
etc. 

Loop Length (Pile Structures) — The continuous 


length of yarn or fibres between the two successive 
lowest points of bindings of the pile in the substrate. 


Lousiness — A defect in silk due to fibrillation of silk 
filaments. The filament splits up into fine fibrils, which 
form small neps and which in dyed fabric are evident as 
white specks (see also fibrillation). 


Lovers-Knot-Mat — See mats (g). 


Lumen — A canal or central cavity in the fibre. 


15 


IS 232 : 2020 


Lump — A length of unfinished fabric usually longer 
than the customary piece length. 


Lustre — The display of different intensities of light 
reflected both specularly and diffusely from different 
parts of a surface exposed to the same incident light. 
Due to this reflection of light, the surface of textiles 
(fibre, yarn or fabrics) looks glossy or shinning. 


M 
Madras Hemp — See Bombay Hemp. 


Maguey — Fibre from the leaves Ageva cantala. Also 
known as Cantala, Nanas sabrong, Poepoes. 


MANGADAN Yarn — See coir yarn (h). 


Manila Hemp — A hard fibre obtained from the leaf 
stems forming the trunk of the Abaca plant Musa 
textiles. It is also known as Abaca fibre. The fibres are 
long (1 to 3 m), rather coarse, creamy white to brown in 
colour, quite strong and durable. It is extensively used 
for the manufacture of ropes and cordages. 


Marl Yarn — Yarn made by running together and 
drafting into one, two slubbings or rovings of different 
colour or lustre. 


Marten Fibre — Fibre from marten Mustela martes. 
Matching 


a) General — A process in which the proportions of 
the dyes present in a material are adjusted so that 
the final colour resembles that of a given sample 
as closely as possible; and 


b) Wool — A process in wool sorting which consists 
of putting together those portions of different 
fleeces which correspond in quality. 


MATKA — The yarn spun by hand appliances cut of 
mulberry pierced and other waste cocoons. 


Mats (Coir) — These are characterized by their method 
of production as follows: 


a) Bit Mats — The pile is produced by insertion of 
bits of coir yarn in place of the fibre or the PUNJA 
yarn. 


b) Brush Mats — The pile is obtained by cutting 
topping or PUNJA yarn wound on a flat iron rod 
with grooved rod interlacing the base fabric. Also 
called ‘Rod Mats’. 


Corridor Mats — The yarns forming the face of 
the mat are taken alternatively over metal rods in a 
series to make the required length. When the fabric 
is formed, the metal rods are removed and thick 
coir yarn is inserted to obtain the consolidated 
mat. 


c 


ma 


d 


wa 


Creel Mats — The pile is produced by cutting the 
loops made from an additional set of warp yarn. 
The base fabric of a creel mat may be either of coir 
or jute or a mixture of the two depending on the 
quality. 


IS 232 : 2020 


e) Dumping Mats — Pillow like structures with 
straight sides from heavy grade matting made from 
ANJENGO or ARATORY yarn. It is tightly filled 
with cut coir fibres or coir yarn to give sufficient 
resiliency. The sides are sewn thoroughly with 
high—twist coir yarn. These mats act as shock 
absorbers when material are unloaded from a 
lorry or a truck, thus preventing the material 
unloaded being damaged. Two loops of coir rope 
are provided at the two ends for lifting the mats. 


Fibre Mats — The pile is produced by insertion of 
fibre around alternate warps. The fibre is held in 
place by weft yarn. 


Lovers-Knot Mat — Obtained in a similar manner 
to the sinnet mat but instead of the braided yarn, 
ropes are used. A set of five ropes are used to form 
the mat in which neither the beginning nor the end 
of the rope can be detected. 


Matting Mat — Obtained from cut-lengths of 
matting, and suitably finished. 
j) Rod Mats — See brush mats (b) above. 


k) Sinnet Mat — Produced by suitable arrangement 
of braided coir yarn. 


Matted Wool — See cotted wool. 
Matting 
a) Coir — Coir floor covering fabric woven on 
handlooms in plain, dobby and jacquard designs. 
Matting are sold in standard length of 45 m but in 


different widths ranging from 30 to 275 cm. One 
individual piece of matting is called a unit. 


wa 


g 


h 


wn 


b) Jute — Jute floor covering fabric woven in plain, 
striped, dobby jacquard designs. 


Mattress Fibre (Coir) — The waste fibre obtained 
during the extraction of bristle fibre along with pith. 


Maximum Deviation (Silk) — The degree of size 
variation in the test skeins, it is expressed by the higher 
of the two differences namely, the difference between 
the average size and the average size of a known 
number of coarsest skeins and the difference between 
the average size and the average size of the same 
number of finest skeins. 


Maturity — The degree to which the lumen (or canal) 
of cotton fibre has been obliterated by the cellulose laid 
down in the walls of the fibre. 


Mean Fibre Length — The average measure of the 
fibre length. 


Mean Fibre Mass per Unit Length — The quantity 
obtained by dividing the mean fibre mass by the mean 
fibre length. 


Medium Cross-Bred Wool — Wools lying in the fibre 
diameter range of about 29 to 34 micrometres. 


Medulla — The more or less continuous cellular 
narrow cavity/canal inside the cortical layer in most of 
the medium and coarse wools and hairy fibres. 


16 


Melange Yarn — A yarn produced from coloured 
printed tops or slivers, being distinguished from a 
mixture yarn, in that the fibres have more than one 
colour upon them. 


Mercerization — The treatment of cellulosic textiles 
and blends in yarn or fabric form with caustic soda 
solution of desired strength whereby the yarns or 
fabrics are swollen and dye affinity and lustre of the 
materials are increased. 


Merino Wool — Wool from pure bred merino sheep, 
normally having a mean fibre diameter of 25 microns 
or less. 


Merino Yarn — Yarn made from merino quality wool. 


Mesh (Fabric) — A fabric having appreciable openings 
spaces between the threads. 


MESTA — See kenaf. 


Metric Count — The linear density of yarns, expressed 
as number of 1000 m hanks/kg (see count of yarn). 


Middle (Jute) — Indicates a quality of raw jute (see 
grading of jute). 


Mildew — A superficial growth produced by certain 

species of fungi. 
NOTE — On textile materials, this may lead to discolouration, 
tendering, and variation in dyeing properties. 

Milling (Cloth Finishing) — The process of 

consolidating or compacting woven or knitted fabrics 

which usually, though not exclusively, contain wool. 
NOTE — The treatment, which is usually given, in a cylinder 
milling machine or in milling stock, produces relative motion 
between the fibres of a fabric which have been wetted out and 
swollen with a liquid of suitable pH. Depending on the type 
of fibre and the structure of the fabric and on variations in the 
conditions of milling, a wide range of effects can be obtained 
from a slight alteration in handle to a dense matting with 
considerable reduction in area. 


Mill Rigs — Creases produced in milling. 


Mink Fibre — Fibre from mink Mustela (Lutreola) 
vison. 


Mixture Fabric — Cloth made of mixture yarns or of 
yarns made of different types of fibres, for example, 
wool and cotton, or wool and man-made fibres. 


Mixture Yarn — Yarn made by mixing together of 
fibres of different characteristics, such as, colour, 
lustre, etc. 


Mock Grandrelle Yarn — A single yarn with a 
grandrelle effect. 


Modal Length — The central length of the group 
which in a fibre length frequency distribution contains 
the largest number of fibres. 


Mohair — The hair of the angora goat Capra hircus 
aegagrus. 


Moisture Content — The weight of moisture in a 
textile material expressed as a percentage of the total 
weight. 


Example: 


If 100 parts by weight of material contains 20 parts by weight 
of moisture, the moisture content is: 


100 x 20 A 
~io percent 
Moisture Equilibrium — The condition reached 


by a sample or specimen in a controlled atmosphere 
when the net difference between the amount of 
moisture absorbed and the amount desorbed, as shown 
by a change in weight, shows no trend and becomes 
insignificant. For test 
purpose, moisture equilibrium shall be reached by 
absorption, starting from a relatively low moisture 
content. 
Moisture Regain — The weight of moisture present 
in a textile material expressed as a percentage of the 
oven-dry weight. 
Example: 
If 100 parts by weight of material contains 20 parts by weight 
of moisture, the regain is 
100 x 20 
80 


Morah — See head (jute). 


Moss (Jute) — The vegetable matter other than jute 
adhering to the jute fibre strands. 


= 25 percent 


Motes — Small pieces of broken or crushed seeds or 
small immature seeds found in ginned cotton. 


a) Fuzzy Motes — The largest of this type of mote 
consists of whole aborted or immature seeds 
covered with fuzz fibres and possibly also with 
very short lint fibres, the development of which 
ceased at a very early stage. Small fuzzy motes 
originate as either undeveloped seeds or fully 
grown seeds, which are broken in ginning and 
disintegrate still further in the opening, cleaning, 
and carding processes. 


b 


ma 


Bearded Motes — A piece of seed coat with fairly 
long lint fibres attached. 


Mottle Yarn — See grandrelle yarn. 


Moulting — Shedding of skin by silkworm during its 
larval stage. The silkworm normally sheds its skin four 
times during its development. 


Mourzouks — A floor covering produced on special 
looms, the surface and pattern of which is formed by 
the weft yarn and not by warp yarns as in coir matting, 
the warp threads are drawn back into the fabric after 
weaving. 


Muga Silk — Silk of golden yellow colour obtained 
from partly domesticated moth Antheraea assamensis 
which feeds on the leaves of Som (Machilus bombycina) 
and Soalu (Litsaea polyantha). 


Mulberry — An urticaceous, hardy and perennial tree 
of the genus morus, silkworms (Bombayx Mori) feed 
on its leaves. 


17 


IS 232 : 2020 


Mulberry Silk — Silk mainly of yellow, white or 
greenish yellow colour obtained from domesticated 
silkworm Bombyx mori belonging to the family 
Bombycidae which feed on mulberry leaves. 


Mule Spinning — A system of spinning on a mule 
frame in which the drafting of the roving, twisting 
of the yarn and winding it on the bobbin, takes place 
intermittently and not continuously (see also ring 
spinning). 


Multivoltine Cocoons — Cocoons built by a silkworm 
race with more than two generations (life cycles) in a 
year. 


Mungo — The fibrous material made in the woollen 
trade by pulling down new or old hard woven or milled 
cloth or felt in rag form (see also Shoddy). 


Mushy Wool — Without any regularity of staple, 
obtained usually from old sheep in bad seasons. It is 
usually not combed as its yield of top is poor and the 
quantity of noils is large. 


Muskrat — Fibre from muskrat Ondatra zibathicus. 


N 


Nap (Wool) — Pile or cover obtained on cloth by 
raising, rubbing, etc. 


Napping — A finishing process used for obtaining nap 
on the surface of cloth. 


Naps (Cotton) — Small aggregates of loosely 
entangled cotton fibres. They are comparatively easy 
to remove from cotton and generally their individual 
fibres can be easily separated. They are larger than 
neps. 


Neatness (Silk) — The degree of neatness of raw 
silk panels, determined on the basis of incidence 
of defects which are smaller than those classified as 
‘minor cleanness defects’ by using official standard 
photographs for neatness. Neatness is expressed as a 
percentage. 
NOTE — Low neatness is the average of the neatness percent 
values of one-fifth of the panels inspected for neatness, which 
show the lowest neatness values. 
Nep — A small knot-like aggregate of tightly entangled 
fibres, usually not larger than a common pin-head 
(about 2 mm in diameter). 


Nep Count — The number of neps per unit weight of 
material, usually expressed in terms of number of neps 
per gram. 


Nett Silk — Raw silk filaments or strands which have 
been processed into yarns by twisting or folding or 
both. 


Nettle Fibre — Fibre from the bast of Urica dioica. 
Noils 


a) General — Shorter fibres separated from longer 
fibres during the process of combing; or 


IS 232 : 2020 


b) Silk — Short stapled residue from the dressing 
operations in silk spinning. 
Noil Yarn (Silk) — Yarn spun from silk noil. 


Non-woven — A non-woven is manufactured sheet, 
web or batt or directionally or randomly orientated 
fibres, bonded by friction, and/or cohesion and/or 
adhesion, excluding paper and products which are 
woven, knitted, tufted, stitch-bonded incorporating 
binding yarns or filaments or felted by wet-milling 
whether additionally needled or not. The fibres may be 
of natural or man-made origin. They may be staple or 
continuous filaments or be formed in situ. 

Northrow Silk — Two or more untwisted singles, 
which are doubled together with no more twist than is 
necessary to bind together the filaments of silk. 


NOTE — The treatment given makes a very soft yarn and 
eliminate formation of loops. 


Nutria Fibre — Fibre from coypu Myocastor coypus. 


O 


Omatt Fibre (Coir) — The shorter fibres obtained 

while combing the bristle fibre. 

Opening 

a) A general term covering several processes in the 

preliminary treatment of raw cotton. The primary 
objects of which are to separate the compressed 
and matted masses of cotton into loose tufts and to 
remove the heavier and bulkier impurities. 


b 


wm 


A general term for opening of cloth from rope 
form to open width form through scutcher or 
opener machine. 


Organizine — Yarn consisting of 2 or 3 single threads 
with Z-twist of 400 to 800 tpm, doubled with S-twist of 
400 to 700 tpm. 


Otter Fibre — Fibre from otter Lutra lutra. 
Oven Dry Mass — The mass of a sample of textile 
materials dried to constant mass in a drying oven 


maintained at 140 + 2 °C for silk and 105 + 3 °C for 
other fibres. 


Open Boil — Scouring of cellulosic textiles with 
alkaline liquors in open-topped vessels at or near to 
boiling point (see scouring). 
NOTE — Scours at temperatures lower than the boil are 
usually referred to as ‘Steeps’. 
Open-end Spinning — The production of spun yarns 
by a process in which the sliver or roving is opened 
or separated to its individual fibres or tufts and is 
subsequently reassembled in the spinning element into 
a yarn. 


Ovule — Small undeveloped seed present in cotton. 
P 


Palma Ixtle — Fibre from the leaves of Yucca 
carnerosana also known as Ixtle of Palma. 


18 


Par Weighting — A degree of weighting that results in 
a degummed silk returning to its original weight. Thus 
it is considered that 100 lb of raw silk yields 75 Ib of 
degummed silk and from this will be produced 100 1b 
of par-weighted silk. Par weighted silk is also known 
as 16 oz, weighted silk. Thus weighted silk of which 
150 Ib is produced from 100 |b of raw silk is silk of 24 
oz weighting. 

PASHMINA — See cashmere wool. 


Patent Selvedge — A type to selvedge formed within 
the width of cloth between the real selvedges of the 
cloth. This enables the cloth to be subsequently cut into 
narrower widths and prevents the cut edges so formed 
from frying, it is also called split selvedge. When the 
selvedge is at the centre of the width of the fabric, it is 
called centre selvedge. 


PAT — The local Bengali name for raw jute. 


Peat Fibre — Fibre from the leaf sheath of the plant 
Eriophorum vaginatum. 


Phormium — Fibre from the leaves of Phormium 
tenax, This is also known as Formio, New Zeland flax, 
New Zeland hemp. 


Photo Degradation — Degradation caused by 
electromagnetic radiation in the ultra-violet, visible and 
near infra-red wave-bands. 


NOTES: 


1 Photo degradation occurs only when electromagnetic 
radiation falls on the textile, but the resulting total degradation 
may depend on other factors. 


2 The limits of the visible spectrum are ill-defined, but for most 
practical purposes the lower limit is 380 nm and the upper 780 
nm. In daylight, the photo chemically active radiations are 
principally in the wavelength range 296-800 nm. 
Pick and Pick — Putting in regular succession single 
picks of different characteristics, such as count and 
colour. 


Picking 
a) The operation of passing the weft through the 
warp shed during weaving. 


b) The rectification of the face and back of a carpet 
after manufacture including inserting missing 
tufts, replacing incorrect ones and repairing 
broken yarns in the backing (local mending). 

c) Aprocess carried out before the final stage of cloth 

finishing to remove by hand any contamination 

(such, as kemp, wrong fibre, coloured hair, 

etc) which has not been removed by previous 

processing. This process is carried out particularly 
during the finishing of suiting, face-finished 
cloths, and cream or off-white cloths. 


Picks — The weft or filling yarn which lies across at 
right angle to the length of fabric. 


Piece Length — A customarily accepted continuous 
length of cloth. 


Pierced Cocoon — Cocoon from which the moth has 
emerged after softening the end of the cocoon and 
forcing its way out. 
NOTE — Pierced cocoons are not reelable and are wed in spun 
silk manufacture. 
Pile — The raised loops or tufts forming all or a portion 
of surface of certain types of fabrics or carpets. 


Pitch — The average number of tufts or knots in carpets 
per unit area. Traditionally number of knot per sq inch. 


Pilling — Small accumulations of fibres on the surface 
of a fabric. Pills can develop during wear, are held to 
the fabric by an entanglement with the surface fibres of 
the material. 


Pineapple Leaf — Fibre from the leaves of Anannas 
comosus merr. It is also known as Pina. 


Pita — Fibre from the leaves of Aechmea magdalenae. 


Plain Weave — The type of weave in a cloth in which 
each warp thread for a pair of warp threads passes 
alternatively over and under each weft thread. 


Plied Yarn — See folded yarn. 


Ply — One of the component threads in plied or cabled 
yarn. 


Plying — See doubling. 
Porter (Jute) 


a) Fabric — The value obtained by counting in a jute 
fabric or jute product as marketed, the number of 
warp threads per full gauge length of 47 mm ( or 
37/20 in) and dividing it by the number of threads 
per split. (2 for hessian, 4 for-double warp plain 
fabric and 6 for double warp twill cloth). 


b) Reed — Number of groups of 20 splits over 94 cm 
(37 in). 
Preconditioning — To bring a sample or specimen 
to a relatively low moisture content [equilibrium in 
an atmosphere between 10 and 25 percent RH and not 
exceeding 50 °C (see Note)] prior to conditioning in a 
controlled atmosphere for testing (while preconditioning 
is frequently translated as predrying, specimens should 
not, in fact, be brought to the oven-dry state). 
NOTE — These conditions may be obtained by heating air 
at 65 percent RH and 27°C (the standard atmosphere) to a 
temperature up to 50° C. 
Pre-tension — The relatively low tension used to 
remove kinks and crimp when mounting a specimen 
preparatory to making a test and used to establish the 
nominal gauge length. 


Proofing — A chemical treatment of fabric to make it 
resistant to water, fire, insects, rot, moth, etc. 


Protein A natural polymer, consisting of 
amino acids linked together by the peptide group 
( CO NH: ). Examples are silk, wool 
and other animal hair fibres. 


19 


IS 232 : 2020 


Pull (Sampling) — The act of manually abstracting a 
sample of fibres from a bulk lot of raw material or sliver 
with a view to assessing the length and/or distribution 
of length of fibre within the sample. 

Pulled Wool — See skin wool. 


Punga — Fibre from the bast of Clappertonia ficifolia, 
Triumfetta cordifolia and Triumfetta rhomboidea. 
Puppa (Silk) — The resting stage in the life cycle of a 
lepidopteran insects (it is also called Chrysalis stage). 
During this stage, replacement of larval organs by that 
of the adult is realized. 

Pure Dye Silk — Silk dyed but neither weighted nor 
adulterated. 


R 


Rabbit — Fibre from the common rabbit Oryctolagus 

cuniculus. 

Raising (Wool) — See napping. 

Ramie — A soft fibre obtained from the bark of the 

ramie plant, Boehmeria nivea and B. tenacissima, 

belonging to the nettle family. It is also known by the 

common names China grass, Rhea. The fibres are from 

10 to 100 cm in length, white in colour, very strong and 

durable and have silky lustre. It is still being used in the 

manufacture of fabrics for dress goods, sports clothes, 

table cloths, etc. 

Ratch 

a) The distance between the nips of the front and 

back rollers in a roller drafting system (synonym, 
reach). 

b) A slight additional drafting of the yarn, which 
takes place towards the end of the mule draw. 
Raw Silk — The silk reeled by drawing together the 
required number of filaments from cocoons, it contains 

its original gum or sericin. 
Real Selvedge — See ‘patent selvedge’ and ‘selvedge’. 


Rearing House — The house wherein silkworms are 
reared from hatching of eggs to formation of cocoons. 
Reclaimed Wool — Wool recovered from rags, known 
as ‘shoddy’ or ‘mungo’. 
Reach 

a) See Ratch (a), and 


b) The distance from the back heald to the back rest 
or back roller of a loom (locally Ratch or Perry). 


Reed 


a) A device consisting of a number of wires closely 
set between two slats or baulks which may serve 
any or all the following purposes: 


1) Separating the warp threads, 
2) Determining the spacing of the warp threads, 


IS 232 : 2020 


3) Guiding the shuttle, and 
4) Beating up the weft. 


b) Jute — The fibre coming from one jute plant, held 
together as a unit by the meshy structure of the 
fibre system; and 


c) To draw ends through a reed. 


Reed Number or Count of Reed — The number of 
dents per unit width of reed. There have been many 
units in common use. The recommended SI unit is 
dents/cm. 


Reed Length (Jute) — The average length of jute fibre 
strands. 


Reediness — Crack between groups of warp ends 
appearing either uniformly across the cloth or in an 
isolated manner. 


Reeling — The process of winding silk filament from 
the cocoon. 


Reindeer Fibre — Fibre from reindeer Genus rangifer. 


Relative Humidity — The ratio of the actual pressure 
of the water vapour in the atmosphere to the saturation 
vapour pressure at the same temperature. The ratio is 
usually expressed as a percentage (see also absolute 
humidity). 

Recommended Allowance — The percentage that, in 
the calculation of commercial weight and of yarn linear 
density is added to the oven-dry weight with or without 
previous washing to remove natural or added oils 
and dressings. For such materials, the recommended 
allowance is arbitrarily chosen according to commercial 
practice and includes the moisture regain. It may 
also include the normal finish that is added to impart 
satisfactory textile qualities to the material. 


Regain — See moisture regain. 


Renditta — The number of kilograms of cocoons 
required to yield 1 kg of raw silk. The cocoons yield is 
expressed in terms of renditta. 


Example: 


If 18 kg of cocoons give 1 kg of raw silk, the yield is 
said to be 18 renditta. 


Rereeling — The process of winding yarn reeled on 
small reels on to standard reel (150 cm) to make hanks 
for marketing. 


Resham — Indian name for natural silk (see also raw 
silk), 

Retting — The treatment on the crop to make the bast 
fibre strands more easily separable from the woody part 
(stick) of the stem by immersing the plants in water 
which sets up certain chemical and biological changes 
to help the process. 


Ribbon Width (Cotton) — The width of the broadest 
part of a fibre between two successive convolutions. 


Rigging — See cuttle. 


20 


Ring Spinning — A system of spinning on a ring frame 
in which drafting of the roving, twisting of the yarn and 
winding it on the bobbin takes place simultaneously 
and continuously (see a/so mule spinning). 


Rings (Raw Silk) — Places where a length of raw silk 
thread has, in reeling, been inadvertently wound in the 
form of ring instead of in its usual cross form, due to 
the thread having escaped from the traversing guide of 
the reeling machine. Rings increase waste in winding. 


Rod Mats — See mats (b). 


Roots (Jute) — The hard, barky portions at the lower 
end of jute strand. 


Rope — A material of cordage construction with a 
circumference of 25 mm or more. 


Roping Yarn — See coir yarn (j ). 


Roselle Fibre — Fibre from the bast of roselle Hibiscus 
sabdariffa. 


Rove (or Roving) 


a) General — A continuous, slightly twisted strand 
of fibres produced on a roving frame and from 
which yarn is spun; or 

b) Wool — A continuous strand of fibres with no 
twist, made from the web produced on condenser 
card by splitting the web into a number of parts 
and then condensing each part by rubbing; 


Rug — A piece of thick, heavy fabric used for floor 
covering. 


Runnage (Coir) — Unit of linear density for coir yarn 
expressed as number of metres per kilogram or yards 
per pound. 


Runners (Jute) — The hard barky jute strand running 
from its lower end to the middle or sometimes up to the 
tip of the fibre. This is due to incomplete retting. 


S 
Sable Fibre — Fibre from the sable Mustela zibellina. 


Sappy Wool — Wool containing abundance of grease; 
consequently the yield of such wool is low. 


Schappe — Spun silk yarn particularly that which is 
made from stock which has been partly degummed by 
the schapping or maceration process. 
NOTE — Such a fermentation process does not remove the 
gum entirely and hence schappe contains up to 10 to 12 percent 
of gum. 
Scourage of Yarn (Coir) — A number indicating the 
fineness or coarseness of the coir yarn which is obtained 
by dividing the number of strands that could be laid 
very close to each other without overlapping in a length 
of 0.914 m (or 1 yd) by 20. 


Scouring — Treatment of textile materials in aqueous 
or other solutions in order to remove natural fats, 
waxes, proteins and other constituents, as well as dirt, 
oil and other impurities. 


Scroop — A property of finished silk such that the 
material has a characteristic feel and gives a crunching 
noise when crushed by hand. It is produced by acid 
treatment and appears to be due to the presence of fatty 
acids or some such lubricant. 


Scutching 


a) Cotton — An operation in preparing cotton for 
spinning that has three objects, namely, to reduce 
the cotton to loose open condition by beating it, 
removal of impurities remaining in the cotton 
after opening and the formation of a continuous 
lap or web of cotton wound on to a rod for use on 
carding machine. 


b) A cleaning operation given to bast fibres like flax 
and hemp, after they have been retted, to separate 
the fibres from the woody portion of the stalk. 


Seal Fibre — Fibre from seal Family pinnipedia. 


Sechoiring (Conditioning of Hot Airing) — The 
technique of killing and drying the pupae in the 
cocoons by subjecting the cocoons to hot air of specific 
temperature in an enclosed chamber for required time 
without damaging the quality of silk in the cocoons. 


Seed Cocoons — Cocoons of pure race of selected 
quality chosen for propagation. 


Seed Cotton — Raw cotton (including seeds) as 
removed from bolls. It is also called KAPAS. 


Seedy Wool — Wool containing a variety of grass 
seeds difficult to remove. 


Seed Hair — Fibres growing from the surface of seeds 
or from the inner surfaces of fruit cases or pods. Such 
fibres (seed hairs) are formed by the marked elongation 
of epidermal cells. 


NOTE — From a botanical aspect, cotton is a seed hair, since, 
it is an outgrowth in the form of single cells from the epidermis 
or outer skin of cotton seeds. In this respect, cotton differs from 
fine vegetable fibres which are composed of a number of plant 
cells, usually joined and cemented together to form a bundle 
and often occurring in stems (for example, flax) or leaves 
(for example, sisal) of plants of shrubs. Nevertheless, in 
commerce and industry, it is customary to refer to cotton as 
a vegetable fibre. Calotropis gigantea and Calotropis procera 
(akund) and Asclepias (milkweed) are other example of hair 
growing on seeds, whereas Eriodendron (Java kapok) grows on 
the inner surface and the placenta of seed pods. 


Selvedges — The longitudinal edges of a fabric formed 
in such a way that its component threads cannot ravel. 


NOTE — In jute industry, a selvedge is sometimes called RS 
or Real Selvedge to distinguish it from PS or Patent Selvedge. 


Sericin — See gum. 
Sericulture — The art and science of raising silkworms 
for the production of cocoons. 


Serrations — The scales of wool fibre, more in 
evidence on the finer wools. 


21 


IS 232 : 2020 


Set or Sett 


a) Atermusedto indicate the spacing of ends or picks, 
or both per unit length. It is usually expressed as 
ends or picks per decimetre (or centimetre); or 


b) A synonym for ‘count of reed’. 


Shafty Wool — Well grown fleece wools having long 
uniform, sound staples. 


Sheering (Wool) — To cut the fleece from a sheep. 
Shives 


a) Vegetable matter other than burr found in fleece, 
and 


b) The short pieces of woody waste beaten from the 
straw during scutching. 


Shoddy (Wool) — The fibrous material made in the 
woollen trade by pulling down new or old knitted or 
loosely woven fabrics in rag form ( see also Mungo). 


Shorn Wool — Wool obtained by shearing live sheep. 


Shot (Jute) — A single thread of weft yarn running 
from selvedge to selvedge, it is inserted in one passage 
of the shuttle across the loom. 


Shotting (Jute) — The number of weft threads per dm 
of the finished cloth. 


Shrinkage — A decrease in dimensions of a fabric. 


Silk — A protein substance which is secreted in the 
fluid state by silkworm Bombyx mori (caterpillar stage) 
and which on exposure to air hardens in the form of a 
thread. Fibre extruded by silk worm of other species are 
also categorized as silk but with specific generic, such 
as Tasar, Muga, Eri, Anaphe. These are also known as 
wild silk. It is composed mainly of fibroin and partly 
of sericin and other substances (see also Mulberry silk, 


ENDI, Muga silk and Tasar silk). The term is also used 
to denote a fabric or a yarn made from silk or waste 
silk. 


a) All Silk — A term which may be applied to fabrics 
where no textile fibre other than silk is present, 
irrespective of the amount of weighing. 


b) Pure Silk — A textile material shall be considered 
‘pure silk’ if the material comprises of silk only 
subject to manufacturing tolerance up to 5 percent 
of foreign matter including metallic and weighting 
materials. 


c) Raw Silk — See raw silk 

d) Silk Spun — See spun silk. 

e) Blended Silk — The textile material shall be 
considered ‘blended silk’ if it contains not less 
than 50 percent of silk fibres. However, a tolerance 


of + 3 percent shall be permitted on the declared 
silk content in the textile material. 


f) Part Silk— The textile material shall be considered 
‘part silk’ if it contains not less than 20 percent of 


IS 232 : 2020 


silk. However, a tolerance of + 3 percent shall be 
permitted on the declared silk content in the textile 
material. 


g) Pure Zari — A yarn having a silk core, wrapped 
with silver wire and may be electroplated with 
gold. The silk core is a two ply 16/18 denier soft 
twisted yarn dyed in a red or yellow colour. 


Singed Yarn — See gassed yarn. 
Singeing — See gassing. 


Singles — A term applied to thrown silk when its single 
threads have been twisted, used for chiffon. 


Single Filament (Bast Fibre) — The finest fibre strand 
which appears single to the naked eye. It tends to be 
identical with a small fibre strand. 


Single Yarn — A yarn which is either twistless or 
can be rendered twist less in a single untwisting 
operation. 


Sinkage 


a) Loss to weight in wool cleaning, usually expressed 
as a percentage. 


b) Unaccounted or ‘invisible’ loss of weight in 
processing, usually expressed as a percentage. 


NOTE — It is incorrect to use the word shrinkage as a synonym 
for sinkage. 


Sinnet Mat — See (k) under mats. 


Sisal — A hard fibre obtained from the sword like 
leaves of the sisal plant Agave sisalana and other 
Agava species. The fibres are long (60 to 180 cm), 
white or creamy white in colour and strong and durable. 
It is used extensively for the manufacture of binder 
twine, summer rugs, brushes, etc. Also known as Sisal 
hemp. 


Size — A colloidal solution of materials, such as 
starch and glue, which is generally applied when hot 
before weaving and which when cold forms a film. It 
strengthens and stiffens the warp. 
NOTE — The main type of substance used are carbohydrates 
and their derivates; gelatin and animal glues, although other 
substances, such as oil, polyacrylic acid and polyvinyl alcohol 
are also used. 


Size (Raw Silk) — Term used in respect of raw silk 
synonymous to count in respect of cotton, woollen and 
jute yarns. The size of raw silk is expressed in deniers 
(see also Denier). 


Sizing — A process of applying size to the warp. 
Skein — A definite length of sliver, slubbing, roving or 


yarn in the form of a coil made on a reel of a specified 
girth. A synonym for hank (see Hank). 


Skein Breaking Tenacity — The maximum tensile 
stress developed in a test skein before rupture, expressed 
in force per unit linear density of the yarn constituting 
the skein. This is expressed in, grams per tex. 


22 


Skein breaking tenacity, grams per tex 


Breaking load in grams of skein 


2 x Number of wraps in test skein x linear density 
of unstrained yarn in tex 


Skin Wool — Wool obtained from the skins of 
slaughtered sheep, also known as pulled wool. 


Skirting — Portion of the fleece obtained from head, 
face, legs and britch of sheep, usually removed from 
the fleece to make it uniform. 


Slashing — See sizing. 
Slats — See battens. 
Slipe Wool — See skin wool. 


Sliver — A continuous assemblage of a strand of fibres 
without twist. 


Slub — A defect in yarn characterized by thick yarn 
uneven portion. Such a yarn is called Slubby Yarn. 


Slubbing — A slightly twisted continuous strand of 
fibres produced on a slubbing machine. 


Slub Yarn — It is a type of fancy yarn having slubs at 
intervals. 


Snarls — Small curly portions in a yarn with twist. 


Snarly Yarn — A yarn that shows excessive tendency 
to twist round itself if held with insufficient tension. It 
is also known as kinky yarn. 


Soaking (Silk) — A process of treating raw silk with 
oil-in-water type of emulsions to soften the gum and 
render the threads pliable for winding, throwing and 
knitting. 

Soft Silk — Thrown silk yarn, undyed or dyed, from 
which the gum has been removed. 


Soft-Twisted Yarn — A yarn with twist less than the 
normal. 


Soft Waste — Waste which is soft in nature and which 
has a little or no twist produced during the spinning 
process, obtained mostly in machines, such as scutchers 
and cards, also includes clearer laps, sweepings, fly, etc. 


Sorting (Wool) — Classification and separation of a 
fleece into parts on the basis of the quality of the fibre. 


Souple Silk — Silk which has been dyed and from 
which only a part of the gum has been removed. 


Souring — A process of treating loose cotton, yarn or 
cloth in dilute solution of an acid. 


Specific Strength — A synonym for tenacity. 


Specific Stress — The ratio of force to mass per unit 
length (this ratio is equal to the stress per unit density). 
It is expressed as mN/tex or N/tex. Here force at a given 
strain gives specific stress at that strain. 


Specimen— A specific portion of material or laboratory 
sample upon which a single test is performed or which 
is selected for that purpose. 


Specks and Leaves (Jute) — Spots of dry leaves and 
bark which appear above the root portion of the jute 
fibre and affect the appearance of the fabric. This is due 
to defective retting. 


Spider Silk — The product mainly of Nephila 
madagascariensi. One characteristics of spider silk is 
its fineness, the diameter of filament of Epeira diadema 
is about one twentieth of that of silk filaments. Spider 
silk can be spun and woven but with great difficulty. 


Spinner’s Waste — All types of waste produced during 
the conversion of fibres into yarn. 


Spinning 
a) General — The process or processes for producing 
single yarns. 
b) Silk 
1) The process of making yarn out 
discontinuous filaments of silk, and 


of 


2) An operation by which silkworms produce 
cocoons. 


Split — The space between two adjacent wires of a 
loom reed. The term is also used for a wire of the loom 
reed. 


Splits — Fabrics woven with split selvedges. 
Split Selvedge — See patent selvedge. 
Spool — See cheese. 


Spun-Silk (Yarn) — Yarn made from waste silk 
and pierced cocoons, by dressing and spinning it is 
composed of short lengths of filaments ranging from 
2.5 to 20 cm. 


Spyndle — A unit of length used in the determination 
of count or grist of jute yarn, it is equal to 13167 m 
(14400 yd). 


Staining 


a) Any adventitious (unwanted) colour, for example, 
dye, dirt, or iron, on textile material. 


b) The fugitive or permanent colouring of textile 
materials with different colours, for example, in 
histology for identification. 


Standard Atmosphere — See atmospheric conditions 
for testing. 


Staple Length — An estimated length of a majority of 

fibres in a sample of raw cotton. 

Steeping 

a) General — The treatment of textile materials in 

a bath of liquid, usually, though not necessarily, 
without continuous or intermittent agitation. The 
term is also applied to processes whereby the 
materials are impregnated with a liquor, highly 
squeezed, and then allowed to lie. 


b) Flax — The process of retting flax straw by 
immersion in an aqueous liquor. 


23 


IS 232 : 2020 


Stentering — The stretching to required width and 
drying of cloth. 


Stifling — See sechoiring. 


Straight Reeled Skeins — The skeins made by direct 
reeling that is without re-reeling, for example, charkha 
and domestic basin reeling. 


Strand 
a) Asingle fibre, filament or monofilament; or 


b) A single ordered assemblage of textile fibres 
having a high ratio of length to diameter and 
normally used as a unit including slivers, rovings, 
single yarns, plied yarns, cords, braids, ropes, etc. 

Strazza (Italian) — See gum waste. 


Strength — The ability of a material to resist rupture 
induced by external forces, for example, breaking 
strength, tear strength, bursting strength, etc. 


Strings — Small pieces of thread inserted at the 
selvedges of fabrics to indicate defects. Also known as 
‘flaggings’. 

Strick (Flax/Jute) — A small bunch of flax straws, of 
scutched flax, or of hackled flax, of a size that can be 
held in the hand. 


NOTE — In the jute section of the textile industry, it is also 
known as strike, and refer to a bunch of jute similar to a ‘head’ 
but smaller, usually | to 2 kg. 


Strusa (Italian) — See frison. 
S-Twist — See Twist. 
Suint 


a) Excretions from the sweat glands of sheep, 
principally consisting of potash salt; or 


b) The water-soluble portion of yolk. 


Sunn — A soft fibre obtained from the inner bark of 
sunn plant, Crotalaria juncea. The fibres are long (45 
to 150 cm), grey or brown with a wide range of colour 
and quality due to differences in preparation. It is used 
mainly for twines and cordages. It is also known as 
sunn hemp, Bombay hemp, Madras hemp, Indian 
hemp, Sana, Benaris hemp, Brown hemp, Coconada 
hemp, Itarsi hemp, Jubblepore hemp, Phibilit black 
hemp, Seonie hemp, St. helena hemp, etc. (in all these 
common names the term ‘hemp’ is used improperly). 


Sweeping Waste — Sweepings from the floors or from 
various rooms in a textile mill. 


Swollen Fibre Diameter (Cotton) — The diameter 
of a fibre when swollen to its maximum extent in 18 
percent caustic soda solution. 


T 


Tail End — The finishing end of a woven piece or a 
package of yarn. 


Tampico Fibre — Fibre from the leaves of Agave 
lechuguilla Torr. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Tape — A woven narrow fabric not exceeding 10 cm in 
width and not exceeding 3.4 gram per meter length per 
centimeter width. 


Tape Length — The distance between the successive 
cut marks inserted during sizing of warps. 


Tare — The weight of all external and internal packing 
materials of a case, bale, or other type of container 
including the weight of bobbins, tubes, etc. 


Tasar Silk — Silk fibres of natural copperish colour 
obtained from a species of wild lepidopteran insect/ 
silk worm (Antheraea mylitta) belonging to the 
Assamensis group Antheraea pernyi, Antheraea yama- 
may, Antheraea roylei, Antheraea proylei. It feeds on 
the leaves of a variety of forest trees such as Asan 
(Teiminalia tomentosa), Arjun (Terminalia arjuna), Ber 
(Zizyphus jujuba), Sal (Shorea robusta), and Himalayan 
oak (Quercus serrata), and is habitant of Bihar, Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh. 


Tearing Strength — The force required to start or 
continue a tear in a fabric under specified conditions. 


Tenacity — The breaking load of a material under test 
divided by the linear density of the unstrained material 
and is expressed as mN/tex. 


Tensile Strain — The relative length deformation 
exhibited by a specimen subjected to a tensile force. 
Strain is expressed as a fraction of the nominal gauge 
length; also as a percentage (see also elongation). 


Tensile Strength 


a) General — The strength shown by a specimen 
subjected to tension as distinct from torsion, 
compression or shear. 


b) Specific — The maximum tensile stress expressed 
in force per unit cross-sectional area of the 
unstrained specimen, for example, kg/mm’. 


c) True — The maximum tensile stress expressed in 
force per unit cross-sectional area of the specimen 
at the time of maximum load. 


Tensile Stress — The resistance to tensile deformation 
developed within a specimen subjected to tension by 
external force. The tensile stress is expressed in two 
ways, as the force per unit cross-sectional area of the 
unstrained specimen or as the force per unit linear 
density of the unstrained specimen. The latter is more 
frequently used in textile testing and is referred to as 
specific stress. 


Tensile Test — A test in which the resistance of 
material to a force tending to stretch it in one direction 
is measured. 


Tentering — See stentering. 


Tex — The direct decimal system based on metric units 
as the universal system for describing the linear density 
(mass per unit length) of fibres, filaments, slivers and 
yarns. It is the shortened name given to the combination/ 
unit grams per kilometre ( see also count ). 


24 


The multiples and sub-multiples recommended for use 
in preference to other possible combinations/units are 
as follows: 


a) Grams per metre or kilograms per kilometre — 
Kilotex. 


b) Milligrams per kilometre — millitex. 
c) Decigrams per kilometre — Decitex. 


Textile — Originally a woven fabric. The term is now 

applied to any manufacture from fibres, filaments or 

yarns, natural or man-made, obtained by interlacing. 
NOTE — For example, thread, cords, ropes, braids, lace, 
embroidery, nets and cloths made by weaving, knitting, felting, 
bonding and tufting are textiles. 

Thread — The result of twisting together in one or 

more operations two or more single, folded, or cabled 

yarns. 


NOTES: 

1 The term is frequently used to describe single yarns. 

2 In the natural silk industry, threads is used as a synonym of 

fold, for example, 3 thread 13/15 denier yarn. 
Throwing (Silk) — A process of winding with or 
without soaking and doubling and twisting of raw silk 
to make it into yarn suitable for knitting, weaving, etc. 


Threads per Unit Length (Woven Fabric) — The 
number of weft yarns (picks) in a specified length of 
fabric. 


NOTES: 

1 The traditional unit of length has been the inch but the value 

should now be expressed as ‘threads per cm’ although the 

actual count may be made over 1 cm, 2.5 cm, 5 cm or 10 cm, 

according to the nature of the fabric. 

2 Counting may be done at the following stages of manufacture: 

a) In the loom — The position of the count should be 

agreed. It is usually taken between the fall of the 
cloth and the take up roller, with the cloth under 
weaving tension. 


b) Loom state — The count is taken after the cloth has 
been removed from the loom and is relaxed from 
weaving tension, but before it is subjected to any 
further treatment that modify its dimensions. 


c) Finished — The count is taken when no further 
processing in the piece is contemplated. 
In all cases, the condition of the cloth at the time the 
count was taken should be specified. 


Threads per Unit Width (Woven Fabric) — The 
number of warp yarns (ends) in a specified width of 
fabric. 


See threads per unit length (woven fabrics) notes 
1 and 2. 


Thrums — Those unwoven parts of warp yarn at the 
beginning and end of the loom beam which are cut off 
and generally used for joining broken warp threads 
during weaving. 


Time-to-Break — The time interval during which a 
specimen is under (a generally increasing) tension, to 
reach the breaking load/extension. 


NOTE — Time-to-break does not include the time required 
to remove slack from the specimen. On machines supplied 
with an autographic recorder, the time-to-break is indicated 
by the time elapsing after the pen registers the initial tension 
sustained by the specimen until the pen registers the maximum 
force. 

Tinting — Colouring of fibres and yarns with fugitive 

colours to permit easy distinction. 


Top 
a) See wool top. 
b) Jute — Indicates a quality of raw jute (see also 
grading of jute). 
Top Dyeing — Dyeing of wool fibres in the form of 
worsted tops. 


Topping 


a) Bringing up to shade by dyeing on the top of other 
colours, or 


b) A light cut on a shearing machine, also called 
‘ending’. 
Toughness (or Specific Work of Rupture) — It is the 
energy per unit mass required to rupture the specimen. 
It is the integral of the nominal stress strain curve and is 
calculated by dividing the work of rupture by the mass 
of the specimen under test. 


Tow 


a) Flax or Hemp — Any substantially clean fibre of 
less than scutched length. 


b) Man-made Fibres — A large number of filaments 
collected into a loose strand or assemblage 
substantially without twist. 


Tram — Soft silk yarn consisting of raw silk threads 
(usually two)twisted together with a few turns, say, 3 to 
5 per cm; used for weft. 


Trash (Cotton) — Foreign matter present in bales of 
raw cotton, excluding abnormal items, such as stone, 
timber, pieces of old iron, etc. 


NOTES: 


1 Normal wholes seeds, either ginned or unginned, are 
frequently excluded from this category, but broken portions of 
them and also whole or broken undeveloped seeds are usually 
regarded as trash. 


2 The main component of trash is chaff including bits of seeds, 
leaves and stem. Dirt in the form of soil or sand is another 
component of trash. Fragments of foreign fibres, such as sisal, 
jute, hemp, etc, are sometimes regarded as trash but usually 
receive special reference when easily recognizable. 
Truss (Jute) — A bundle or small bale suitably covered 
or wrapped but neither hooped nor machine pressed. 


Tsatlee Silk — Chinese hand-reeled silk which is 
uneven and is more imperfect than filature silk. It is 
sometimes called “‘book-silk’ 


Tussah Silk — See tasar silk. 
T-VYCOME Yarn — See coir yarn (k). 


25 


IS 232 : 2020 


Twill Weave — A weave that produces diagonal lines 
on the surface of the cloth. 


Twine — A plied yarn made by twisting together two 
or more strands of yarn. 


Twist 


a) The spiral disposition of the components of a yarn 
which is usually the result of relative rotation of 
the two ends. 

b) The number of turns per unit length of a yarn 

expressed as turns per metre (tpm) or turns per 

inch (tpi). 

S-Twist — The twist in yarn due to which its 

spirals are in line with central portion of letter S, 

when the yarn is held in a vertical position (see 

Fig. 2). 

Z-Twist — The twist in yarn due to which its 

spirals are in line with central portion of letter 

Z, when the yarn is held in a vertical position 

(see Fig. 2). 


c) 


d) 


SH 


S-Twist Z-Twist 


Fic, 2 S- anb -Twists 


Twisted Yarn — See folded yarn. 
Twisting — See doubling. 


Twist Factor, Twist Multiplier — A measure of 
the ‘twist hardness’? of a yarn determined by the 
multiplication of the turns per unit length by the square 
root of the linear density on a direct system, or the 
division of the turns per unit length by the square root 
of the count on an indirect system. Typical examples of 
units of twist factor are: 


a) Turns per centimetre multiplied by VW(linear 
density of yarn of yarn in tex); 
b) Turns per inch divided by V(cotton count of yarn). 
Unit (a) is the recommended SI Unit. 
Twistless Yarn — A yarn prepared without twist 


in order to obtain special properties, for example, 
increased softness and dyeability. 


IS 232 : 2020 


Twist-on-Twist — Descriptive of a folded yarn in 
which the direction of the folding twist is the same as 
that of the single twist. 
NOTE — The use of this term to indicate a specific direction of 
twist should be discouraged. 
Twist Release — The extension in length of yarn on 
untwisting, expressed as a percentage of the length of 
twisted yarn. 


Twist Take-up — The decrease in length of yarn on 
twisting, expressed as a percentage of the yarn length 
before twisting. 
NOTE — As the length of yarn before twisting may not be 
known, the length of the yarn after untwisting may be treated as 
equal to the length of the untwisted yarn for practical purposes. 
Twitty — Describes yarn of irregular thickness and 
twist and brittle in places. 


U 


Ultimate Fibre — A botanical cell of leaf and bast 
fibres. 


Unevenness — The non-uniformity of the linear 
density of a continuous strand or portion of a strand. 
Following three principal expressions for unevenness 
are in use: 


a) Unevenness, Coefficient of Variation — The 
square root of the average of the squares of the 
deviation of linear density from the average linear 
density; expressed as percentage of the average 
linear density within the tested length of strand. 


b) Unevenness, percent Mean Deviation — The 
average of the absolute values of the deviation 
of linear density from the average linear density, 
expressed as percentage of the average linear 
density within the tested length of strand. 


c) Unevenness, percent Mean Range — The average 
of the ranges of linear density found within units 
of equal length, expressed as the percentage of 
linear density within the tested length of strand. 


Union Cloth — A cloth made with warp of one kind of 
fibre and weft of another. 
NOTE — Originally the term related to clothes made from 
cotton warp and wool weft or from linen warp and cotton weft. 
Univoltine Cocoons — Cocoons built by a silk-worm 
race with one generation (life cycle) in a year. (Also see 
Multivoltine Cocoons). 


Urena — Fibre from the bast of urena Urena lobata and 
Urena sinuate. It is also known as Ake-ire, Aramima, 
Bimia, Ban_ochro, Bolo-bolo, Brazilian jute, Caesar 
weed, Candillo-a, Canhamo, Carrapicho, Congo jute, 
Cousins rouge, Cuban jute, Culotan, Culut, Gonama, 
Grand cousin, Guaxima, Malva, Ototo, Paka, Toja, 
Vocima, 


26 


Vv 
Vicuna (Fibre) — Undercoat hair from vicuna Lama 
vicugna, an animal of the llama family. 


Virgin Wool — Wool which previous to its present use 
as a textile raw material has not been spun into yarn or 
felted. 


VYCOME Yarn — See coir yarn (m). 


WwW 
Wall Thickness — Thickness of the cell wall of a fibre. 
Warp (Warp Yarn) 
a) Threads lengthways in a fabric as woven, or 
b) A number of threads in long lengths and running 
in the same direction intended for weaving or 
knitting. 
Warping — The process of preparing a warp for 
weaving or knitting. A number of methods are 


employed, such as beam warping, chain warping and 
sectional warping. 


Washed (or Steeped) Silk — Raw silk which has been 
soaked in warm soap solution so as to soften its gum 
and loosen its threads. 


Wastes — Processing by-products in the manufacture 
of yarn and cloth. 


Waste Silk — Silk from wild and cultivated cocoons 
which cannot be reeled and silk from the unreelable 
parts of the cocoons. It also includes the waste 
produced during the various processes of silk reeling 
and throwing. It is used as a raw material for spun-silk. 
Wales and Courses 

a) Wale — A longitudinal chain of loops in a knitted 

fabric or garment formed by one needle. 


b) Course — A transverse row of loops in a knitted 
fabric or garment. 


Weasel — Fibre from weasel Mustela misalis. 


Weaving — The interlacing of warp and weft with one 
another to form a fabric. 


Webbing 


a) A woven narrow fabric which weighs over 3.4 g 
per m length per cm width (or 2.5 Ib gross yd/in 
width ); or 


b) A term of classification referring to webbings in 
general. 


Weftage (Coir) — The number of transverse strands of 
yarn in a matting per decimetre (or foot). 


Weft (Weft Yarn) 
a) Yarn widthways in a fabric as woven; or 


b) Yarn intended for use in a fabric widthways. 


Weight (Gross) — The total weight of a consignment, 
case, bale or sample includes the weight of packing 
materials, containers and of supports, such as cones 
and bobbins. 


Weight (Net) — The difference between the gross 
weight and the tare. 


Weighted Silk — Silk which has been increased in 
weight and bulk by the addition of chemicals. 
Wet Spun 
a) Descriptive of a yarn of flax, hemp or similar fibre 
spun from roving that has been thoroughly wetted 
out in hot water immediately prior to the drafting 
operation. 


b 


wm 


Descriptive of man-made filaments, the 
coagulation of which is effected by extrusion into 
a liquid bath. 


Winding — An operation of transferring yarn from 
one form of package to another. 


Wool — Primarily, hair from the fleece or coat of the 
sheep or lamb of the genus Ovis aries. The term is also 
used as extension for fibres/hair obtained from alpaca, 
camel, dromedary (an Arabian camel), llama, vicuna, 
cashmere goat, angora rabbit, guanaco, angora goat, 
yak, beaver, otter. 


Woollen Count 


a) Dewsbury — The linear density of woolen yarn, 
expressed as number of yards per ounce. 


b) Yorkshire — The linear density of woolen yarn, 
expressed as 256 yd skeins per pound. 


Woollenized Jute — Jute fibre when subjected to 
mercerising treatment under controlled conditions 
becomes crimpy like wool and soft and fluffy, the 
treated jute with or without further chemical softening 
treatment. 


Woollen Yarn — A yarn spun from wool which has 
been carded but not gilled or combed before spinning 
and which the fibres cross each other in every direction 
presenting a rough surface. 


Wool Quality — The spinning quality of wool 
assessed primarily on the basis of fibre fineness. Crimp, 
waviness, handle, etc, also influence wool quality. 


Wool Top — Continuous untwisted sliver of wool 
fibres from which the shorter fibre or noils have been 
removed and the fibres brought parallel to each other 
by combing. 


Wool Yield (Clean Wool Fibre Content) — The 
weight of wool fibres, free from vegetable matter, 
grease, dirt and other impurities and adjusted to the 
standard condition of 13.8 percent moisture content, 
1.5 percent alcohol extractable matter content and 0.5 
percent ash content, the latter two calculated on the 
basis of the oven-dry weight of the scoured specimen 
(see IS 1349). 


Work of Rupture — It is the energy required to bring 


27 


IS 232 : 2020 


a specimen to rupture under a (tensile) deformation 
test. It is the integral of the load-elongation curve and 
is dependent on the linear density and length of the 
specimen. 


Worsted Count — The linear density of worsted yarn 
expressed as number of 560 yd hanks per lb (see also 
count of yarn). 


Worsted Yarn — A yarn from wool fibres which have 
been carded and either gilled or combed or both. 


X 
X-Bottom — Indicates a quality of raw jute (see 
grading of jute). 

Y 


Yak — Fibre from yak Bos (Poephagus) grunniens. 


Yarn — A continuous strand of textile fibres or filaments 
with or without twist, suitable for plying, knitting, 
braiding, weaving or otherwise inter twining to form a 
textile end product. Yarn occurs in the following forms: 


a) Spun Yarn — A yarn composed of fibres (short 
length or staple) twisted together. 


b) Filament Yarn — A yarn composed of continuous 
filaments assembled with or without twist. 


c) Monofilament — With or without twist. 


d) Narrow Strip of Material — Such as, paper, 
cellophane or metal foil, with or without twist. 
NOTE — Varieties include single yarn, plied yarn, cabled 
yarn, cord, thread, fancy yarn, etc. 

Yarn Construction — Construction which indicates 
the material, count of single yarn, number of turns per 
unit length, number of plies and the direction of twist 
in the plies. 

Yarn count — see count. 

Yarn Package — A length or lengths of yarn in a form 
suitable for handling, storing or shipping. Packages 
may be unsupported as skeins or cakes, or prepared 
with various winding patterns on bobbins, cops, cones, 
pirns, spools, tubes or beams. 

Yarn Regularity — Pertaining to evenness of yarn. 
Yarn Strength Index (YSI) (Cotton) — The breaking 
load, in grams of a 100 m skein divided by the linear 
density of yarn expressed in tex units [see also Break 
Factor (skeins) and Count Strength Products]. 

Yolk — Extraneous matter of animal origin in greasy 
wool. 

Yellowing — The yellow discoloration that may 
develop on textile materials during processing, use or 
storage over a long period. 


Z 


Z-Twist — See Twist. 


IS 232 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1349 : 1964 Methods for determination 6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of 
of wool fibre content of raw textiles 
wool 15090 (Part 1): 2002 Raw silk — Grading and 
methods of tests: Part 1 
Grading 


28 


IS 232 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TXD 01 


Organization 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 

Bidhata Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Central Silk Technological Research Institute, 
Bangalore 


Delta Ropes Mfg Co, Kolkata 
Garware Wall Ropes Limited, Pune 


Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkata 


Institute of Jute Technology, Kolkata 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 

Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 
North India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 
Office of Jute Commissioner, Kolkata 
Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 
Testtex India Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Texanlab Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Textiles Committee, Mumbai 
Thanawala & Co, Mumbai 


The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmedabad 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills’ Research Association, 


Mumbai 
Tirupati Technik, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr P. G. Par (Chairman) 


Suri R. K. PACHERIWALA 
SHRI ROHIT PACHERIWALA (Alternate) 


DR PRADEEP MANDHYAN 
Dr T. SENTHILKUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr Susuas V. NAIK 
Dr S. Nivepita (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND MAJARIA 


SHRI SANJAY VASUDEO RAUT 
SHRI S.G PALUSKAR (Alternate) 


Ms SAUMITA CHOUDHURY 
Suri D. P. Gon (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. Bera (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NARAYAN B. BORADE 
SHRI HEMANT Paras (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHENDRA SINGH 
Suri S. S. Kasuyap (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV SHUKLA 
SHRIMATI NASRAH Himayar Kiowa! (Alternate) 


SHRI SOMYADIPTA DATTA 
Sarı MananeB Dutta (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. GUPTA 
SHRI JAMIL AHMAD (Alternate) 


SMT MEETA SHINGALA 
SHRI MAHESH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR 
SHRI MANOJEET Kunnu (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTIKAY DHANDA 
Suri S. G. Patuy (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMAL THANAWALA 
SHRI UPENDERA THANAWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA KAJALE 
SHRIMATI MAMTA CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Suri R. A. SHAIKH 
SHRIMATI PRAGTI KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
Surimati A. A. SupaM (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHAL MASAND 


IS 232 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
TUV Rheinland (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon SHRI CHARAN SINGH 
SHRI ASHOK MEnRA (Alternate) 
Uster Technologies India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai SHRI JAGDISH KULKARNI 
VJTI, Mumbai REPRESENTATIVE 
Wool Research Association, Thane SHRIMATI SEEMA PATEL 


SHRI JAGADANANDA BEHERA (Alternate) 


World Traders Manufacturing Co, Mumbai SHRI VARUN GUPTA 
SHRI ADITYA Gupta (Alternate) 


In Personal Capacity (B-21, Parijat, Talepakhadi, Dr R. P. NACHANE 
Eskar Road, Borivali, Mumbai-400091 ) 
BIS Directorate General Suri A. K. Bera, ScIENTIsT ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


30 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 01 (13072). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


