UDC

621'482'3/4'018-712

IS:

12455 -1988

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS OF AIRCOOLED SPARK IGNITION AUTOMOTIVE ENGINES

1. Scope- Specifies performance requirements of spark ignition engines of two- and four-strokl cycles type, naturally aspirated, air cooled used for propelling two/three wheeled vehicles.
- Shall be in accordance with IS : 10000 (Part I)-1980 2. Definitions combustion engines: Part 1 Glossary of terms relating to test methods'. 3. Types of Engines -The engines covered under this standard `Methods of tests for interna

are of the following

types: air fans suet

a) Automotive air cooled spark ignition engines which do not have built-in as those used on motorcycles and mopeds.

cooling

b) Automotive air cooled spark ignition engines of the type which have a built-in cooling fan such as those used on scooters and their three wheeled derivatives ( autorickshaw ), etc. 4. General Requirements for the type test shall have been well run-ir

4.1 Any engine taken from production and prepared according to manufacturer's recommendations. 4.2 The auxiliaries,

if any attached to the engine shall be specified

by the manufacturer. limits for carbor

4.3 The exhaust smoke emission levels shall comply with IS : 9057-1986 `Emission monoxide for vehicles powered by spark ignition engines ( first revision )`. 5. Installation and Adjustments

5.1 The air cooled automotive engines of the type described in 3 (a) (which do not have built-ir cooling fan ) shall be provided with an external air cooling arrangement provided on the test bet installation. The external air cooling may be provided by a blower or fan or any other suitable ail handling system. The cooling air from the external blower shall flow past the engine in approximately the same direction as it would, when the vehicle is in motion. The air velocity is to be so adjusted thai the spark plug seat temperature does not at any time exceed the value specified by the manufacturer, However, the air velocity shall not exceed the maximum vehicle speed plus 5 km/h at level road at same engine/vehicle operating conditions. The minimum value of spark plug seat temperature shall not be lower than the value specified by the manufacturer. In the absence of such data by the manufacturers, the testing authority may arrive at or deduce suitable values in consultation with the manufacturers. 5.1.1 The blower shall be capable of being moved into such positions with respect to the engine Nhich will give the requisite direction and velocity to cooling air. Any other air handling system shall lave suitable means to regulate air velocity. In case duct is used, the area of the duct shall be enough to cover at least the frontal area of the engine. 5.1.2 The temperature of the cooling air shall be substantially close to the atmospheric temperature, ;ay, within f5 K, to ensure that the air flow past the engine will be simulating the vehicle operational :onditions. The temperature shall be measured at the point of entry to the engine and beyond the ,adiation zone of the engine. 5.1.3 The spark plug seat temperature shall be measured by placing a copper washer on the spark Ilug seat below the spark plug and connecting it to a suitable thermocouple or by any other suitable nethod keeping the spark plug tip position same. 5.1.4 The engine shall be mounted on the dynamometer nstalled for the particular vehicle application, stand at the angle at which the engine is

5.1.5 The exhaust shall be lead out into atmosphere by suitable ducting so that the change in back jressure in the silencer is not appreciable. It is not permissible to interchange the systems of intake md exhaust.

Adopted 12 July 1986 I BUREAU
MANAK

0 January 1989, BIS OF INDIAN

I
ZAPAR MARG

Gr 4

STANDARDS

SHAVAN,

9 SAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS I 12455 - 1988
5.1.0 The engine shall be tested at the crank shaft end or at the gear box output shaft depending upon the manufacturer's declaration and provision on the engine. The point of testing shall be recorded in the test data. 5.1.7 The manufacturer shall give complete instructions before the commencement of the tests, with regard to the spark plug cleaning period, exhaust port cleaning period and silencer decarbonization period, etc. The manufacturer shall also give details of overhaul and maintenance schedules for the engine. 5.1.8 A complete record of all deviations and minor adjustments made on the engine during the test Minor adjustments and maintenance shall be maintained and given as appendix to the test report. include spark plug cleaning, exhaust port cleaning, any adjustments of magneto contact breaker points, replacement of ignition coil ( if running hot ), etc. 6. Fuels and Lubricants 6.1 FuelThe fuel shall conform to IS : 2796-1971 `Specification for motor gasolines (

firsfrevision

)`. the for

shall provide the complete technical particulars of 6.2 Lubricating Oil - The manufacturer lubricating oil that has to be used. A statement of a viscosity grade alone shall not be sufficient undertaking the tests.

6.2.1 For two-stroke engines that are lubricated by oil mixed in the fuel, the manufacturer shall state the grades of lubricating oils that have to be used alongwith the percentages to be mixed with the fuel. This shall be stated separately for: a) Running-in, b) Performance 7. Declaration and and endurance tests. Fuel Consumption

of Power

7.1 The declarations

of power are required for two main purposes as follows:

a) Declaration by a manufacturer of value of the power which the engine will deliver under standard reference conditions. This declared value is known as the `rated power'. The rated power shall correspond to IS rating as defined in 7.3. b) Verification by measurement that the engine delivers the power which has been declared in 7.1 (a) under the same set of reference conditions or after proper allowance has been made for any difference in the ambient site conditions from the standard reference conditions. 7.2 The declaration performance curves conditions. of the engine output at different operating shall be presented by the manufacturer in the form of speeds at full throttle obtained under the reference

7.3 IS Rating -The power measured on a test bed at the crankshaft or its equivalent at the rated speed specified by the manufacturer and corrected to the standard reference conditions, the engine being equipped with auxiliaries, if any, for determination of net power. The power is also defined as rated net brake power. 7.4 Power Adjustment Factor factor is determined (+ where P = pressure at site ambient conditions, T = air intake temperature 7.5 Declaration of Fuel Consumption shall state the specific fuel consumption ( SFC ) at rated output and also at 75, 50 and 25 percent of rated load. under kPa; and K.

7.4.1 The power adjustment

jx(+jo'5

by the following

formula:

at site ambient,

7.5.1 The engine manufacturer the standard reference conditions

7.5.2 A tolerance of +5 percent the speed range shall be allowed, purchaser,

in fuel consumption at 100 percent of the rated load throughout unless otherwise agreed to between the manufacturer and the

2

IS:12455-1988
7.5.3 Before the commencement of the tests, the specific gravity of the fuel shall be measured. In case of two-stroke spark ignition engines where pre-mixing of lubricating oil and fuel is done, the specific fuel consumption shall be calculated taking the specific gravity of the fuel alone into consideration (not the specific gravity of the fuel mixed with lubricating oil ). However, while carrying out the arithmetical calculations for determining the gravimetric specific fuel consumption, a due allowance for the volume of lubricating oil shall be made, Example If V ml of fuel containing v percent of lubricating oil takes t seconds for being consumed, while the engine is developing P kW and the specific gravity of the fuel is S g/ml, then the specific fuel consumption is given by the following relationship: x ( 3 peats ) g/kWh

Note -

V percent of oil means Y ml of oil in 100 ml of fuel, that is, In ( 100 + v) ml of fuel and oil.

It is the ratio of the specific fuel 7.5.4 Specific Fuel Consumption Adjustment Factor `p'consumption under ambient site conditions to the specific fuel consumption under standard reference conditions, that is, Specific fuel consumption under ambient site conditions fi = ~T~-~~.~~~__~_~,~~ Spectfrc fuel consumptron under standard reference condmons 7.6 The lubricating oil consumption shall be declared by the manufacturer any method agreed to between the manufacturer and the testing authority. 6. Standard Reference Conditions when different from the stated, shall be recorded. The reference and shall be determined by

6.1 The standard conditions are:

reference conditions, pressure

Total barometric Air temperature Relative humidity
Note: Total

100 kPa 298 K 30 percent.

barometric

pressure

= 100 kPa
= 300 K = 60 percent permissible a8 reference conditions for a period of five years.

Air temperature Relative These humidity are also still

conditions

6.2 Performance data shall be obtained under stabilized normal operating conditions, with an adequate If the ambient test conditions are different from the standard reference fresh air supply to the engine. conditions as given in 6.1 the performance data shall be adjusted to the standard reference conditions. 8.3 No data shall be recorded until percent for at least 30 seconds. torque, speed and temperature have been maintained within one

6.4 Observed brake load and fuel consumption data shall be taken simultaneously and shall be the average of two stabilized sustained values which do not vary by more than one percent. A time measurement of not less than 10 seconds shall be used when measuring speed and fuel consumption with an automatlcally synchronized counter-timer combination. For hand operation, the time of measurement shall be not less than 20 seconds. 9. Tests 6.1 Type Tests - Shall be carried out on engines when first offered and shall also be conducted when there is any significant change in design of the engine or change in any of the critical component or Type tests shall change in any declared parameter such as power and specific fuel consumption. include the tests in the following sequence: a) Preparation combustion b) Preliminary of tests according to IS : 10000 ( Part 5)-1980 "Methods of tests for internal engines: Part 5 Preparation for tests and measurements for wear', run, 3

IS:12455

-1988
tests,

c) Initial performance
d) 100 hour test, and e) Final performance 9.1.1 Preparation

tests. Genera/ requirements for tests: engine prior to the Ime. shall

of tests and wear measurements

a) The manufacturer shall supply the performance characteristics of the commencement of the tests and all other information, as required.

b) The enaine offered bv the manufacturer for the tests shall be from reaular oroduction and run:n for the period recommended by him. All parts essential for eigine' operation be included.

c>The
d)

manufacturer shall supply operating instructions, servicing in 9.1.1 (d).

a set of printed literature giving technical specifications, schedule and wear limits of various components listed

engine shall be completely dismantled and examined physically Preparation for tests -The so that design features and also the conditions of the various parts may be noted before tests are commenced. After the physical examination, the dimensions of the main working parts, listed below, shall be checked and recorded in the proforma oiven in is : 10000 (Part 5)-1980: 1) Cylinder 2) Cylinder 3) Piston, 4) Piston rings, 5) Gudgeon pin, 8) Valves ( inlet and exhaust ), 7) Valve seats ( inserts 8) Valve guides, 9) Valve springs, ), head, bore/cylinder liner,

10) Connecting rod, 11) Big end bearing, 12) Small end bush,
13) Connecting 14) Crankshaft, 15) Crankshaft 18) Camshaft, 17) Timing bearings and journals, and test). rod bolts and nuts,

gears ( backlash shall be measured before and after endurance

e) The engine shall then be re-assembled

by ( or under the supervision of) the manufacturer, mounted on a suitable test bed and run-in for the period and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer. The running-in period shall be stated by the manufacturer. In case the engine has not been run-in by the manufacturer prior to offering for test, the engine shall be run-in for a period and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer and this shall be mutually agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser or the inspecting authority. During the running-in, none of the critical components listed above shall be allowed to be replaced. In case any of these parts need to be changed during running-in, the engine shall be discarded and fresh engine selected for testing. of the engine shall be carried out in accordance

f)

After completion of running-in, the servicing with the manufacturer's schedule.

9) No modifications/replacements

shall be allowed during the running-in and regular testing If any modification/alternation which have direct bearing on the performance of the engine. is considered necessary by the manufacturer, he may withdraw the engine from the test and The changes carried out by the submit another engine incorporating the required changes. 4

IS :12455 - 1988
manufacturer shall be stated and he shall have to complete tests separately for the testing of the modified engine. all the necessary formalities for

The engine shall be 9.1.2 Preliminary run - Shall be carried out after the engine is well run-in. fitted with the auxiliaries required to enable it to give the net output at standard reference condition. The sequence of running shall be as given in Table 1. The speeds shall be rounded to nearest 100.

TABLE Engine Speed (Percent of Maximum Speed Idling :: 70

1

PRELIMINARY

RUN Time ( Minutes

)

Load (Percent of Rated Load )

)

up to 30
30 :: 40 50 tY: 30 xx 30

a5 40 z"o

60 ;!I

a5

t: 60 60

1: 30 30

100 iz 100

100 100 100

100

30 30 z

9.2 Initial

Performance

Test

9.2.1 Test procedure -The performance of the engine shall be assessed by drawing a power curve over normal full load speed range. Readings shall be taken at a minimum of six approximately evenly spaced settings after stable conditions are reached over the normal speed range from maximum rated speed at full load to 45 percent of this speed or 1 000 rev,`min, whichever is lower. At all these points, the fuel pump shall be set at its maximum fuel delivery stop. 9.2.2 The performance specific fuel consumption data shall be presented in the form of graphs and smoke density duly corrected. recording power output, torque,

9.2.3 idling test - With engine at the working temperature specified ascertained if the engine idles satisfactorily for at least five minutes.

by the manufacturer,

it shall be

9.2.4 Acceleration test - With dynamometer set for speed giving the maximum brake power at full throttle, the engine shall be accelerated abruptly from idling to full throttle. The engine shall pick up the speed easily This test shall be carried out three times. The test shall also be repeated on 40 percent maximum dynamometer speed. 9.2.5 Speed limiter ( or governor ) check - The speed high idling speed specified by the engine manufacturer. 9.3 Endurance Test limiter or governor shall be checked for the

9.3.1 Test procedure -The test shall be conducted after the initial performance test and the speed limiter or governor check as specified in 9.2.1,9.2.2 and 9.2.5. The test shall last for a total of 100 hours running time and shall consist of not-stop running periods of 10 hours duration with not less than 2 hours stoppage between consecutive running periods. 9.3.2 Each running period shall consist sequence of engine running conditions: a) 50 minutes of five cycles of two hours duration made up of the following

at 75 percent of full load at the declared maximum 5

speed;

IS : 12455- 1988
b) 45 minutes c) 5 minutes d) 20 minutes 9.3.3 During 9.3.4 Before temperature. at full load at speed corresponding at idling; and speed. by the manufacturer shall have reached shall be used. within 5 K of the room to maximum torque;

at full load at declared maximum oil recommended cycle, the engine

the tests, lubricating starting the next

shall be 9.3.5 Results of the test - The above results corrected to standard reference conditions plotted on a time scale in accordance with IS : 10000 ( Part 6)-1980 `Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 6 Recording of test results'. 9.3.6 The corrected power and the corrected torque shall at no time fall by more than 5 percent of the initial readings ( at corresponding speeds ) for more than two consecutive readings. 9.3.7 The corrected specific fuel consumption the initial performance test values. shall at no time increase by more than 5 percent above

9.3.6 A maximum of two interruptions to correct any fault or mal-adjustment shall be permitted The nature of such adjustments shall be recorded. during the full duration of the test. 9.3.9 If the engine needs to be stopped during any cycle for any minor attention, the running time of that cycle shall not be counted as part of the test and the cycle shall be recommended, In case of power breakdown or breakdown of testing epuipment, the test cycle shall not be scrapped and the remaining cycle time shall be completed on resumption of power or repair of test equipment as the case may be. In case of major breakdown, the entire test shall be repeated from the beginning on another engine. For this purpose. a minor breakdown is one which requires normal service adjustments and replacements as recommended by the manufacturer and a major breakdown is one which requires complete overhaul and changing of parts not covered by normal service adjustments and replacements. The major breakdown will also mean the breakdown or replacement of any of the critical components of the engine. 9.3.10 During the endurance tests, periodic checks shall be made of the fuel and oil. conform to the specifications of the manufacturer. 9.4 Final Performance the 100 h tests, the engine shall be tested for final performance in the way outlined The oil shall

9.4.1 After in 9.2.

9.4.2 The corrected power and torque than five percent from the corresponding

throughout the running speed range shall initial performance test values.

not drop by more

9.4.3 The corrected specific fuel consumption shall at no point throughout increase by more than five percent from the corresponding value obtained test.

the running during initial

speed range performance

9.4.4 The corrected exhaust gas opacity shall at no point in the running speed range exceed the limiting values given in IS : 10000 ( Part lo)-1980 `Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 10 Tests for smoke levels, limits and corrections for smoke levels for variable speed compression engines'. of the endurance and final performance 9.5 fuel Consumption - Shall be measured at the beginning tests. The specific fuel consumption shall be stated by the manufacturer at rated net power under The specific fuel consumption at site conditions shall be connected to standard reference conditions. standard reference condition. evenly spaced 9.6 Determination of Power - Shall be computed after taking at least five approximately operating speed, to define complete the power curve between the lower stable speed on load and the maximum engine speed on load recommended by the manufacturer, 9.7 Test Results Shall be recorded as per IS : 10000 ( Part 6).1980.

9.8 Information on Enquiry or Order and Information to be Supplied by the Manufacturer - Shall be as given in IS : 10000 ( Part 11 )-I980 `Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 11 Information required with enquiry or order and information supplied by manufacturer with the engine'. Any other special characteristics or relevant data for testing shall also be supplied by the engine manufacturer. 6

IS : 12455 - 1988
10. Marking plate: - The engines shall be clearly marked with the following on the engine name plate/data

a) Engine number; b) Volumetric capacity; and and code number. at rated speed in kW, maximum speed (rpm), of lubricating and fuel oil shall be given in the

c) Manufacturer's

name or trade-mark

10.1 The information regarding maximum rated output maximum torque (Nm). SFC (g/kWh), and specifications manual provided to the purchaser. 10.2 Standard Mark 11. Test Certificate in IS : joooo (Part certificates'.
12. Packing

Details available

with

the Bureau of Indian

Standards.

- Shall be provided by the testing authority/manufacturer in the proforma given 12)-1980 `Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 12 Test

-

The engines shall be suitably

crated so as to avoid damage during transist.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard has been prepared for covering special needs for conducting all tests on the These tests are also applicable to engines classes of engines which are used in motorcycles, mopeds. which are used on scooters. threewheelers and car be extended to, in the absence of any standard, The testing needs of all these classes of engine covered outboard motors for marine or rivercraft. under this specification are covered by the following three characteristic problems: a) Difficulties b) Simulating c) Lubrication of ascertaining the mechanical efficiency,

the vehicle slip stream on test beds, and being provided by mixing of lubricating oil with the fuel.

This Indian standard specification has been drawn to supplement IS : 10000 ( Parts 1 to 12)1980, IS : 10004-1981 `Performance requirements for spark ignition engines for automotive purposes' `Performance of small size spark ignition engines'. and IS : 73471974, 7
Printed at Arare Prore. New Dolhl. India

