UAT Wah IS 1046 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


das gett — faterite 
(ae FRAT) 


Cash Boxes — Specification 
(Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 683.341 


© BIS 2014 


ARA AMA AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM gz, 9 SERA pi mm, ae eet (ou? 
ay MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2014 Price Group 4 


Security Equipment Sectional Committee, ME 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Forth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Security Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 


This standard, first published in 1957, was revised in 1970, 1979 and 1992. In this revision amendment Nos. 1 
and 2 have been incorporates. Cash boxes of various kinds are being manufactured in India from a long time to 
cater to a wide variety of requirements. Several improvements in the manufacture and design of cash boxes have 
been made from time-to-time. This standard on Cash Boxes has been also been revised accordingly to keep it up 
to date with customers’ requirements and industry practices. 


The following major changes in this revision are: 


a) Salt spray test has been incorporated to ensure the quality of surface finishing; 
b) Options for types of lock to be used have been widened; and 


c) Provision has been made for manufacture of cash boxes of sizes as per customer’s requirement, subject 
to meeting other requirements of the standard. 


Cash boxes of various kinds are being manufactured in India from a long time to cater to the needs of government 
departments like the Posts and Telegraphs, treasuries, railways, banks, companies and general public. Several 
improvements in the manufacture and design of cash boxes have been made from time-to-time. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1046 : 2014 


Indian Standard 
CASH BOXES — SPECIFICATION 
( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements for cash boxes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard area encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards given in Annex A. 


3 SIZE AND DIMENSIONS 


The size, shape and leading dimensions of cash boxes 
shall be as given in Fig. 1 to Fig. 4. 


NOTE — Any other size agreed between the purchaser and the 
supplier, can also be supplied, subject to meeting requirements 
of 5. 


4 MATERIAL 


Materials specified in Table 1 are for general guidance 
only. The critical quality parameters of the materials 
used for the components shall be declared by the 
manufacturer at the time of type approval and records 
of details of material shall be maintained for conformity 
during routine production. 

NOTE — Keeping in view the availability of indigenous 

materials and testing facilities with the manufacturer, some 


physical methods of tests have been given in Annex B for 
guidance only. 


5 CONSTRUCTION AND WORKMANSHIP 


5.1 Fabrication 


The cash boxes shall be well made and free from 
defects. Workmanship shall be good. The body, cover 
and main bolt of the lock shall be free from blow holes, 
casting defects and other surface defects. Surfaces of 
the bolts, which are to be in sliding contact, shall be 
finished smooth. 


5.2 Body 


The body shall be bent out of a single or two mild steel 
plates to the shape illustrated in Fig. 1 which shows 
sectional perspective of the body for clarity. The plate 


Table 1 Materials to be Used in the Manufacture 
of Different Parts of Cash Boxes and Their Locks 


(Clause 4) 
SI Part Material 
No. 
a) (2) (3) 


i) Body, fixed bottom, 
detachable Bottom, 
lid, coin tray, 
slotted lugs, Locker 
case and cover plate 
ii) Drill proof plate 


Any grade of steel as per IS 2062, 
IS 1079 or any other equivalent 
standard 


Any grade of hardenable steel 
with HRC 50, Min 


iii) Handles and other Cast brass as per IS 292 or the 


non-ferrous bronze as per IS 306 or zinc base 
components alloy as per IS 713 or suitable 
including those of stainless steel as per IS 1570 or 
lock body any other equivalent 


iv) Levers Sheet brass conforming to CuZn 


40 of IS 410 


NOTE — The materials for the components shall be declared by 
the manufacturer at the time of type approval and records of 
details of material shall be maintained for conformity during 
routine production 


shall be bent uniformly by machine and not by hammer 
blows. The recess at top, which receives the lid, shall 
be deep enough to allow the lid in closed position to 
remain 6 to 10 mm below the top edge of the body. All 
the eight corners, as also the single joint of the body 
shall be strongly welded and finished smooth. 


5.3 Bottom 


One fixed and one detachable bottom, both of mild 
steel, shall be provided. The fixed bottom (see B in 
Fig. 3) shall be inserted from inside and welded to the 
bottom flanges of the body. It shall have two or three 
recesses for cash boxes of nominal size 1 or 2 
respectively which, in conjunction with the rear bottom 
flange of the body, shall form pockets (see C in Fig. 3) 
to engage the lugs in the rear edge of the detachable 
bottom. The front edge of the detachable bottom shall 
be provided with two mild steel slotted lugs for cash 
boxes of nominal size 1 and three mild steel slotted 
lugs for cash boxes of nominal size 2 to engage the 
lower bolts of the cash box lock mechanism, when the 
lid is locked. Suitable holes shall be provided on the 
detachable bottom so that it can be fixed to a table or 
counter 


IS 1046 : 2014 


Fic. 1 SECTIONAL PERSPECTIVE OF BODY SHOWING 
BEND CONSTRUCTION 


Fic. 2 CAsH Box (witH Lip OPEN) 


| 


LID, 2.5 THICK BODY, 2.5 


THICK PLATE COIN TRAY 


1.0 THICK 


a 

Fa a a a A a a a a a Y 

i A a a; 

RT a el 
SE EE 


BEE 


y 


SS 


DRILL PROOF PLATE 
COVER PLATE , 2.5 THICK 
LOCK CASE, 1.6 THICK 
FIXED BOTTOM, 2 THICK 


AS 


ar ar ar a 


LI ES 


d 


eessen: 


DETACHABLE 
BOTTOM, 2 THICK X 


All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fic. 3 DIMENSIONS FOR CASH BOXES 


@5 


LEVER 


IS 1046 : 2014 


TILL LLL LL 


B - B WITH COVER 


A - A WITH COVER 


PLAN WITHOUT COVER 


Fic. 4 Lever Type Lock 


5.4 Lid 


The lid shall be of mild steel with double-bent flanges 
along its front edge, preferably double-bent flanges 
along its rear edge and single-bent flanges on the sides. 
The four corners of the lid shall be strongly welded. 
The front inside flange shall be provided with 
rectangular slots to receive and engage the top locking 
bolts. The back edges of the lid shall be reinforced 
with a rectangular or round mild steel section which 
shall also act as rigid support for the pivot pins. The 
lid, when closed, shall snugly fit into the recess formed 
by the body flanges and the clearance at any place 
between the lid and the body shall be not more than 1 
mm. When locked, the lid shall not have a play of more 
than | mm in the direction in which the lid opens. 


5.5 Hinges 


Hinges shall be of the pin pivot type and shall be made 
of mild steel. The pivots shall be accurately machined 
and fitted so as to allow the lid to move without 
appreciable friction or play. They shall not be accessible 
from the outside. The pivot pins shall be not less than 
8 mm dia. 


5.6 Bolts 


Bolts shall be of cast brass or tin bronze (gun metal) or 
mild steel bar. There shall be two main bolts for locking 
the lid and two auxiliary bolts for locking the 
detachable bottom to the box for cash boxes of nominal 
size | and three main bolts for locking the lid and three 
auxiliary bolts for locking for detachable bottom to 


IS 1046 : 2014 


the box for cash boxes of nominal size 2. The layout 
of the bolt-work and the lock shall be generally as 
shown in Fig. 3. The bolts shall slide smoothly when 
the key is turned in the lock and fit snugly into the 
slots on the lid. The lock and bolt work shall be 
mounted on the firm base of a lock case (see D in Fig. 3) 
which shall be firmly secured to the body of cash box 
from inside. 


5.7 Handle 


The handle, shall be made of steel or non-ferrous 
material. It shall be nickel plated or chromium plated 
or anodized or powder coated. Handle may also be 
made of polymer. 


5.8 Lock 


The cash box shall be fitted with a high quality lock. 
The general arrangement of the typical lever lock shall 
be as shown in Fig. 4. The lock shall be protected by a 
drill-resisting plate fitted to the body of the cash box 
in front of the lock (see Fig. 3). Locks other than lever 
type may also be used. 


5.8.1 Levers 


The lever lock when used, shall be fitted with at least 
six levers. The levers may not be of uniform thickness 
but shall be smooth on both faces so as to obtain 
parallelism. The levers shall be machine-punched and 
shall not be less than 1.2 mm thick. The slots in the 
levers shall be accurately cut so as to minimize friction 
in their working. In case of dual control lock each lever 
shall have two slots for the passage of main and 
auxiliary bolt pins. Alternatively, a pin tumbler type 
lock having minimum six pin tumblers may be used. 


5.8.1.1 False (dummy) levers or pins shall not be used. 
5.8.2 Lever Springs 


Each lever shall be fitted with phosphor bronze springs 
with their ends securely lodged in to the slots cut in 
the lever. After fitting the spring, the slots shall be 
peened over at both sides. The springs shall be 
uniformly curved and shall be free from dents or 
scratches. When the levers are fitted into the lock, each 
spring shall rest against the back of the main body, so 
that the spring is kept under tension. The spring fitted 
into the levers shall stand the test given in 5.8.2.1. 


5.8.2.1 Test of lever springs 


The spring fitted into the lever shall be pressed down so 
as to touch the top of the lever, and released. This shall 
be repeated six times in quick succession. At the end of 
the test, the springs shall regain its original position. 


5.8.3 Key 


Each lock shall be provided with duplicates of main 


and/or auxiliary keys as the case may be. Keys shall 
be made from stainless steel or any other non-ferrous 
material. The wards shall be evenly cut, clearly defined 
and free from burrs. The engaging ends of the key 
wards shall be finished smooth. 


5.8.4 Unpickability 


The lock shall be carefully and accurately made so as 
to render it unpickable. 


5.8.5 Non-interchangeability 


The workmanship shall be such that the keys of any two 
locks, which have the nearest lever combinations, shall 
be mutually non-interchangeable. In other words, no 
lock shall open by any key other than its own specific 
key. For this purpose, it is essential that, unless 
specifically required by the purchaser, no two locks shall 
have the same lever combination. A given combination 
of levers once used, shall not be used again unless the 
thickness of the levers and their numbers, or the radius 
of sweep or steps, or the increment in steps is altered. 


6 INTERNAL FIXTURES 


Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the cash 
box shall be provided with a coin tray having three 
compartments. It shall be made of mild steel of 
thickness as specified in Fig. 3 or from moulded plastic. 


7 PAINTING/ SURFACE COATING 


The cash boxes shall be painted/coated inside and 
outside with a standard paint system or powder coating 
or any other surface coating. 


Cross hatch test shall be conducted to conform the 
adhesion coating in accordance with 7.1. 


7.1 Cross Hatch Test 


a) Make 6 parallel cut marks using sharp metal 
pointer and straight edge, through the painted/ 
coated surface, so as to make the base surface 
visible through cut marks. 

b) Cut marks shall be minimum 20 mm long and 
at 2 mm distance from each other. 

c) Make 6 similar cut marks in the direction 
perpendicular to first set of cut marks, with 
same length and spacing. 

d) These 12 cut marks together shall make a 
pattern of 25 squares of 2 mm x 2mm size, 
totally separated from each other. 

e) A good quality transparent adhesive tape not 
less than 20 mm width shall be stuck on the 
pattern, parallel to any one set of cut marks. 

f) To ensure continuous contact with paint/coat 
film, rub the tape firmly and remove air 


bubbles under the tape, if any. 


g) Within 60 to 120 s after sticking the tape, 
remove it by seizing free end of the tape and 
rapidly pulling it off at an angle close to 180°. 


h) Painting/Coating quality is considered as 
acceptable if no part of any 2 mm x 2 mm 
square of paint/ coat comes off the surface 
due to pulling the tape. 


8 MARKING 


8.1 Marking on Cash Boxes 


A metal plate showing the maker’s name or trade-mark 
shall be affixed to the cash boxes. 


8.2 BIS Certification Marking 
Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


8.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 


IS 1046 : 2014 


the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


8.3 Marking on Keys 


The keys shall bear an identification number which shall 
not be the same as the serial number of the cash box. 


9 PACKING 


Each cash box shall be packed in accordance with the 
best trade practice with its lid shut but not locked. The 
keys shall be separately sealed in a cardboard or metal 
box, or pouch and placed inside the cash box. The keys 
may also be packed and dispatched separately or 
delivered in some other manner if the purchaser so 
requires. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
292 : 1983 Leaded brass ingots and castings 
(second revision) 


306 : 1983 Tin bronze ingots and castings (third 
revision) 

410: 1977 Cold rolled brass sheet, strip and foil 
(third revision) 

713: 1981 Zinc base alloy ingots for die castings 
(second revision) 

1079 : 2009 Hot rolled carbon steel sheet and strip 


(sixth revision) 


IS No. Title 
1570 (Part 5): Schedules for wrought steels : 
1985 Part 5 Stainless and heat resisting 

steels 

2062 : 2011 Steel for general structural purposes 
(seventh revision) 

2704 : 1983 Brass wires for cold-headed and 
machined parts 

7608 : 1987 Phosphor bronze wire for general 


engineering purposes (first revision) 


IS 1046 : 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4) 


REQUIREMENTS FOR MATERIALS OF CASH BOXES CONFORMING TO 
INDIAN STANDARDS AND METHODS OF TEST 


(for guidance and not mandatory) 


SI No. Material Typical Example Requirements for Material 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Cast brass Grade 3 of IS 292 Copper content shall be not less than 60 percent. 


Castings shall be free from blow holes, surface and 
other casting defects. 


il) Brass sheet CuZn 40 of IS 410 The brass sheet shall meet the same bend test as 
specified for mild steel. 


111) Brass wire IS 2704 Copper contents shall not be less than 55 percent and 
tensile strength 350 MPa minimum. 


1v) Phosphor Grade 1 of IS 7608 The wire used for springs shall bronze wire comply 
with the rest given below: “The lever spring shall be 
fitted into the lever as specified in 5.8.2.1 and shall be 
pressed down so as to touch the top edge of the lever 
and released. This shall be repeated six times. At the 
end of the test the spring shall regain its original 
position”. 


IS 1046 : 2014 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Security Equipment Sectional Committee, ME 24 


Organization 
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai 


ARAI, Pune 


Bank of India, Mumbai 


Central Bank of India, Mumbai 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Ltd, Mumbai 


Guardwell Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Gunnebo India Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Overseas Bank, Mumbai 

Indian Bank Association, Mumbai 

Insurance Regulatory & Development, Hyderabad 
Methodex Systems Ltd, New Delhi 


Ministry of Civil Supplies & Disposal, New Delhi 


Punjab National Bank, New Delhi 


Sherni Enterprises, Pune 


Tata Consultancy Services, New Delhi 


The Gem & Jwellery Export Promotion Council, Mumbai 


Union Bank of India, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
Suri S. VENKATACHALAM (Chairman) 


SHRI A.V. MANNIKAR 
Suri M. SREENIVASULU (Alternate) 


Capt L. K. SINGH 
Capt VIRINDER Minuas (Alternate) 


Capt S. KANNAN 
Lr Cpr Vinop Sunotra (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBIR SINGH 
Suri H. K. Jain (Alternate) 


Suri D. E. BYRAMJEE 
SHRI PRASHANT CHOUTHKANTHIWAR (Alternate) 


Suri ANTHONY L. TUSCANO 
Suri Jonn D’MELLo (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GANGOPADHYAY 
Suri P. SENGUPTA (Alternate) 


Capt M. P. Sivan 
SHRI V. RAMCHANDRAN 
Suri T. S. NAIK 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI SAMEER SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR 
SHRI SHLOK BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


Capt S. P. SINGH 

Cart DEEPAK SAGAR (Alternate) 
SHRI FAROKH KUTAR 

Ms Arti Gupta (Alternate) 
Suri Amt MENON 

Suri R. K. RAGHAVAN (Alternate) 
SHRI KonaL Dosui 

Suri Vuay Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri R. RAJARAM 
Suri Manos M. K. MALL (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (Plot No. 41, Block No. 5, Mehta Cottage, Dr Suri Amt G. NARAVANE 
Raut Road, Shivaji Park, Dadar, Mumbai 400 028) 


BIS Directorate General Suri T. V. SincH, Scientist "E and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms KuusHBoo Kumari 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 24 (1280). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central ` : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


