( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard TESTING EQUIPMENT FOR AC ELECTRICAL ENERGY METERS (First Revision)

ICS 91.140.50

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OFINDIAN
BHAVAN,

STANDARDS

9 BAHADU~R SHAH ZAFA~R MARG NEW DELHI 110002

July 1999

Price Group 6

Equipment

for Electrical

Energy

Measurement

and Load Control

Sectional

Committee,

ETD

13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Equipment for Electrical Energy Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. While preparing this standard assistance was derived from IEC 736-1982 energy meters (first edition)' issued by the International Electrotechnical `Testing equipment Commission. for electrical

This revision is being published to meet the growing need of testing class 0.2s ac static energy meters and to meet the requirements as specified in IEC for testing of energy meters. This also covers the special requirements for portable field equipment. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, ohserved or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance places with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 12346 : 1999

Indian Standard

TESTING EQUIPMENT FOR METERS AC ELECTRICALENERGY -( First Revision )
1 SCOPE automatically as well as recorded along with the test data, through a computer program (software). 2.2 Portable Testing Equipment for Electrical Energy Meters; Portable MTE ac This standard is applicable to three-phase and/or single-phase equipment used for type, routine and acceptance testing of electrical energy meters of Classes 0.2, 0.5, 1 and 2. 2 TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition to those given in the following Indian Standards shall apply: IS No. 13010 : 1990 13779 : 1993 Title ac Watt-hour meters, 0.5, 1 and 2.0 ac Static watt-hour class 1 and Specification class

An electronic apparatus to measure electrical energy supplied to meters under test at site and which can be conveniently carried by hand. It may optionally include an apparatus to supply the energy required along with a device for error calculation, display and record. 2.3 Power x Time (Wattmeter Method) Measurement Method

meters, 2 -

2.1 Testing Equipment for ac Electrical Energy Meters; Meter Testing Equipment (MTE) An assembly of apparatus to supply energy meters under test and to measure this energy. 2.1.1 Manual MTE test, its sequence manually. may be electronic to

A method by which the energy supplied to the meter(s) under test is determined by the product of a known constant power and a known interval of time. 2.4 Energy Comparison Measurement (Standard Meter Method) A method by which a known amount supplied to the meter(s) under test. 2.5 Reference Standard of lower accuracy Method

of energy

is

The supply of energy to meter under measurement, error calculation, the test are all done and test procedure, Measurement and error calculation optionally performed with the aid of devices. 2.1.2 Semi-Automatic MTE

A standard with which standards are compared. 2.6 Working Standard

The supply of energy to meter under test and the test sequence are manually controlled. Measurement and error calculation are performed and controlled as well as recorded along with test data, automatically through a computer program (software). The manual control and settings of the source are generally guided by the computer program. 2.1.3 Fully Automatic MTE

A standard which, calibrated against a reference standard, is intended to verify working measuring instruments of lower accuracy. 2.7 MTE Test Standard

A measuring device for the determination of the accuracy of an MTE. It always includes a reference standard. It may include other elements, for example precision instrument transformers, precision time interval generator, etc. 2.8 Output Terminals of an MTE

The supply of energy to meter under test, its measurement, error calculation, the test sequence and the test procedure, are all performed with the aid of electronic devices and controlled 1

The terminals from which the power, corresponding to the separate application of voltages and currents, is supplied to the terminal block(s) of the meter(s) under test.

IS 12346 : 1999 2.9 Maximum Output of an MTE rack, scanner for sensing meter under test revolutions/test outputs for every meter under test and electronic working standard meter along with computer and test software. Test points and procedure are programmable and pre-defined in the test computer and can be adjusted sequentially by associated test computer system. Error calculation, record keeping, data storage and data analysis is done by associate test computer. 3.3 The error E of an MTE is the overall error of all its components under normal service conditions. when an MTE! 4 METHODS OF TEST and error

The output, in volt-amperes, corresponding to the highest loading applied at the output terminals of an MTE, for which the limits of permissible errors (Table J) under reference conditions (6.1) are not exceeded. The output shall be defined voltage and current circuits. 2.10 Basic Measurements calibration separately for the

Measurements for commences service. 2.11 Control

Measurements check on the accuracy

Measurements for periodical of MTE while in service. 3 GENERAL

4.1 A note concerning error definitions determination is given in Annex A. 4.2 Methods for the Determination Overall Error of an MTE

of

the

REQUIREMENTS

3.1 An MTE shall allow the user to adjust and measure the necessary quantities, voltage, current, power-factor, time, power and energy within the permissible tolerances for the relevant class of meters which will be tested with this MTE. 3.2 The MTE can be classified in to the following ~three categories based on the various types of sources, method of measurement and method of control. 3.2.1 Manual MTE for manual MTE are given below:

4.2.1 The determination of the overall error of an MTE is made according to the following methods when the working reference instrument is not connected to its output terminals:

4 Comparison

of the energy delivered at the output terminals of the MTE indicated by the MTE test standard with the energy indicated by the working standard(s) of the MTE. of the power at the output terminal of the MTE!, indicated by the MTE test standard, with the power indicated by the working standard(s) of the MTE. The influence of the accuracy of the time measurement on the error of the energy shall be specified.

b) Comparison

The requirements

This consists of transformer generating source and meter mounting rack. Test points are adjusted and set manually on the source and error calculation, record keeping and data storage are done by manual process. However electronic devices may be used for measurement and error calculation. 3.2.2 Semi-Automatic MTE MTE are given

4.2.2 When the working standard instrument is connected to the MTE output terminals, the determination of the error of the working standard instrument alone is equivalent to the overall error of the MTE. 5 5.1 ACCURACY LIMITS of an MTE

The requirements below:

for semi automatic

This consists of transformer generating source, meter mounting rack, scanner(s) and electronic reference standard meter along with computer and test software. Test points are adjusted manually on the source. Error calculation, record keeping, data storage and data analysis is done by associate test computer. 3.2.3 Fully Automatic MTE MTE! are given

Error Determination

The error of an MTE shall be lower than the error &lX in Table 1 at the test points given in Table 3. If the result of a single measurement gives an error in excess of the permissible limits, then two additional measurements at this particular test point can be taken. The results ~of these two additional measurements shall be within the permissible limits of EInux An MTE is capable of being used at least for meters of the relevant class (type test or routine test or acceptance inspection) according to Table 1, if the 2

The requirements below:

for fully automatic

This consists of electronic stabilized source (for controlled voltage or output power), meter mounting

IS 12346 : 1999 results of all test points limits of the permissible class. (Table errors 3) are within the for that accuracy It is evident that the method for ascertaining the error E of an MTE has to take into consideration not only metrological, but also economical facts. As a low number of measurements usually does not give a statistical basis, a correct determination of the error of an MTE on a statistical basis is not possible. Therefore, Table 2 gives the permissible limits for the estimation s of the standard deviation. A good compromise is to carry out five measurements as indicated in 5.4. 5.4 Repeatability of the Measurements

If the results of some test points are not within the limits of the permissible errors, the use of this MTE may be restricted to certain ranges and for certain classes of meters. Such a restriction shall be indicated in a suitable visible place on this MTE. For site testing of meters particularly Low Tension meters, the general practice is to use the MTEs with clamp on CT's, Hence for site testing of all types of meters, one class higher accuracy MTEs than meter under test may be used. Such MTEs can be tested as per the relevant standards of accuracy. 5.2 Correction of the Error E of an MTE

If the error E of an MTE in service is outside the limits of Table 1 but within twice the relevant values of Table 1 then a correction for the error of the MTE shall be applied to the results of the tests on the meter(s) under test. In these cases, it is recommended that an effort should be made to reduce the error of the MTE in order to bring it within the permissible limits. 5.3 Mean Value Measurements and Repeatability of the

is A sequence of repeated measurements recommended for the `control point' U,, L,, at power-factor 1 (reference No. 1 of Table 3). Not less than five measurements for each phase shall be made. Between successive measurements the controlling switches and controlling devices shall be operated. The results of these repeated measurements are used to calculate the values, which is the estimation of the standard deviation:

s=+ where fi =

1
1

n-

i= 1

Z (Ei-E)2

5.3.1 An MTE with the mean value of error E = 0, but a high value for the estimation `s' of the standard deviation does not ensure the repeatability of measurements. 53.2 An MTE with a high mean value of error E, but a low value for `s' may be used for measurements of high accuracy, when a correction is used or the mean value E is corrected by a correction transformer or through software. 53.3 From a statistical point of view, the number of measurements to be carried out at each test point depends on the metrological result required. However, taking into account the fact that tests have to be made for:

error of the MTE determined by one individual measurement of il sequence of repeated measurements at a certain test point, mean value of the errors Et, and number total measurements. of individual

E n

= =

For newly manufactured MTEs, the value of `s' at the control point U,, I,, power-factor 1 shall be within the limits of s,_ given in Table 2. If additional measurements are made at powerfactor 0.5 lagging, the corresponding values for slnclX given in Table 2, are recommended. For MTEs in service, are permitted. 6 6.1 twice the values of Table 2

4 different

current

ranges;

b) different voltage ranges;
c) different
power-factors; load; load; meters; meters; and

INPUT AND OUTPUT Reference Conditions

REQUIREMENTS

4 maximum
e) minimum

0 single-phase g) three-phase

The reference conditions at the input of the MTE shall be specified by the manufacturer and shall be such that, at its output, the reference conditions for the meter(s) under test are fulfilled. 7.4 gives the particular requirements magnetic field produced by the MTE. 3 for the

h) different measuring methods (three-phase three
and four-wire systems).

IS 12346 : Z999 Table 1 Limits of Permissible Errors in Percentage (Clauses 2.9, 5.1, 5.2, 7.7.3, 7.7,4, 7.8 and 7.9)
Meter Class Power Factor
E nmr

0.2 1.0 +0.05 0.5 Lag +O.l 0.5 lead kO.15 1.0 kO.10

0.5 0.5 Lag kO.15 0.5 lead *0.20 1.0 io.20

1.0

2.0 0.5 lead +0.40 1.0 kO.30 0.5 Lag io.45 0.5 lead + 0.60 _-

0.5 Lag f0.30

Table 2 Limits of Permissible Values `s' in Percentage (Clauses 5.3.3, 5.4, 7.7.3, 7.7.4, 7.8 and 7.9)
1

Meter Class Power-factor Sm4Y 1 0.005

~0.2 0.5 lagging 0.01 1 0.01

0.5 0.5 lagging 0.02 I 0.02

2 0.5 lagging 0.03 1 0.05 0.5 lagging 0.07

Table 3 Ranges Controlled (Clauses 5.1, 5.4, 9.1.1 and 9.2)
Current Power-Factor Load of the MTE Number of Tests

E

1

Voltage

Single phase Three phase
I

Min or
MC2

Basic Measumments (9.2) 1 1 1 iz4') k7"

Control Measurements (9.3) I

UC

1

0.5 lagging 0.5 leading 1, [tin < li 5 I-`) Ii # I, 1 1
I

Single phase Single phase Single phase Single phase Single phase Single phase Single phase Single phase Three phase')

Mitt Mill
Min

I
I I=$' 1=2"

Min Min MUX MUX
MUX Min

I
1
I 2

I

0.5 lagging 0.5 leading 1 Total number of tests for a single-phase MTE Total number of tests for a three-phase MTE
I)

2

I

17 53

I

8 26

i is the index of a certain test point (V or I). If an MTE has less voltage or cutrent-ranges than started by the limits for i, then the number of tests is correspondingly reduced. One measurement should be in four-wire connection and a second in three-wire connection. Minimum load corresponds to the connection of one measuring instrument (meter or watt-meter) only. Maximum load corresponds to the connection of the highest number of meters which consume the maximum output of the voltage circuit and/or the current circuit.

2, `)

4

IS 12346 : 1999 6.2 Supply to the MTE requirements specified for the apparatus used with the MTE. 7.4 Magnetic Field Strength instruments and

The supply to the MTE shall be such that the relevant values at the output terminals of the MTE (voltage, current, frequency, wave form, phase, sequence, balance of voltage and current) are in accordance with the relevant standards for the meter(s) under test. The supply voltage shall be constant in such a way that the accuracy of all measuring devices used and necessary for measuring a certain class of meter can be utilized. If the MTE is connected to the mains network, the voltage may not be stable enough for the Wattmeter method to be used. However, if the Wattmeter method is used, some action should be taken in order to meet the requirements of this standard (for example, voltage stabilizer). In order to avoid different voltage drops in the event of output changes of the MTE, the cross-section of the feed wire to the MTE must be sufficient. For time power method of testing may be used with the best possible 7 7.1 CONSTRUCTIONAL Meter Test Rack a static source stability.

It is recommended that the magnetic flux density produced by the MTE at the position of the meter(s) under test should not exceed the following values: for II 1OA B50.0025mT B IO.05 mT

for I< 200A where I B = =

output current of the MTE, and magnetic flux density in air due to the magnetic field.

The limiting values of magnetic flux density for I, between 10A and 200A, shall be evaluated by interpolation.
NOTE - B = pH, H in amperes per meter; and p0 = 4~ x
low7 H/m (henrys per metre).

7.5

Running with No-load of Meters Under Test

FEATURES

It shall be possible to open the current circuits in order to prevent any current being produced by induction in these circuits by the voltage circuits. 7.6 Adjusting Devices

The meter test rack is a rack including the necessary constructional requirement and the requisite connections, designed to enable meters to be tested under reference conditions specified in the relevant standards. The wiring shall be such as to minimize the effects of magnetic induction, capacitive interference and voltage drop. 7.2 Output Terminals

The following adjusting devices shall be provided in an MTE for supply energy to the meter under test, the control of which may be manual or automatic by computer program, depending on requirement. 7.6.1 Voltage Adjusting Device

By agreement, the terminals from which the meter test rack is supplied may be defined as the output terminals of the MTE. 7.3 Dielectric Requirements 7.3.1 Dielectric Properties and Safety

The voltage adjusting device shall permit the adjustment of the rated voltage within the tolerances given by the reference conditions for the relevant class of meters. 7.6.2 Current Adjusting Device

Properties

The MTE shall be such that it retains adequate dielectric qualities under normal service conditions and under normal conditions of atmospheric humidity and under normal' service voltages. The insulation tests for an MTE should be made according to the requirements for the ~highest values of voltage from the MTE as well as the instruments and apparatus used. 7.3.2 Sufety Requirements such as earthing connections, etc, should confirm to the
5

The current adjusting device shall permit the adjustment of the necessary testing current within the entire load range for which the MTE is provided, and within the tolerances given in the reference conditions for the relevant class of meters. 7.6.3 Phase Shifting Device

The phase shifting device shall permit the adjustment of the phase angle between the output voltage and current in each phase within the entire load range for which the MTE is provided, and within the tolerances given for the relevant class of meters. 7.6.4 Overall Error Adjusting Device

Safety requirements, protection switches,

In order to control and adjust the overall error of an MTE within the allowable limits, compensating

IS 12346 : 1999

transformers having various tappings may be used in the circuit of reference instruments of the MTE. There shall be provision for sealing the terminals of such transformers. The overall error of an MTE may also be adjusted through software. 7.6.5
Voltuge Balance

7.7.4

Energy Meter (Energy

Comparison

Method)

In order to obtain the necessary voltage balance according to the reference conditions of the relevant class of meters, voltage balance adjusting devices and voltage balance indicators may be used. Voltmeters used for indication shall have an appropriate accuracy. In case of MTE to be used for testing and calibration of reactive energy meter, the voltage halance adjusting device and indicator are essential
for proper calibration.

These energy meters shall permit the supply of required amount of energy for the class of meters considered, depending also on the required value of the power-factor, and have an accuracy which allows compliance with the permissible limits of Table 1 as regard percentage errors and of Table 2 as regards standard deviation values. 7.7.5
Frequency Meter

A frequency meter should be used if the frequency of the supply mains is not sufficiently regulated, or if the frequency of the MTE output is not identical with the mains frequency. 7.8 Voltage Transformers
(see Note)

7.6.6

Current

Balance

In addition to phase shifting balance devices may be used. 7.7
Measuring Instruments

devices,

current

Voltage transformers shall allow compliance with the permissible limits of Table 1 as regards percentage errors and of Table 2 as regards standard deviation values.
NOTE ~By agreement between the parties, speciul requirement may be laid down regarding adjusting mnges, accuracy, etc.

The following measuring instruments shall be provided in the MTE? for the purpose of control and measurement of supply of energy ta the meter under lest. `The functions of one or more instruments may he carried out by a single working standard inslrument.
7.7.1 Voltmeters

7.9

Current

Transformers

(see Note under 7.8)

Current transformers shall allow compliance with the permissible limits of Table 1 as regards percentage errors and of Table 2 as regards standard deviation values. 8 GUIDE FOR INITIAL CHECKING Guidelines for initial checking of the MTE are given in Annex B. 9 BASIC AND CONTROL MEASUREMENTS
Ranges

Voltmeters shall permit the adjustment of the rated voltage within the tolerances given in the reference conditions for the relevant class of meters. The tolerance refers to the indication of the voltmeter, the errors of series resistance's and/or voltage transformers included. 7.7.2
Ammeters

911 Selection of Voltage and Current 9.1.1 Of all the possible combinations

Ammeters shall permit fhe adjustment of the rated current within the tolerances given in the reference conditions for the relevant class of meters. The tolerance refers to the indication of the ammeter, the errors of parallel resistance's or current transformers included. 7.7.3
Wattmeters ( Power x Time Method)

of voltage and current, only those should be chosen for testing which are particularly important in practice or with which certain sources of error show up with the most effect. Figure 1 shows by means of a graph the way in which the measuring points given in Table 3 have been, chosen. The values U,,,, , I/min , Imax , Imin , 0, , and I, correspond to the rated values of the relevant ranges. 1 2 3 4 5 are *e reference numbers of ~tesl ooc00 I points in Table 3,

The Wattmeters shall permit the adjustment of the power between the permissible limits for the class of meters considered, depending also on the required value of the power-factor, and `have an accuracy which allows compliance with the permissible limits of Table 1 as regard percentage errors and of Table 2 as regards standard deviation values.

9.1.2 For a sequence of repeated measurements (5,3), the values for the control point U, , 1, can be fixed by agreement, for example according to the rated voltage and the basic current of meters which dare usually tested with the ~MTE.

IS 12346 : 1999 made of the equipment and, if it is used to control large quantities of meters, the shorter the interval between two control measurements shall be. Conversely, an MTE which is not frequently used (for example, if it is intended exclusively for prototype tests) may be controlled at the same intervals as these tests. Generally, the interval of time between two control measurements should be not greater than:
IJ

a) two years for MTEs for meters of Class 2, b) one year for MTEs for meters of Classes 0.5, and 1 and

FIG. I GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OFTESTPOINTS 9.1.3 Additional test points or a reduction of the number of test points can be fixed by agreement. It is recommended, that all voltage ranges and current ranges which include the values U, Urnin, I,,,, and lnlin of the MTE are included when determining the error of the MTE. 9.1.4 Errors of voltage, current and power-factor combinations which have not been measured but calculated and derived from other measured errors shall not be used as a basis for assessing the error of an MTE. If those combinations are significant the errors shall be measured.
order to cheek the extent of any capacitive interference of various origins (for example, Wring, instrument transformers), additional measurements at UWX, Iti,, at a power-factor 0.5 lagging nre recommended.

c) 6 months If for any measurements 10 10.1 EFFECTS Magnetic

for MTEs for meters reason doubt exists, shall be repeated. OF INFLUENCE Field

of Class 0.2. the control

QUANTITIES

In a laboratory the meters under test and the MTE may be influenced by magnetic fields of different origin:

a) Magnetic
mains-voltage

field of a regulator;

generator

or

a

b)

NOTE-In

Magnetic field of the wiring supply to the MTE;

from the voltage

c) Magnetic field of the wiring or of a component
of the MTE;

9.2

Basic Measurements measurements according to Table 3 most important measurements and shall when a newly manufactured MTE service. They should also be made:

4 Magnetic field of the wiring or of an apparatus
in the measuring circuit outside the MTE especially the field of the wiring from the MTE to the meter(s) under test or between the meters under test;

The basic include the be made commences

a) when the general

use of an MTE has been changed (for example, change of the control point V,, I,.); components of an MTE, which are important for its accuracy, have been repaired or replaced; doubt exists about the use of an MTE for a certain class of meters; and of a control measurement to 9.3 gives tise to doubt. Measurement and Its Interval
if for any reason

e) Magnetic
(illumination,

field of the meter test auxiliary circuit, etc); and

rack

f) Other external magnetic fields in a laboratory.
11 GUIDELINES LABORATORY SET-UP 11.1 Laboratories FOR OVERALL

b) when

x)

d) w-hen the result
according 9.3 Control Frequency

-11.1.1 All laboratories for the testing of electrical energy meters should have facilities for carrying out the required tests in -accordance with the relevant standards and corresponding requirements. The rooms for laboratories sufficiently clean, dry, large, should be:

The interval frequency of control measurements of an MTE shall be adopted to the use which is made of the equipment. Thus, the greater the utilization

IS 12346 : 1999 dust-flee, free from vibration, sufficiently protected illuminated, against and the national standard laboratories in the range of IO-" to 10dx DC potentiometers are capable of measuring d.c. voltages with an uncertainty of about lo-`. The accuracy of the time measurement is 2 to 3 x lo-" for an atomic clock, 5 x lo-' for a quartz clock in most national standard laboratories. Portable quartz generators have an uncertainty between 1 x lOA and 5 x lo-' To relate the measurement of a.c. quantities to equivalent d.c. quantities transfer standards shall be used. The most suitable of these devices which, at present, permit the highest attainable accuracy and which are used by national standard laboratories, enable measurement of a.c. energy with an uncertainty in the order of 2 x 1OA (power factor = 1.0). Example of such transfer devices are:

solar-radiation. the of

11.2 The laboratory shall be equipped with necessary MTE test standards for determination the overall accuracy of the MTE. 11.3 Lowest Possible Uncertainty Elements of an MTE Test Standard of

the

The overall uncertainty of an MTE test standard depends on the uncertainty of each of the elements
used.

These different the quantity of possibilities laboratories of 11.4

uncertainties are directly related to the element used and the calibration offered by national standard the highest order (see A-2).

electrodynamic thermo-electrical static multiplier

comparator comparator circuit various given standards in 2 is

Basic Quantities

The energy measurement is derived from the standard cell, the standard resistor (power) and the time measurement with a quartz oscillator (energy). The uncertainties of national standard for the standard cell and the standard resistor are given by

11.5 The relationship among illustrating the definitions schematically shown in Fig. 2.

8

f ~EION~L~ECIO~K~STANDARDS L -----+--I---J

1

r

--------em

_I .-.-.

I
METER TESTING (MTE) .-.-.-.m. r EQUIPMENT

r-`--T

1.-.-.-.-.1
I I

.-.-*

1
TIME

/.
L --------

REFERENCE * STANDARDS Of METER TESTING I STATION

I
\o

I I I I I

1 d/S-@ PHANTOM POWER SOURCE WITH CONTROL DEVICES: AND INSTRUMENTS

I OUTPUT I -t I

----a---

TERMINAL

t

I I

l- .-.-.-.-.

!

REFERENCE INSTRUMENTS (WORKING STANDARDS)

I I I .
I

INblCATED VALUE PdWER/ENERGY

Of

-I
FIG.~ ILLUSTRATiONOF DEFINITIONS

IS 12346 : 1999

ANNEX A (Clause 4.1)
NOTES CONCERNING ACCURACY ERROR DEFINITIONS, BASIC QUANTITIES,

AND ERROR

DETERMINATION indicated value - true value x 100 true value indicated value - conventional true value conventionaltrue value x loo x 100
0

A-l

ERROR

DEFINITIONS

Et percent =

The absolute error of an MTE is `indicated value true value'. The term `true value' is often used when the `c.anventiond true value' is meant. Since the true value cannot be determined by measurement (because it would be necessary to have a measuring process which introduces no error), it is approximated by the `conventional true vdl1P `, a value corrected for systematic errors and with stated uncertainty, that can Abe traced to national standards or to standards agreed upon by manufacturer and user. The errors are expressed Eo = as relative errors:

E percent =

Ei percent=`+ where

value of the energy indicated by lhc MTE, and Jo = conventional true value of the energy (corrected indicated value of the MTE test-standard). NOTE&Instead of the energy W, thepower can be the basis
for this measurement, taking into account the influence of the accuracy of the time measurement.

Ji

=

theoretical true error of the MTE test standard after applying any known correction corresponding to its known part theoretical true error of an MTE error of an MTE error E of an MTE determined by one individual measurement at a certain test point error of a meter under test measured the MTE theoretical test. true error of a meter with under

MTEZ

Et E Ei

= = =

output terminals

MTE test standard

E'm Em

= =

Indicated value

Conventional

true value

Em=Et+M'm=Eo+E+E'm Error +

A-2 LOWEST POSSIBLE OF THE ELEMENTS OF STANDARD

UNCERTAINTY AN MTE TEST

The overall uncertainty of an MTE test standard depends on the uncertainty of each of the elements used.

Bm
E(Ei)
Et

Em

These different uncertainties are directly Telated to the quality of the elements used and the calibration national standard possibilities offered by laboratories of the highest order. The overall uncertainty of an MTE test standard should be estimated preferably by the root mean square (rims.) value of the uncertainties of the elements used (see 11.4). Typical values of uncertainty of the lowest, at present, possible uncertainty for these elements are given below:

NOTE-An error E of an MlT causes an error of the meter under test equal to E but of opposite sign.

a)

Static wattmeter

)

(2x10+

(power factor = 10) )

10

IS 12346 : 1999 h) c) Static standard meter Double and triple scale wattmeter Single-scale Class 0.1 wattmeter ) (4x10m4 (power factor = OS)} given by the r.m.s. above-mentioned values: 1.5 x 10"' 2x ) {5x10m4 (power factor =l .O)} (power factor = 0.5)) and 0.2 min. 1o-4 summation of the

1

(power-factor (power-factor

= 1.O> = 0.5) FOR OF THE THE

d)

A-3 INTERVAL FREQUENCY CONTROL MEASUREMENT ACCURACY OF AN MTE The interval frequency for the accuracy of an MTE depends on: the type of equipment the history the number a period of the MTE

1 e) Current or voltage tranformers 1

( 1Ox1O-4 1x10-4

control

of

the

Taking into account the fact that a phase difference of 1 min gives an additional error for either instrument transformer of about 0.05 percent at a power-factor 0.5, the resultant uncertainties are : 1 x lti 1.5 x lOA (power factor = 1.0) (power factor = 0.5)

of meters tested with the MTE in

-

the maintenance the accuracy the MTE the quality

of the MTE

class of meters being tested with

-

of the components fluctuations

~of an MTE stated when

When using current and voltage transformers, the most probable values for the uncertainty may be

the possible error operating an MTE.

11

IS 12346 : 1999

ANNEX B (Clause 8)
GUIDELINES A NEW FOR METER THE INITIAL TESTING CHECKING EQUIPMENT of Current CIRCUITS Circuit OF

The following checks are to be carried m~~nual/scmi-automatic MTE: B-I MECHANICAL CONSTRUCTION

out for

B-7.4 VA Burden B-8 MEASURING

AND CONNECTIONS B-2 WIRING ESPECIALLY THOSE OF PARTS WHICH CAN BE MOVED (FOR EXAMPLE PHASE SHIFTING DEVICE) B-3 STATED ACCURACY ING INSTRUMENTS B-4 DIELECTRIC B-S PHASE OF ALL MEASUR-

B-8.1 Wattmeters and Meters Used as Working Standards : Measuring Ranges, Measuring Methods. Checking of Phase Displacement (Lagging - leading); B-8.2 Polarity B-S.3 Accuracy Changing of Wattmeters (see 5 and 9) CONTROL

Measurements FACTOR

PROPERTIES

B-9 DISTORTION

SEQUENCE CONTROL OF

B-9.1 Input Terminals B-9.2 Output Terminals

of the MTE of the MTE = 1 .O and load) = 1.0 and load)

B-6 VOLTAGE CIRCUIT THE COMPONENTS B-6.1 Measuring

Range Switching Regulating Devices And

Current circuit (power-factor 0.5 at maximum/minimum Voltage circuit (power-factor 0.5 at maximum/minimum

B-6.2 Voltage Adjusting Devices. Capacity at Various Loads B-6.3 Voltage Balance Balance Indicators B-6.4 VA Burden Adjusting Circuit -

of Voltage

All the above checks are to be carried out for automatic MTE and semi-automatic M'IE, may be with the help of computer software. The software provided with automatic and semiautomatic MTE's shall be checked for the following: a) Facility and b) Facility for user programming of test sequence,

B-7 CURRENT CIRCUIT THE COMPONENTS B-7.1 Measuring

CONTROL

OF

Range Switching Regulating

B-7.2 Current Adjusting Devices. Capacity at Various Loads B-7.3 Current Balance Adjusting

Devices

for user programming

of test points.

12

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

RIS iy ;I statutory

institution established under the Bureau of Indian Stundurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious devclopmcnt of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright BIS I~;Ishc copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without rhe prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of irnplcmcnting the standard,' of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of -India Standards

Amcncln~ents arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed lxrioclically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc ncodcd; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the I:I~CSI issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. ETD 13 (5022).

Amendments ---

Issued Since Publication

.-__ ___

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Test Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Hcaclquartcrs :

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 Tclcphones : 323 0 I 3 1, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Offices :
Central

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 3233841 337 84 99,337 3378626,33791 85 61 20

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI I IO 002 I / I4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700 054 SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 i

Eastern

Northern

60 38 43 60 20 2.5

Souhxn

C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600 1 I3 i

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,23523 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 8327891,8327892

Wcstcrn

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400 093

i

Branches

AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWARXOIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printograph, New Delh, ph.: 5726847

