RAT Alte IS 397 (Part 0) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


SCOTS Oh SUT AST orat 
Piao At worrett 
TT 0 raat are ch aa oh fore anA 
( FET YÖT ) 


Methods for Statistical Quality 
Control During Production 


Part 0 Guidelines for Selection of Control Charts 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 03.120.30 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERTE TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2021 Price Group 4 


Statistical Methods for Quality and Reliability Sectional Committee, MSD 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Statistical Methods for Quality and Reliability Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Management 
and Systems Division Council. 


The control charts are extensively being used by the industry for controlling the quality during manufacturing. 
For this purpose, the Indian Standards describing various control charts to be used under different situations 
have been published as different parts of IS 397. 


For wider application, a need was felt to provide the guidelines for selection of an appropriate control chart for 
a specific application. This standard has been brought out to fulfill that need and this standard has been made a 
part of this series. Apart from the field of application, the merits and demerits of each type of chart are discussed. 
The tabular presentation would enable the user to quickly select the relevant chart, to be used in a given situation. 


This standard was originally issued in 1999 and subsequently revised in 2003. The revision of this standard 
has been undertaken to incorporate guidelines on control charts covered in the new or revised Indian Standards 
published subsequently. 


This Indian Standard is published in several parts. The other parts in this series are: 


Part 1 Control charts for variables (second revision) 

Part 2 Control charts for attributes (third revision) 

Part 3 Specialized control charts (Adoption of ISO 7870-5) 

Part 4 Cumulative sum chart (Adoption of ISO 7870-4) 

Part 5 Acceptance control charts (Adoption of ISO 7870-3) 

Part 6 EWMaA control charts (Adoption of ISO 7870-6) 

Part 7 Multivariate control charts ((Adoption of ISO 7870-7) 

Part 8 Charting techniques for short runs and small mixed batches (Adoption of ISO 7870-8) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 397 (Part 0) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR STATISTICAL QUALITY 
CONTROL DURING PRODUCTION 


PART 0 GUIDELINES FOR SELECTION OF 


CONTROL CHARTS 
( Second Revision ) 
nBCOPE IS No. Title 
This Standard (Part 0) provides guidelines for selection Part 6: 2018 EWMA control charts (Adoption of 
and use of appropriate control chart(s) for controlling ISO 7870-6) 
the processes during production. Merits and demerits 
of each type of control chart have also been given. Part 7: 2020 Multivariate control charts 
Part 8:2018 Charting techniques for short runs 
2 REFERENCES and small mixed batches (Adoption 
The following standards contain provisions, which of ISO 7870-8) 
through reference in this text constitute provision of 7920 Statistical vocabulary and symbols 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions Partit 2012 General. statistical- terms. and 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to tëriis üšed in probability 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this (Modified ISO 3534-1) 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility f _ ; 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards Part 2 : 2012 Applied Statistics (Adoption of 
indicated below: ISO 3534-2) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


IS No. Title 

397 Method for statistical quality control 
during production 

Part 1: 2003 Control charts for variables 
(second revision) 

Part2:2003 Control charts for attributes 
(third revision) 

Part 3: 2019 Specialized control charts (Adoption 
of ISO 7870-5) 

Part 4: 2018 Cumulative sum chart (Adoption of 
ISO 7870-4) 

Part5:2015 Acceptance control charts (Adoption 


of ISO 7870-3) 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 7920 (Part 1) and IS 7920 (Part 2) shall apply. 


4 TYPES OF CONTROL CHARTS AND THEIR 
APPLICABILITY 


4.1 The guidelines for selection and use of appropriate 
control charts to control the process during production 
for variable type of data is given in Table 1. 


4.2 The guidelines for selection and use of appropriate 
control charts to control the process during production 
for attribute type of data is given in Table 2. 


Table 1 Types of Control Charts and their Applicability for Variable Type of Data 


( Clause 4.1 ) 


SI Type of Chart General Field of Application Merits Demerits Ref. to Indian 
No. Standard 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Average-Range Control of individual characteristic a) Maximizes information from available data a) Difficult to understand, training becomes 6.3.2.1 and 6.3.1.1 
Chart when sample results are available at b) Provides information on central value and variation for NECESSALY of 
(X-R) small intervals and/or the product is control b) Less precise for assessment of variation for TS 397 (Part 1) 

not perfectly homogeneous c) Samples of small size suffices large sample size as Range may be affected 
. by presence of extreme values. 
d) Convenient for shop-floor operators 
ii) Average-standard -do- a) Same as X-R chart merits a) to d) above a) Difficult to understand, training becomes 6.3.2.1 and 6.3.1.2 
deviation chart iy M ‘ae fi f variation than X-R necessary of 
X ore precise for assessment of variation than X— = 
a) i chart ý b) Requires more calculations than X-R IS 397 (Part 1) 
chart 
c) Applicable even for large sample sizes 
iii) Median-range -do- a) Same as X-R chart a) Not easy to use when sample size is large or 6.3.2.2 and 
chart H asy toiadopt wh le size is odd and i even. 6.3.1.1 of 
asy to adopt when sample size is odd and sma 
(Me—R) 7 j aha a a b) Less efficient as compared to mean chart IS 397 (Part 1) 
c) More appropriate in certain situations for example 
non-normal distributions as median is not affected by 
extreme values 

iv) Mid range - range -do- a) Same as X-R chart a) Less efficient than mean chart 6.3.2.3 and 6.3.1.1 
chart a he ed of 
(M—R) b) Calculation is simplified IS 397 (Part 1) 

v) X (Individual) Control of individual characteristic a) Simple to operate a) Short term variations not detectable 6.3.3 of IS 397 
chart when sample results are available b) Specification limits can be super imposed on control b) It is assumed that individual characteristics (Part 1) 

at longer intervals or product is chart follow normal distribution 
homogeneous 

vi) Moving average Control of individual characteristic a) Need not wait for accumulation of samples a) Successive points are not independent 6 of IS 397 
and moving range when sample results are available at b) Provides an early warning signal b) Traditional interpretation of runs is not valid (Part 3) 
chart small intervals and/or the product is ; : > 

c) It is more efficient than X -R chart 
not perfectly homogeneous 
vii) | High-Low chart When sample is large in size (greater a) Extremely simple since no calculation is required a) Not very useful when the process is erratic 9 of IS 397 
than six) and sequence of production b) One chart instead of two charts (Part 3) 
is irrelevant 
viii) Coefficient of Relative variability in relation to One chart instead of two a) More calculations are involved 11 of IS 397 
variation chart (Y) mean is of concern (Part 3) 


T707 : (0 Hed) LOE SI 


x) 


xi) 


xii) 


xiii) 


xiv) 


xv) 


Type of Chart 


(2) 
Trend 


Modified control 


Group control 


Cumulative sum 
(CUSUM) 


Z- Chart 


Non-Normal 


Exponentially 
Weighted Moving 
Average (EWMA) 


General Field of Application 


(3) 


Control of individual characteristics 
when the process level is changing 
systematically 


Control of individual characteristic 
when process capability index is high 
(preferably (Om is more than 1.50) 


Control of individual characteristic 
when samples are drawn from 
different sources having same 
averages and variability 


Control of individual characteristic 
when it is desired to detect even the 
small shift in the process average 


Where processes are needed to be 
controlled when there are large 
varieties of products with different 
specifications, different variability, 
production runs are small with 
varying sample/lot sizes. 


Control of individual characteristic 
when samples are drawn from 
processes which exhibit non-normal 
behaviour, 


Control of individual characteristic 
when it is desired to detect small 
shifts in the process mean. It makes 
possible the faster detection of small 
to moderate shifts in the process 
average. 


a) 


b) 


a) 


a) 
b) 
c) 


a) 


a) 


a) 


a) 


b) 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Merits 


(4) 


It minimizes the frequency of process adjustments 
resulting in corresponding cost reduction 


Calculations are simplified 


May be used as adjustment chart if systematic trends or 
cyclic patterns exist 


Involves less work in plotting the chart 
Compact presentation makes it easier to interpret 


It is easier to identify sub-groups running consistently 
high or low 


Particularly useful when detection of small changes 
which go undetected in usual charts and are yet vital 


The z-chart has the advantage of simplified calculation, 
presentation and most important it facilitates usual 
interpretation of Shewhart control charts to control the 
processes and decision-making. 


Non-normal pattern is observed in many situations, 
like in service industry (Hospitals, BPOs, etc.), in 
Special processes (welding, chemical processes, etc). 
Therefore, this chart is useful in such situations 


EWMA control charts is efficient in detecting small 
shift in the process average 


EWMA control chart is relatively robust in the face of 
non-normally distributed quality characteristics. 


a) 


b) 
c) 
a) 


a) 


a) 


a) 


a) 


b) 
c) 


a) 


b) 


Demerits 


(5) 
Useful only when process capability index is 
very high 
Less efficient than mean chart 


No further assembly is involved 


Not recommended when components are 
meant for assembly 


Needs experience and skill in interpretation 


Needs training and more calculations 


When there is no historical data, this chart 
may be difficult to apply because it requires 
past data for estimating variability. 


It requires large subgroups. 
It is difficult to understand 


It requires more calculations 


The EWMA control chart does not reflect 
the out of control situations for larger shifts 
as quickly as the Shewhart control chart 
does. 


As production proceeds, if a trend develops, 
the trend is unfortunately shown to be well 
within control of the EWMA chart’s control 
limits. 


Ref. to Indian 
Standard 


(6) 


10 of IS 397 
(Part 3) 


10 of IS 397 
(Part 1) 


8 of IS 397 
(Part 3) 


4 and 5 of 
IS 397(Part 4) 


7 of IS 397 
(Part 3) 


12 of IS 397 
(Part 3) 


4 of IS 397 
(Part6) 


1707 : (0 Hed) L6E SI 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


SI Type of Chart General Field of Application Merits Demerits Ref. to Indian 
No. Standard 
a) 2 (3) (4) (5) (6) 
xvi) Acceptance This chart is used to take decisions This chart introduces concept of process acceptance This chart can be used only when: 6 of IS 397 
Control Charts in terms of process acceptance, that a) the within subgroup variation is in-control (Part 5) 
is, whether designated percentage and the variation is estimated efficiently (at 
of products produced or services minimum cost); 
derived from the process meet the by a high evël r bility has b 
specification limits, and whether ya fe ks of process capability has been 
process average has shifted beyond Sa 
allowable shift in the process average 
xvii) Multivariate Multivariate charts are used to This is useful when the characteristics of a product are highly Multivariate control charts work well when the 5, 6 and 7 of 
control charts determine whether process is under correlated, and in such situations Shewhart control charts number of process variables is not too large — say, IS 397 (Part 7) 


control when number of inter 
dependent quality characteristics are 
to be controlled simultaneously. 


give misleading information. 


ten or fewer. As the number of variables grows, 
however, traditional multivariate control charts 
lose efficiency with regard to shift detection. 


1707 : (0 Hed) L6E SI 


Table 2 Types of Control Charts and their Applicability for Attribute Type of Data 


( Clause 4.2 ) 

SI Type of Chart General Field of Application Merits Demerits Ref. to Indian 

No. Standard 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) Number of Control of overall fraction a) Data required are often already available from a) Does not provide detailed information for 6.3.2 of IS 397 
non-conforming non-conforming items of a process inspection records control of individual characteristic (Part 2) 
Items np Chart b) Easily understood b) Does not recognize criticality of 

c) Provides overall picture non-conformity in products(s) 
c) Requires fixed sample size from each subgroup 

ii) Fraction Control of overall proportion/percent a) Same as for np chart a) Does not provide detailed information for 6.3.1 of IS 397 
non-conforming non-conforming items of a process b) This chart is used when sample size (n) varies. control of individual characteristic. (Part 2) 

P Chart b) Does not recognize criticality of 
(proportion) non-conformity in products(s) 
or c) Control limits vary with the sample size, and 
therefore, these limits will not be straight lines 
P (percent) . . 
d) Requires more calculations as compared to np 
chart 

iii) Standardized Control of overall fraction a) Control limits and standard line are fixed a) Involves more calculations 13 of IS 397 
‘p’ Chart non-conforming of a process b) Interpretation is facilitated (Part 3) 

iv) number of Control of overall number of a) Index of non-conformities per unit is easily a) Does not provide detailed information for 6.3.3 of IS 397 
non-conformities non-conformities of a process understandable control of individual characteristics (Part 2) 
chart b) Very simple and easy to understand b) Not applicable when unequal number of items 
C Chart are being inspected from each subgroup 

v) number of Control of overall number of Applicable in situations when sample size vary a) Control limits depend on sample size and 6.3.4 of IS 397 
non-conformities non-conformities per item of a process therefore, these limits will not be straight lines (Part 2) 
per item chart 
u Chart 

vi) Demerit control Control of non-conformities with their a) In addition to advantages of c (or u-) chart, it takes a) Scoring system has to be worked out and its 14 of IS 397 
chart criticality into account the intensity, extent and seriousness usages explained through a suitable training (Part 3) 

of non-conformity programme 
b) Scoring system considers the extent and b) Involves more calculations 


seriousness of non-conformities 


1707 : (0 Hed) L6E SI 


Table 2 ( Concluded ) 


SI Type of Chart General Field of Application Merits Demerits Ref. to Indian 
No. Standard 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
vii) Inspection by Control of individual characteristics, a) Data on number of oversize and undersize items a) Requires training and conviction that narrow 15 of IS 397 
gauging when instead of hitting the target it is available gauging will not be harsh in application (Part 3) 
essential to meet the specifications, as b) Measurement of individual values is difficult since artificial level of acceptance is created 
in assembly operations uneconomic or impossible but easy to know consistent with quality requirements 
whether it is below or above a certain value X b) Pattern of data on individual characteristic is 
c) As substitute of `X — R chart, it requires larger unknown 
sample size but still reduces overall inspection 
load 
d) Itis more efficient than p chart 
viii) Short run Chart, To control product characteristics or a) It is simple to use a) If the distribution is not normal, the test will 6 of IS 397 
small mixed batch process parameters regardless of the b) The chart is accurate if the values of the quality only give an approximate guide. (Part 8) 


control charting 


type of feature or differences in units of 
measure and process spread 


characteristic conform to a normal distribution. 


1707 : (0 Hed) L6E SI 


IS 397 (Part 0) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Statistical Methods for Quality and Reliability Sectional Committee, MSD 03 


Organization 


Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 


Automotive Research Association of India (ARAT), Pune 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Central Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics & 
Programm Implementation, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Gurgaon 
Directorate General Quality Assurance (DGQA), Kanpur 


Faculty of Management Studies, University of Delhi, 
Delhi 


FICCI, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute TASRI) 
New Delhi 


Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), New Delhi 
Institute of Quality and Reliability, Pune 


Maruti Suzuki India Limited (MSIL), Gurgaon 


M.S. University of Baroda, Deptt. of Statistics, Vadodra 
M/s Mahle Filter Systems India (P) Ltd, 
QCI/NABL, New Delhi 


National Institution of Medical Statistics (NIMS), ICMR, 
New Delhi 


National Productivity Council, New Delhi 


National Sample Survey Office (NSSO), Ministry of 
Statistics & Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


Standardization, Testing and Quality Certification 
Directorate, New Delhi 
Tata Consultancy Services, New Delhi 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


In personal capacity 


Representative(s) 


Pror Bimat K. Roy (Chairman) 


Suri V. K. JADHAV 
SHRI V. V. SHINDE (Alternate) 


Ms SMITHA PUROHIT 
MR AparsH ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. GUPTA 


SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 


DR A. P. SRIVASTAVA 
Dr S. K. TEwaRI (Alternate) 


Dr HAMENDRA KUMAR DANGI 
Dr Panka Sinua (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. ARORA 
Suri MRITYUNJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 


DR RAJENDER PARSAD 
Dr Hukum CHanpra (Alternate) 


Pror IsHA DEWAN 
Ms Rina CHakravorty (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT URDHAWARSHEE 
SHRI YASHWANT MAHAKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAG BASIL 
SHRI ANIL BHARDWAJ 
SHRI SHOBHIT MANORI (Alternate I) 
Suri Ravi Kant Yapay (Alternate II) 


ProF K. MURALIDHARAN 
SHRI ASHEESH GAUR 


SHRI N. VENKATESWARAN 
Suri Avisit Das (Alternate) 


Dr D. K. SHUKLA 
Dr Ast MUKHEJEE (Alternate) 


Dr K. P. SUNNY 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR TYAGI 
SHRI SACHIN (Alternate) 


Suri R. P. SONDHI 


SHRI DEBASIS BEHURA 
Ms SANDHYA KAKKAR (Alternate) 


MRs ASMITA A. GHATE 
SHRI A. P. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


Pror S. CHAKRABORTY 


IS 397 (Part 0) : 2021 


Organization 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Pror. A. N. NANKANA 
Dr V. K. BuaTIA 
Suri P. K. GAMBHIR, Ex-DDG, BIS 


Composition of Subcommitee for “Process Control” (MSD 3:5) 


Organization 


Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), New Delhi 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Institute of Quality and Reliability, Pune 
ISI, Chennai 

Mahle Filter Systems India (P) Ltd 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


National Institution of Medical Statistics (NIMS), ICMR, 
New Delhi 


Tata Consultancy Services, New Delhi 
In personal capacity 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Ms RINA CHAKRAVORTY (Convener) 


Ms Smita PUROHIT 
Mr AparsH ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT URDHWARSHEE 
Ms SuUsHMA BENDRE 
SHRI ASHEESH GAUR 


SHRI PRAG BASIL 
SHRI ANIL BHARDWAJ (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHOBHIT MAnor! (Alternate II) 
Suri Ravi Kant Yapay (Alternate II) 


Dr VISHNU VARDHAN 


Ms SANDHYA KAKKAR 
Pror A. N. NANKANA 


Suri P. K. GAMBHIR 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 03 (12586). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


