HRAT AAF IS 17022 : 2018 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


aha Arato wara ee tere 
GELEEN 


Guidelines for 
Green Manufacturing Practices 


ICS 13.020.10 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay feet — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2018 Price Group 6 


Environmental Management Sectional Committee, CHD 34 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Environmental 
Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


The existence of mankind solely depends upon natural resources, the availability of which is finite and limited. 
Therefore, for the sustainability of present and future generations, judicious utilization of resources is of paramount 
importance. However, variations in the supply and demand curve coupled with the associated environmental 
burdens due to increasing population and user preferences take precedence over the requisite focus needed to 
be laid on conservation of environment. Further, the need for growth and development of a country makes it 
imperative to utilize the resources judiciously to ensure competitiveness and the quality of environment. “Green 
Manufacturing Practices” are a step towards it. 


The concept of ‘green’ is a philosophy in the approach at each and every stage of business, strategic planning, 
purchasing, designing, commissioning and operation including decommissioning. To actualize the philosophy of 
green manufacturing in an organization, the awareness of the purpose and intent of the embedded environmental 
concepts and principles within the operations, as well as the roles and responsibilities of the people and that of 
the organization is of great significance. This helps in building the environmental culture and practices within the 
organization. 


Environmental burdens associated with the activities of an organization which causes impacts on environment are 
global as well as local in nature. Such impacts may result in: 


a) Climate Change, 

b) Ground water depletion, 

c) Soil erosion, 

d) Water quality degradation, and 
e) Deforestation etc. 


However, their significance varies with time and space. Sometimes, market relevance also predominates and 
decides their significance such as greenhouse gas emissions. 


A mechanism to address an environmental issue to a particular geography may not fit elsewhere. Therefore, a 
solution to a process should always be tailored in line with all the relevant and significant environmental impacts 
associated to the product or activity in consideration. 


Though there is no clear definition for ‘Green Manufacturing’, one would understand with the available information 
that, it deals with the manufacturing processes involving technologies which impose less burden on environment. 
Therefore, requirements for ‘Green Manufacturing’ invariably are in terms of process and product requirements 
specific to the environmental aspects associated with them. 


To decide the relevance and significance of numerous environmental aspects associated with either process 
or a product, tools such as ‘Life Cycle Assessment’, ‘Environmental Impact Assessment’, ‘Material flow cost 
accounting’, “Carbon Footprint’ and ‘Water Footprint’ etc. may be applied to identify them throughout the life 
cycle of the product. Based on the results of such assessment methods, one could identify the environmental 
impacts that should be addressed by the technology. 


This Guideline Standard attempts to provide doable action by the new industry (projects) as also by the existing 
industry pursuing the concepts of Green Manufacturing. The aim of this Indian Standard ‘Guidelines on green 
manufacturing practices’ is to offer a general framework for efficient manufacturing management for the purpose 
of understanding the potential resource and environmental consequences of infrastructure or manufacturing 
activities including materials and energy use practices. Objectives of such exercise could be many for such 
purposes, out of which the important ones for example are: 


a) To design and establish the new projects with all measures which in turn results in resources and energy 
conservation. 


b) To choose better technologies in place of existing technologies in the context of optimum utilization of 
resources and energy conservation. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 17022 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR 
GREEN MANUFACTURING PRACTICES 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard provides guidelines and 
framework on “Green Manufacturing Practices” for all 
types of industries and organizations including service 
sector. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
IS/ISO 14040 Environmental management — Life 
: 2006 cycle assessment — Principles and 


framework 


IS/ISO 14044 Environmental management — Life 


: 2006” cycle assessment — Requirements 
and guidelines 
IS/ISO 14051 Environmental management — 


: 2011 Material flow cost accounting — 
General framework 
IS/ISO Guide Guide for addressing environmental 
64 : 2008 issues in product standards 
NOTE — For reference to other publications, please see 


Bibliography (Page 12). 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Design 


A creative activity that is based on expressed or implied 
needs, existing means and technological possibilities, 
results in the definition of technical solutions for 
a product or process that can be commercially 
manufactured or fabricated into prototypes. 


3.2 Energy 


Power derived from the utilization of physical or 
chemical resources, especially to provide light, heat 
and/or to work machines. 


3.3 Energy Flow 


Input to or output from a unit process or product system, 
quantified in energy units. 


3.4 Environment 


Surroundings in which an organization operates, 
including air, water, land, natural resources, flora, 
fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 


3.5 Environmental Aspect 


Element of an organization’s activities, products or 
services that can interact with the environment. 


3.6 Environmental Impact 


Any change to the environment, whether adverse 
or beneficial, wholly or partially resulting from an 
organization’s activities, products or services. 


3.7 Environmental Outputs 


Toxic chemical releases, toxicity-weighted chemical 
emissions, ozone depletion potential, conventional 
air pollutant emissions, global warming potential, 
hazardous waste generation. Where possible, the social 
costs of these outputs are also quantified. 


3.8 Evaluation 


Element within the life cycle interpretation phase 
intended to establish confidence in the results of the life 
cycle assessment. 


3.9 Full Cost Accounting 


Assigns the costs of materials, energy, labor, waste 
disposal, and other costs to specific products or 
processes instead of lumping them in an overhead 
account, to recognize the true burden of their 
environmental impacts. 


3.10 Green Auditing /Accounting 


Identifying and measuring the costs of environmental 
materials and activities so as to use this information for 
management of environmental impacts. 


3.11 Green Manufacturing 


The use of manufacturing technologies that minimize 
environmental impacts such as emission of greenhouse 
gases, use of non-renewable or toxic materials, and 
waste generation etc. 


D Superseding IS/ISO 14041 : 1998, IS/ISO 14042 : 2000 and IS/ISO 14043 : 2000. 


IS 17022 : 2018 


3.12 Input 

Product, material or energy flow that enters a unit 
process. 

3.13 Interested Party 

Individual or group concerned with or affected by the 
environmental performance of a product system, or by 
the results of the life cycle assessment. 

3.14 Life Cycle 


Consecutive and interlinked stages of a product system, 
from raw material acquisition or generation from 
natural resources to final disposal. 

3.15 Life Cycle Assessment 


Compilation and evaluation of the inputs, outputs 
and the potential environmental impacts of a product 
system throughout its life cycle. 

3.16 Life Cycle Inventory Analysis 

Phase of life cycle assessment involving the compilation 
and quantification of inputs and outputs for a product 
throughout its life cycle. 

3.17 Mass Balance 


Exercises consider inputs and outputs of a process and 
determine effectiveness of utilization and wastages in 
time and money. 

3.18 Output 

Product, material or energy flow that leaves a unit 
process. 

3.19 Process 

Set of interrelated or interacting activities that 
transforms inputs into outputs. 

3.20 Process Energy 


Energy input required for operating the process 
or equipment within a unit process, excluding energy 
inputs for production and delivery of the energy 
itself. 

3.21 Product 


Any goods or service. 


3.22 RawMaterial 


Primary or secondary material that is used to produce 
a product. 


3.23 Recyclable Material 


Material for which an economically and technically 
feasible recycling method exists. 


3.24 Recycled Materials 


Materials that have been recovered, or otherwise 
diverted, from the waste stream, either from the 


manufacturing process [that is, post-industrial recycled 
materials, but not in-house scrap or after consumer use 
(that is, post-consumer recycled materials), and are 
reused in the manufacture of new products. 


3.25 Renewable Materials 


Materials that have been produced from a source, 
usually plant or animal biomass, that can be renewed 
by short- to medium-term regeneration. 


3.26 Resource Inputs 


Raw materials, water, electricity, fuels, ores etc. 


3.27 Sensitivity Analysis 


Systematic procedures for estimating the effects of 
the choices made regarding methods and data on the 
outcome of a study. 


3.28 Variable Frequency Drive 


A Variable Frequency Drive (VFD) is a type of 
motor controller that drives an electric motor by 
varying the frequency and voltage supplied to the 
electric motor. 


4 PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS OF GREEN 
MANUFACTURING 


The aim of green manufacturing is to reduce adverse 
impacts of a process or product on human health and 
to virtually eliminate environmental impacts. Green 
manufacturing provide framework for alternative, 
environmentally friendly processes and practices to 
balance increase of process efficiency and lowering of 
environmental burdens simultaneously. 


4.1 Design 


4.1.1 Design Less Polluting Manufacturing Processes 


Where feasible, make use of equipment, processes 
that pose least or no threats to human health and the 
environment. 


4.1.2 Taking Advantage of Products Designed for least 
Degradation 


Reduce the effect on the environment by developing 
products that are designed with least burden on the 
environment for example, biodegradable. 


4.2 Process 


4.2.1 Process Efficiency 


An efficient process ensures that the maximum amount 
of input materials is converted to the final product so 
as to minimize waste as residues. Process conversion 
should be the maximum or emphasis to be given to 
economy and selection of various requisite materials. 
Conversion could also depend on the catalyst that is 
used. Thus, eco-catalyst should be used even if they are 
costlier. 


4.2.2 Waste Minimization and Prevention 


Development of manufacturing techniques, which 
reduce or prevent waste. It is better to prevent waste 
than to clean it up after its creation. 


4.2.3 Establishment of in-process Controls for Pollution 
Prevention 


To avoid formation of hazardous by-products/residues, 
adopting real-time analysis and in process monitoring 
during manufacturing. 


4.3 Resources 
4.3.1 Materials 


4.3.1.1 Use safer materials 

Use material/chemicals that have the lowest levels of 
environmental load and toxicity. 

4.3.1.2 Accident prevention 

Selection of materials/substances that minimize the 
potential for explosions, fires and releases into the 
environment. 

4.3.1.3 Use of alternative and renewable feedstock 


Use of alternative materials or renewable or recycled 
materials (waste from other processes or products 
derived from agricultural streams etc.) whenever 
technically or economically feasible. 


4.3.2 Energy 


4.3.2.1 Enhanced energy efficiency 

The realization of the economical and environmental 
impact of energy use in a chemical process and the 
development of alternative means to reduce the impact. 
4.3.2.2 Enhanced water efficiency 


Selection of water efficient equipment, processes and 
following practices including reuse, recycle, use of 
rainwater etc. 


4.3.3 Safety and Health 


4.3.3.1 Usesafer reaction conditions 


Search for the most up-to-date information on green 
inputs that will optimize the process and provide a safer 
working environment. 


5 GREEN MANUFACTURING FRAMEWORK 


5.1 General 


Sustainable manufacturing or green manufacturing 
involves processes that are: 


a) Non-polluting, 
b) Conserve energy and natural resources, 
c) Economically viable, and 


d) Safe for workforce, communities and consumers. 


IS 17022 : 2018 


5.2 Green Factory 


The manufacturing facility/factory shall be designed 
and constructed in way to enhance higher efficiency 
and optimal utilization of resources to produce eco- 
friendly/green products. This requires close cooperation 
of the design team, the architects, the engineers, and 
the client at all project stages. The primary objective 
of green factory shall be able to reduce the overall 
environmental impact of the product/process on human 
health and the natural environment by: 


a) Efficiently using energy, water, and other 
resources; 
b) Protecting occupant health and improving 


employee productivity; and 


c) Reducing waste, pollution and environmental 
degradation. 


5.2.1 Location 


In case of new project, more preference shall be given 
to the site/location which: 


a) Is closer to the primary source of raw material to 
reduce emissions, leakages during transport; 


b) Better connected via rail/road/sea or all the three 
modes to utilize the environmental friendly 
transport; 


c) Proximity to the primary/potential market to keep 
the supply chain/value chain within the project 
boundary if possible; 

d) Availability of sufficient and reliable energy from 
national grids/bulk supplies; 

e) Easy availability of water, work force and raw 
material, excess of which could be recycled; 

f) Renovate and reuse existing buildings and 
associated infrastructure instead of building the 
same anew; 


wa 


The location should also consider the possibility 
of use of the by-products in industries in the same 
vicinity; 


8 


h 


© 


Location preference should include places where 
the hazardous waste/solid waste can be used for 
co-processing in nearby industries; and 


wa 


Simultaneously, availability of co-processable 
hazardous waste/solid waste should be 
considered. 


j 


5.2.2 Design, Architecture and Planning 


a) The factory design, architecture and layout shall 
be able to utilize natural resources like sunlight, 
water or wind optimally; 


b) Implementation of green building concept in 
offices, stores and warehouses, sub stations, 
that is use of non-toxic, zero VOC paints, high 
efficiency windows, insulation in walls, ceilings, 
floors etc.; 


IS 17022 : 2018 


c) Installation and fitting of devices/equipment, 
which consume lesser energy and resources such 
as power, water, fuel etc.; 


d) Innovation, automation and more application of 
sensor controlled devises/equipment to conserve 
electrical energy and other resources; 


e) Provision for flexibility in use, function and 
change in factory layout; 


f) Efficient usage of landscape, infrastructure and 
architecture. For example, smaller and integrated 
buildings with efficient use of space; and 


g) Hire a design team which has green design 
experience with respect to building and structures. 


5.2.3 Construction 


Sustainable construction, execution and establishment 
methodology to be adopted by considering aspects such 
as: 


a) Materials — Selection and use of more 
sustainable/eco-friendly (namely, renewable, 
recycled, non-toxic etc.) materials or alternatives 
with similar/better performance. For example, use 
of eco labeled products; 


b) Selection and adoption of  efficient/latest 
construction technology and processes to help 
resource conservation; 


c) Operation and maintenance — Make provisions 
for easy operation and (minimal) maintenance 
with easily available eco-friendly materials/ 
methods in long run; and 


d) Ensure occupational health and safety and working 
conditions. 


5.3 Green Products 


Agreen product must have lesser impact on environment 
and shall be lesser detrimental to human health than 
the traditional product equivalent. Green product shall 
be manufactured in a green manufacturing facility and 
should be: 


a) Energy efficient, durable and often have low 
maintenance requirements. 

b) Lesser/Free of Ozone depleting chemicals, 
toxic compounds and do not produce toxic by- 
products. 

c) Often/can be made of recycled materials or content 
or from renewable and sustainable sources. 

d) Obtained from local manufacturers or resources. 

e) Biodegradable/recyclable/repairable or 
reused either in part or as a whole. 


easily 


f) Safe for human and environment. 
g) Use of safe/eco-friendly/biodegradable packaging 
materials. 


h) Packaging Materials — and 


Environment-friendly. 


Disposable 


j) Can have improved shelf life and can be stored 
safely. 


k) Green/Eco-product development the 


market research and analysis. 


through 


5.4 Green Processes 


Green process refers to measures to eliminate the 
environmental burden in such areas as resources input, 
chemical substances use and energy consumption to the 
greatest extent possible from all the processes involved 
in manufacturing the products. 


It is the design, commercialization, and use of processes 
and products, which are feasible and economical while 
minimizing: 

a) Generation of pollution at the source, and 

b) Risk to human health and the environment. 
It embraces the concept that decides to protect human 
health and the environment can have the greatest impact 


and cost effectiveness when applied early to the design 
and development phase of a process or product. 


5.4.1 Principles of Green Engineering/Process 


a) Engineer processes and products holistically, use 
systems analysis, and integrate environmental 
impact assessment tools. 


b) Conserve and improve natural ecosystems while 
protecting human health and well-being. 


c) Use life-cycle thinking in all engineering activities. 
d) Ensure that all material and energy inputs and 


outputs are as inherently safe and benign as 
possible. 


e) Minimize depletion of natural resources. 
f) Strive to prevent waste. 


g) Develop and apply engineering solutions, while 
being cognizant of local geography, aspirations, 
and cultures. 


h) Create engineering solutions beyond current or 
dominant technologies; improve, innovate, and 
invent (technologies) to achieve sustainability. 


j) Actively engage communities and stakeholders in 
development of engineering solutions. 
Examples: 


1) Using electronic media and technology to reduce 
paper and fuel; 


2) Lead-free soldering for electronics; 
3) Use of environment-friendly chemicals; and 
4) End of life treatment — Recycling of components, 
collection of equipment 
5.5 Green Operation, Supply Chain and Logistics 


Supply chains are critical links that connect an 
organization’s inputs to its outputs. Traditional 
challenges have included lowering costs, ensuring 


just-in-time delivery, and shrinking transportation 
times to allow better reaction to business challenges. 
However, the increasing environmental costs of 
these networks and growing consumer pressure for 
Eco-friendly products has led many organizations to 
look at supply chain sustainability. 

Green logistics attempts to measure and minimize the 
ecological impact of logistics activities. This includes 
all activities inward and out ward flows of materials/ 
products between the point of origin and the point of 
consumption. 


5.5.1 Materials 


Material selection and usage can lead to reduction in 
environment burden (see Fig. 1): 


a) Institutionalize environmental considerations in 
all procurement decisions ; 


b) Materials control-utilize reusable and recyclable 
materials wherever possible; 


c) Promote environment awareness among suppliers/ 
contractors; 


d) Vendor commitment and monitoring; 


e) Prefer supplier with better track records on 
environment, health and safety; 

f) Proper Storage management to minimize waste 
and support production; and 


g) Selection of recycled/biodegradable/renewable 
materials as much as possible. 


Green Procurement/ 


Procurement 


IS 17022 : 2018 


5.5.2 Responsible Sourcing 


Input should not result into any type of pollution, toxic/ 
hazard in the finished goods/product (see Fig. 2): 


a) Consider whether a product is needed before 
purchasing it; 

b) Purchase a product considering the various 
environmental impacts over its life cycle — from 
extraction of raw materials to disposal; 


c) Select suppliers who make conscious efforts to 
care for the environment; and 


d) Collect environmental information on products 
and suppliers green purchasing to encourage 
environmentally conscious management and eco- 
product development through the market. 


5.5.3 Energy 
a) Use of energy efficient equipment and process; 


b) Measurement of consumption; 


c) Studying new ways to use technology to minimize 
energy consumption; 


d) Energy savings should be incorporated in a 
manner that waste energy from a process step is 
recovered for re-use in another process step; 


e) Variable frequencydrives should be considered 
for all energy intensive rotating equipment with 
varying loads; 

f) Periodic energy audit/electrical system audit 
may be taken up voluntarily or may be made 
mandatory; 


Eco/Green Products 


Fic. 1 MATERIAL SELECTION AND USAGE 


Greener Input: 
Reduce input 
Non-hazardous material 
Easy-to-recycle 
Energy saving 
Resource saving 


Consumption 


Production 


Reduce Output 

o Waste 

a Pollution 

a Hazardous substances 
2 Carbon Dioxide 


Fic. 2 RESPONSIBLE SOURCING 


IS 17022 : 2018 


g) Work environment should be such that it is 
comfortable for the production workers which in 
turn would provide higher efficient man power 
leading to more production per unit of manpower; 
and 


h) Encourage use of bi-cycles within the plant 
premises in a manner that a bicycle can be picked- 
up from one location, driven to another location 
and dropped there. This would ensure saving on 
fuel used by vehicles within the plant premises. 


5.5.4 Water 
a) Use of water efficient equipment and process; 
b) Measurement of consumption and discharge; 
c) Check leakages and waste in the process; 
d) Cleaning andreusing water used for manufacturing; 


e) Studying new ways to use technology to minimize 
water usage in life cycle; 


f) Metering at each water use point should be a 
practice so as to reduce water; 

g) Use at each point per unit of production; 

h) In case of green belts/aesthetic gardening; a 
practice of growing low water consuming trees/ 
shrubs/lawns should be a practice; 

j) Collection of storm water in a collection tank 
before allowing it to go for sub-soil rain water 
harvesting would enable use of the collected storm 
water in the manufacturing process (wherever 
possible) and thus reduce withdrawal of fresh 
water for the same; 

k) Paving of the land to the maximum possible extent 
would ensure higher collection of the rain water in 
the storm water collection tank; and 


m) Periodic water foot print assessment may be taken 
up voluntarily or made mandatory. 
5.5.5 Logistics and Supply Chain 


A supply chain is the portion of the value chain that 
focuses primarily on the physical movement of goods 
and materials, that is, purchasing raw materials and 
distribution of finished goods to retail outlets: 


a) Using transportation modes that minimize costs 
and carbon output; and 


b) Studying new ways to use technology. 
5.5.6 Packaging 


a) Packaging materials selection — Prefer disposable 
and environment-friendly. 


b) End of life treatment — Recycling of components. 
c) Use of biodegradable materials. 


5.5.7 End of Life Treatment 


“End-of-life” (EOL) is a term used with respect to a 
product supplied to customers, indicating that the 
product is in the end of its useful life and a vendor 


intends to stop marketing, selling, or sustaining it. 
A green product shall: 

a) Aware/guide consumer/customer about the proper 
handling and disposal method; 

b) Responsible manufacture may extend support to 
customers for proper collection and disposal of 
product after EOL; 

c) Lucrative buy back schemes; and 

d) Encourage/train and authorize parties for proper 
recycling of components and collection of 
equipment. 


6 ECONOMIC ASPECTS 
MANUFACTURING 


OF GREEN 


6.1 Environmental impact and efficient manufacturing 
are important to investors who have the access and the 
control to discuss business practices with management. 
Consequently, they have the ability to persuade 
businesses to adopt green practices. The prospect of 
adoption of these practices is tremendous given the fact 
that the industry is still developing and large majority 
of it is classified as a small or medium scale enterprise. 
Hence the applicability and the economic gains to be 
derived from these guidelines are very substantial. 


6.2 The average investor and consumer are not likely 
to knowingly, or actively, invest in a company that 
blatantly violates environmental standards or human 
rights. Environmental responsibility, which includes 
adopting green manufacturing practices, can raise long- 
run profits, especially if it creates extra benefits such as 
a better business environment that penetrates all levels 
of the operation. Consumers and investors have much 
more access to this information now than they did in 
the past. This knowledge and increased competition 
forces companies to be more responsible for their 
practices. Many firms must choose to be proactive and 
adopt green strategies or be reactive and change once 
they are prodded by consumers and investors. 


6.3 As an organization adopting green manufacturing 
practices, it should also specifically mention its 
activities in respect to the same in their annual report 
as an effective means to communicate with the various 
stakeholders on their initiative to become more 
sustainable. 


7 BIODIVERSITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE 


7.1 Conventional risk management often fails to 
address one of the most significant issues facing many 
companies today, that is, the environmental and social 
risks within global supply chains. Unsustainable 
sourcing can destroy biodiversity and affect 
communities, threatening future supply and brand 
reputation and potentially leading to expensive legal 
disputes. 


7.2 A risk analysis methodology must be followed 
while assessing the impact on biodiversity and 
climate change. The methodology adopted by 
organizations should enable the understanding of risks 
to biodiversity associated with commodity production 
and procurement, as well as developing action plans to 
reduce those negative impacts. It should also facilitate 
the understanding of relative risk and opportunity 
within a supply chain to develop an action plan to 
reduce the footprint of a commodity’s production on 
a global scale. Key vulnerabilities of an organization 
with respect to climate change could be identified using 
the criteria listed in Annex A. 


8 IMPLEMENTATION OF 
MANUFACTURING PRACTICES 


GREEN 


A well-managed supply chain can create more value 
for the manufacturing industry in the form of quality 
products or processes, innovative new goods and 
services and increasing as well as protecting the brand 
reputation and enhancing customer loyalty: 


a) Company policies should include the green 
manufacturing prospect and ensure that the 
green manufacturing practices are reported in 
annual report. This would ensure that the various 
stakeholders also know, appreciate and support 
the stated practices. 


b) Companies should adopt green supply chain 
standards and implement them through inspection 
and compliance regimes, such as requiring 
their suppliers to use a certified Environmental 
Management System (see IS/ISO 14001 : 2015) 


Industry-based green standards can play a crucial 
role in the design, manufacturing, packaging 
and end-of-life stages of a product. Industry 
management standards are often integrated into 
voluntary environmental management systems, 
especially those that can be certified by various 
certifying bodies against International/National 
Standards. 


Implementation of green management systems, 
certified by independent parties, would help 
developing country manufacturers comply 
with requisite standards and to verify their 
performance against those standards. This is 
especially relevant in instances where enterprises 
are meeting process-related standards. In addition, 
management systems can be useful for complying 
with specific product-related standards, such 
as Quality Management Standards, Energy 
Management System Standards for example, 
IS/ISO 9000, IS/ISO 50001. 


Energy efficiency can be enhanced by updating 
electricity infrastructure with smart energy 
grids. Improved energy efficiency is one of 
the most cost-effective ways to reduce global 


Cc 


wa 


d 


wm 


e 


wa 


IS 17022 : 2018 


GHG emissions, enhance energy security and 
reduce the amount of money spent on energy. 
For most industries, increasing energy efficiency 
in production, therefore, is not just a response 
to environmental concerns or objectives; it 
has become a core determinant of economic 
competitiveness and sustainable growth. Most 
energy efficiency gains in industry are achieved 
through changes in how energy is managed 
in an industrial facility, rather than through 
the installation of new technologies. Energy 
management systems, like the IS/ISO 50001 
Standard, provide a framework for understanding 
significant energy use and offer applicable best 
practices. 


9 GREENING OPPORTUNITIES ALONG THE 
MANUFACTURING SUPPLY CHAIN FOR 
EXISTING ENTERPRISES 


9.1 The manufacturing sector can, regardless of 
size or location of facilities, continuously reduce the 
environmental impacts of manufacturing processes and 
products through: 

a) Taking increased extended producer responsibility; 

b) Compliance to all environmental standards set by 

the government; 
c) Performing a material, energy and water audit; 


d) Using energy and other resources 
efficiently; 


(more) 


e) Substituting fossil fuels with renewable energy 
sources; 

f) Phasing out toxic substances including but not 
limited to heavy metals, obsolete pesticides and 
insecticides, and asbestos; 

g) Promoting the sound management of chemicals; 

h) Improving occupational health and safety; 

waste 


j) Looking for solutions to 


minimization; 


superior 


k) Establishing environmental management systems; 
m) Upgrading and green retrofitting; 


n) Implementation of Management Systems such as 
IS/ISO 9001, IS/ISO 14001 and IS/ISO 50001, 
IS/ISO 18001; and 


p) Using Life Cycle Analysis tools (IS/ISO 14040, 
IS/ISO 14044). 


9.2 Enterprises can incorporate the following initiatives 
to increase awareness and directing a behavioral change 
within its supply chain: 


a) Encourage service providers to disclose their 
environmental footprint: Service providers can 
be encouraged to provide verifiable and easily 
available, comparable and understandable 


IS 17022 : 2018 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


information on the environment footprint of their 
products and/or services and to support the public 
dissemination of this information. 


Identify opportunities to collaborate on the 
use of sustainable transportation processes and 
technologies: Collaboration with actors in other 
parts of the value chain, including both suppliers 
upstream and customers downstream, can help 
to develop and scale up the use of sustainable 
transportation processes and technologies. 


Create new green industries: Stimulating the 
development and creation of manufacturing 
industries that deliver green products can help 
build up new capabilities in green sectors. This 
includes companies that manufacture and install 
renewable energy equipment and companies that 
develop and produce clean technologies. 


Advocate and ensure ‘supplier’s’ adherence to 
green codes of conduct: In response to growing 
consumer demand for sustainable business practice, 
organizations shall develop and implement codes 
of conduct. Also it shall encourage suppliers to 
ethical environmental practices. By demonstrating 
adherence to such codes of conduct, businesses in 
developing economies can significantly improve 
their export opportunities. 


Remanufacturing is the process of bringing used 
products and individual product components to a 
‘like new’ functional state. It recovers a substantial 
proportion of the resources incorporated into a 
used product in its first manufactured state, at low 
additional costs, thus reducing the price of the 
resulting new product. Remanufacturing is often 
considered an environmentally preferable end-of- 
life option in comparison with material recycling 
or manufacturing new products. This is because, 


Assembly 


Y component 
L! conditioning & 


Component 
Manufacturing 


Raw 
Materials 


X 
\ 


Material 
processing 


Recycled 
Components 


Finished 
Product 


Recovered 
Components 


Bs Product assembly § 


remanufacturing alleviates the depletion of 
natural resources, helps reduce excess production 
and also enhances chances to close the loop for 
recycling of resources including safer handling of 
toxic materials. (see Fig. 3) 


10 GREENING OPPORTUNITIES ALONG 
THE MANUFACTURING SUPPLY CHAIN 
FOR NEW ENTERPRISES 


New enterprises have an advantage of addressing inter- 
alia the green concepts, principles, technologies, good 
management practices, during its project cycle. The 
environmental aspects and management issues shall 
vary during each stage of: 


Project-planning, 

Design, 

Raw Material, 

Construction, 

Procurement stage, 
Construction stage, 
Commissioning, 

Operation, 

Supply-chain operations, and 
Decommissioning. 

For the pre-commissioning stage, includes the health 
and safety as well as social aspects. 


During the project planning it is pertinent to consider 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and related 
notifications and guidelines, as well as the guidelines 
by World Bank, International Finance Corporation 
(IFC), Asian Development Bank (ADB), Equator 
Principles, Global Compact/SA 8000 and/or other 
lender or regulatory specific requirements. At any stage 


Forward logistics 


Reverse logistics 


Sc 
~-.— 


a 


Fic. 3 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF REMANUFCTURING PROCESS 


of the project, for borrowing money or for alliances, 
adherence to these allows the international acceptability 
of the company. 


New enterprises during its establishment can ensure that 
sustainability is interspersed within its organizational 
values by establishing a green supply chain: 


a) Setting up green factories — Incorporating building 
codes, construction materials, natural lighting etc. 


b) Extraction of materials (resources) — In this 
step, resources needed for product manufacturing 
are collected. Some equipment is used for 
environmental impact reduction in this stage. 


c) Material and component production (materials/ 
parts) — This is a stage where interim products 
including materials and components are 
manufactured. Such interim products and their 
designs are intended for environmental impact 
reduction. 


d) Design and material selection (design) — In 
this step, designs and materials are carefully 
selected for product manufacturing, including 
environmentally compatible designs. 


e) Product manufacturing (production) — Products 
are manufactured in this step using materials and 
components. This step includes products that 
help reduce environmental impact during the 
manufacturing process. 


f) Transportation — In this step, materials, parts, 
and products are carefully transported to result in 
a low environmental burden. This step includes 
products for which modes of transportation have 
been changed and those with unique packaging. 


g) Product use, maintenance, and repair (use/ 
repair) — In this step, products are used by 
consumers and maintenance and repairs are 
carried out. This step includes consideration of 
energy saving and environmental cleanup as well 
as prolonging product life by repairs and product 
life improvement. 


h) End-of-life — In this step, products are disposed 
of and recycled. Included in this step are products 
that contribute to the reduction of final disposal 
volumes and can be disassembled, are easily 
reusable, easily recyclable, and compatible with 
well-established recycling systems. 


11 MEASUREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE 
INDICATORS 


The concept of ‘what can be measured — can be 
managed’ to be introduced for all measurable parameters 
and quantified not only to meet “Requirements of 
Green Standard” but also to demonstrate achievements 
with facts and figures in the following areas: 


a) Energy efficiency; 
b) Water conservation; 


IS 17022 : 2018 


c) Renewable energy; 

d) Greenhouse gas emission; 

e) Waste management; 

f) Material conservation, recycling and recyclability; 
g) Green supply chain; 

h) Product stewardship; 

j) Life cycle analysis; and 


k) Other areas (ventilation, 
location and innovation). 


surroundings, site 
The lifecycle approach and material flow cost accounting 
may be used as a push for determining environment 
performance indicators, including financial as well as 
to engrain the environmental culture. The boundary of 
the life cycle approach may be limited to company or 
extended beyond: 


a) Activity based cost apportionment of various 
resource use and consumptions, for example, 
energy, water, etc. This would require companies 
to install energy or water meters at point of use. 


b) Indicators of resource consumption or wastage 
per unit production or the costs involved can be 
estimated, to further refine areas. 


c) Benchmarking to own best performance vis-d-vis 
peer industries. 


d) Material balances of resources and costs across 
the company and at unit level, allows for the green 


mapping. 
12 PERSONNEL AND COMPETENCE 


12.1 Awareness, Training and Skills Development 


Environmental culture, attitudes and approach of the 
company is the key for environmental management. To 
build a culture around green-thinking, companies need 
to hold awareness and training programme periodically. 
The training can be of various types ranging from 
awareness, functional, job based, skill and development 
based, in alignment with the business vision, strategies, 
policies, to achieve business focus of short term and 
long term. 


The environmental awareness programme should 
focus on the environmental purpose and intent of 
the designed systems and procedures to achieve the 
effective implementation and building the culture of 
green manufacturing. While the top-down approach 
plans the expanse of the business vision and strategies 
over different time horizon with environmental 
considerations, by way of technologies, designing, 
operations, products and processes as well as services, 
it paves way for bottom up approach to inbuilt 
environmental planning and implementation. In other 
words, ‘taking ownership’ of the own processes/ 
function segments/departments and workings to 
include the green concepts and principles, aligned to 
business vision and plans is important. 


IS 17022 : 2018 


Frequent awareness programs for ideas and innovations 
within existing framework of implementation and new 
tools and techniques, is as important as arranging training 
and awareness programme on how to achieve them. 
Such awareness programmes allow the participation of 
people and taking ownership of existing systems and 
openness to the newness with green thinking. Often, 
such programmes will allow companies to identify the 
champions, who can derive the environmental efforts 
as campaign within the organization. 


This also allows the top management awareness of the 
new tools and techniques, and their cost-benefits, to in- 
built them into their business planning and strategies, 
as ‘smart options’ of taking leadership in business with 
sustainability. 


12.2 Competence 


a) Competence criteria for the personnel handling 
key functions should be defined. The competence 
criteria should be based on qualification, 
knowledge, experience and skill required to meet 
the assigned task. 

b) As a good practice, key ‘environmental roles and 

responsibilities’ of personnel are part of their job 

profile, to allow them recognizing its importance 
and take its ownership as well enable in training 
need assessment resulting from job performance 
evaluations. These should not be restricted to 

Environmental or Safety Manager only but 

extended across. 


In addition to key personnel at different job 
functions and levels, all personnel including 
workers and contract workers, should be included 
in the awareness and training programmes. 

d) Awareness programme are also held on the 
new areas of environmental tools, techniques, 
standards, etc. 

e) Training need assessment plan is based on the 
defined roles and responsibilities of the personnel, 
as well as different routes of training need 


identification. 


Training need identification should be aligned to 
achieve the company’s vision and strategies as 
well. 


Awareness and Training plans should be dynamic 
and relevant to the personnel at the given time. 


g) 


10 


Organizations to Ensure that Awareness and Training 
ProgrammeAddress 


a) The identified environmental roles 
responsibility of the personnel within 
department and at company level. 


and 
the 
b) How to realize their defined environmental roles 
and responsibility. 

Knowledge of the potential benefits and 
significance of achieving the environmental 
performance. 


c) 


d) Knowledge of the potential consequences of the 
departure from the systems and procedures or 


instructions. 


Skill enhancements of key 
functions and operations. 


e) environmental 
Conditions of environmental regulations, roles, 
and responsibilities of various functions and 
personnel. 


12.3 Indicative List of Areas of Training 


a) Adoption and adaptation of new technologies or 
modifications or renovations. 

b) Planning of the calibration of process control 

parameters that can affect the environmental 


performance, for example, air emissions. 


Clear work instructions with close ended 
statements and performance parameters. 


Use of pictorial depictions in the work instructions 
as well as point of functioning. 


Formation of groups with champions for 
significant environmental aspects and impacts for 
identifying areas of improvement. 


Environmental and 


measurements. 


monitoring techniques 


Environmental regulatory parameters or those 
covered under the covenants. 


g) 
h) Emergency preparedness and response work 
instructions on actions, reporting lines and 
command and control structure, emergency 
contacts and help lines within the company, outside 
and those in the vicinity company facilities. 

j) Green supply chain, including vendors or 
subcontractors who undertake their jobs with 
consideration of environmental aspects and 
impacts. 


A-1 


IS 17022 : 2018 


ANNEX A 


( Clause 7 ) 


CRITERIA FOR IDENTIFICATION OF KEY VULNERABILITIES OF 
AN ORGANIZATION WITH RESPECT TO CLIMATE CHANGE 


Sample criteria for identification of key 


vulnerabilities of an organization with respect to 
climate change: 


a) 


b) 


d) 


Magnitude and distribution of impacts — The 
magnitude and distribution of an impact is 
determined by its scale (for example, the area or 
number of people affected) and its intensity (for 
example, the degree of damage caused). 


Timing of impacts — A harmful impact is more 
likely to be considered as ‘key Impact’ if it is 
expected to happen soon rather than in the distant 
future. 


Persistence and reversibility of impacts — 
Examples of impacts that could become key 
due to persistence include the emergence of 
near-permanent drought conditions and 
intensified cycles of extreme flooding that were 
previously regarded as ‘one-off’ events. 


Likelihood (estimates of uncertainty) of impacts 
and vulnerabilities, and confidence in those 
estimates — Likelihood of impacts and our 
confidence in their assessment are two properties 
often used to characterize uncertainty of climate 


e) 


change and its impacts. Likelihood is the probability 
of an outcome having occurred or occurring in the 
future; confidence is the subjective assessment 
that any statement about an outcome will prove 
correct. Uncertainty may be characterized by these 
properties individually or in combination. 


Potential for adaptation — To assess the potential 
harm caused by climate change, the ability of 
individuals, groups, societies and nature to adapt 
to or upgrade adverse impacts must be considered 


Importance of the system(s) at risk — This point 
can be best described by the following situation- 
the transformation ofan existing natural ecosystem 
may be regarded as important if that ecosystem 
is the unique habitat of many endemic species 
or contains endangered charismatic species. On 
the other hand, if the livelihoods of many people 
depend crucially on the functioning of a system, 
this system may be regarded as more important 
than a similar system in an isolated area. 


A.2 The following table illustrates through examples 
how fields of action, new or existing, can affect climate 
change and biodiversity factors. 


Sites and Facilities Supply Product Manufacturing Logistics Personnel 
Chains and Processes 
Commodities 
Space required Space required Area and volume | Land needed for Space required for Habitats constructed 


Habitat fragmentation 


for production 


requirement of 
the product 


production facilities 
Discharge of heated 
waste water 


roads and storage 
Roads and pipelines 
cross migratory 
species routes 


in an employee 
volunteering project 


Power demand and 
carbon dioxide (CO,) 
emissions of buildings 
Ground storage of 
carbon dioxide (CO,) 


Power demand 
and carbon 
dioxide (CO,) 
emissions 
Depletion of 
Carbon sink 


Ozone depleting 
substances 


Power demand 

and carbon dioxide 
(CO,) emissions 
Need for ozone- 
depleting substances 
in production 


Power demand and 
carbon dioxide 
(CO,) emissions 
caused by 
transportation 


Employee behaviour 
impacts power 
demand and therefore 
greenhouse gas 
emissions 


Site location may 
accommodate invasive 
species 


Cultivation of 
new non-native 
resources 


Product design 
may lead to 
spreading of 
invasive species 


Production processes 
may promote 
spreading of 
invasive species 


Spreading of invasive 
species by transport 
of resources and 
products 


Employee behaviour 
has impact on 
spreading of invasive 
species 


Drainage of wetlands | Homogenization | Service features | Excessively sized Parking space Employee behaviour 
Erosion caused by of agriculture and product facilities may management has impact on 
agriculture Monoculture attributes can generate increased biodiversity 

have an impact demand for 

on biodiversity resources and lead to 

over exploitation 

Release of climate Over Product usage Wastewater Separation of oil Emissions caused by 
gases from depletion fertilization, may cause Emissions Detergent and waste employee business 
of forests and Wastewater emissions (for water Particulate travel 


drainage of wetlands, 
Dust, Building 
shadows 


example, waste- 
water, noise, 

air pollutants) 
Product as waste 


11 


matter 


IS 17022 : 2018 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

ISTSO 14031 1999 Environmental IEC Guide 109 : 2012 Environmental aspects — 
management — Environmental performance Inclusion in electro-technical product standards 
evaluation — Guidelines ISO/TR 24699 : 2009 Rubber and rubber 
ISO/TR 14062 2002 Environmental products — Environmental aspects — General 
management — Integrating environmental aspects guidelines for their inclusion in standards 

into product design and development ISO/IEC 17021-2 2016 Conformity 
IEC Guide 114 : 2005 Environmentally conscious assessment — Requirements for bodies 


design — Integrating environmental aspects 
intodesign and development of electro-technical 
products 


ISO 17422 : 2018 Plastics — Environmental 


aspects — General guidelines for their inclusion 
in standards 


12 


providing audit and certification of management 
systems — Part 2: Competence requirements 
for auditing and certification of environmental 
management systems 


(Continued from second cover) 


c) To critically examine manufacturing practices of products to be aware from claims of green washing. 
d) To support green productivity. 
e) To generate sectoral data banks for each activity and product category. 


This standard helps to better understand efficiency of infrastructure, equipment, material and energy use practices 
via development of matrices of all inputs including equipment, materials, energy, water, wastes, emissions and 
effluents that track and quantify them. 


Many organizations may not be aware of green manufacturing concepts with which one can assess the factors 
leading to inefficiency, material losses and higher environmental burdens. However, once the information is 
available in the form of matrices, it can be easily used to seek opportunities to resource conservation, efficient 
uses of material and energy, reduce adverse environmental impacts and associated costs. 


This standard is applicable to all the industries that use materials and energy, including extraction, manufacturing, 
services, etc. It can be implemented by all organizations without any existing systems in place such as environmental 
management systems. 


The Guidelines standard is expected to provide tools for efficient manufacturing and environmental management 
and can be used by single organization or extended to multiple organizations within a supply chain, to help 
develop an integrated approach to adopt efficient practices, use of materials and energy. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 34 (11416). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


