NAT AWA IS 15935 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


mer atest A fee Sat GT À dia 
Tranter thet (IP) di sia 
vert ta da Rere — RE 


( Teel JAGT ) 


Composite Cylinders for On-Board 
Storage of Compressed Natural Gas 
(CNG) as a Fuel for Automotive 
Vehicle — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.020:43.060.40 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAR BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2021 Price Group 14 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREVVORD 
This Indian Standard (First Revision) vvas adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 
This standard was originally published in 2011. In this revision following major changes have been done: 

a) Scope has been modified; 

b) New terminology has been added; 

c) Service life clause has been modified; 

d) Gas composition clause has been modified; and 

e) Certain other changes for better implementation of this standard. 


Cylinders for the on-board storage of fuel for natural gas vehicle service are required to be light-weight, at the 
same time maintaining or improving on the level of safety currently existing for other pressure vessels. 


The purpose of this standard is to specify minimum requirements for serially produced light-weight, composite 
refillable gas cylinder intended for the on-board storage for high pressure compressed natural gas as a fuel for 
automotive vehicles. This standard covers the metal and non-metal lined composite cylinders of the following 


types: 
a) Type 2 — Metal lined hoop wrapped composite cylinders; 
b) Type 3 — Metal lined full wrapped composite cylinders; and 
c) Type 4 — Non-metal lined full wrapped composite cylinders. 
The type 1 metal cylinders are covered in IS 15490. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been taken from the following: 


ISO 11439 : 2013 Gas cylinder — High pressure cylinders for the on-board storage of natural 
gas as a fuel for automotive vehicles 

ANSI/CSA NGV2 Basic Requirements for compressed natural gas vehicle (NGV2) fuel 
containers 

ISO 7866 : 1999 Gas Cylinders — Refillable seamless aluminum alloy gas cylinders — 


Design, construction and testing 


ISO 14130 : 1997 Fiber reinforced plastic composite — Determination of apparent inter 
laminar shear strength by short-beam method 


NACE/TM 0177 : 2005 Laboratory Testing of metals for resistance to sulfide stress cracking in H,S 
environment at ambient temperature 


ISO 7539-6 : 2003 Corrosion of metals and alloys — Stress corrosion testing — Part 6 
Preparation and use of pre-cracked specimens for tests under constant load 
or constant displacement 


ISO 11119-1 : 2002 Gas cylinders of composite construction — Specification and test methods 
Part 1: Hoop wrapped composite cylinders 


ISO 11119-2 : 2002 Gas cylinders of composite construction — Specification and test methods 
Part 2: Fully wrapped fiber reinforced composite gas cylinders with load 
sharing metal liners 


Since IS 15490 is a standalone standard for ‘metal cylinders’, we have to make this another standalone standard 
so as to cover all types of cylinders in Indian Standard as are covered in a single ISO standard 11439. 


While implementing this standard, the manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with 
statutory regulations. 


(Continued to third cover) 


Indian Standard 


COMPOSITE CYLINDERS FOR ON-BOARD 
STORAGEOF COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS (CNG) 
AS A FUEL FOR AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE — 

SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies minimum requirements for 
serially produced light-vveight, refillable gas cylinder 
intended for the on-board storage of high pressure 
compressed natural gas as a fuel for automotive 
vehicles to vvhich the cylinders are to be fixed. The 
service conditions do not cover external loadings which 
may arise from vehicle collisions, etc. This standard 
covers metal and non-metal lined composite cylinders 
of the following types: 


a) Type 2 Metal lined hoop wrapped composite 
cylinders; 

b) Type 3 Metal lined full wrapped composite 
cylinders; and 


c) Type 4 Non-metal lined full wrapped composite 
cylinders. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No./ Title 
Other Publications 
101 (Part 3/Sec 2) Methods of sampling and 
: 1989 test for paints, varnishes 


and related products: Part 3 
Tests on paint film formation, 
Section 2 Film thickness 
(third revision) 


Metallic materials — Brinell 
hardness test: Part 1 Test 
method (fourth revision) 


Metallic materials — 
Rockwell hardness test: Part 1 
Test method (fifth revision) 


1500 (Part 1) : 2013 


1586 (Part 1) : 2018 


IS No./ 
Other Publications 


1608 (Part 1) : 2018 


1757 (Part 1) : 2014 


3224 : 2002 


5903 : 2014 


13360 
(Part 5/Sec 1) : 
2018 


13360 
(Part 5/Sec 2) : 
2017 


13360 
(Part 6/Sec 1) : 
2018 


13411 : 1992 


IS 15935 : 2021 


Title 


Metallic materials — Tensile 
testing: Part 1 Method of 
test at ambient temperature 
(fourth revision) 


Metallic materials — Charpy 
pendulum: Part 1 Test method 
(fourth revision) 


Valve fittings for compressed 
gas cylinders exceeding 
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
cylinders — Specification 
(third revision) 


Recommendation for safety 
devices for gas cylinders 
(first revision) 


Plastics — Methods of testing: 
Part 5 Mechanical properties, 
Section 1 Determination of 
tensile properties — General 
principles (first revision) 
Plastics — Methods of testing: 
Part 5 Mechanical properties, 
Section 2 Determination 
of tensile properties test 
condition for moulding 
and extrusion plastics 
(first revision) 


Plastics — Methods of testing: 
Part 6 Thermal properties, 
Section 1 Determination of 
vicat softening temperature 
of thermoplastic materials 
(second revision) 


Glass reinforced polyester 
dough moulding compounds — 
Specification 


IS 15935 : 2021 


IS No./ 
Other Publications 


15490 : 2017 


Title 


Seamless steel cylinders 
for on-board storage of 
compressed natural gas as 
a fuel for automotive 
vehicles — Specification 
(first revision) 

Refillable transportable 
seamless aluminium alloy 
gas cylinders — Specification 
(first revision) 


15660 : 2017 


15958 : 2012 Compressed natural gas 
(CNG) for automotive 


purposes — Specification 


15975 : 2013 Gas cylinders — Conditions 


for filling gas cylinders 


16087 : 2016 Biogas (bio-methane) — 


Specification (first revision) 


Standard test method for 
chipping resistance of coating 


Standard test method for 
transition temperatures and 
enthalpies of fusion and 
crystallization of polymers 
by differential scanning 
calorimetry 


ASTM D3170: 
2003 


ASTM D3418 : 
2015 


NACE TM 0177: Laboratory testing of metals 
2005 for resistance to sulphide 
stress cracking and stress 

corrosion cracking in H,S 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Authorized Inspection Authority — An inspection 
agency having qualification and wide experience in the 
field of design, manufacture and testing of gas cylinders 
and recognized by the statutory authority for inspection 
and certification of gas cylinders. 


3.2 Autofrettage — Pressure application procedure 
used in manufacturing composite cylinders with 
metal liners, which strains the liner past its yield point 
sufficient to cause permanent plastic deformation. This 
results in the liner having compressive stresses and the 
fibres having tensile stresses at zero internal pressure. 
Autofrettage is a part of the manufacturing operation 
and is conducted on the metal lined filament wound 
cylinders prior to hydrostatic pressure testing. 


3.3 Autofrettage Pressure — Pressure within the 
over-wrapped cylinder at which the required distribution 
of stresses between the liner and the overwrap is 
established. 


3.4 Batch (of Composite Cylinders) — Group of 
cylinders successively produced from qualified liners 
having the same size, design, specified material of 
construction and process of manufacture. A batch 
shall be a group of 200 cylinders plus cylinders for 
destructive testing or one shift of successive production, 
whichever is greater. 


3.5 Batch (of Metallic Liners) — Group of liners 
successively produced having the same nominal 
diameter, wall thickness, design, specified material 
of construction, process of manufacture, equipment 
for manufacture and heat treatment, and conditions 
of time, temperature and atmosphere during heat 
treatment. A batch shall be a group of 200 liners plus 
liners for destructive testing or one shift of successive 
production, whichever is greater. 


3.6 Batch (of Non-metallic Liners) — Group of 
nonmetallic liners successively produced having 
the same nominal diameter, wall thickness, design, 
specified material of construction, process of 
manufacture. A batch shall be a group of 200 liners plus 
liners for destructive testing or one shift of successive 
production, whichever is greater. 


3.7 Burst Pressure — The highest pressure reached in 
a cylinder during a burst test. 


3.8 Composite Cylinder — Cylinder made of resin 
impregnated continuous filament wound over a metallic 
or non-metallic liner. 


NOTE — Composite cylinders using non-metallic liners are 
referred to as all composite cylinders. 


3.9 Controlled Tension Winding — Process used in 
manufacturing hoop-wrapped composite cylinders with 
metal liners by which compressive stresses in the liner 
and tensile stresses in the over-wrap at zero internal 
pressure are obtained by winding the reinforcing 
filaments under significant high tension. 


3.10 Filling Pressure — Pressure to which a cylinder 
is filled. 


3.11 Finished Cylinders — Completed cylinders 
which are ready for use, typical of normal production, 
complete with identification marks and external 
insulation specified by the manufacturer, but free from 
non-integral insulation or protection. 


3.12 Full Wrapped Cylinder — Cylinder with an 
overwrap having a filament wound reinforcement both 
in the circumferential and axial direction of the cylinder 
rover the entire liner including the domes. 


3.13 Gas Temperature — Temperature of gas in a 
cylinder. 


3.14 Hoop Wrapped Cylinder — Cylinder with an 
overwrap having a filament wound reinforcement 
in a substantially circumferential pattern over the 


cylindrical portion of the liner so that the filament does 
not carry any significant load in a direction parallel to 
the cylinder longitudinal axis. 


3.15 Liner — Gas tight inner shell, on which 
reinforcing fibres are filament wound to reach the 
necessary strength. Two types of liner are described 
in this standard, metallic and non-metallic liner. 
Metallic liners are designed to share the load with the 
reinforcement and non-metallic liners do not carry any 
part of the load. 


3.16 Manufacturer — Person or organization 
responsible for the design, fabrication and testing of 
the cylinders. 


3.17 Pre-stress or Pre-stressing — The process of 
applying Autofrettage or controlled tension winding. 


3.18 Overwrap — Reinforcement system of filament 
and resin applied over the liner. 


3.19 Service Life — Life, in years, during which the 
cylinders may safely be used in accordance with the 
standard service conditions. 


3.20 Settled Pressure — Gas pressure, when a given 
settled temperature is reached. 


3.21 Settled Temperature — Uniform gas temperature 
after the dissipation of any change in temperature 
caused by filling. 


3.22 Test Pressure — Required pressure applied during 
a pressure test. This shall be 1.5 x working pressure. 


3.23 Working Pressure — Settled pressure of 200 bar 
at a uniform temperature of 15 °C. 


3.24 Type-2 Design — A hoop wrapped cylinder with 
a load sharing metal liner and composite reinforcement 
on the cylinder part only. 


3.25 Type-3 Design — A fully wrapped cylinder with 
a load sharing metal liner and composite reinforcement 
on both the cylindrical part and dome ends. 


3.26 Type-4 Design — A fully wrapped cylinder with 
anon-load sharing liner and composite reinforcement 
on both the cylindrical part and dome ends. 


4 SERVICE CONDITION 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 Standard Service Conditions 


The standard service conditions in this clause are 
provided as the basis for the design, manufacture, 
inspection, testing and approval of cylinders that are to 
be mounted permanently on vehicles and used to store 
natural gas at ambient temperature for use as a fuel on 
the vehicles. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


4.1.2 Use of Cylinders 


The service conditions specified are also intended 
to provide information on how cylinders which are 
manufactured in accordance with this standard may 
safely be used. This information is intended for: 


a) Manufacturers of cylinders; 
b) Owners of cylinders; 


c) Designers or contractors responsible for the 
installation of cylinders; 


d) Designers or owners of equipment used to refuel 
vehicle cylinders; 


e) Suppliers of natural gas; and 


f) Regulatory authorities who have jurisdiction 
over cylinder use. 


4.1.3 Service Life 


The service life for which cylinders are safe shall be 
specified by the cylinder manufacturer on the basis 
of use under service conditions specified herein. The 
maximum service life shall be 20 years. 


For all composite cylinders, the service life shall be 
demonstrated by appropriate design methods, design 
qualification testing and manufacturing controls. 


The requirements for periodic re-qualification by 
inspection or testing during the service life shall be 
specified by the cylinder designer in consultation with 
statutory authority on the basis of use under service 
conditions. 


Periodic inspection of cylinders shall be done at 
interval as per IS 15975 or as specified by the statutory 
authority. 


4.2 Maximum Pressures 


This standard is based upon a working pressure of 
200 bar settled at 15 °C for natural gas as a fuel with 
a maximum filling pressure of 260 bar. Other working 
pressures may be accommodated by adjusting the 
pressure by the appropriate factor (ratio), for example, 
a 250 bar working pressure system will require 
pressures to be multiplied by 1.25. Except where 
pressures have been adjusted in this way, the cylinder 
shall be designed to be suitable for the following 
pressure limits: 


a) A working pressure that would settle to 200 bar 
at a settled temperature of 15 °C; and 


b) The maximum pressure in the cylinder shall not 
exceed 260 bar regardless of filling conditions or 
temperature. 


4.3 Design Number of Filling Cycles 


Cylinders shall be designed to be filled up to a settled 
pressure of 200 bar at a settled gas temperature of 
15 °C for up to 1 000 times per year of service. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


4.4 Temperature Range 


4.4.1 Gas Temperature 


Cylinder shall be designed to be suitable for the 
follovving gas temperature limits: 


a) The settled temperature of gas in cylinders, which 
may vary from a low of —20 °C to a high of 
+ 65 °C. 


b) The developed temperatures of gas in cylinders 
during filling and discharge, which may vary 
beyond the settled temperature limits for short 
periods. 


4.4.2 Cylinder Temperature 


Cylinder shall be designed to be suitable for the 
following material temperature limits: 


a) Temperature of the cylinder materials may vary 
from —20 °C to +82 °C. 


b) Temperatures over +65 °C shall be sufficiently 
local, or of short enough duration, that the 
temperature of gas in the cylinder never exceeds 
+65 °C, except under the conditions of 4.4.1 (b). 


4.5 Gas Composition 


4.5.1 General 


Cylinders shall be designed to tolerate being filled with 
natural gas meeting the requirements of either IS 15958 
for CNG or IS 16087 for biogas based on the gas to be 
filled. 


The gas may contain compressor oil to the extent of 
1 mg/kg of gas. 


4.6 External Surfaces 


It is not necessary for cylinders to be designed for 
continuous exposure to mechanical or chemical attack, 
for example, leakage from cargo that may be carried 
on vehicles or severe abrasion damage from road 
conditions. However, cylinder external surfaces shall 
be designed to with-stand inadvertent exposure to the 
following consistent with installation being carried out 
in accordance with the instructions to be provided with 
the cylinder. 


Mechanical or chemical attack may result from 
environments, such as: 


a) Water, either by intermittent immersion or road 
spray, or from cargo in vehicle; 


b) Salt, due to the operation of the vehicle near the 
ocean or where ice-melting salt used; 


c) Ultra-violet radiation from sunlight; 
d) Impact of gravel; 
e) Solvents, acids and alkalis, fertilizers; 


f) Automotive fluids, including petrol, hydraulic 
fluids, battery acid, glycol and oils; and 


g) Exhaust gases. 


5 APPROVAL AND CERTIFICATION 


5.1 Inspection and Testing 


In order to ensure that the cylinders are in compliance 
with this standard, they shall be subjected to design 
approval in accordance with 5.2, and inspection and 
testing in accordance with either 6, 7 or 8 as appropriate 
to the construction. This shall be carried out by an 
authorized inspection authority. Test procedures are 
detailed in Annex A and Annex B. 


5.2 Type Approval Procedure 
5.2.1 General 


Type approval consists of following two parts: 


a) The design submission comprising of information 
furnished by the manufacturer to the inspector for 
appraisal/scrutiny and further recommendations to 
the statutory authority for approval, as detailed in 
5.2.2; and 


Prototype testing, comprising testing carried 
out under the supervision of the inspector. The 
cylinder material, design, manufacture and 
examination shall be proved to be adequate for 
their intended service by meeting the requirements 
of the prototype tests specified in 6.5 or 7.5 or 8.5 
as appropriate for the particular cylinder design. 


b 


ma 


The test data shall also document the dimension, wall 
thicknesses and weights of each of the test cylinders. 


5.2.2 Design Approval 


Cylinder designs shall be approved by the statutory 
authority. The following information shall be submitted 
by the manufacturer to the inspector for examination 
and further approval by statutory authority: 


a) Statement of service, in accordance with 5.2.3; 
b) Design data, in accordance with 5.2.4; 
c) Manufacturing data, in accordance with 5.2.5; 


d) Fracture performance and NDE (non destructive 
examination) defect size, in accordance with 
5.2.6; 


e) Specification sheet, in accordance with 5.2.7; and 
f) Additional supporting data, in accordance with 
5.2.8. 
5.2.3 Statement of Service 


The purpose of this statement of service is to guide the 
user and the installer of cylinders as well as to inform 
the inspector. The statement of service shall include: 

a) A statement that the cylinder design is suitable for 
use in the service conditions defined in 4 for the 
service life of the cylinder; 

b) A statement of the service life, 


c) The minimum periodic inspection requirements; 


d) A specification for the pressure relief devices, 


e) A specification for the support methods, protective 
covering and any other items required but not 
provided, 


f) A description of the cylinder, such as, fiber(s), 
type, number of layers etc.; and 


g) Any other information necessary to ensure the 
safe use and inspection of the cylinder. 
5.2.4 Design Data 


5.2.4.1 Drawings 
Drawings shall show at least the following: 


a) Title, manufacturer, reference number, date of 
issue, and revision numbers with dates of issue, 
if applicable; 

b) Reference to this standard and the cylinder type; 


c) All cylinder dimensions complete with tolerances, 
including details of end closure shapes with 
minimum thicknesses, openings and neck threads; 


d) Water capacity and mass (including any 
permanent attachments), complete with tolerance 
of cylinders; 


e) Material specifications, mechanical and chemical 
properties (including tolerances where applicable) 
and, for metal liners, the specified hardness range; 


f) Other data, such as, working pressure, 
auto-frettage pressure, test pressure, minimum 
design burst pressure, design life; and 


g) Details of the fire protection system and of any 
exterior protective coating. 


5.2.4.2 Stress analysis report 


A finite element stress analysis or other stress analysis 
shall be carried out. A table stresses shall be provided. 


5.2.4.3 Material property data 


A detailed description of the materials and tolerances 
of the materials properties used in the design shall be 
provided. Test data shall also be presented characterizing 
the mechanical properties and the suitability of the 
materials for service under the conditions specified 
in 4. 
5.2.4.4 Fire protection 
The arrangement of pressure relief devices that 
will protect the cylinder from sudden rupture when 
exposed to the fire conditions specified in A-14 shall be 
specified. Test data shall substantiate the effectiveness 
of the specified fire protection system. 

NOTE — The manufacturer may specify alternative PRD 


locations for specific vehicle installations. 


5.2.5 Manufacturing Data 


Details of all fabrication processes, non-destructive 
examinations, production tests and batch tests shall 


IS 15935 : 2021 


be provided. The tolerances for all production 
process, such as, heat treatment, end forming, 
resin-mix ratio, filament tension and speed for controlled 
tension winding, curing times and temperatures, and 
autofrettage procedures shall be specified. 


Surface finish, thread details, acceptance criteria for 
ultrasonic examination (or equivalent) and maximum 
lot sizes for batch tests shall also be specified. 


5.2.6 Fracture Performance and Non-destructive 
Examination (NDE) Defect Size 


The manufacturer shall specify the maximum defect 
size for non-destructive examination that will ensure 
leak-before-break (LBB) fracture performance and will 
prevent failure by leakage or rupture of the cylinder 
during its service life. The maximum defect size shall 
be established by a method suitable to the design. 


NOTE — An example of a suitable method is given in 
Annex C. 


5.2.7 Specification Sheet 


Asummary of the documents providing the information 
required in 5.2.2 shall be listed on a specification sheet 
for each cylinder design. The title, reference number, 
revision numbers and dates of original issue and version 
issues of each document shall be given. All documents 
shall be having organization stamp signed or initialed 
by the issuer. The specification sheet shall be given a 
number and revision numbers if applicable, that can be 
used to designate the cylinder design. 


5.2.8 Additional Supporting Data 


Additional data which would support the application, 
such as the service history of material proposed for 
use, or the use of a particular cylinder design in other 
service conditions may be provided. 


5.3 Type Approval Certificate 


If the results of the design approval according to 5.2 
and the prototype testing according to 6.5 or 7.5 or 
8.5 as appropriate to the particular cylinder design are 
satisfactory, the inspector shall forward the test report 
for approval of the statutory authority. 


6 REQUIREMENTS FOR METAL-LINED 
HOOP WRAPPED CYLINDERS (TYPE 2) 


6.1 General 


This standard does not provide design formula nor 
list permissible stresses or strains, but requires the 
adequacy of the design to be established by appropriate 
calculations and demonstrated by testing, to show 
that the cylinders shall pass the materials, design 
qualification, production and batch tests specified in 
this standard. 


During pressurization, this type of cylinder design 
exhibits behaviour in which the displacements of 


IS 15935 : 2021 


the composite overwrap and the metal liner are 
superimposed. 


The design shall ensure a leakage-before-break failure 
mode during normal service. 


6.2 Materials 


6.2.1 General Requirements 


Material used shall be suitable for the service conditions 
specified in 4. The design shall ensure that incompatible 
materials are not in contact. 


6.2.2 Controls on Chemical Composition 


6.2.2.1 Steel 


Steel shall be aluminium and/or silicon-killed and 
produced to predominantly fine grain practice. The 
chemical composition of all steel shall be declared and 
defined by at least: 


a) Carbon, manganese, aluminium, and silicon 


contents in all cases; and 

b) Chromium, nickel, molybdenum, boron and 
vanadium contents and that of any other alloying 
elements intentionally added. 


The sulphur and phosphorus content in the cast analysis 
shall not exceed the values given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Maximum Sulphur and Phosphorus 
Limits in Steel 


( Clause 6.2.2.1 ) 


SI No. Element Percent by Mass 
() (2) 8) 
i) Sulphur 0.010 
ii) Phosphorus 0.020 
iii) Sulphur + Phosphorus 0.025 


6.2.2.2 Aluminium 


Aluminium alloys may be used to produce liners 
provided they meet all requirements of this standard 
and have maximum lead and bismuth contents not 
exceeding 0.003 percent total. 


6.2.3 Composite Materials 
6.2.3.1 Resins 


The material for impregnation may be thermosetting 
or thermoplastic resin. Examples of suitable matrix 
materials are epoxy, modified epoxy, polyester and 
vinyl ester thermosetting plastics, and polyethylene and 
polyamide thermoplastic material. 


The glass transition temperature of the resin material 
shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D 3418. 


6.2.3.2 Fibres 


Structural reinforcing filament material types shall be 
glass fibre or carbon fibre. If carbon fibre reinforcement 
is used, the design shall incorporate means to prevent 
galvanic corrosion of the metallic components of the 
cylinder. 


The manufacturer shall keep on file the published 
specification for fibre material, the material 
manufacturer’s recommendations for storage, 
conditions and shelf life and the material manufacturer’s 
certification that each shipment conforms to said 
specification requirements. 


The fibre manufacturer shall certify that the fibre 
material properties conform to the manufacturer’s 
specification for the product. 


6.3 Design Requirements 


6.3.1 Test Pressure 


The minimum test pressure used in manufacture shall 
be 300 bar (1.5 times working pressure). 


6.3.2 Burst Pressure and Fibre Stress Ratios 


The metal liner shall have a minimum actual burst 
pressure of 260 bar (1.3 times working pressure). 


The minimum actual burst pressure of the finished 
cylinder shall be not less than the values given in 
Table 2. The composite overwrap shall be designed 
for high reliability under sustained loading and cyclic 
loading. This reliability shall be achieved by meeting 
or exceeding the composite reinforcement stress ratio 
values given in Table 2. Stress ratio is defined as the 
stress in the fibre at the specified minimum burst 
pressure divided by the stress in the fibre at working 
pressure. The burst ratio is defined as the actual 
burst pressure of the cylinder divided by the working 
pressure. The stress ratio calculations shall include the 
following: 


a) An analysis method with capability for nonlinear 
materials (special purpose computer programme 
or finite element analysis programme); 


b) Correct modelling of the elastic-plastic 
stress-strain curve for a known liner material; 


c) Correct modelling of the mechanical properties of 
composite material; 


d) Calculations at autofrettage pressure, zero pressure 
after autofrettage, working pressure and minimum 
burst pressure; 


e) Account for the pre-stresses from winding tension; 


f) The minimum burst pressure, chosen such that 
the calculated stress at minimum burst pressure 
divided by the calculated stress at working 
pressure meets the stress ratio requirements for the 
fibre used; and 


g) Consideration of the load share between the 
different fibres based on the different elastic moduli 
of the fibres when analyzing cylinders with hybrid 
reinforcement (two or more different fibres). The 
stress ratio requirements for each individual fibre 
type shall be in accordance with the values given 
in Table 2. 


Verification of the stress ratios may also be performed 
using strain gauges. An acceptable method is outlined 
in Annex D. 


Table 2 Minimum Actual Burst Values and 
Stress Ratios for Metal-Lined Hoop Wrapped 
Cylinders (Type 2) 


( Clauses 6.3.2 and 6.5.2.4 ) 


SI No. Fibre Type Stress Ratio Burst Pressure (bar) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Glass 2.15 500 
ii) Aramid 2.35 470 
iii) Carbon 2.35 470 


iv) Hybrid” - - 


D Minimum actual burst pressure. In addition, calculations shall be 
performed in accordance with 6.3.2 to confirm that the minimum stress 
ratio requirements are also met. 


2 Stress ratios and burst pressure shall be calculated in accordance 
with 6.3.2. 


6.3.3 Stress Analysis 


The stresses in the composite and in the liner after 
pre-stress shall be calculated for 0 bar, 200 bar, test 
pressure and design burst pressure. The calculations 
shall use suitable analysis techniques taking into 
account non-linear material behaviour of the liner when 
establishing stress distributions. 


For designs using auto-frettage to provide pre-stress, 
the limits within which the auto-frettage pressure shall 
fall and shall be calculated and specified. For designs 
using controlled tension winding to provide pre-stress, 
the temperature at which it is performed, the tension 
required in each layer of composite and the consequent 
pre-stress in the liner shall be calculated. 


6.3.4 Maximum Defect Size 


The maximum defect size at any location in the metal 
liner is such that the cylinder meets pressure cycling and 
LBB requirements shall be specified. The NDE method 
shall be capable of detecting the maximum defect size 
allowed. The allowable defect size for NDE shall be 
determined by an appropriate method, for example, as 
described in Annex C. 


6.3.5 Openings 


Openings are permitted in heads only. The centre line 
of openings shall coincide with the longitudinal axis of 
the cylinder. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


6.3.6 Fire Protection 


The cylinder design shall be protected with pressure 
relief devices. The cylinder, its materials, pressure relief 
devices and any added insulation or protective material 
shall be designed collectively to ensure adequate safety 
during fire conditions in the test specified in A-14. A 
manufacturer may specify alternative PRD locations 
for specific vehicle installations in order to optimise 
the safety considerations which shall be approved 
by statutory authority. Pressure relief devices shall 
conform to IS 5903. 


6.4 Construction and Workmanship 
6.4.1 General 


The composite cylinder shall be manufactured from a 
seamless metallic liner over wrapped with continuous 
filament windings. Fibre winding operations shall be 
computer or mechanically controlled. The fibres shall 
be applied under controlled tension during winding. 
After winding is completed, thermosetting resins 
shall be cured by heating using a pre-determined and 
controlled time-temperature profile. 


6.4.2 Liner 


The manufacture of a metallic liner shall meet the 
requirements given in 6.2, 6.3.2 and either 6.5.2.2 
or 6.5.2.3 for the appropriate type of liner construction. 
Each liner shall be examined for thickness and the 
surface finish before end forming operations are 
carried out. The base ends of aluminium liners shall 
not be manufactured from tube. The base ends of steel 
liners that have been closed by forming shall be NDE 
inspected or equivalent. Metal shall not be added in the 
process of closure at the ends. 


6.4.3 Neck Threads 


The cylinder neck shall be threaded to suit the type of 
valves as given in IS 3224 or any other specification as 
approved by the statutory authority. Threads shall be 
clean cut, even, without chatter, answering to gauges 
and concentric with the axis of the cylinder. 


6.4.4 Overwrap 


6.4.4.1 Fibre winding 


The cylinders shall be manufactured by a fibre winding 
technique. During winding the significant variables 
shall be monitored within specified tolerances and 
documented in a winding record. These variables can 
include but are not limited to: 


a) fibre type including sizing; 
b) manner of impregnation; 
c) winding tension; 

d) winding speed; 

e) number of rovings; 


IS 15935 : 2021 


f) band width; 

g) type of resin and composition; 
h) temperature of the resin; 

j) temperature of the liner; and 
k) winding angle. 


6.4.4.2 Curing of the thermosetting resins 


If a thermosetting resin is used, the resin shall be 
cured after filament winding. During the curing, the 
curing cycle (that is, the time temperature history) 
shall be documented. The maximum curing time 
and temperature for cylinders with aluminium alloy 
liners shall be below the time and temperature, which 
adversely affect metal properties. 


6.4.4.3 Autofrettage 


Autofrettage, if used, shall be carried out before the 
hydrostatic pressure test. The autofrettage pressure 
shall be within the limits established in 6.3.3 and the 
manufacturer shall establish the method of verifying 
the appropriate pressure. 


6.4.5 Exterior Environmental Protection 


The exterior of cylinders shall meet the requirement of 
the acid environment test described in A-13. Exterior 
protection may be provided by using any of the 
following: 


a) A surface finish giving adequate protection 
(for example, metal sprayed on to aluminium, 
anodizing); 


b) The use of a suitable fibre and matrix material 
(for example, carbon fibre in resin); 


c) Aprotective coating (for example, organic coating, 
paint); if exterior coating is part of the design, the 
requirements of A-9 shall be met; or 


d) A covering impervious to the chemicals listed 
in A-13. 

Any coatings applied to cylinders shall be such that 
the application process does not adversely affect the 
mechanical properties of the cylinder. The coating 
shall be designed to facilitate subsequent in-service 
inspection and the manufacturer shall provide guidance 
on coating treatment during such inspection to ensure 
the continued integrity of the cylinder. 


An environmental performance test that evaluates the 
suitability of coating systems is provided in Annex E 
(Informative). 


6.5 Prototype Testing Procedure 


6.5.1 General Requirements 


Prototype testing shall be conducted for each new 
design, on liners and/or finished cylinders, which are 
representative of normal production and complete with 
identification marks. The test liners or cylinders shall 


be selected and the prototype tests detailed in 6.5.2 
verified/witnessed by the inspector. If more cylinders 
or liners are subjected to the tests than are required by 
this standard, all results shall be documented. 


6.5.2 Prototype Tests 6.5.2.1 Test required 


In the course of the type approval, the inspector shall 
select the necessary cylinders or liners for testing and 
witness the following tests: 


a) Liner material tests specified in 6.5.2.2 or 6.5.2.3 
as appropriate on one liner; 


b) Hydrostatic pressure burst test specified in 6.5.2.4 
on one liner and three cylinders; 


c) Ambient temperature pressuring cycling test 
specified in 6.5.2.5 on two cylinders; 


d) LBB test specified in 6.5.2.6 on three cylinders; 


e) Bonfire test specified in 6.5.2.7 on one or two 
cylinders as appropriate; 


f) Penetration test specified in 6.5.2.8 on one 
cylinder; 

g) Acid environmental test specified in 6.5.2.9 on 
one cylinder; 


h) Flaw tolerance test specified in 6.5.2.10 on one 
cylinder; 

j) High temperature creep test specified in 6.5.2.11 
where appropriate on one cylinder; 


k) Accelerated stress rupture test specified in 6.5.2.12 
on one cylinder; 


m) Extreme temperature pressure cycling test 


specified in 6.5.2.13 on one cylinder; and 


n) Resin shear strength test specified in 6.5.2.14 
on one sample coupon representative of the 
composite overwrap. 


6.5.2.2 Material tests for steel liners 


Material tests shall be carried out on steel liners as 
follows: 


a) Tensile Test — The material properties of the 
steel in the finished liner shall be determined 
in accordance with A-1 and shall meet the 
requirements there in. 

b) Impact Test — The impact properties of the 
steel in the finished liner shall be determined 
in accordance with A-2 and shall meet the 
requirements there in. 


c 


wm 


Sulphide Stress Cracking Resistance Test — If the 
upper limit of the specified tensile strength for the 
steel exceeds 950 MPa, the steel from a finished 
cylinder/liner shall be subjected to a sulphide 
stress cracking resistance test in accordance with 
A-3 and meet the requirements there in. 


d) Hardness Test — Hardness of sample liners shall 
be recorded by testing on parallel wall at the 


centre. None of the results shall be outside the 
limits specified on the design drawing. 


Hardness testing shall be carried out in accordance with 
IS 1500 (Part 1) or IS 1586. The indenter and applied 
load shall be such that it shall not damage the cylinder. 
The test shall be carried out after final heat treatment. 


Test values for hardness at the top, mid-section and base 
have been specified for those processes where cylinders 
are quenched by vertical immersion into the quench 
tank. Where the cylinders are immersed horizontally 
into the quenchant, hardness test shall be carried out 
at two points around the cylindrical mid-section of the 
parallel wall. 


The hardness values obtained thus shall be in the range 
specified for the design. 


The cylinders which are found to have hardness 
value beyond the specified range shall be subjected to 
appropriate re-heat treatment to achieve the hardness 
values within specified range. 


6.5.2.3 Material tests for aluminium alloy liners 


Material tests shall be carried out on aluminium alloy 
liners as follows: 


a) Tension Test—The material properties of 
the aluminium alloy in the cylinder shall be 
determined in accordance with A-1 and shall meet 
the requirements therein. 


b 


wm 


Corrosion Test — Aluminum alloys shall meet the 
requirement of the corrosion test carried out in 
accordance with A-4. 


c 


— 


Sustained Load Cracking Tests — Aluminum alloys 
shall meet the requirements of the sustained load 
cracking test carried out in accordance with A-5. 


6.5.2.4 Hydrostatic pressure burst test 


a) One liner shall be hydrostatically pressurized 
to failure in accordance with A-11. The burst 
pressure shall exceed the minimum burst pressure 
specified for the liner design. 


Three cylinders shall be —hydrostatically 
pressurized to failure in accordance with A-11. 
The burst pressure shall exceed the minimum 
burst pressure calculated by the stress analysis for 
the design, in accordance with Table 2, and in no 
case be less than the value necessary to meet the 
stress ratio requirements of 6.3.2. 


b 


wm 


6.5.2.5 Ambient temperature pressure cycling test 


Two cylinders shall be pressure cycled to failure at 
ambient temperature in accordance with A-12, or to 
a minimum of 45 000 cycles. The cylinders shall not 
fail before reaching the specified service life in years 
multiplied by 1 000 cycles. Cylinders exceeding 
1 000 cycles multiplied by the specified service life in 
years shall fail by leakage and not by rupture. Cylinders 


IS 15935 : 2021 


which do not fail within 45 000 cycles shall be destroyed 
either by continuing the cycling until failure occurs, or 
by hydrostatically pressurizing to burst or by drilling 
holes in side wall. 


Cylinders exceeding 45 000 cycles are permitted to 
fail by rupture. The number of cycles to failure and 
the location of the failure initiation shall be recorded. 
If cylinder is destroyed, mode of destruction and 
photograph to be recorded. 


6.5.2.6 Leak-before-break (LBB) test 

The LBB test shall be carried out in accordance with 
A-6 and shall meet the requirement therein. 

6.5.2.7 Bonfire test 


One or two cylinders as appropriate shall be tested 
in accordance with A-14 and meet the requirement 
therein. 


6.5.2.8 Penetration test 

One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-15 
and meet the requirement therein. 

6.5.2.9 Acid environmental test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with 
A-13 and meet the requirement therein. An optional 
environmental test is included in Annex E. 


6.5.2.10 Flaw tolerance test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-16 
and meet the requirement therein. 


6.5.2.11 High temperature creep test 


In designs, where the glass transition temperature 
of the resin does not exceed 102 °C, one cylinder 
shall be tested in accordance with A-17 and meet the 
requirements therein. 


6.5.2.12 Accelerated stress rupture test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-18 
and meet the requirements therein. 


6.5.2.13 Extreme temperature pressure cycling test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-7 and 
meet the requirements therein. 


6.5.2.14 Resin shear strength 


Resin material shall be tested in accordance with A-25 
and meet the requirements therein. 


6.5.3 Change of Design 


A design change is any change in the selection 
of structural materials or dimensional change not 
attributable to normal manufacturing tolerances. Minor 
design changes shall be permitted to be qualified 
through a reduced test programme. Changes of design 
specified in Table 3 shall require only the prototype 
testing as specified in the table. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


d) the nominal fibre strength, specified by the fibre 


A fibre material shall be considered to be of a new fibre 


type when: 


manufacturer, differs by more than +5 percent 


from that defined in the prototype tested design. A 


a) the fibre is of a different classification, e.g. glass, 


resin material shall be considered to be a new resin 


type when: 


aramid, carbon; 


b) the fibre is produced from a different precursor 


e) the resin is of a different classification, for 


(starting material), for example, polyacrylonitrile 


(PAN), pitch for carbon; 
c) the nominal fibre modulus, specified by the fibre 


example, thermosetting or thermoplastic; or 


epoxy, polyester, 


for example, 


resin, 


f) the resin is of a different type of same classification 
of 


manufacturer, differs by more than + 5 percent 


polyethylene, polyamide. 


from that defined in the prototype tested design; 


X 
X 
X 


(OD 


(LV 
208) aanjdny 
SSIS po/p19j002V 


_ X 

X X 

X X 

X X 

(6) (8) 
(LI-V 2S) (9I-¥ 208) 
dəə 20UD.19/0/, 

amyp.oduiay MOLT 

431H ənsoduop 


(2) 


EX 


(9) 


(€I-V 208) 
Juouuomaug —(ÇI-V 208) 


poy 


UOINDUJouod4 


ysay, Jo addy, 


‘posinbal ospe 91€ s4859 JeW (¢ 


“SUBISOP IOUT] Z-Ç8TL SI-U0U 107 posmnbos ATU (p 


“soseaioap J939tu81p Hi posmnbos AquÇ (€ 


‘adueyo oinssoid 10/pue Jojouerp 0} peuon1odoid s38ueyo ssouyony uoyM ÁJUO (Z 


(s) 


(I-V 208) 
onfuog 


( E'S'9 asnvjD ) 


X 
(v) 
(ZI-V 208) 
aanjpsaduay, 
juaiqup 
10 Buijodo 
AANSSAL 


eX 


(9-p 228) 
411 


'SosBaloUI yuo uym pənnbər Aquo 39 L, (1 


© 


(II-¥ 225) 
isang IYDIS 


OMPAH 


(z 9dAL) sJ9pung4 ) pədderm doo H-pourT-IC397A) 103 USISIq Jo IFSULYO E ALL 


301P 
JoHa omssalg 


Sso901d 
BULINYOLJNULJA 
osurys BULOQ 
əzıs Zuruədo 
adeys owoq 
Wd 


07 5 a8ueyo 
omnssoid GUDIOM 


məd QS 
< osueyo IUT 


Ju9919q QS 
S ogue puo 


yusoiog 07 = 
osueys Joj}oulRIq 


yusdiog 07 S 
asueyd Jojouleiq 


enou UISDY 
penou DIQIA 


([elayeu 
JOUT] LPN 


Jom) oemueuu 
əqiq 
© 


asueyD USIS9Q 


(AIX 
(MX 
ax 
(Ix 
(x 
(xr 
Cua 
(UA 
(1A 
(A 
(ar 
(mn 
(u 


q 
(D 


“ON 
Is 


10 


6.6 Batch Tests on Liners and Cylinders 
6.6.1 General Requirements 


Batch testing shall be conducted on liners and on finished 
cylinders which are representative of normal production 
and are complete with permanent identification marks. 
The cylinders and liners required for testing shall be 
randomly selected from each batch. If more cylinders 
are subjected to the tests than are required by this 
standard, all results shall be documented. Where 
defects are detected in composite overwrap before 
any Autofrettage or hydrostatic pressure testing, the 
overwrap may be completely removed and replaced. 


6.6.2 Required Tests 
6.6.2.1 Liner tests 


On a liner, or heat treated sample representative of a 
finished liner: 


a) a check of the critical dimensions against the 
design (see 5.2.4.1); 

b) one tensile test in accordance with A.1; the test 
results shall satisfy the requirements of the design 
(see 5.2.4.1); 

c) for steel liners, three impact tests in accordance 
with A.2; the test results shall satisfy the 
requirements specified in A.2; and 


d 


wn 


for steel liners with a tensile strength exceeding 
1 100 MPa, each new cast of material shall meet 
the requirements of the sulphide stress cracking 
test in A.3. A sample of material from each cast 
may be heat treated and tested by the steel supplier 
or cylinder manufacturer, provided that the 
samples have the same strength values specified 
in the cylinder design. 


All liners represented by a batch test that fail to meet 
the requirements specified shall follow the procedures 
specified in 6.9. 


6.6.2.2 Cylinder tests 


a) onone cylinder, one hydrostatic pressure burst test 
in accordance with A.11. 


b) ona further cylinder: 


1) a check of the critical dimensions against the 
design (see 5.2.4.1); and 


2) when a protective coating is a part of the 
design, a coating batch test in accordance with 
A.24. 


Where the coating fails to meet the requirements of 
A.24, the batch shall be 100 percent inspected to remove 
similarly defectively coated cylinders. The coating 
on all defectively coated cylinders may be stripped 
using a method that does not affect the integrity of the 
composite wrapping then recoated. The coating batch 
test shall then be repeated. 


11 


IS 15935 : 2021 


6.6.2.3 Additionally, a periodic pressure cycling test 
shall be carried out on 1 finished cylinder in accordance 
with A-12. One cylinder from each batch shall be 
pressure cycled for a total of 1 000 times the specified 
service life in years, with a minimum of 15 000 cycles. 


Should the cylinder under test in above fail to meet 
the minimum cycle life requirement of 1 000 cycles 
multiplied by the specified service life in years 
(minimum 15 000 cycles), then the cause of failure 
shall be determined and corrected in accordance with 
the procedure in 6.9. The pressure cycle test shall then 
be repeated on an additional three cylinders from that 
batch. Should any of the three additional cylinders fail 
to meet the minimum pressure cycling requirement of 
1 000 cycles multiplied by the specified service life in 
years, then the batch shall be rejected. 


6.7 Tests on Every Liner and Cylinder 


Production examinations and tests shall be carried out 
on all liners and cylinders produced in a batch. 


Each liner shall be examined either during manufacture 
or after completion, as appropriate: 


a) by NDE of metallic liners in accordance with 
Annex B or demonstrated equivalent method 
to verify that the maximum defect size does 
not exceed the size specified in the design as 
determined in accordance with 6.3.4. The NDE 
method shall be capable of detecting the maximum 
size allowed; 


b 


wm 


to verify that the critical dimensions and mass of 
the liners are within design tolerances; 


c) to verify conformance to specified surface finish 
with special attention to deep-drawn surfaces and 
folds or laps in the neck or shoulder of forged or 
spun end enclosures or openings; 


d 


wm 


by hardness tests of metallic liners in accordance 
with A. 8 carried out after the final heat treatment. 
The values thus determined shall be in the range 
specified for the design; 


e 


wm 


Each cylinder shall be examined either during 
manufacture or after completion, as appropriate, 
to verify that the critical dimensions and mass of 
the completed cylinders and overwrapping are 
within design tolerances; 


to verify the permanent identification marks; 


by hydrostatic test of finished cylinders in 
accordance with A-11. The manufacturer shall 
establish the appropriate limit of permanent 
expansion for the test pressure used, but in no case 
shall the permanent expansion exceed 5 percent of 
the total volumetric expansion measured under the 
test pressure; and 


8) 


h 


— 


by leak testing of cylinders with base ends formed 
by spinning. Typical testing procedures include 


IS 15935 : 2021 


the pneumatic leakage test where the bottom 
end should be clean and free from all moisture 
on the test pressure side. The inside area of the 
cylinder bottom surrounding the closure should be 
subjected to a pressure equal to at least 2/3 times 
the test pressure of the cylinder for a minimum of 
1 min. This area should be not less than 20 mm in 
diameter around the closure and at least 6 percent 
of the total bottom area. The opposite side should 
be covered with water or another suitable medium 
and closely examined for indication of leakage. 
Cylinders that leak should be rejected. 


6.8 Batch Acceptance Certificate 


If the results of batch testing according to 6.6 and 6.7 
are satisfactory, the manufacturer and the inspector 
shall sign an acceptance certificate. 


6.9 Failure to Meet Test Requirements 
6.9.1 Liners 


In the event of failure of a liner to meet the test 
requirements, re-testing or re-heat treatment and 
re-testing shall be carried out if: 


a) there is evidence of a fault in carrying out a test, 
or an error of measurement, a further test shall be 
performed if, the result of this test is satisfactory. 
The first test shall be ignored; 


the test has been carried out in a satisfactory 
manner, the cause of test failure shall be identified 
if the failure is: 


b 


wm 


1) considered to be due to the heat treatment 
applied, the manufacturer may subject all the 
liners implicated by the failure to a further 
heat treatment; however if the failure occurs 
sporadically in a test applied to every liner, 
then only those liners which fail the test shall 
require re-heat treatment and re-testing: 


i) Whenever liners are re-heat treated, the 
minimum guaranteed wall thickness shall 
be maintained. 


i) Only the relevant prototype or batch 
tests needed to prove the acceptability of 
the new batch shall be performed again. 
If one or more tests prove even partially 
unsatisfactory, all liners of the batch shall 
be rejected, and not placed in service. 

2) due to a cause other than the heat treatment 
applied, all defective liners shall be either 
rejected or repaired by an approved method. 
Provided that the repaired liners pass the test(s) 
required for the repair, they shall be re-instated 
as part of the original batch. 


12 


6.9.2 Cylinders 


In the event of failure of cylinder to meet test 
requirements, re-testing or re-heat treatment and 
re-testing shall be carried out: 


a) if there is evidence of a fault in carrying out a test, 
or an error of measurement, a further test shall be 
performed, if the result of this test is satisfactory, 
the first test shall be ignored; or 


b) if the test has been carried out in a satisfactory 
manner, the cause of test failure shall be identified. 


All defective cylinders shall be either rejected or 
repaired by an approved method. Provided that the 
repaired cylinders pass the test(s) required for the repair, 
they shall be re-instated as part of the original batch. 


7 REQUIREMENTS FOR METAL-LINED 
FULLY-WRAPPED CYLINDERS (TYPE 3) 


7.1 General 


This standard does not provide design formulae nor 
list permissible stresses or strains, but requires the 
adequacy of the design to be established by appropriate 
calculations and demonstrated by testing to show that the 
cylinders shall pass the materials, design qualification, 
production and batch tests specified in this standard. 


During pressurization, this type of cylinder exhibits 
behaviour in which the displacements of the composite 
overwrap and the liner are superimposed. The design 
shall ensure a leakage-before-break failure mode during 
normal service. 


7.2 Materials 
7.2.1 General Requirements 


Materials used shall be suitable for the service conditions 
specified in 4. The design shall ensure that incompatible 
materials are not in contact with each other or the gas 
contained in cylinder. 


7.2.2 Controls on Chemical Composition 
7.2.2.1 Steel 


Steel shall be aluminum and/or silicon-killed and 
produced to predominantly fine grain practice. The 
chemical composition of all steels shall be declared and 
defined by at least: 


a) the carbon, manganese, aluminum, and silicon 
contents in all cases; and 

b) the chromium, nickel, molybdenum, boron and 
vanadium contents, and that of any other alloying 
elements intentionally added. 


The sulphur and phosphorus content in the cast analysis 
shall not exceed the values in Table 4. 


Table 4 Maximum Sulphur and Phosphorus Limits 
( Clause 7.2.2.1 ) 


SI No. Element Percent by Mass 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Sulphur 0.010 
ii) Phosphorus 0.020 
iii) Sulfur + phosphorus 0.025 
7.2.2.2 Aluminium 


Aluminium alloys may be used to produce liners 
provided they meet all requirements of this standard 
and have maximum lead and bismuth contents not 
exceeding 0.003 percent. 


A list of permitted aluminium alloys is given in 
IS 15660. 


7.2.3 Composite Materials 
7.2.3.1 Resin 


The material for impregnation may be thermosetting 
or thermoplastic resin. Examples of suitable matrix 
materials are epoxy, modified epoxy, polyester and 
vinyl-ester thermosetting plastics, and polyethylene 
and polyamide thermoplastic material. 


The glass transition temperature of the resin material 
shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D 3418. 


7.2.3.2 Fibres 


Structural reinforcing filament material types shall 
be glass fibre, aramid fibre or carbon fibre. If carbon 
fibre reinforcement is used the design shall incorporate 
means to prevent galvanic corrosion of the metallic 
components of the cylinder. 


The manufacturer shall keep on file the published 
specification for fibre material, the material 
manufacturer’s recommendations for storage, 
conditions and shelf life and the material manufacturer ’s 
certification that each shipment conforms to said 
specification requirements. 


The fibre manufacturer shall certify that the fibre 
material properties conform to the manufacturer’s 
specifications for the product. 


7.3 Design Requirements 
7.3.1 Test Pressure 


The minimum test pressure used in manufacture shall 
be 300 bar (1.5 times working pressure). 


7.3.2 Burst Pressure and Fibre Stress Ratios 


The minimum actual burst pressure shall be not less 
than the values given in Table 5. The composite 


13 


IS 15935 : 2021 


overwrap shall be designed for high reliability under 
sustained loading and cyclic loading. This reliability 
shall be achieved by meeting or exceeding the composite 
reinforcement stress ratio values given in Table 5. Stress 
ratio is defined as the stress in the fibre at the specified 
minimum burst pressure divided by the stress in the 
fibre at working pressure. The burst ratio is defined as 
the actual burst pressure of the cylinder divided by the 
working pressure. 


The stress ratio calculations shall include 


a) an analysis method with capability for nonlinear 
materials (special purpose computer program or 
finite element analysis programme; 


5) correct modelling of the elastic-plastic 
stress strain curve for a known liner 
material; 


5) correct modelling of the mechanical 
properties of composite material; 


e) calculations at Autofrettage pressure, zero pressure 
after Autofrettage, working pressure and minimum 
burst pressure; 


5) account for the pre-stresses from winding 
tension; 


f) the minimum burst pressure, chosen such that the 
calculated stress at minimum burst pressure divided 
by the calculated stress at working pressure meets 
the stress ratio requirements for the fibre used; and 


5) consideration of the load share between 
the different fibres based on the different 
elastic moduli of the fibres when analyzing 
cylinders with hybrid reinforcement 
(two or more different fibres). The stress 
ratio requirements for each individual fibre 
type shall be in accordance with the values 
given in Table 5. 


Verification of the stress ratios may also be performed 
using strain gauges. An acceptable method is outlined in 
Annex D. 


Table 5 Minimum Actual Burst Values and Stress 
Ratios for Metal-Lined Fully Wrapped Cylinders 
(Type 3) (with a working pressure of 200 bar) 


( Clause 7.3.2 ) 


SI No. Fibre Type Stress Ratio Burst Pressure, bar 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Glass 3.65 700” 
ii) Aramid 3.10 600 
ili) Carbon 2.35 470 
iv) Hybrid” - — 


1 Minimum actual burst pressure. In addition, calculations shall be 
performed in accordance with 7.3.2 to confirm that the minimum stress 
ratio requirements are also met. 


2 Stress ratios and burst pressure shall be calculated in accordance with 
7.3.2. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


7.3.3 Stress Analysis 


A stress analysis shall be performed to justify the 
minimum design wall thicknesses. It shall include the 
determination of the stresses in liners and fibres of 
composite designs. 


The stresses in the tangential and longitudinal direction 
of the cylinder in the composite and in the liner after 
pre-stress shall be calculated for 0 bar, 200 bar, test 
pressure and design burst pressure. The calculations 
shall use suitable analysis taking into account non-linear 
material behaviour of the liner when establishing stress 
distributions. The limits within which the Autofrettage 
pressure shall fall shall be calculated. 


7.3.4 Maximum Defect Size 


The maximum defect size at any location in the metal 
liner such that the cylinder meets pressure cycling and 
LBB requirements shall be specified. The NDE method 
shall be capable of detecting the maximum defect size 
allowed. 


The allowable defect size for NDE shall be determined 
by an appropriate method (see Annex C). 


7.3.5 Openings 


Openings are permitted in heads only. The centre line of 
openings shall coincide with the longitudinal axis of the 
cylinder. 


7.3.6 Fire Protection 


The cylinder design shall be protected with pressure 
relief devices. The cylinder, its materials, pressure relief 
devices and any added insulation or protective material 
shall be designed collectively to ensure adequate safety 
during fire conditions in the test specified in A-14. A 
manufacturer may specify alternative PRD locations for 
specific vehicle installations in order to optimize safety 
considerations which shall be approved by statutory 
authority. Pressure relief devices shall conform to 
IS 5903. 


7.4 Construction and Workmanship 
7.4.1 General 


The composite cylinder shall be manufactured from a 
seamless metallic liner overwrapped with continuous 
filament windings. Fibre winding operations shall be 
computer or mechanically controlled. The fibres shall 
be applied under controlled tension during winding. 
After winding is complete, thermosetting resins shall be 
cured by heating, using a predetermined and controlled 
time-temperature profile. 


7.4.2 Liner 


The manufacture of a metallic liner shall meet the 
requirements given in 7.2, 7.3.2 and either 7.5.2.2 or 


14 


7.5.2.3 for the appropriate type of liner construction. 
Each liner shall be examined for thickness and the surface 
finish before end forming operations are carried out. The 
base ends of aluminium liners shall not be manufactured 
from tube. The base ends of steel liners that have been 
closed by forming shall be NDE inspected or equivalent. 
Metal shall not be added in the process of closure at the 
ends. 


7.4.3 Neck Threads 


The cylinder neck shall be threaded to suit the type of 
valves as given in IS 3224 or any other specification as 
approved by the statutory authority. Threads shall be 
clean cut, even, without chatter, answering to gauges and 
concentric with the axis of the cylinder. 


7.4.4 Overwrap 
7.4.4.1 Fibre winding 


The cylinders shall be manufactured by a fibre winding 
technique. During winding the significant variables 
shall be monitored within specified tolerances and 
documented in a winding record. These variables can 
include but are not limited to: 

a) Fibre type including sizing; 

b) Manner of impregnation; 

c) Winding tension; 

d) Winding speed; 

e) Number of rovings; 

f) Band width; 

g) Type of resin and composition; 

h) Temperature of the resin; 

j) Temperature of the liner; and 

k) Winding angle. 


7.4.4.2 Curing of the thermosetting resins 


If a thermosetting resin is used, the resin shall be cured 
after filament winding. During curing, the curing 
cycle (that is, the time temperature history) shall be 
documented. The maximum curing time and temperature 
for cylinders with aluminium alloy liners shall be below 
the time and temperature, which adversely affect metal 
properties. 


7.4.4.3 Autofrettage 


Autofrettage, if used, shall be carried out before the 
hydrostatic pressure test. The Autofrettage pressure 
shall be within the limits established in 7.3.3 and the 
manufacturer shall establish the method of verifying the 
appropriate pressure. 


7.4.5 Exterior Environmental Protection 


The exterior of cylinders shall meet the requirement of 
the acid environment test described in A-13. Exterior 


protection may be provided by using any of the 
follovving: 


a) A surface finish giving adequate protection (for 
example, metal sprayed on to aluminum, anodizing), 


b) The use of a suitable fibre and matrix material 
(for example, carbon fibre in resin), 


c) A protective coating (for example, organic coating, 
paint), if exterior coating is part of the design, the 
requirements of A-9 shall be met; or 


d) A covering impervious to the chemicals listed in 
A-13. 


Any coatings applied to cylinders shall be such that 
the application process does not adversely affect the 
mechanical properties of the cylinder. The coating shall 
be designed to facilitate subsequent in-service inspection 
and the manufacturer shall provide guidance on coating 
treatment during such inspection to ensure the continued 
integrity of the cylinder. 


An environmental performance test that evaluates the 
suitability of coating systems is provided in Annex E. 


7.4.6 Traceability 


Materials of construction affecting cylinder performance, 
as determined by the manufacturer, shall be traceable to 
the extent required to recall cylinders, if necessary. 


7.5 Prototype Testing Procedure 
7.5.1 General Requirements 


Prototype testing shall be conducted for each new 
design, on liners and/or finished cylinders, which are 
representative of normal production and complete with 
identification marks. The test cylinders or liners shall 
be selected and the prototype tests detailed in 7.5.2 
(and detailed in Annex A) verified/witnessed by the 
inspector. If more cylinders or liners are subjected to the 
tests than are required by this standard, all results shall be 
documented. 


7.5.2 Prototype Tests 
7.5.2.1 Test required 


In the course of the type approval, the inspector shall 
select the necessary cylinders or liners for testing and 
witness the following tests: 


a) Liner material tests specified in 7.5.2.2 or 7.5.2.3 as 
appropriate on one liner; 

b) Hydrostatic pressure burst test specified in 7.5.2.4 
on three cylinders; 

c) Ambient temperature pressuring cycling 
specified in 7.5.2.5 on two cylinders; 

d) LBB test specified in 7.5.2.6 on three cylinders; 


e) Bonfire test specified in 7.5.2.7 on one or two 
cylinders as appropriate; 


test 


f) Penetration test specified in 7.5.2.8 on one cylinder; 


IS 15935 : 2021 


g) Acid environmental test specified in 7.5.2.9 on one 
cylinder; 

h) Flaw tolerance test specified in 7.5.2.10 on one 
cylinder; 

j) High temperature creep test specified in 7.5.2.11 
where appropriate on one cylinder; 

k) Accelerated stress rupture test specified in 7.5.2.12 
on one cylinder; 

m) Extreme temperature pressure cycling test specified 
in 7.5.2.13 on one cylinder; 

n) Resin shear strength test specified in 7.5.2.14 on 
one sample coupon representative of the composite 
overwrap; and 


p) Drop test specified in 7.5.2.15 on one cylinder. 
7.5.2.2 Material tests for steel liners 


Material tests shall be carried out on steel liners as 
follows: 

a) Tensile Test — The material properties of the steel in 
the finished liner shall be determined in accordance 
with A-1 and shall meet the requirements therein. 

b) Jmpact Test — The impact properties of the steel in 
the finished liner shall be determined in accordance 
with A-2 and shall meet the requirements therein. 

c 


wa 


Sulphide Stress Cracking Resistance Test — If the 
upper limit of the specified tensile strength for the 
steel exceeds 950 MPa, the steel from a finished 
cylinder shall be subjected to a sulphide stress 
cracking resistance test in accordance with A-3 and 
meet the requirements therein. 


d) Hardness Test — Hardness of sample liners shall 
be recorded by testing on parallel wall at the centre. 
None of the results shall be outside the limits 
specified on the design drawing. 


Hardness testing shall be carried out in accordance 
with IS 1500 (Part 1) or IS 1586. The indenter and 
applied load shall be such that it shall not damage 
the cylinder. The test shall be carried out after final 
heat treatment. 


Test values for hardness at the top, mid-section and 
base have been specified for those processes where 
cylinders are quenched by vertical immersion into 
the quench tank. Where the cylinders are immersed 
horizontally into the quenchant, hardness test shall 
be carried out at two points around the cylindrical 
mid-section of the parallel wall. 

The hardness values obtained thus shall be in the 
range specified for the design. 


The cylinders which are found to have hardness 
value beyond the specified range shall be subjected 
to appropriate re-heat treatment to achieve the 
hardness values within specified range. 


7.5.2.3 Material tests for aluminium alloy liner 


Material tests shall be carried out on aluminium alloy 
liners as follows: 


IS 15935 : 2021 


a) Tension Test — The material properties of the 
aluminium alloy in the cylinder shall be determined 
in accordance with A-1 and shall meet the 
requirements therein. 


b 


we 


Corrosion Test — Aluminum alloys shall meet 
the requirement of the corrosion test carried out in 
accordance with A-4. 


c 


wa 


Sustained Load Cracking Tests — Aluminum alloys 
shall meet the requirements of the sustained load 
cracking test carried out in accordance with A-5. 


7.5.2.4 Hydrostatic pressure burst test 


Three cylinders shall be hydrostatically pressurized 
to failure in accordance with A-11. The cylinder burst 
pressure shall exceed the specified minimum burst 
pressure established by the stress analysis for the design 
in accordance with Table 5 and in no case be less than 
the value necessary to meet the stress ratio requirements 
of 7.3.2. 


7.5.2.5 Ambient temperature pressure cycling test 


Two cylinders shall be pressure cycled to failure at 
ambient temperature in accordance with A-12, or 
to a minimum of 45 000 cycles. The cylinders shall 
not fail before reaching the specified service life in 
years multiplied by 1 000 cycles. Cylinders exceeding 
1 000 cycles multiplied by the specified service life in 
years shall fail by leakage and not by rupture. Cylinders 
which do not fail within 45 000 cycles shall be destroyed 
either by continuing the cycling until failure occurs, or 
by hydrostatically pressurizing to burst or by drilling 
holes in side wall. 


Cylinders exceeding 45 000 cycles are permitted to fail by 
rupture. The number of cycles to failure and the location 
of the failure initiation shall be recorded. If cylinder is 
destroyed, mode of destruction and photograph to be 
recorded. 


7.5.2.6 Leak-before-break (LBB) test 


The LBB test shall be carried out in accordance with A-6 
and shall meet the requirement therein. 


7.5.2.7 Bonfire test 


One or two cylinders as appropriate shall be tested in 
accordance with A-14 and meet the requirement therein. 


7.5.2.8 Penetration test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-15 and 
meet the requirement therein. 


7.5.2.9 Acid environmental test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-13 and 
meet the requirement therein. An optional environmental 
test is included in Annex E. 


16 


7.5.2.10 Flaw tolerance test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-16 and 
meet the requirement therein. 


7.5.2.11 High temperature creep test 


In designs, where the glass transition temperature of the 
resin does not exceed 102 °C, one cylinder shall be tested 
in accordance with A-17 and meet the requirements 
therein. 


7.5.2.12 Accelerated stress rupture test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-18 and 
meet the requirements therein. 


7.5.2.13 Extreme temperature pressure cycling test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-7 and 
meet the requirements therein. 


7.5.2.14 Resin shear strength 


Resin material shall be tested in accordance with A-25 
and meet the requirements therein. 


7.5.2.15 Drop test 


One (or more) finished cylinders shall be drop tested in 
accordance with A-19 and meet the requirements therein. 


7.5.3 Change of Design 


A design change is any change in the selection 
of structural materials or dimensional change not 
attributable to normal manufacturing tolerances. Minor 
design changes shall be permitted to be qualified through 
a reduced test programme. Changes of design specified 
in Table 6 shall require design qualification testing as 
specified in Table 6. 


A fibre material shall be considered to be of a new design 
when: 


a) the fibre is of a different classification, e.g. glass, 
aramid, carbon; 


b) the fibre is produced from a different precursor 
(starting material), for example, polyacrylonitrile 
(PAN), pitch for carbon; 

c) the nominal fibre modulus, specified by the fibre 
manufacturer, differs by more than + 5 percent from 
that defined in the prototype tested design; 

d) the nominal fibre strength, specified by the fibre 
manufacturer, differs by more than + 5 percent from 
that defined in the prototype tested design; 


e) A resin material shall be considered to be a new 
resin type when: 
1) the resin is of a different classification, for 
example, thermosetting or thermoplastic; or 
2) the resin is of a different type of same 
classification of resin, for example, epoxy, 
polyester, polyethylene, polyamide. 


LI 


Table 6 Change of Design for Metal-Lined-Hoop Wrapped Cylinders (Type 3) 


( Clause 7.5.3 ) 


SI No. Design Change Type of Test 
Hydro LBB Pressure Bonfire Penetration Environmental Flaw High Stress Drop Torque 
static Burst (See A-6) Cyclingat (See A-14) (See A-15) (See A-13) Tolerance Temperature Rupture (See A-19) (See A-26) 
(See A-11) Ambient (See A-16) Creep (See A-17) (See A-18) 
Temperature 
(See A-12) 

(1) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) 

i) Fibre manufacturer x X X — — — — X X 

ii) Metallic liner material X X X X X X X X X X 

iii) Fibre material X X X X X X X X X X 

iv) Resin material — — — X X X X X X 

v) Diameter change < 20 percent X X X — xX?) — — — — — 

vi) Diameter change > 20 percent X X X X X — X — — X 

vii) Length change < 50 percent X — x” — — — — — — 
viii) | Length change > 50 percent X X X x) — — — — — X 

ix) Working pressure change < 20 X X X — — — — — — — 

percent?) 

x) Dome shape X X X — — — — — — — 

x1) Opening size X X X — — — — — — — 

xii) Change in manufacturing X X X — — — — — — — 

process 

xiii) Coating change X 
xiv) Pressure relief device — — X — — — — — — 

XV) Thread X 


D Test only required when length increases. 


2. Only when thickness change proportional to diameter and/or pressure change. 


3 Only required if diameter decreases. 


® Materials tests are also required 


ITOT : SEOST SI 


IS 15935 : 2021 


7.6 Batch Tests on Liners and Cylinders 
7.6.1 General Requirements 


Batch testing shall be conducted on liners, and 
on finished cylinders which are representative of 
normal production and are complete with permanent 
identification marks. The cylinders and liners required 
for testing shall be randomly selected from each 
batch. If more cylinders or liners are subjected to the 
tests than are required by this standard, all results 
shall be documented. Where defects are detected in 
overwrapping before any Autofrettage or hydrostatic 
pressure testing, the overwrapping may be completely 
removed and replaced. 


7.6.2 Requirements 
7.6.2.1 Liner tests 


On a liner, or heat treated sample representative of a 
finished liner: 


a) a check of the critical dimensions against the 
design (see 5.2.4.1); 
b) one tensile test in accordance with A-1, the test 


results shall satisfy the requirements of the design 
(see 5.2.4.1); 


c) for steel liners, three impact tests in accordance 
with A-2; the test results shall satisfy the 
requirements specified in A-2; 


d 


WwW 


for steel liners with a tensile strength exceeding 
1100 MPa, each new cast of material shall meet 
the requirements of the sulphide stress cracking 
test in A.3. A sample of material from each cast 
may be heat treated and tested by the steel supplier 
or cylinder manufacturer, provided that the 
samples have the same strength values specified 
in the cylinder design. 


All liners represented by a batch test that fail to meet 
the requirements specified shall follow the procedures 
specified in 7.9. 


7.6.2.2 Cylinder tests 


a) on one cylinder, one hydrostatic pressure burst test 
in accordance with A-11. 


b) ona further cylinder: 


1) a check of the critical dimensions against the 
design (see 5.2.4.1); and 


when a protective coating is a part of the 
design, a coating batch test in accordance 
with A-24. Where the coating fails to meet 
the requirements of A-24, the batch shall be 
100 percent inspected to remove similarly 
defectively coated cylinders. The coating 
on all defectively coated cylinders may be 
stripped using a method that does not affect 


2) 


18 


the integrity of the composite wrapping then 
recoated. The coating batch test shall then be 
repeated. 


7.6.2.3 Additionally, a periodic pressure cycling test 
shall be carried out on | finished cylinder in accordance 
with A-12. One cylinder from each batch shall be 
pressure cycled for a total of 1 000 times the specified 
service life in years, with a minimum of 15 000 cycles. 


7.7 Tests on Every Liner and Cylinder 


Production examinations and tests shall be carried 
out as follows on all liners and cylinders produced in 
a batch. Nondestructive examinations shall be carried 
out in accordance with a standard approved by the 
inspector. Each liner and cylinder shall be examined 
during manufacture and after completion as follows: 


a) By NDE of metallic liners in accordance with 
Annex B or demonstrated equivalent method 
to verify that the maximum defect size does 
not exceed the size specified in the design as 
determined in accordance with 7.3.4. The NDE 
method shall be capable of detecting the maximum 
size allowed; 


b 


we 


To verify that critical dimensions and mass of the 
completed cylinders and of the liners and over 
wrapping are within design tolerances; 


c 


ma 


To verify compliance with specified surface finish 
with special attention to deep drawn surfaces and 
folds or laps in the neck or shoulder of forged or 
spun end enclosures or openings; 


d) To verify the permanent markings; and 


e) By hardness tests of metallic liners in accordance 
with A-8 carried out after the final heat treatment. 
The values thus determined shall be in the range of 
specified for the design. 


7.7.1 Cylinder Tests 


Each cylinder shall be examined either during 
manufacture and/or after completion, as appropriate: 


a) to verify that the critical dimensions and mass of 
the completed cylinders and overwrapping are 
within design tolerances; 


b) to verify the permanent identification marks; 


c) by hydrostatic test of finished cylinders in 
accordance with A-11. The manufacturer shall 
establish the appropriate limit of permanent 
expansion for the test pressure used, but in no case 
shall the permanent expansion exceed 5 percent of 
the total volumetric expansion measured under the 
test pressure. 


d 


— 


by leak testing of cylinders with base ends formed 
by spinning. Typical testing procedures include 
the pneumatic leakage test where the bottom 


end should be clean and free from all moisture 
on the test pressure side. The inside area of the 
cylinder bottom surrounding the closure should be 
subjected to a pressure equal to at least 2/3 times 
the test pressure of the cylinder for a minimum of 
1 min. This area should be not less than 20 mm in 
diameter around the closure and at least 6 percent 
of the total bottom area. The opposite side should 
be covered with water or another suitable medium 
and closely examined for indication of leakage. 
Cylinders that leak should be rejected. 


7.8 Batch Acceptance Certificate 


If the results of batch testing according to 7.6 and 7.7 
are satisfactory, the manufacturer and the inspector 
shall sign an acceptance certificate. 


7.9 Failure to Meet Test Requirements 
7.9.1 Liners 


In the event of failure to meet test requirements, 
retesting or re-heat treatment and re-testing shall be 
carried out as follow to the satisfaction of the inspector; 


a) If there is evidence of a fault in carrying out a test, 
or an error of measurement, a further test shall be 
performed. If the result of this test is satisfactory, 
the first test shall be ignored. 


b) If the test has been carried out in a satisfactory 
manner, the cause of test failure shall be identified: 


1) If the failure is considered to be due to the 
heat treatment applied, the manufacturer may 
subject all the cylinders implicated by the 
failure to a further heat treatment, that is, if 
the failure is in a test representing the batch 
cylinders, test failure shall require re-heat 
treatment of all the represented cylinders prior 
to re-testing. 

2) However, if the failure occurs sporadically in a 

test applied to every cylinder, then only those 

cylinder which fail the test shall require re-heat 
treatment and re-testing: 


i) Whenever liners are re-heat treated, the 
minimum guaranteed wall thickness shall 
be maintained. 


ii) Only the relevant batch test needed to 
prove the acceptability of the new batch 
shall be performed again. If one or more 
tests prove even partially unsatisfactory; 
all cylinders of the batch shall be rejected. 


If the failure is due to a cause other than the 
heat treatment applied, all defective cylinders 
shall be either rejected or repaired by an 
approved method. Provided that the repaired 
cylinders past he tests required for the repair, 
they shall be re-instated as part of the original 
batch. 


3 


— 


19 


IS 15935 : 2021 


1.9.2 Cylinders 


In the event of failure of a cylinder to meet test 
requirements, re-testing shall be carried out: 


a) if there is evidence of a fault in carrying out a 
test, or an error of measurement, a further test 
shall be performed, if the result of this test is 
satisfactory, the first test shall be ignored; and 


b 


wm 


if the test has been carried out in a satisfactory 
manner, the cause of test failure shall be 
identified. 


All defective cylinders shall be either rejected or 
repaired by an approved method. Provided that the 
repaired cylinders pass the test(s) required for the 
repair, they shall be re-instated as part of the original 
batch. 


8 REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-METAL-LINED 
COMPOSITE CYLINDERS (TYPE 4) 


8.1 General 


This standard does not provide design formulae nor 
list permissible stresses or strain, but requires the 
adequacy of the design to be established by appropriate 
calculations and demonstrated by testing to show 
that the cylinders shall pass the materials, design 
qualification, production and batch tests specified in 
this standard. 


The design shall ensure a leakage-before-break failure 
mode during normal service. 


8.2 Materials 
8.2.1 General Requirements 


Materials used shall be suitable for the service 
conditions specified in 4. The design shall ensure that 
incompatible materials are not in contact with each 
other or with gas contained in cylinder. 


8.2.2 Resins 


The material for impregnation may be thermosetting 
or thermoplastic resin. Examples of suitable matrix 
materials are epoxy, modified epoxy, polyester and 
vinyl ester thermosetting plastics, and polyethylene and 
polyamide thermoplastic material. 


The glass transition temperature of the resin material 
shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D3418. 


8.2.3 Fibres 


Structural reinforcing filament material types shall 
be glass fibre, aramid fibre or carbon fibre. If carbon 
fibre reinforcement is used the design shall incorporate 
means to prevent galvanic corrosion of the metallic 
components of the cylinder. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


The manufacturer shall Reep on file the published 
specification for fibre material, the material 
manufacturer’s recommendations for storage, 
conditions and shelf life and the material manufacturer’s 
certification that each shipment conforms to said 
specification requirements. 


The fibre manufacturer shall certify that the fibre 
material properties conform to the manufacturer’s 
specification for the product. 


8.2.4 Plastic Liners 


The polymeric material shall be compatible with the 
service conditions specified in 4. 


8.2.5 Metal End Bosses 


The metal end bosses connected to the non-metallic 
liner shall be of a material compatible with the service 
conditions specified in 4. 


8.3 Design Requirements 
8.3.1 Test Pressure 


The minimum test pressure used in manufacture shall 
be 300 bar (1.5 times working pressure). 


8.3.2 Burst Pressure and Fibre Stress Ratios 


The minimum actual burst pressure shall be not less 
than the values given in Table 7. Stress ratio is defined 
as the stress in the fibre at the specified minimum burst 
pressure divided by the stress in the fibre at working 
pressure. 


The burst ratio is defined as the burst pressure of the 
cylinder divided by the working pressure. 


For nonmetal lined full wrapped designs, the stress 
ratio is equal to the burst ratio. 


For designs using hybrid reinforcement (two or more 
different fibres), the load share between the different 
fibres based on the different elastic moduli of the fibres 
shall be considered in the analysis. The stress ratio 
requirements for each individual fibre type shall be in 
accordance with the values given in Table 7. 


Verification of the stress ratios may also be performed 
using strain gauges. 
NOTE — An acceptable method is outlined in Annex D. 


20 


Table 7 Minimum Actual Burst Values and Stress 
Ratios for Non-metal-Lined 
Full Wrapped Cylinders (Type 4) 
(with Working Pressure of 200 bar) 


( Clauses 8.3.2 and 8.5.2.3 ) 


SI No. Fibre Type Stress Ratio Burst Pressure 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Glass 3.65 730 
ii) Aramid 3.10 620 
ili) Carbon 235 470 
iv) Hybrid” - — 


D Stress ratios and burst pressures shall be calculated in accordance 
with 8.3.2. 


8.3.3 Stress Analysis 


A stress analysis shall be performed to justify the 
minimum design wall thicknesses. It shall include 
the determination of the stresses in liners and fibres 
of composite designs. The stresses in the tangential 
and longitudinal direction of the cylinder composite 
and in the liner shall be calculated. The pressure 
used for these calculations shall be 0 bar, working 
pressure, test pressure and design burst pressure. The 
calculations shall use suitable analysis techniques to 
establish stress distribution throughout the cylinder. 


8.3.4 Openings 


Openings are permitted in the end bosses only. 
The centre line of openings shall coincide with the 
longitudinal axis of the cylinder. 


8.3.5 Fire Protection 


The cylinder design shall be protected with 
pressure relief devices. The cylinder, its materials, 
pressure relief devices and any added insulation or 
protective material shall be designed collectively 
to ensure adequate safety during fire conditions 
in the test specified in A-14. A manufacturer may 
specify alternative PRD locations for specific 
vehicle installations in order to optimize safety 
considerations which shall be approved by statutory 
authority. Pressure relief devices shall conform to 
IS 5903. 


8.4 Construction and Workmanship 
8.4.1 General 


The composite cylinder shall be manufactured from 
anon-metallic liner overwrapped with continuous 
filament windings. Fibre winding operations shall be 
computer or mechanically controlled. The fibre shall 
be applied under controlled tension during winding. 
After winding is complete, thermosetting resins shall be 
cured by heating, using a predetermined and controlled 
time-temperature profile. 


8.4.2 Neck Threads 


The cylinder neck shall be threaded to suit the type of 
valves as given in IS 3224 or any other specification 
as approved by the statutory authority. Threads shall 
be clean cut, even, without surface discontinuities and 
concentric with the axis of the cylinder. 


8.4.3 Curing of the Thermosetting Resins 


The curing temperature for thermosetting resin shall be 
at least 10 °C below the softening temperature of the 
plastic liner. 


8.4.4 Exterior Environmental Protection 


The exterior of cylinders shall meet the requirement of 
the acid environment test described in A-13. Exterior 
protection may be provided by using any of the 
following: 


a) A surface finish giving adequate protection 
(for example, metal sprayed on to aluminum, 
anodizing); 


b) The use of a suitable fibre and matrix material 
(for example, carbon fibre in resin); 


c) Aprotective coating (for example, organic coating, 
paint); if exterior coating is part of the design, the 
requirements of A-9 shall be met; or 


d) A covering impervious to the chemicals listed in 
A-13. 


Any coatings applied to cylinders shall be such that 
the application process does not adversely affect the 
mechanical properties of the cylinder. The coating 
shall be designed to facilitate subsequent in-service 
inspection and the manufacturer shall provide guidance 
on coating treatment during such inspection to ensure 
the continued integrity of the cylinder. 


An environmental performance test that evaluates the 
suitability of coating systems is provided in Annex E 
(Informative). 


8.4.5 Traceability 


Materials of construction affecting cylinder 
performance, as determined by the manufacturer, shall 
be traceable to the extent required to recall cylinders, if 
necessary. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


8.5 Prototype Testing Procedure 
8.5.1 General 


Prototype testing shall be conducted for each new 
design, on finished cylinders, which are representative 
of normal production and complete with identification 
marks. The test cylinder or liners shall be selected 
and the prototype tests detailed in 8.5.2 (and detailed 
in Annex A) verified/witnessed by the inspector. If 
more cylinders or liners are subjected to the tests 
than are required by this standard, all results shall be 
documented. 


8.5.2 Prototype Tests 
8.5.2.1 Test required 


In the course of the type approval, the inspector shall 
select the necessary cylinders or liners for testing and 
witness the following tests: 


a) Liner material tests specified in 8.5.2.2 as 
appropriate on one liner; 

b) Hydrostatic pressure burst test specified in 8.5.2.3 
on three cylinders; 

c) Ambient temperature pressuring cycling test 
specified in 8.5.2.4 on two cylinders; 

d) LBB test specified in 8.5.2.5 on three cylinders; 

e) Bonfire test specified in 8.5.2.6 on one or two 
cylinders as appropriate; 

f) Penetration test specified in 8.5.2.7 on one 
cylinder; 

g) Acid environmental test specified in 8.5.2.8 on 
one cylinder; 

h) Flaw tolerance test specified in 8.5.2.9 on one 
cylinder; 

j) High temperature creep test specified in 8.5.2.10 
where appropriate on one cylinder; 

k) Accelerated stress rupture test specified in 8.5.2.11 
on one cylinder; 


m) Extreme temperature pressure cycling test 
specified in 8.5.2.12 on one cylinder; 

n) Resin shear strength test specified in 8.5.2.13 
on one sample coupon representative of the 
composite overwrap; 

p) Drop test specified in 8.5.2.14 on one cylinder; 

q) Boss torque test specified in 8.5.2.15 on one 
cylinder; 

r) Permeation test specified in 8.5.2.16 on one 
cylinder; and 

s) Natural gas cycling test specified in 8.5.2.17 on 
one cylinder. 


8.5.2.2 Material tests for plastic liners 


The tensile yield strength and ultimate elongation shall 
be determined in accordance with A-21 and shall meet 


IS 15935 : 2021 


the requirements therein. The softening temperature 
shall be determined in accordance vvith A-22 and shall 
meet the requirements therein. 


8.5.2.3 Hydrostatic pressure burst test 


Three cylinders shall be hydrostatically pressurized 
to failure in accordance with A-11. The cylinder burst 
pressure shall exceed the specified minimum burst 
pressure established by the stress analysis for the liner 
design, in accordance with Table 7, and in no case 
less than the value necessary to meet the stress ratio 
requirements of 8.3.2. 


8.5.2.4 Ambient temperature pressure cycling test 


Two cylinders shall be pressure cycle tested at ambient 
temperature in accordance with A-12 to failure, or to 
a minimum of 45 000 cycles. The cylinders shall not 
fail before reaching the specified service life in years 
multiplied by 1000 cycles. Cylinders exceeding 
1 000 cycles multiplied by the specified service life in 
years shall fail by leakage and not by rupture. Cylinders 
which do not fail within 45 000 cycles shall be destroyed 
either by continuing the cycling until failure occurs, or 
by hydrostatically pressurizing to burst or by drilling 
holes in side wall. Cylinders exceeding 45 000 cycles 
are permitted to fail by rupture. The number of cycles to 
failure and the location of the failure initiation shall be 
recorded. If cylinder is destroyed, mode of destruction 
and photograph to be recorded. 


8.5.2.5 Leak-before-break (LBB) test 


The LBB test shall be carried out in accordance with 
A-6 and shall meet the requirement therein. 


8.5.2.6 Bonfire test 


One or two cylinders as appropriate shall be tested 
in accordance with A-14 and meet the requirement 
therein. 


8.5.2.7 Penetration test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-15 
and meet the requirement therein. 


8.5.2.8 Acid environment test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-13 
and meet the requirement therein. 


8.5.2.9 Flaw tolerance test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-16 
and meet the requirement therein. 


8.5.2.10 High temperature creep test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-17 
and meet the requirements therein. 


22 


8.5.2.11 Accelerated stress rupture test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-18 
and meet the requirements therein. 


8.5.2.12 Extreme temperature pressure cycling test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-7 and 
meet the requirements therein. 


8.5.2.13 Resin shear strength 


Resin material shall be tested in accordance with A-25, 
devices and meet the requirements therein. 


8.5.2.14 Drop test 


One (or more) finished cylinders shall be drop tested 
in accordance with A-19 and meet the requirements 
therein. 


8.5.2.15 Boss torque test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-23 
and meet the requirements therein. 


8.5.2.16 Permeation test 


One cylinder shall be tested for permeation in 
accordance with A-20 and meet the requirements 
therein. 


8.5.2.17 Natural gas cycling test 


One cylinder shall be tested in accordance with A-27 
and meet the requirements therein. 


8.5.3 Change of Design 


8.5.3.1 A design change is any change in the selection 
of structural materials or dimensional change not 
attributable to normal manufacturing tolerances. Minor 
design changes shall be permitted to be qualified 
through a reduced test programme. Changes of design 
specified in Table 8 shall require design qualification 
testing as specified in Table 8. 


8.5.3.2 Either a fibre material change or a fibre 
manufacturer change shall be considered to be of anew 
design and require full qualification when: 


a) the fibre is of a different classification, for example, 
glass, aramid, carbon; 


b) the fibre is produced from a different precursor 
(starting material), for example, polyacrylonitrile 
(PAN), pitch for carbon; 

c) the nominal fibre modulus, specified by the fibre 
manufacturer, differs by more than +5 percent 
from that defined in the prototype tested design; or 

d) the nominal fibre strength, specified by the fibre 
manufacturer, differs by more than +5 percent 
from that defined in the prototype tested design. 


Fibre materials that are vvithin the above limits are 
considered equivalent fibres and are eligible for the 
reduced test programme described in Table 10. Note 
that a change in fibre material does not require tests that 
evaluate the performance of plastic liners, for example, 
permeation testing and natural gas cycle testing. 


8.5.3.3 A resin material shall be considered to be a new 
resin type when: 


a) the resin is of a different classification, for 
example, thermosetting or thermoplastic, and 


b) the resin is of a different type of same classification 
of resin, for example, epoxy, polyester, 
polyethylene, polyamide. 


8.6 Batch Tests 


8.6.1 Batch testing shall be conducted on finished 
cylinders which are representative of normal 
production and are complete with identification marks. 
The cylinders and liners required for testing shall be 
randomly selected from each batch. If more cylinders 
are subjected to the tests than are required by this 
standard, all results shall be documented. 


8.6.2 Required Tests 


8.6.2.1 At least the following tests shall be carried out 
on each batch of cylinders: 


a) On one cylinder, a hydrostatic pressure burst test 
is carried out in accordance with A-11. The burst 
pressure is less than the minimum calculated burst 
pressure, the procedures specified in 8.9 shall be 
followed. 


b 


wm 


On a further cylinder or liner representative of a 
finished cylinder: 

1) A check of the critical dimensions against the 
design (see 5.2.4.1); 

One tensile test of the plastic liner in accordance 
with A-21, the test result shall satisfy the 
requirements of the design (see 5.2.4.1); and 


2) 


3) The softening temperature of the plastic liner 
shall be tested in accordance with A-22, and 
the requirements of the design. 

c) When a protective coating is a part of the design, 
a coating batch test in accordance with A.24. 
Where the coating fails to meet the requirements 
of A.24. The batch shall be 100 percent inspected 


to remove similarly defectively coated cylinders. 


23 


IS 15935 : 2021 


The coating on all defectively coated cylinders 
may be stripped using a method that does not 
affect the integrity of the composite wrapping then 
recoated. 


The coating batch test shall then be repeated. 
8.6.2.2 Failure to meet batch test requirements 


All cylinders or liners represented by a batch test which 
fail to meet the specified requirements shall follow the 
procedures specified in 8.9. 


8.6.2.3 Additionally, a periodic pressure cycling test 
shall be carried out on | finished cylinder in accordance 
with A-12. One cylinder from each batch shall be 
pressure cycled for a total of 1 000 times the specified 
service life in years, with a minimum of 15 000 cycles. 


8.7 Tests on Every Cylinder 


Production examinations and tests shall be carried out 
as follows on all cylinders produced in batch. Each 
cylinder shall be examined during manufacture and 
after completion as follows: 


a) By inspection of liners to confirm that the 
maximum defect size present is smaller than the 
specified in the design; 


b) To verify that critical dimensions and mass of 
the completed cylinders and of any liner and 
overwrapping are within design tolerances; 


c) To verify compliance with specified surface finish; 
d) To verify the markings; 


e) By hydraulic test of finished cylinders in 
accordance with A-10. The manufacturer shall 
define the appropriate limit of elastic expansion 
for the test pressure used, but in no case shall 
the elastic expansion of any cylinder exceed the 
average batch value by more than 10 percent; and 


f) 


By leak test in accordance with A-9, and shall 
meet the requirements therein. 


8.8 Batch Acceptance Certificate 


If the results of batch testing according to 8.6 and 8.7 
are satisfactory, the manufacturer and the inspector 
shall sign an acceptance certificate. 

NOTE — An example of an acceptance certificate (referred to 


as a “Report of Manufacture and Certificate of Conformance”) 
is given in Annex D. 


VC 


Table 8 Change of Design for Type 4 Cylinders 


( Clause 8.5.3 ) 


Design Change 


Perme-ation CNG — Hydro-static Boss LBB Pressure 
Cycling Burst Torque Cycling at 
Ambient 
Tempe-rature 


(A.20) (A.27) (A.11) (A.23) (A.6) (A.12) 


Fibre manufacturer X X 
Plastic liner material X X X X 

Fibre material X X X 
Resin material X 

Diameter change < 20 X X 
percent 

Diameter change >20 X X X 
percentb 

Length change < 50 X 

percent 

Length change > 50 X X 
percent 

Working pressure X X 
change < 20 percent 

Dome shape X X X 
Opening size X X X 


(com-posite) 
Coating change 
End boss design X X X 


Pressure relief device 


* Test only required when length increases. 

> Only when thickness change proportional to diameter and/or pressure change. 

° Only if boss/liner interface is affected. 

d Only if boss/liner or boss composite interface is affected or torque requirements change. 


° Only required if diameter decreases. 


Type of Test 


Penetra-tion Environ-mental 


(A.15) 


High 
Tempe-rapture 
Creep 


(A.17) 


X 
X 


Stress 
Rup-ture 


(A.18) 


X 


Impact 
Dam-age 


(A.19) 


X 
X 
X 


ITOT : SE6ST SI 


8.9 Failure to Meet Test Requirements 


In the event of failure to meet test requirements, 
retesting shall be carried out as follows: 


a) If there is evidence of a fault in carrying out a test, 
or an error of measurement, a further test shall be 
performed, if the result of this test is satisfactory, 
the first test shall be ignored; 


b) If the test has been carried out in a satisfactory 
manner, the cause of test failure shall be identified 
by the following: 


1) All defective cylinders shall be rejected or 
repaired by an approval method. Provided that 
the repaired cylinders pass the test(s) required 
for the repair, they shall be re-instated as part 
of the original batch. 


The new batch shall be re-tested. All the 
relevant prototype or batch test needed to 
prove the acceptability of the new batch shall 
be performed again. If one or more tests prove 
even partially unsatisfactory, all cylinders of 
the batch shall be rejected. 


2) 


9 MARKING 


9.1 On each cylinder the manufacturer shall provide 
clear permanent markings not less than 6 mm high. 
Marking shall be made either by labels incorporated 
into resin coatings, labels attached by adhesive or any 
combination of the above. Multiple labels are allowed 
and should be located such that they are not obscured 
by mounting brackets. Each cylinder complying with 
this standard shall be marked as follow: 


a) The words ‘CNG only’; 


b) Expiry date. The words ‘DO NOT USE AFTER 
XX/XXXX’, where XX/XXXX identifies the 
month and year of expiry. The period between the 
dispatch date and the expiry date shall not exceed 
the specified service life. The expiry date may be 
applied to the cylinder at the time of dispatch, 
provided that the cylinders have been stored in a 
dry location without internal pressure. 


c) Manufacturer’s identification; 

d) Cylinder identification (a serial number unique for 
every cylinder); 

e) Working pressure at temperature; 

f) Maximum temperature which the cylinder can 
sustain (This shall not be exceeded during filling, 
retesting and cleaning operations); 

g) Reference to this standard, along with cylinder 
type and statutory authority’s approval numbers; 


h) The words ‘Use only an manufacturer’s approved 
PRD’; 


25 


IS 15935 : 2021 


j) Date of manufacture (month and year); 
k) Periodical retesting on XX — XX — XXXX; and 


m) When labels are used, a unique identification 
number and the manufacturer’s identification 
stamped on an exposed metal surface to permit 
tracing in the event that the label is destroyed. 


9.2 The marking shall be placed in the listed sequence 
but the specific arrangement may be varied to match the 
space available. An acceptable example is: 


a) CNG only; 

b) Do not use after 3/2009; 

c) Manufacture/Identification number; 

d) 200 bar/15°; 

e) CIS 15935 : 2019 TYPE-2 (registration No.), 
f) ‘Use only manufacturer approved PRD”; and 
g) Manufacturer date 08/98. 


9.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


9.4 Warning 


Vehicles with Type 4 cylinder shall not be parked in 
enclosed space for extended periods of time. Permeation 
of gas through the cylinder wall or leakage between the 
end connections and the liner shall be considered in the 
design. 


10 PRIOR TO DISPATCH 


Preparation of dispatch from the manufacturer’s shop, 
every cylinder shall be internally cleaned and dried. 
Cylinders which are not immediately closed by the 
fitting of a valve, and safety devices if applicable, 
shall have plugs, which will prevent entry of moisture 
and protect threads, fitted to all openings. A corrosion 
inhibitor (for example oil-containing) shall be sprayed 
into all steel liners prior to dispatch. 


The manufacturer’s statement of service and all 
necessary information and instructions to ensure 
the proper handling, use and in-service inspection 
of the cylinder shall be supplied to the purchaser. 
The statement of service shall be in accordance with 
5.2.3.Guidance on the content of the instructions is 
given in Annex F. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


ANNEX A 


(Clauses 5.1, 6.3.6, 6.4.5, 6.5.2.2 to 6.5.2.14, 6.6.2.1, 6.6.2.2, 6.7, 7.3.6, 7.5.2.2 to 7.5.2.15, 7.6.2.1 to 7.6.2.3, 
7.7, 7.7.1, 8.3.5, 8.4.4, 8.5.2.2 to 8.5.2.17, 8.6.2.1, 8.6.2.3 and 8.7) 


TEST METHODS AND CRITERIA 


A-1 TENSILE TESTS FOR 
ALUMINIUM LINERS 


STEEL AND 


A tensile test shall be carried out on material taken 
from the cylindrical part of the finished liner using a 
rectangular test piece shaped in accordance with the 
method described in IS 15490 for steel and IS 15660 for 
aluminum. The two faces of the test piece representing 
the inside and outside surfaces of the liner shall not 
be machined. The tensile test shall be carried out in 
accordance with IS 1608 (Part 1). 


The tensile strength shall meet the manufacturer’s 
design specifications. The elongation of steel liner shall 
be at least 14 percent. The elongation of aluminium 
alloy liners for hoop wrapped construction shall be at 
least 12 percent. The elongation of aluminium alloy 
liners for full wrapped construction shall meet the 
manufacturer’s design specifications. 


A-2 IMPACT TEST FOR STEEL LINERS 


The impact test shall be carried out on material taken 
from the cylindrical part of the liner on three test pieces 
in accordance with IS 1757 (Part 1). 


The impact test pieces shall be taken in the direction as 
required in Table 9 from the wall of the cylinder. The 
notch shall be perpendicular to the face of the cylinder 
wall. For longitudinal tests, the test piece shall be 
machined all over (on six faces). If the wall thickness 
does not permit a final test piece width of 10 mm, the 
width shall be as near as practicable to the nominal 
thickness of the cylinder wall. Test pieces taken in the 
transverse direction shall be machined on four faces 
only, the inner and outer face of the cylinder wall shall 
be unmachined. The impact values shall be not less 
than those specified in Table 9. 


A-3 SULPHIDE 
FOR STEEL 


STRESS CRACKING TEST 


If the upper limit of the specified tensile strength for 
the steel exceeds 950 MPa, the steel from a finished, 
cylinder shall be subjected to a sulphide stress cracking 
resistance test. 


Tests shall be conducted on a minimum of three tensile 
specimens with a gauge diameter of 3.81 mm machined 
from the wall of a liner. The specimens shall be placed 


26 


under a constant tensile load equal to 60 percent of 
the specified minimum yield strength of the steel, 
immersed in a solution of distilled water buffered with 
0.5 percent (mass fraction) sodium acetate trihydrate 
and adjusted to an initial pH of 4.0 using acetic acid. 
The solution shall be continuously saturated at room 
temperature and pressure with 0.414 kPa hydrogen 
sulphide (balance nitrogen). The tested specimens shall 
not fail within test duration of 144 h. Specimen that 
fails outside gauge are considered as invalid test. 


NOTES 


1 This is a test for type of material, duly heat treated, and 
results can be used for any cylinders from that material with 
same heat treatment. 


2 For guidance method A — NACE Standard tensile test 
procedure as described in NACE standard TM0177-96 may be 
referred. 


A-4 CORROSION TESTS FOR ALUMINIUM 


Corrosion tests for aluminium alloy shall be carried out 
in accordance with the procedure given in A-4.1 and 
A-4.2 and meets the requirements given therein. 


A-4.1 Tests for Assessing Susceptibility to Inter- 
crystalline Corrosion 


A-4.1.1 Principle 


The method described below consists of simultaneously 
immersing the specimen taken from the finished 
cylinder liner under test in a corrosive solution and 
examining them after a specified etching time in order 
to detect any signs of inter crystalline corrosion and 
determine the nature and degree of such corrosion. 
The propagation of inter crystalline corrosion is 
determined metallographically on polished surfaces cut 
transversally to the etched surface. 


A-4.1.2 Specimen Size 


Specimens are taken from the head, body and base of 
the cylinder (see Fig. 1). Each specimen shall be of the 
general shape and the dimensions indicated in Fig. 2. 


The faces a,-a,-a,-a,, b,-b,-b,-b,, a,-a,-b,-b, and 
a,-a,-b,-b, are all cut with a band saw and then carefully 
trimmed with a fine file. The surfaces a-,a,-b,-b, and 
a,-a,-b,-b, which correspond respectively to the inner 
and outer faces of the cylinder liner are left in their 
rough state. 


Table 9 Impact Test Acceptance Values 


( Clause A-2 ) 


IS 15935 : 2021 


SI No. Cylinder Diameter D, in mm > 140 < 140 
(1) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Direction of testing Transverse Longitudinal 
ii) Width of Test Piece, mm 3-5 > 5-7.5 >7.5-10 3-10 
iii) Test temperature, in °C —50 —50 
. Impact strength in J/em", Mean of 3 specimens 30 35 40 60 
™ Individual specimen 24 28 32 48 


Fic. 1 LOCATION OF SPECIMENS 


27 


IS 15935 : 2021 


1) HOLE@3 
2) THICKNESS OF THE CYLINDER 


N 


All dimensions in millimetres 


FIG. 2 SPECIMEN SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


A-4.1.3 Preparation of Specimen Surface before 
Corrosive Etching 


A-4.1.3.1 Reagents — Nitric acid, HNO,, analytical 
grade, density 1.33 g/cm? 


Hydroflouric acid, HF, analytical grade, density 
1.14 g/cm? (at 40 percent) and De-ionized or distilled 
water. 


A-4.1.3.2 Prepare the following solution in a beaker: 


Nitric acid (HNO,) I 63 cm? 
Hydrogen fluoride (HF) : 6 cm? 
Water (H,O) : 931 cm? 

a) Bring the solution to a temperature of 95 °C. 


Treat each specimen, suspended on a wire made 
of aluminium or another inert material, in this 
solution for 1 min. 


b) Wash in running water and then in de-ionized or 
distilled water. 


c) Immerse the specimen in nitric acid for 1 min at 
room temperature to remove any copper deposit, 
which may have formed. 

d) Rinse in de-ionized or distilled water. 

e) To prevent oxidation of specimens they should be 


plunged, as soon as they have been prepared, into 
the corrosion bath intended for them. 


28 


A-4.1.4 Preparation of Corrosive Solution 


The corrosive solution to be used contains 57 g/l of 
sodium chloride and 3 g/l of hydrogen peroxide. 


A-4.1.4.1 Reagents 
a) Sodium chloride, NaCl, crystallized, analytical 


grade; 
b) Hydrogen peroxide, H,O,, 100 to 110 volumes; 
c) Potassium permanganate, RMnO,, analytical 
grade; 


d) Sulphuric acid, H,SO,, analytical grade, 
density1.83 g/cms; 
e) De-ionized or distilled water; and 
f) Titration of hydrogen peroxide. 
A-4.1.4.2 Since hydrogen peroxide is not very stable, 
it is essential to check its titre before use. To do this: 


a) take 10 cm? of hydrogen peroxide using a pipette 
and dilute to 1 000 cm? (in a gauged flask) with 
de-ionized or distilled water, thus obtaining a 
hydrogen peroxide solution which will be called 
‘C’. Using a pipette, place in a conical flask; 

b) 10 cm? of hydrogen peroxide solution C; and 


c) 2 cm? approximately of sulphuric acid. 


A solution of permanganate at 1.859 g/l is used for the 
titration. The permanganate itself acts as an indicator. 


The reaction of the permanganate on the hydrogen 
peroxide in a sulfuric medium is expressed as: 


2 KMn0O,+ 5 H,O, + 3 H,SO,— — K,SO, + 2 MnSO,+ 
8 H20 + 50, 


Which gives the equivalence: 316 g RMnO, 
170 gH,O, 


Therefore 1 g of pure hydrogen peroxide reacts with 
1.859 g of potassium permanganate, hence the use of 
a 1.859 g/l solution of potassium permanganate, which 
saturates volume, | g/l of hydrogen peroxide. Since, the 
hydrogen peroxide was diluted 100 times to begin with, 
the 10 cm? of the test sample represents 0.1 cm? of the 
original hydrogen peroxide. 


Multiplying by ten the number of cubic centimetres 
of potassium permanganate solution used for titration, 
the titre T of the original hydrogen peroxide in g/l is 
obtained. 


Method for 10 litres Corrosive Solution Preparation: 


Dissolve 570 g of sodium chloride in de-ionized or 
distilled water to obtain a total volume of about 9 litre. 
Add the quantity of hydrogen peroxide calculated 
below. Mix and then make up the volume to 10 litres 
with de-ionized or distilled water. 


Calculate the volume of hydrogen peroxide to be put 
into the solution as follows: 


Quantity of hydrogen peroxide required 30 g. 


If the hydrogen peroxide contains ‘T g of 
H,O,/litre, the volume required, expressed in cm? will be 
100 x 30/T 


A-4.1.5 Etching Conditions 


The corrosive solution is placed in a crystallizer 
(or possibly a large beaker), itself placed in a water bath. 
The water bath is stirred with a magnetic stirrer and the 
temperature is regulated with a contact thermometer. 


The specimen is either suspended in the corrosive 
solution by a wire made of aluminium (or other inert 
material) or placed in a solution so that it rests only 
on the corners, the second method being preferable. 
The etching time is 6 h and the temperature fixed at 
30 + 1 °C. Care shall be taken to ensure the quantity of 
reagent is at least 10 cm? per cm" of specimen surface. 


After etching, the specimen is washed in water, 
immersed for about 30 s in 50 percent dilute nitric acid, 
washed again in water and dried using compressed air 
free of oil. A number of specimens may be etched at 
the same time provided that they are of the same type 
of alloy and that they are not in contact. The minimum 
quantity of reagent per unit of specimen surface area 
shall be adhered to. 


29 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-4.1.6 Preparation of Specimens for Examination 


Each specimen is placed vertically in a casting dish 
so that it rests on face a,-a,-a,-a,. The casting dish 
can be of external diameter 40 mm, height 27 mm, 
wall thickness 2.5 mm. Around it is poured a mixture 
of epoxy resin and hardener (or equivalent) in the 
appropriate proportion. The usual setting time is 
about 24 h. 


A certain amount of material is removed from face 
a,-a,-a,-a, preferably by lathe, so that the section 
a’-a’,-a’-a’, when examined under the microscope, 
cannot show corrosion from a,-a,a,-a,. The distance 
between faces a,-a,-a,-a, and a’-a’,-a’,-a’, that is the 
thickness removed by the lathe, shall be at least 2 mm 
(see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3) 


Alternatively, prepare a section by sawing through plane 
a’ -a’,-a’,-a’, (see Fig. 2) to remove a specimen between 
5 mm and 10 mm thick (that is such that the thickness 
from a,, to a, is between 5 mm and 10 mm). 


Mount this specimen in a thermosetting or 
thermoplastic mounting compound with face 
a’ -a’,-a’,-a’, exposed to allow mechanical polishing. 


The section for examination is polished mechanically 
with abrasive paper, a diamond compound and/or 
magnesia polishing compound. 


A-4.1.7 Micrographic Examination of Specimens 


The examination is intended to assess the degree of 
penetration of inter-crystallization corrosion into each 
of the two faces, which make up the outer and inner 
surfaces of the cylinder. 


The section is first examined at low magnification 
(for example X 40) in order to locate the most corroded 
areas, and then at a higher magnification, usually about 
X 300, in order to assess the nature and extent of the 
corrosion. 


A-4.1.8 Interpretation of Micrographic Examination 


a) For alloys with an equiaxed crystal structure the 
depth of corrosion shall not exceed the greater of 
the following two values: 


1) Three grains in the direction perpendicular to 
the face examined. 


2) 0.2 mm. 


But in no case shall the depth exceed 0.3 mm. 
However, it is permissible for these values to 
be exceeded locally provided that they are not 
exceeded in more than four fields of examination at 
X 300 magnification. 


b 


wm 


For alloys with a crystal structure oriented in 
one direction through cold working, the depth of 
corrosion into each of the two faces, which make 
up the internal and external surfaces of the cylinder, 
shall not exceed 0.1 mm. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


REY 


1) CASTING MOULD 
2) TEST PIECE 


3) EPOXY RESIN AND HARDENER 


Fic. 3 SPECIMEN IN CASTING DISH 


A-4.2 Tests for Assessing Susceptibility to Stress 
Corrosion 


A-4.2.1 Principle 


The method described below consists of the subjection 
to stress of rings cut from the cylindrical part of the 
cylinder, their immersion in brine for a specified 
period, followed by removal of the brine and exposure 
to the air for a longer period and repetition of this cycle 
for 30 days. If there are no cracks after the period of 
30 days, the alloy can be considered suitable for the 
manufacture of gas cylinders. 


A-4.2.2 Tests Specimens 


Six rings with a width of four times the actual wall 
thickness or 25 mm, whichever is the greater, are cut 
from the cylindrical part of the cylinder (see Fig. 4).The 
specimens shall have a 60° cut-out and be subjected 
to stress by means of a threaded bolt and two nuts 
(see Fig. 5). Neither inner nor outer surfaces of the 
specimens shall be machined. 


30 


A-4.2.3 Surface Preparation before Corrosion Test 


All traces of grease, oil and adhesive used with stress 
gauges shall be removed with a suitable solvent. 


A-4.2.4 Preparation of Corrosive Solution 


The brine is prepared by dissolving 3.5 parts + 0.1 parts 
(m/m) of sodium chloride in 96.5 parts (m/m) of water. 


The pH of the freshly prepare solution shall be in the 
range 6.4 to 7.2. The pH may be corrected only by using 
dilute hydrochloric acid or dilute sodium hydroxide. 


The solution shall not be topped up by adding the salt 
solution described, but only by adding distilled water 
up to the initial level in the vessel. Topping up maybe 
carried out daily if required. The solution shall be 
completely replaced every week. 


A-4.2.5 Applying Stress to Rings 


A-4.2.5.1 Three of the rings shall be compressed so that 
the outer surface is under tension. The other three rings 
shall be expanded so that the inner surface is under 
tension. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


a 
PTT TT 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 4 SPECIMEN RING LOCATION 


60° 60° 


a) STRESSED INTERNALLY a) STRESSED EXTERNALLY 


KEY 
1) THREADED BAR 
2) INSULATING BUSH 
3) NUT 


Fic. 5 STRESSED SPECIMENS 


31 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-4.2.5.2 The rings shall be stressed to a maximum as 
given by: 


RF 


where 
R,— guaranteed minimum yield stress in MPa; and 
F= design stress factor (variable). 


A-4.2.5.3 The actual stress may be measured by electric 
stress gauges. 


A-4.2.5.4 The diameter of the ring to achieve the 
required stress may be calculated using the following 
equation: 


D’=D-[[[R(-tY/4 Et) 


’= diameter of the ring when compressed 
(or expanded), in mm; 


D= outside diameter of the cylinder, in mm; 
t= cylinder wall thickness, in mm; 
E= modulus of elasticity in MPa = 70 000 MPa 
approximately; 
Z= correction factor (see Fig. 6); and 
R= (F. R), in MPa. 
A-4.2.5.5 It is essential for the nuts and bolts be 


electrically insulated from the rings and protected 
from corrosion by the solution. The six rings shall be 


completely immersed in the salt solution for 10 min. 
They are then removed from the solution and exposed 
to the air for 50 min. This cycle shall be repeated for 
30 days or until a ring break, whichever happens first. 
The specimens shall be visually inspected for any 
cracks. 


A-4.2.6 Interpretation of Results 


The alloys shall be considered acceptable for the 
manufacture of gas cylinder if none of the rings 
subjected to stress develops any cracks visible 
to the naked eye or visible at low-magnification 
(X 10 to X 30), at the end of the 30 day test period. 


A-4.2.1 Possible Metallographic Examination 


In the event of doubt about the presence of cracks 
(for example line of pitting), uncertainty may be 
removed by means of an additional metallographic 
examination of a section taken perpendicular to the 
axis of the rings in the suspect area. A comparison is 
made of the form (inter-or trans-crystalline) and depth 
of penetration the corrosion on the faces of the ring 
subjected to tensile and compressive stress. 


The alloys shall be considered accepted if the corrosion 
on each face of the ring is similar. If, however, the face 
of the ring under tension reveals inter-crystalline cracks 
which are clearly deeper than those in the face under 
compression, the ring shall be considered to have failed 
the test. 


1.00 


0.98 


0.96 


0.94 


0.92 


0.90 


0.88 


0.86 


50 60 70 80 90 
Dia 


FIG. 6 CORRECTION FACTOR Z PLOTTED AGAINST D/a 


A-5 SUSTAINED LOAD CRACKING (SLC) 
TESTS FOR ALUMINIUM 


A-5.1 Principle 


A fatigue pre-cracked specimen is loaded by a constant 
load or constant displacement method to stress intensity 
K app €qual to a defined value. The specimen is kept in the 
loaded condition for a specified time and temperature. 
After the test period, the specimen is examined to assess 


whether the initial fatigue crack did or did not grow. 
K 


IAPP 


y= 


applied elastic stress-intensity, in MPaVm; 


crack-mouth opening displacement 
(CMOD), in mm, defined as the mode 1 
(also called opening mode) component 
of crack displacement due to elastic and 
plastic deformation, measured at the 
location on a crack surface that has the 
greatest elastic displacement per unit load; 


average of measured yield stress of 
two specimens from the test cylinder 
representing the SLC test specimens 
location at room temperature, in MPa; 


notch radius; 


theoretical elastic stress concentration 
factor; 

apparent crack tip stress intensity factor 
calculated on the basis of the notch depth 
and applied load; 


bending moment; 
Poisson’s ratio; 
Sustained load cracking; and 


threshold stress intensity factor for 
susceptibility to stress corrosion cracking. 


Liners with nominal neck and shoulder wall thickness 
<7 mm are exempt from the sustained load cracking 
tests. The inspector shall ensure that the neck/shoulder 
wall thickness of the actual cylinders reasonably 
represents the quoted nominal figure. Figure 7 illustrates 
the neck and shoulder thickness. 


A-5.2 Specimen Configurations and Number of Tests 


A-5.2.1 Any one or a combination of specimen 
geometries of the following listed specimens shall be 
used for the tests: 

a) Compact tension test (CTS) specimen, see Fig. 8; 


b) Double cantilever beam (DCB) 
see Fig. 9; 


specimen, 


c) T-type wedge opening loaded (T-WOL) specimen, 
see Fig. 10; and 
d) C shaped specimen, see Fig. 11 


A-5.2.2 Specimen orientation shall be Y-X or Y-Z as 
shown in Fig. 12. 


33 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-5.2.3 At least three specimens from the cylinder wall 
and if possible three specimens from the shoulder and 
three from the neck shall be tested. At each location, 
three specimens shall be taken as close to each other 
as possible. One specimen from each location shall be 
used for SLC testing and two from each location for 
tensile testing. 


A-5.2.4 Flattening of specimen blanks is not allowed. 


A-5.2.5 If test specimen thickness cannot be obtained 
from the specified location or locations to meet the 
validity requirements given below, then the thickest 
possible specimen shall be tested. The specimen 
shall be taken when the mechanical properties have 
been fully developed in the cylinder but before any 
external machining of the neck/shoulder area. Validity 
requirement for the specimen is given as: 


A, B, By (W— a) = 1.27 (Kape Ra) * 1000 


The notations are as indicated in the specimen sketches 
given Fig. 8 to Fig. 11. B, refers the reduced thickness 
at side groove (minimum side-side dimension between 
the notches in side grooved specimens). 


A-5.2.6 When it is impossible to obtain full size tensile 
specimens, small size specimens are permitted for 
determination of yield stress. 


A-5.3 Fatigue Pre-cracking 


A-5.3.1 The machine used for fatigue cracking shall 
have a means of loading such that the stress distribution 
is symmetrical about the notch and the applied load 
shall be known to an accuracy of + 2.5 percent. 


A-5.3.2 The environmental conditions apparent during 
fatigue pre-cracking, as well as the stressing conditions, 
can influence the subsequent behaviour of the specimen 
during stress corrosion testing. In some materials, the 
introduction of the stress corrosion test environment 
during the pre-cracking operation will promote a change 
from the normal ductile trans-granular mode of fatigue 
cracking to one that more closely resembles stress 
corrosion cracking. This may facilitate the subsequent 
initiation of stress corrosion cracking and lead to the 
determination of conservation initiation values of K scc- 
However, unless facilities are available to commence 
stress corrosion testing immediately following the 
pre-cracking operation, corrodent remaining at the 
crack top may promote blunting due to corrosive 
attack. Furthermore, the reproducibility of results may 
suffer when pre-cracking is conducted in the presence 
of an aggressive environment because of the greater 
sensitivity of the corrosion fatigue fracture mode to the 
cyclic loading conditions. In addition, more elaborate 
facilities may be needed for environmental control 
purposes during pre-cracking. For these reasons, it is 
recommended that, unless agreed otherwise between 
the parties, fatigue pre-cracking shall be conducted in 
the normal laboratory air environment. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


REY 


1) NOMINAL NECK THICKNESS 
2) NOMINAL SHOULDER THICKNESS 


NOTE :- 
a-b, c-d, e-f AND g-h ARE TANGENTS INITIATING AT 
INTERSECTING SURFACES 


Fic. 7 ILLUSTRATION OF NECK AND SHOULDER THICKNESS 


34 


IS 15935 : 2021 


a 
' // 0.2% B |A 
e—a 
co 
i i E 
2 ad 
o © 
+ o Ra 0.4 
I È 
i I 
i i 
< 3s 
= 2 Ra 0.4 
I É 
ae ee | A 
0, 
W 40.49 _ 70.4% H JR a B+0.8% 104% H 
C K 
p | A-A 
A 
Net width =W 
Total width, C = 1.25 W min. 
Thickness, B =0.5W 
Half height, H =0.6W 
Hole diameter, D =0.25 W 
Half distance between =1.6D 
hole outer edges ,F 
Notch width, N = 0.065 VV max. 
Effective notch, length, £ = 0.25 VV TO 0.40 VV 
Effective crack, length, a = 0.45 W TO 0.55 W 


A 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 8 PROPORTIONAL DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES FOR COMPACT TENSILE TEST PIECE 


35 


IS 15935 : 2021 


B 40.804 l A 


H 40.4% Ra 0.8 


SCREW TIP 
RADIUS 12.5 TO 50 


Half height =H 
Thickness, B = 2H 

Net width, W =10 H min. 
Total width, C =W+d 
Screw diameter, d =0.75 H min. 
Notch width, N = 0.14 H max. 
Effective notch, length, £ =2H 


Note :- 


1) "A" surfaces should be perpendicular and parallel as aplicable to within 0.002 h TIR 

2) At each side point "b" should be equidistant from the top to bottom surface to within 0.001 h 

3) The bolt centreline should be normal to the specimen centreline to within 1° 

4) The bolt material should be similar to that of the specimen, fine threaded with a square or allen - screw head 
5) Surface roughness values in microns 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 9 PROPORTIONAL DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES FOR DOUBLE CANTILEVER BEAM TEST PIECES 


36 


IS 15935 : 2021 


B 20.890 


R0.05 +0.025 


Ei 


Ra 0.8 / a ALL OVER 


Thickness =B 

Net width, W =2.55B 

Total width, C =3.20B 

Half height, H =1.24B 

Hole diameter, D =0.718B+0.003B 
Effective notch, Length, £ =0.77B 

Notch width, N = 0.06 B 

Thread diameter, T =0.625B 

Distance from hole centreline to = 0.239 B 


notch centreline, F 
Notes :- 
1) Surface should be perpendicular and parrallel as applicable to within 0.002 H TIR 


2) The bolt centreline should be normal to the specimen centreline to within 1° 


3) The bolt material should be similar to that of the specimen, fine-threaded with a square or allen scew head 
4) Surface roughness values in microns 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 10 PROPORTIONAL DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCE FOR MODIFIED 
WEDGE OPENING LOADED TEST PIECES 


37 


IS 15935 : 2021 


Note 


Ra 0.4 


A-A 
A 

Net vvidth =W 
Thickness, B = 0.5 W 0.01 VV 
Distance from hole axes to tangent = 0.50 W 0.005 W 
with the inner surface, X Notch width, N = 1.5 min. (0.1 W max.) 
Notch length, £ =0.3W 
Distance from the hole axes to face of the specimen, Z = 0.25 W +0.01 W 
Distance from the hole axes to outer surface,T = 0.25 W 0.01 W 
Diameter of holes, D = 0.25 W 0.005 W 


1) All surface should be perpendicular and parrallel as applicable to within 0.002 W TIR 


and "E" surfaces should be perpendicular to "Y" surfaces to within 0.02 W TIR 


2) Surface roughness values in microns 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 11 PROPORTIONAL DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES FOR C-SHAPED TEST PIECES 


38 


key 


1) Neck specimen Y - Z 3) Shoulder specimen Y - Z 
2) Neck specimen Y - X 4) Cylinder wall specimen Y - X 


Note :- 
1) Specimen should be taken as close as possible to neck. 
2) Notch direction shall be toward the neck, as shown 


Fic. 12 ORIENTATION OF NECK, SHOULDER AND CYLINDER WALL SPECIMENS 


39 


IS 15935 : 2021 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-5.3.3 The specimens shall be pre-cracked by fatigue 
loading with an R value in the range 0 to 0.1 until the 
crack extends at least 2.5 percent W or 1.25 mm beyond 
the notch at the side surfaces, whichever is greater. 


A-5.3.4 The final length of the fatigue crack shall be 
such that the requirement for plane strain predominance 
is satisfied by the following equation: 


a> 1.27 (Kigpp/Rygc)? x 1000 


TAPP 


A-5.4 Specimen Testing Procedure 


A-5.4.1 Before testing, the thickness B and either width 
W or half-height H [in the case of (W—a) in different 
specimens] shall be measured to within 0.1 percent 
W (or H) from the crack plane. 


A-5.4.2 Load the fatigue pre-cracked specimens to a 
stress-intensity KIAPP determined from the following 
equation: 


Equip = 0.056 Rose 


Specimens shall be loaded by a suitable constant 
displacement or constant load method. 


A-5.4.3 For specimens loaded by a constant 
displacement method, the loading shall be either the 
non-monitored load method or the monitored load 
method and shall meet the following requirements. 

a) For non-monitored load method: 

1) Record the crack mouth opening displacement 
(CMOD) at the end of the test, before 
unloading; 

2) Unload the specimen; and 

3) Reload the specimen up to the measured CMOD 
in a device suitable for load measurement, 
Record the load and use this load in the K 


TAPP 
calculations. This calculated K,,,, shall be 


equal to or greater than the calculated K, 
value from A-5.4.2. 
b) For monitored load method: 
1) The final load at the end of the test period shall 
be applied in the K,,,,,calculations; and 
2) This calculated KIAPP shall be equal to or 


greater than the calculated KIAPP value from 
A-5.4.2. 


APP 


A-5.4.4 Testing Using the Constant Displacement 
Method 


a) For testing of compact tension specimen (CTS) 
specimens at a constant displacement loading, use 
the following equations to determine V: 


E Kipp (vw) 
(0.032)(£)(.f (x))( BIB, ) 


40 


i 2.24(1.72-0.9x+x")(VI-x) 


(9.85-0.17x +1 1x?) 


x 


x =a/w 


b) For testing of C-shaped specimens at a constant 
displacement loading, use the following equations: 


For specimens with X/W = 0 
P, =(2+a/w)/(l-a/w) ; 
Q, = 0.399 +12.63 (a / w)—9.838(a/w) +4.66(a/w) 


(Kure (VW )(R) [0.43 (1-7/2 +O.) ] 


ds (0.032)(E)(Y) 


For specimens with X/W = 0.5 


— (Kure (VW )(P)[0.45(1-7 175 +2) ] 
(0.032)(£)(Y) 


where 


Y = [18.23 V(a/W) — 106.2 V(a2/W) + 397.7 V(a5/W) 
— 582.0 — V(a2/W) 369.1 V(a2/W)] x [141.54 (XIW) + 
0.5 (a/W)] [1 + 0.22 (1 -V(a/W) (1-1 /r,)] 


P,=(1+a/W)(1 — a/WY 


Q, = 0.542 + 13.137 (a/W) — 12.316 (a/W)? + 6.576 
(a/W) 


P, (2 + a/W)(1 —a/Wy 
Q, = 0.399 + 12.63 (a/W) — 9.838 (a/W)?+ 4.66 (a/W) 


c) The stress intensity factor equations for DC Band 
T-WOL specimens are: 


The stress intensity factor equations for double 
cantilever beam specimen (DCB). 


p -E Vu HBH (a+0.6H} +H° 


4| (a+0.6H} 4 Ha] 


The stress intensity factor equations for wedge opening 
loaded specimen (WOL). 


where 


IS 15935 : 2021 


2 3 4 5 
Y 23096) — |-195.8| & | 47306) £ +ases( £) +rsas( £) 
W wW W wW W 


advances by at least one millimeter. After fatigue 
cracking, break open the specimen. 


A-5.4.5 Testing Using the Constant Loading Method 


a) For testing DCB specimens at a constant load (P), 
the following equation shall be used: 


RIAPP = (Pa/BH3/2) x (3.46 + 2.38 H/a) 


The above equation shall satisfy the following validity 
requirements. 


2<a/H< 10 


W/a+2H 


b) For testing of CTS, T-WOL and C shaped 
specimens at a constant load, the stress intensity 
factor equations given in the previous section 
(see 5.4.4) shall be used. 


A-5.4.6 The loaded specimens shall be tested for 
90 days at room temperature. 


A.5.4.7 If the additional test referred to in A-5.5.4 is 
required then repeat the entire procedure using only 
constant load conditions for a period of 180 days at 
room temperature. 


A-5.5 Crack Growth Examination 


A-5.5.1 After the specified test period, unload the 
specimen, fatigue the specimen at maximum stress 
intensity not exceeding 0.6 KIAPP till the crack. 


A-5.5.2 Measure the distance between the two pre 
and post-fatigue cracks using a scanning electron 
microscope (SEM). Measurements shall be taken 
perpendicular to the pre- and post-fatigue cracks at 
25 percent B, 50 percent B and 75 percent B locations. 
Calculate the average of these three values. 


A-5.5.3 If the average measured distance between 
the two fatigues cracks does not exceed 0.16 mm, the 
specimen passes the test. If all the specimens pass, the 
alloy is qualified. 


A-5.5.4 If the average measured values exceed 
0.16 mm, the alloy may be qualified if, when subjected 
to the test described in A-5.4.3, the average measured 
distance between the two fatigue cracks does not 
exceed 0.3 mm. A-5.5.1 and A-5.5.2 shall also apply. 


A-5.6 Interpretation of Results 


If the test specimen exhibits less than or equal to a 
specified amount of crack growth, then the material is 
characterized as suitable for gas cylinders with respect 


41 


to the sustained-load-cracking resistance requirement. 
Following the initial qualification for resistance to 
sustained-load-cracking, this procedure shall only be 
repeated, ifit applies any one of the following conditions: 


a) It is manufactured in a different factory; or 
b) It is manufactured by a different process such as: 


1) 


Cold or hot extrusion, from cast or extruded or 
rolled billet; 


Cold or hot extrusion followed by cold drawing 
from cast or extruded or rolled billet; 


2) 


3 


— 


Cupping, flow forming, spinning and cold 
drawing sheet or plate; and 

4) Open necking at both ends of an extruded or 
cold drawn tube. 


It is manufactured from an alloy of different 
composition limits from that used in the original 
prototype tests; and 


c 


— 


d 


— 


It is given a different heat treatment that is outside 
the temperature range of 20 °C and/or for times 
shorter than those used for the original type 
approval less 10 percent. 


A-5.7 Cylinder Thickness Qualification 


If the specimen validity requirements are not met, then 
the material is suitable up to a maximum thickness 
of the cylinder location from where the specimens 
were taken provided the specimens meet the other 
requirements of this test method. The material is suitable 
for all thicknesses if the specimens meet the validity 
requirements and the other requirements of this test 
method. 


A-6 LEAK-BEFORE-BREAK (LBB) TEST 


Three finished cylinders shall be pressure cycled 
between 20 bar and 300 bar at a rate not to exceed 
10 cycles per minute in accordance with A-12. 
All cylinders shall either fail by leakage or exceed 
45 000 pressure cycles. 


A-7 EXTREME TEMPERATURE PRESSURE 
CYCLING 


A-7.1 Finished cylinders, with the composite wrapping 
free of any protective coating, shall be cycle tested, as 
follows: 


a) Condition for 48 h at zero pressure, 65 °C or higher 
and 95 percent or greater relative humidity. The 
intent of this requirement shall be deemed met by 
spraying with a fine spray or mist of water in a 
chamber held at 65 °C; 


IS 15935 : 2021 


b) Hydrostatically pressurize for 500 cycles 
multiplied by the specified service life in year 
between 20 bar and 260 bar at 65 °C or higher, 
and 95 percent or greater relative humidity; 
Condition the cylinder and fluid at —40 °C or 
lower as measured in the fluid and on the cylinder 
surface; and 


c 


wa 


d) Pressurize from 20 bar to 200 bar for 
500 cycles multiplied by the specified service life 
in years at —40 °C or lower. Adequate recording 
instrumentation shall be provided to ensure the 
minimum temperature of the fluid is maintained 


during the low temperature cycling. 


WwW 


A-7.2 The pressure cycling rate of (b) shall not exceed 
shall not exceed 3 cycles per minute unless a pressure 
transducer is installed directly within the cylinder. 


A-7.3 During this pressure cycling, the cylinder 
shall show no evidence of rupture, leakage or fibre 
unravelling. 


A-7.4 Following pressure cycling at extreme 
temperatures, cylinder shall be hydrostatically 
pressured to failure in accordance with A-11, and 
achieve a minimum burst pressure of 85 percent of the 
minimum design burst pressure. For non-metal lined 
full wrapped designs, prior to the hydrostatic burst test, 
the cylinder shall be leak tested in accordance with 
A-9. 


A-8 BRINELL HARDNESS TEST 


Hardness test shall be carried out on the parallel wall 
of each liner in accordance with IS 1500 (Part 1) at the 
rate of one test per metre length of parallel wall. The 
test shall be carried out after the final heat treatment 
and the hardness values thus determined shall be in the 
range specified for the design. 


A-9 LEAK TEST FOR NON-METAL-LINED 
FULL WRAPPED CYLINDERS 


A-9.1 Non-metal-lined full wrapped designs 
shall be leak tested using the following procedure 
(or an alternative acceptable to the inspector): 
a) Thoroughly dry the cylinders; and 
b) Pressurize the cylinders to working pressure with 
dry air or nitrogen containing a detectable gas 
such as helium. 


A-9.2 Any leakage detected shall be cause for rejection. 


NOTE — Leakage is the release of gas through a crack, pore, 
un-bond or similar defect. 


A-9.3 Permeation through the wall in compliance with 
A-20 is not considered to be leakage. 


42 


A-10 HYDRAULIC TEST 


Any internal pressure applied after Autofrettage and 
prior to the hydrostatic test shall not exceed 90 percent 
of the hydrostatic test pressure. One of the following 
two options shall be used. 


A-10.1 Volumetric Expansion Test 


a) The cylinder shall be hydrostatically tested to at 
least 1.5 times working pressure. In no case shall 
the test pressure exceed the Autofrettage pressure. 


b) Pressure shall be maintained for 30 s and 
sufficiently longer to ensure complete expansion. 
Any internal pressure applied after Autofrettage 
and prior to the hydrostatic test shall not exceed 
90 percent of the hydrostatic test pressure. If the 
test pressure cannot be maintained due to failure 
of the test apparatus, it is permissible to repeat the 
test at a pressure increased by 7 bar. No more than 
2 such repeat tests are permitted. 


we 


c 


wa 


Any cylinders not meeting the defined rejection 
limit shall be rejected and rendered unserviceable. 


A-10.2 Proof Pressure Test 


The hydrostatic pressure in the cylinder shall be 
increased gradually and regularly until the test pressure, 
at least 1.5 times working pressure is reached. The 
cylinder test pressure shall be maintained for at least 
30 s to establish that there are no leaks. 


A-11 
TEST 


HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE BURST 


The rate of pressurization shall not exceed 14 bar/s 
at pressures in excess of 80 percent of the design 
burst pressure. The rate of pressurization at pressures 
in excess of 80 percent of the design burst pressure 
exceeds 3.5 bar/s, then either the cylinder shall be 
placed schematically between the pressure source and 
the pressure measurement device, or there shall be a 
5s hold at the minimum design burst pressure. 


The minimum required (calculated) burst pressure shall 
be at least 450 bar, and in no case less than the value 
necessary to meet the stress ratio requirements. Actual 
burst pressure shall be recorded. Rupture may occur in 
either the cylindrical region or the dome region of the 
cylinder. 


A-12 AMBIENT TEMPERATURE PRESSURE 
CYCLING TEST 


Pressure cycling shall be performed in accordance with 
the following procedure: 


a) Fill the cylinder to be tested with a noncorrosive 
fluid such as oil, inhibited water or glycol; and 


b) Cycle the pressure in the cylinder between 20 bar 
and 260 bar at a rate not exceeding 10 cycles per 
minute. 


The number of cycles to failure shall be reported, 
along with the location and description of the failure 
initiation. 


A-13 ACID ENVIRONMENT TEST 


A-13.1 Cylinder Set-up and Preparation 


One cylinder shall be tested, including coating if 
applicable. 


The upper section of the cylinder shall be divided 
into 5 distinct areas and marked for pendulum impact 
preconditioning and fluid exposure (see Fig. 13). The 
areas shall be nominally 100 mm in diameter. While 
convenient for testing, the areas need not be oriented 
along a single line, but shall not overlap. 


Although preconditioning and fluid exposure is 
performed on the cylindrical portion of the cylinder, all 
of the cylinder, including the domed sections, shall be 
as resistant to the exposure environments as the tested 
areas. 


A-13.2 Pendulum Impact Preconditioning 


The impact body shall be of steel and have the shape 
of a pyramid with equilateral triangle faces and a 
square base, the summit and the edges being rounded 
to a radius of 3 mm. The centre of percussion of the 
pendulum shall coincide with the centre of gravity of 
the pyramid. Its distance from the axis of rotation of the 
pendulum shall be | m. The total mass of the pendulum 
shall be such that the impact energy of the pendulum at 
the moment of impact is not less than 30 Nm and is as 
close to that value as possible. 


During pendulum impact, the cylinder shall be held in 
position by the end bosses or by the intended mounting 
brackets. Each of the five areas identified in Fig. 13 
shall be preconditioned by impact of the pendulum 
body summit at the centre of the area. The cylinder 
shall be un-pressurized during preconditioning. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-13.3 Environmental Fluids for Exposure 


Each marked area is to be exposed to one of five 
solutions. The five solutions are: 


a) Sulfuric Acid — 19 percent solution by volume, in 
water; 


b) Sodium Hydroxide — 25 percent solution by 
weight, in water; 

c) 5 percent Methanol/05 Percent Gasoline — 
Gasoline concentration of M5 fuel meeting the 
requirements of ASTM D4814; 


d) Ammonium Nitrate — 28 percent by weight, in 
water; and 


e) Windshield washer fluid (50 percent by volume 
solution of methyl alcohol and water). 


When exposed, the test sample shall be oriented with 
the exposure area uppermost. A pad of glass wool 
approximately 0.5 mm thick and between 90 and 
100 mm in diameter shall be placed on the exposure 
area. Apply an amount of the test fluid to the glass wool 
sufficient to ensure that the pad is wetted evenly across 
its surface and through its thickness for the duration 
of the test, and to ensure that the concentration of the 
fluid is not changed significantly during the duration 
of the test. 


A-13.4 Pressure Cycle and Pressure Hold 


The cylinder shall be hydraulically pressure cycled 
between less than or equal to 20 bar and 260 bar for a 
total of 3 000 cycles. The maximum pressurization rate 
shall be 27.5 bar per second. After pressure cycling, 
the cylinder shall be pressurized to 260 bar and held at 
that pressure a minimum of 24 h and until the elapsed 
exposure time (pressure cycling and pressure hold) to 
the environmental fluids equals 48 h. 


A -13.5 Acceptable Result 


The cylinder shall be burst tested in accordance with 
A-12, except that the burst pressure shall be no less 
than 1.8 times the working pressure. 


Ey “Gy Xa QV QV 


Fic.13 CYLINDER ORIENTATION AND LAYOUT OF EXPOSURE AREAS 


43 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-14 BONFIRE TEST 
A-14.1 General 


The bonfire test is designed to demonstrate that 
finished cylinders, complete vvith the fire protection 
system (cylinder valve, pressure relief devices 
and/or integral thermal insulation) specified in the 
design, will prevent the rupture of the cylinder when 
tested under the specified fire conditions. Precautions 
shall be taken during fire testing in the event that 
cylinder rupture occurs. Provision shall be made to 
abandon the test any time during the test progress by 
providing a remotely placed bypass valve to release 
the pressure in the cylinder It should be ensured that 
if excess flow check valve is part of the valve, it is 
removed to make the bypass line operate without any 
obstruction. 


A-14.2 Cylinder Set-up 


The cylinder shall be placed horizontally with the 
cylinder bottom approximately 100 mm above the fire 
source. 


Metallic shielding shall be used to prevent direct 
flame impingement on cylinder valves, fittings, and/or 
pressure relief devices. The metallic shielding shall not 
be in direct contact with the specified fire protection 
system (pressure relief device or cylinder valve). 


Any failure during the test of a valve, fitting or tubing 
that is not part of the intended protection system for the 
design shall invalidate the result. 


A-14.3 Fire Source 


A uniform fire source of 1.65 m length shall provide 
direct flame impingement on the cylinder surface 
across its entire diameter. 


Any fuel may be used for the fire source provided 
it supplies uniform heat sufficient to maintain the 
specified test temperatures until the cylinder is vented. 
The selection of a fuel should take into consideration 
air pollution concerns. The arrangement of the fire shall 
be recorded in sufficient detail to ensure that the rate of 
heat input to the cylinder is reproducible. 


Any failure or inconsistency of the fire source during a 
test shall invalidate the result. 


A-14.4 Temperature and Pressure Measurements 


Surface temperature shall be monitored by the least 
three thermocouples located along the bottom of the 
cylinder and spaced not more than 0.75 m apart. 


Metallic shielding shall be used to prevent direct flame 
impingement on the thermocouples. Alternatively, 
thermocouples may be inserted into blocks of metal 
measuring less than 25 mm’. 


44 


Thermocouple temperature and the cylinder pressure 
shall be recorded at intervals of every 30 s or less 
during the test. 


A-14.5 General Test Requirements 


A-14.5.1 The cylinder shall be pressurized to working 
pressure with natural gas or compressed air and tested 
in the horizontal position at working pressure and 
also at 25 percent of working pressure if a thermally 
activated PRD is not used. 


NOTE — In case thermally activated PRD is not used, total 
2 cylinders shall be subjected to bonfire test. 


A-14.5.2 Immediately following ignition, the fire 
shall produce flame impingement on the surface of the 
cylinder along the 1.65 m length of the fire source and 
across the cylinder diameter. 


A-14.5.3 Within 5 min of ignition, the temperature in 
at least one thermocouple shall indicate a temperature 
> 590°C. This minimum temperature shall be 
maintained for the remainder of the test. 


A-14.5.4 If the temperature of 590 °C is not reached 
within 5 min but the cylinder vents within 5 min and 
the condition of A-14.6 is fulfilled, the test shall be 
considered as acceptable. 


A-14.5.5 For cylinders of length 1.65 m or less, the 
centre of the cylinder shall be positioned over the 
centre of the fire source. 


A-14.5.6 For cylinders of length greater than 1.65 m, 
the cylinder shall be positioned as follows: 


a) Ifthe cylinder is fitted with a pressure relief device 
at one end, the fire source shall commence at the 
opposite end of the cylinder; 


b 


wm 


If the cylinder is fitted with a pressure relief device 
at both ends, or at more than one location along 
the length of the cylinder, the centre of the fire 
source shall be centered midway between the 
pressure relief devices that are separated by the 
greatest horizontal distance; and 


c 


wm 


If the cylinder is additionally protected using 
thermal insulation, then two fire tests at service 
pressure shall be performed, one with the fire 
centered midway along the cylinder length, and 
the other the fire commencing at one of the ends 
of a second cylinder. 


A-14.6 Acceptable Results 


The cylinder shall vent through a pressure relief device. 


A-15 PENETRATION TEST 


A cylinder pressurized to 200 + 10 bar with compressed 
as shall be penetrated by an armour piercing bullet 
with a diameter of 7.62 mm or greater. The bullet 


shall completely penetrate at least one side vvall of 
the cylinder. The projectile shall impact the sidevvall 
at an approximate angle of 452. The cylinder shall not 
rupture. 


A-16 COMPOSITE FLAW TOLERANCE 
TESTS 


One finished cylinder, complete with protective 
coating, shall have flaws cut into the composite in the 
longitudinal direction. The flaws shall be greater than 
visual inspection limits as specified by the manufacturer. 
As a minimum, one flaw shall be 25 mm long and 
1.25 mm in depth and another flaw shall be 200 mm 
long and 0.75 mm in depth, cut in the longitudinal 
direction into the cylinder side wall. 


The flawed cylinder shall then be pressure cycled 
between 20 bar and 260 bar at ambient temperature, 
initially for the design lifetime in years x 1 000 cycles. 


The cylinder shall not leak or rupture within the first 
3 000 cycles, but may fail by leakage during the 
further design lifetime in years x 1 000 cycles (less the 
3 000 cycles already performed). All cylinders which 
complete this test shall be destroyed. 


A-17 HIGH TEMPERATURE CREEP TEST 


This test is required for designs in which the glass 
transition temperature of the resin matrix does not 
exceed 102 °C. One finished cylinder shall be tested 
as follows: 


a) The cylinder shall be pressurized to 260 bar and 
held at a temperature of 100 °C for not less than 
200 h; and 


b) Following the test, the cylinder shall meet the 
requirements of the hydrostatic expansion test 
(see A-10), the leak test (see A-9) and the 
hydrostatic pressure burst test (see A-11). 


A-18 ACCELERATED STRESS RUPTURE 
TEST 


One cylinder shall be hydrostatically pressurized to 
260 bar at 65 °C. The cylinder shall be held at this 
pressure and temperature for 1000 h. The cylinder 
shall then be pressured to burst in accordance with 
the procedure described in A-12, except that the burst 
pressure shall exceed 85 percent of the minimum 
design burst pressure. 


A-19 IMPACT DAMAGE TEST (DROP TEST) 


One or more finished cylinders shall be drop tested at 
ambient temperature without internal pressurization or 
attached valves. The surface on to which the cylinders 
are dropped shall be a smooth, horizontal concrete 
pad or flooring. One cylinder shall be dropped in a 


45 


IS 15935 : 2021 


horizontal position with the bottom 1.8 m above the 
surface on to which it is dropped. One cylinder shall 
be dropped vertically on each end at a sufficient height 
above the floor or pad so that the potential energy is 
488 J, but in on case shall the height of the lower end 
be greater than 1.8 m. One cylinder shall be dropped at 
a 45° angle on to a dome, from a height such that the 
center of gravity is at 1.8 m; however, if the lower end 
is closer to the ground than 0.6 m, the drop angle shall 
be changed to maintain a minimum height of 0.6 m and 
a center of gravity of 1.8 m. 


The cylinder shall be allowed to bounce on the concrete 
pad or flooring after the initial impact. No attempt shall 
be made to prevent this secondary impacting, but the 
cylinder may be prevented from toppling during the 
vertical drop tests. 


Following the drop impact, the cylinders shall then be 
pressure cycled between 20 bar and 260 bar at ambient 
temperature for the design lifetime in years x 1 000 
cycles. 


The cylinder shall not leak or rupture within the first 
3 000 cycles, but may fail by leakage during the further 
design lifetime in years x 1 000 (less the 3 000 cycles 
already performed). All cylinders which complete this 
test shall be destroyed. 


A-20 PERMEATION TEST 


This test is required only for non-metal lined full 
wrapped cylinders. One finished cylinder shall be 
filled with compressed nature gas to working pressure, 
placed in an enclosed sealed chamber at ambient 
temperature, and monitored for leakage for 500 h. The 
permeation rate shall be less than 0.25 ml of natural 
gas per hour per litre water capacity of the cylinder. 
Examples of leakage measurement techniques include 
gas chromatography, mass spectrometry and weight 
loss. 


A-21 TENSILE PROPERTIES OF PLASTICS 


The tensile yield strength and ultimate elongation of 
plastic liner material shall be determined at —50 °C. For 
the determination of tensile properties of plastics, the 
general testing principles given in Section 1 and 2 of 
IS 13360 (Part 5) may be referred. The test results shall 
demonstrate the ductile properties of the plastic liner 
material at temperatures of —50 °C or lower by meeting 
the values specified by the manufacturer. 


A-22 SOFTENING TEMPERATURE OF 
PLASTICS 


Polymeric materials from finished liners shall 
be tested in accordance with a method described in 
IS 13360 (Part 6/Sec 1). The softening temperature 
shall be at least 100 °C. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-23 BOSS TORQUE TEST 


The body of the cylinder shall be restrained against 
rotation and a torque of twice the valve or PRD 
installation torque specified by the manufacturer shall 
be applied to each end boss of the cylinder. The torque 
shall be applied first in the direction of tightening 
at threaded connection, then in the un-tightening 
direction and finally again in the tightening direction. 
The cylinder shall then be subjected to a leak test in 
accordance with A-9. 


A-24 COATING BATCH TESTS 


A-24.1 Coating Thickness 


The thickness of the coating shall be measured in 
accordance with IS 101 (Part 3/Sec 2) and shall meet 
the requirements of the design. 


A-24.2 Coating Adhesion 


The coating adhesion strength shall be measured in 
accordance with ASTM3359, using Method A or B 
as appropriate, and shall have a minimum rating of 
4 when measured using either test Method A or B, as 
appropriate. 


A-25 RESIN SHEAR STRENGTH 


Resin material shall be tested on a sample coupon 
representative of the composite overwrap in accordance 
with the procedure given in this clause. Following 
24 h boiling in water the composite shall have minimum 
shear strength of 13.8 MPa. 


A-25.1 Principle 


A bar of rectangular cross-section is loaded as a simple 
beam in flexure so that inter laminar shear failure 
occurs. The bar rests on two supports and the load 
is applied by means of a loading member midway 
between the supports. 


The result obtained is not an absolute value. For this 
reason the term ‘apparent inter-laminar shear strength’ 
is used to define the quantity measured. Test results 
from different-sized specimens, or from specimens 
tested under different conditions, are not directly 
comparable. 


A-25.2 Test Specimens 
A-25.2.1 Standard Test Specimens 


Test specimens shall comprise rectangular bars of 
uniform thickness: 


Thickness (4) :2+0.2 mm 
Overall length (I) 20+ 1mm 
Width (b) 10+0.2 mm 


46 


A-25.2.2 Other Test Specimens 


A-25.2.2.1 When it is not desirable to use the standard 
specimen, the following rules shall be observed: 


a) The length and the thickness of the test specimen 
shall be in the same ratio as in the standard 
specimen, that is, length (/) = 10 A. 

b) The width shall be chosen in the same ratio to 


the thickness as in the standard specimen, that is, 
width (b) — 5 A. 


A-25.2.2.2 Depending upon the material being tested, 
specimens of 2 mm thickness may fail by shear or 
experience compression failure under load or exhibit 
extreme deflection without shear failure. As specimen 
thickness (height) is increased, the probability of 
compression failure under the load increases and 
the probability of extreme deflection with no failure 
decrease. As specimen thickness is decreased, the 
reverse is true. It is important to select a specimen 
thickness that will cause specimens to fail by horizontal 
shear. 


A-25.3 Test Set-up 


The width of the loading member and the supports shall 
be greater than the test specimen width (see Fig. 14). The 
loading member shall apply the load mid-way between 
the supports. The span (distance between the supports) 
shall be adjustable. The load indicator shall be such that 
the error in the indicated loads is less than 61 percent 
of full scale. The radius of the loading member r, shall 
be 5 + 0.2 mm and that of the supports r, shall be 
20.2 mm. 

NOTE — Measure at the mid-point of each test specimen, 

the width b and the thickness / of the specimen to the nearest 

0.02 mm using a micrometer or an equivalent. 


A-25.4 Preparation of Specimens 


Machine the test specimens from a moulded blank or 
sheet. The specimens shall be flat and free of twist. 
The surfaces and edges shall be free from defects. 
The thickness along the whole length shall be within 
+5 percent of the mean thickness. The width of 
individual specimens shall be constant to within 
0.2 mm. Specimens showing measurable or observable 
departure from one or more of these requirements shall 
be rejected or machined to the required size and shape 
before testing. 


A-25.5 Number of Test Specimens 


At least five test specimens shall be tested. When the 
fiber orientation and distribution in the material to be 
tested does not differ significantly between the two 
principal directions, shear specimens shall be taken in 
each of these two directions. When the material has a 
preferred orientation, the specimens shall be taken in 
this direction (see Fig. 15). 


IS 15935 : 2021 


LOADING MEMBER 
SPECIMEN r1 


Ei 


r2 I r2 SUPPORT 


Fic. 14 LOADING CONFIGURATION 


5 ————————— 


WIDTH DIRECTION OF PRODUCT 


£ 


Fic. 15 LOCATIONS OF SPECIMEN 


47 


IS 15935 : 2021 


A-25.6 Procedure 


Set the span L to 5 h + 0.3 mm, where h is the mean 
thickness of the set of specimens. For some materials, a 
shorter span may be necessary to produce inter-laminar 
shear failure. Place the test specimen symmetrically 
across the two parallel supports with an un-machined 
surface in contact with the supports direction 
(see Fig. 16). 


A-26 VALVE TORQUE TEST 


A-26.1 The body of the cylinder shall be held to 
prevent it rotating. The cylinder shall be fitted with a 
corresponding valve and tightened to 150 percent of the 
maximum torque as recommended by the manufacturer. 
The parameters that shall be monitored and recorded 
are: 

a) type of valve material; 

b) valuing procedure; and 


c) applied torque. 


A-26.2 The cylinder neck or boss and threads shall 
remain within drawing and gauge tolerance. 


48 


A-27 NATURAL GAS CYCLING TEST 


A-27.1 Special consideration shall be given to safety 
when conducting this test. Prior to conducting this test, 
cylinders of this design shall have successfully passed 
the test requirements of A-9 (leak test), A-11 (hydrostatic 
pressure burst test), A-12 (ambient temperature pressure 
cycling test) and A-20 (permeation test). 


A-27.2 One finished type-4 cylinder shall be pressure 
cycled using compressed natural gas between less than 
20 bar and working pressure for 1 000 cycles. The 
filling time shall be 5 min maximum. Unless otherwise 
specified by the manufacturer, care should be taken to 
ensure that temperatures during venting do not exceed 
the defined service conditions. 


A-27.3 The cylinder shall be leak tested in accordance 
with A-9 and meet the requirements therein. Following 
the completion of the natural gas cycling the cylinder 
shall be sectioned and the liner and liner/end boss 
interface inspected for evidence of any deterioration, 
such as fatigue cracking or electrostatic discharge. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


El ee 


SINGLE SHEAR MULTIPLE SHEAR 


16A) SHEAR MODES OF FAILURE - ACCEPTABLE INTERLAMINAR SHEAR FAILURE 


—__ J [es 


SHEAR AND TENSION SHEAR AND COMPRESSION 
16B) NON - SHEAR MODES OF FAILURE - UNACCEPTABLE INTERLAMINAR SHEAR FAILURE 


pa EES 


TENSION COMPRESSION 


16C) NON - SHEAR MODES OF FAILURE - UNACCEPTABLE INTERLAMINAR SHEAR FAILURE 


16D) PLASTIC SHEAR - UNACCEPTABLE INTERLAMINAR SHEAR FAILURE 


Fic. 16 MODES OF FAILURE 


49 


IS 15935 : 2021 


ANNEX B 


( Clauses 5.1, 6.7 and 7.7) 
ULTRASONIC INSPECTION 


B-1 GENERAL 


This Annex is based on techniques used by other 
techniques of ultrasonic inspection, provided these have 
been demonstrated to be suitable for the manufacturing 
method. 


B-2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


The outer and inner surfaces of any cylinder which 
is to be tested ultrasonically shall be in a condition 
suitable for an accurate and reproducible test. For flaw 
detection, the pulse echo system shall be used. For 
thickness measurement either the resonance method 
or the pulse echo system shall be used. Either contact 
or immersion techniques of testing shall be used. A 
coupling method which ensures adequate transmission 
of ultrasonic energy between the testing probe and the 
cylinder shall be used. 


B-3 FLAW DETECTION 
CYLINDRICAL PARTS 


OF THE 


B-3.1 Procedure 


The cylinders to be inspected and the search unit 
shall have a rotating motion and translation relative 
to one another such that a helical scan of the cylinder 
is described. The velocity of rotation and translation 
shall be constant within + 10 percent. The pitch of the 
helix shall be less than the width covered by the probe 
(at least a 10 percent overlap shall be guaranteed) 
and be related to the effective beam width, such as, to 
ensure 100 percent coverage at the velocity of rotation 
and translation used during the calibration procedure. 
An alternative scanning method may be used for 
transverse defect detection, in which the scanning or 
relative movement of the probes and the work piece 
is longitudinal, the sweeping motion being, such as, 
to ensure a 100 percent surface coverage with about 
10 percent overlap of the sweeps. The cylinder wall 
shall be tested for longitudinal defects with the 
ultrasonic energy transmitted in both circumferential 
directions and for transverse defects in both longitudinal 
directions. In this case or when optional testing is carried 
out on the transition areas between the wall and neck 
and/or wall and base, this may be conducted manually 
if not carried out automatically. The effectiveness of 
the equipment shall be periodically checked by passing 
a reference standard through the test procedure. This 
check shall be carried out at least at the beginning and 
end of each shift. If during this check the presence of 
the appropriate reference notch not detected then all 


50 


cylinders tested subsequent to the last acceptance check 
shall be retested after the equipment has been reset. 


B-3.2 Reference Standard 


A reference standard of convenient length shall be 
prepared from a cylinder of similar diameter and wall 
thickness range, and from material with the same 
acoustic characteristic and surface finish as the cylinder 
to be inspected. The reference standard shall be free 
from discontinuities which may interfere with the 
detection of the reference notches. 


Reference notches, both longitudinal and transverse, 
shall be matched on the outer and inner surface of the 
standard. The notches shall be separated such that each 
notch can be clearly identified. 


The following dimensions and shape of notches are of 
crucial importance for the adjustment of the equipment 
(see Fig. 17 and Fig. 18): 


a) Length of the notches (£) shall be no greater than 
50 mm; 

b) Width (W) shall be no greater than twice the 
nominal depth (7). However, where this condition 
cannot be met a maximum of | mmis acceptable; 


Depth of the notches (7) shall be 5 percent +0.75 
percent of the nominal thickness (S) with a 
minimum of 0.2 mm and a maximum of | mm, 
over the full length of the notch. Run outs at each 
end are permissible; 


c 


wm 


d 


wm 


Notch shall be sharp edged at it’s inter section with 
surface of the cylinder wall. The cross section of 
the notch shall be rectangular except where spark 
erosion machining methods are used; then it is 
acknowledged that the bottom of the notch will be 
rounded; and 


e 


wm 


Shape and dimensions of the notch shall be 
demonstrated by an appropriate method. 


B-4 CALIBRATION OF EQUIPMENT 


Using reference standard described in B-3.2, the 
equipment shall be adjusted to produce clearly 
identifiable indications from inner and outer reference 
notches. The amplitude of the indications shall be as 
near equal as possible. The indication of smallest 
amplitude shall be used as the rejection level and for 
setting visual, audible, recording or sorting devices. 
The equipment shall be calibrated with the reference 
standard or probe, or both, moving in the same manner, 
in the same direction and at the same speed as will be 
used during the inspection of the cylinder. All visual, 


audible, recording or sorting devices shall operate 
satisfactorily at the test speed. 


B-5 VALL THICRNESS MEASUREMENT 


If the measurement of the wall thickness is not carried 
out at another stage of production, the cylindrical 
part shall be 100 percent examined to ensure that the 
thickness is not less than the guaranteed minimum 
value. 


B-6 INTERPRETATION OF RESULT 


Cylinders with indications which are equal to or 
greater than the lowest of the indications from the 


T 1 
ty 
| le 
S| 
X-X 
Key 


1) External reference notch 


NOTE :- 


IS 15935 : 2021 


reference notches shall be withdrawn. Surface defects 
may be removed, after removal the cylinders shall be 
re-subjected to ultrasonic flaw detection and thickness 
measurement. 


Any cylinder which is shown to be below the guaranteed 
minimum wall thickness shall be rejected. 


B-7 CERTIFICATION 


The ultrasonic testing shall be certified by the cylinder 
manufacturer. Every cylinder, which has passed the 
ultrasonic testing in accordance with this standard, 
shall be stamp-marked with the symbol ‘UT. 


2 


2) Internal reference notch 


T < (5+ 0.75) % S BUT < 0.2 mm € T € 1 mm 


W < 2T but if not possible then W < mm 


E < 50 mm 


Fic. 17 DESIGN DETAILS AND DIMENSIONS OF THE REFERENCE NOTCHES FOR LONGITUDINAL DEFECTS 


IS 15935 : 2021 


0.2 E w 
M et 7 [ 
T 
xi LE 


lH 


Note :- 
T < (5 + 0.75) % S BUT 0.2 mm < T s< 1 mm 


W < 2T, BUT IF NOT POSSIBLE THEN W <1 mm 
E € 50 mm 


Fic. 18 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF THE REFERENCE 
NOTCHES FOR CIRCUMFERENTIAL DEFECTS 


52 


IS 15935 : 2021 


ANNEX C 


( Clauses 5.2.6, 6.3.4 and 7.3.4 ) 
NDE DEFECT SIZE BY FLAWED CYLINDER CYCLING 


C-1 The following procedure can be used to determine c) Pressure cycle to failure three cylinders containing 
the NDE defect size for metal lined hoop wrapped and these artificial defects in accordance with the test 
metal lined full wrapped designs: method specified in A-12. 


a) Introduce internal flaws in the metallic liner. 
Internal flaws may be machined prior to the heat 
treatment and closing of the end of the cylinder; 


If the cylinders do not leak or rupture in less than 
1 000 cycles multiplied by the specified service life in 
years, then the allowable defect size for NDE is equal 
b) Size these artificial defects to exceed the defect to or less than the artificial flaw size at that location. 
length and depth detection capability of the NDE 
inspection method; and 


ANNEX D 
( Clauses 6.3.2, 7.3.2 and 8.3.2 ) 
D-1 VERIFICATION OF STRESS RATIOS rupture strain of cylinders reinforced with a single 
USING STRAIN GAUGES fibre type. 


This Annex describes a procedure that may be used to D-3 METHOD 2 (APPLIES TO ALL 
verify stress ratios by use of strain gauges: CYLINDERS) 


a) The stress-strain relationship for fibre is always a) At zero pressure after winding and Autofrettage, 
elastic and therefore the stress ratios and the strain apply strain gauges and calibrate. 


ratios are equal. b) Measure strains at zero, working and minimum 


b) High elongation strain gauges are required. burst pressures. 

c) Strain gauges should be orientated in the direction c) At zero pressure, after strain measurements have 
of the fibre on which they are mounted (that is, been taken at the working and minimum burst 
with hoop fibre on the outside of the cylinder, pressure, and with strain gauges monitored, 
mount gauges in the hoop direction). cut the cylinder section apart so that the region 


containing the strain gauge is approximately 
125 mm long. Remove the liner without damaging 
the composite. Measure the strains after the liner 


D-2 METHOD 1 (APPLIES TO 
CYLINDERSTHAT DO NOT USE HIGH 
TENSION WINDING) 


is removed. 
a) Prior to Autofrettage, apply strain gauges and d) Adjust the strain reading at zero, operating, and 
calibrate. minimum burst pressure by the amount of strain 
b) Measure strains at Autofrettage, at zero pressure measured at zero pressure with and without the 
after Autofrettage and at working and minimum liner. 
burst pressure. e) Confirm that the strain at burst pressure divided 
c) Confirm that the strain at burst pressure divided by strain at working pressure meets the stress ratio 
by the strain at working pressure meets the stress requirements. For hybrid construction, the strain 
ratio requirements. For hybrid construction, the at operating is compared with the rupture strain of 
strain at operating pressure is compared with the cylinders reinforced with a single fibre type. 


53 


IS 15935 : 2021 


ANNEX E 


( Clauses 6.4.5, 6.5.2.9, 7.4.4, 7.5.2.9 and 8.4.4 ) 
ENVIRONMENTAL TEST 


E-1 GENERAL 


This optional test is applicable to all types of cylinders 
covered in this standard. 


E-2 CYLINDER SET-UP AND PREPARATION 


Two cylinders are tested in a condition representative 
of installed geometry including coating (if applicable), 
brackets and gaskets, and pressure fittings using the 
same sealing configuration (that is O-rings) as that used 
in service. Brackets may be painted or coated prior to 
installation in the immersion test if they are painted or 
coated prior to vehicle installation. 


The cylinders are subjected to pre-conditioning in 
accordance with E-3 and then exposed to a sequence 
of environments, pressures and temperatures in 
accordance with E-5. 


Although pre-conditioning and fluid exposure is 
performed on the cylindrical section of the cylinder, all 
of the cylinder, including the domed sections, should 
be as resistant to the exposure environments as are the 
exposed areas. 


As an alternative, a single cylinder approach may 
be used in which both the immersion environment 
and other fluids exposure tests are carried out on one 
cylinder. In this case, care should be taken to prevent 
cross contamination among the fluids. 


E-3 PRE-CONDITIONING 


E-3.1 Pre-conditioning Apparatus 


The following types of apparatus are needed for 
preconditioning the test cylinder by pendulum and 
gravel impact. 


a) Pendulum impact apparatus, comprising of: 


1) an impact body of steel having the shape of 
a pyramid with equilateral triangle faces and 
a square base, the submit and the edges being 
rounded to a radius of 3 mm; 


2 


— 


a pendulum, the centre of percussion of which 
coincides with the centre of gravity of the 
pyramid, its distance from the axis of rotation 
of the pendulum being Im and the total mass 
of the pendulum referred to its centre of 
percussion being15 kg; and 


3 


— 


a means of determining that the energy of the 
pendulum at the moment of impact is not less 
than 30 N.m and is as close to that value as 


54 


possible, and a means of holding the cylinder 
in position during impact by the end bosses or 
by the intended mounting bracket. 

b) Gravel impact machine, comprising of: 

1) an impact machine, constructed according 
to the design specifications shown in Fig. 19 
and capable of being operated in accordance 
with ASTM D3170 except that the cylinder 
may beat ambient temperature during gravel 
impact; and 

2 


— 


gravel, comprising alluvial road gravel passing 
through a 16 mm space screen but retained 
on a 9.5 mm space screen. Each application 
is to consist of 550 ml of graded gravel 
(approximately 250 to 300 stones). 


E-3.2 Pre-conditioning Procedure 
E-3.2.1 Pre-conditioning for the Immersion 
E-3.2.1.1 Environment test 


Pre-conditioning by both pendulum impact and gravel 
impact is required for the portion of the container to be 
used for the ‘immersion environment’ test (see E-4.1). 


With the cylinder unpressurized, pre-condition the 
central section of the cylinder that will be submerged, 
by an impact of the pendulum body at three locations 
spaced approximately 150 mm apart. Following 
impact, pre-condition each of the three locations by 
gravel impact application. 


Additionally, pre-condition a location within the 
submerged portion of each domed section and 50 mm 
(measured axially) from the tangent by a single impact 
of the pendulum body. 


E-3.2.2 Pre-conditioning for the Other Fluid Exposure 
Test 


Pre-conditioning by gravel impact only is required for 
the portion of the container to be used for the ‘other 
fluid exposure’ test (see E-4.2). 


Divide the upper section of the cylinder used for 
the ‘other fluids exposure’ test into 5 distinct areas 
of nominal diameter 100 mm and mark these for 
pre-conditioning and fluid exposure (see Fig. 20). 
Ensure that the areas do not overlap on the cylinder 
surface and, for the single cylinder approach, do not 
overlap the immersed section of the cylinder. While 
convenient for testing, the areas need not be oriented 
along a single line. 


VVith the cylinder unpressurized, pre-condition each of 
the 5 areas identified in Fig. 20 for other fluid exposure 
on the cylinder by gravel impact application. 


E-4 ENVIRONMENTS 


E-4.1 Immersion Environment 


At the appropriate stages in the test sequence 
(see Table 10) orient the cylinder horizontally to 
immerse the lovver third of the cylinder diameter in a 
simulated and rain/road salt vvater solution composed 
of the following compounds: 


a) De-ionized water; 
b) Sodium chloride: 2.5 percent (mass fraction): 
+ 0.1 percent; 


c) 


Calcium chloride: 2.5 percent (mass fraction): 
+ 0.1 percent; and 


d) Sulphuric acid: sufficient to achieve a solution pH 


of 4.0 0.2. 


Adjust the solution level and pH prior to each test 
step which uses this liquid. Maintain the temperature 
of the bath at 21 + 5 °C. During immersion, hold the 
unsubmerged section of the cylinder in ambient air. 


E-4.2 Other Fluid Exposures 


At the appropriate stages in test sequence 
(see Table 10) expose each marked area to one of five 
solutions for 30 min. Use the same environment for 
each location throughout the test. The solutions are: 


a) Sulphuric acid : 19 percent (volume fraction) 


aqueous solution; 


b) Sodium hydroxide : 25 percent (mass fraction) 


aqueous solution; 


: 30/70 percent 
concentrations; 


c) Methanol/gasoline 


d) Ammonium nitrate : 29 percent (mass fraction) 
aqueous solution; and 

e) Windscreen washer fluid. 
During the exposure, orient the test cylinder with the 
exposure area uppermost. Place a pad of glass wool one 
layer thick approximately 0.5 mm and trimmed to the 


55 


IS 15935 : 2021 


appropriate dimensions on the exposure area. Using a 
pipette, apply 5 ml of the test fluid to the glass wool. 
Ensure that the pad is wetted evenly across its surface 
and through its thickness. Pressurize the cylinder and 
remove the gauge pad after pressurization for 30 min. 


E-5 TEST CONDITIONS 


E-5.1 Pressure Cycle 


At the appropriate stage in the test sequence 
(see Table 10), subject the cylinder to hydraulic pressure 
cycles of between 20 bar and 260 bar for the ambient 
and high temperature steps, and between 20 bar and 
160 bar for the lower temperature steps. Hold the 
maximum pressure for a minimum of 60 s and ensure 
that each full cycle takes no less than 66 s. 


E-5.2 High and Low Temperature Exposure 


At the appropriate stages in the test sequence 
(see Table 10), bring the surface of the cylinder to a high 
or low temperature in air. The low temperature shall be 
no higher than —35 °C and the high temperature shall 
be 82 +5 °C as measured on the surface of the cylinder. 


E-6 TEST PROCEDURE 


The test procedure is as follows: 


a) Pre-condition the cylinders (or cylinder in the 
single cylinder approach) in accordance with 
E-3.2; 

Carry out the sequences of environmental 
exposure, pressure cycling and temperature 
exposure as defined in Table 10. Do not wash or 
wipe the cylinder surface between stages; and 


b) 


c 


wm 


Following completion of the sequences, subject 
the cylinders (or cylinder) to a hydrostatic pressure 
burst test to destruction in accordance with A-11. 


E-7 ACCEPTABLE RESULTS 


The test is considered to be satisfied if the burst pressure 
of the cylinders (or cylinder) is no less than 1.8 times 
the service pressure. 


IS 15935 : 2021 


Table 10 Test Conditions and Sequence 


( Clauses E-4.1, E-4.2, E-5.1, E-5.2 and E-6 ) 


Test Steps Environments Number of Pressure Cycles | Temperature 
Two Cylinder Approach Single Cylinder Approach 
Immersion cylinder | Other fluids | Alternative single cylinder 
— 1 1 Other fluids (40 min) - Ambient 
1 2 Immersion 500 X service life (years) Ambient 
= 2 — Air 500 X service life (years) Ambient 
— 3 3 Other fluids (40 min) — Ambient 
2 4 4 Air 250 X service life (years) Low 
= 5 5 Other fluids (40 min) = Ambient 
3 6 6 Air 250 X service life (years) High 
ANNEX F 
( Clause 10 ) 
MANUFACTURER'S INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, USE 
AND INSPECTION OF CYLINDERS 
F-1 GENERAL normal operation over the intended service life. Where 


The primary function of the manufacturer’s instructions 
is to provide guidance to the cylinder purchaser, 
distributor, installer and user for the safe use of the 
cylinder over its intended service life. 


F-2 DISTRIBUTION 


The manufacturer should advise the purchaser to 
supply these instructions to all parties involved in 
the distribution, handling, installation and use of the 
cylinders. The document may be reproduced to provide 
sufficient copies for this purpose; however, it should 
be marked to provide reference to the cylinders being 
delivered. 


F-3 REFERENCE TO EXISTING CODES, 
STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS 


Specific instructions may be stated by reference to 
national or recognized codes, standards and regulations. 


F-4 CYLINDER HANDLING 


Handling procedures should be described which would 
ensure that the cylinders will not suffer unacceptable 
damage or contamination during handling. 


F-5 INSTALLATION 


F-5.1 Installation instructions should be provided 
which would ensure that the cylinders do not suffer 
unacceptable damage during installation and during 


56 


the mounting is specified by the manufacturer, the 
instructions should, where relevant, contain details, 
such as, mounting design the use of the resilient 
gasket materials, the correct tightening torques and 
avoidance of direct exposure of the cylinder to the 
environment, chemicals and mechanical contacts. 
Cylinder locations and mountings should comply 
with recognized installation standards. Where the 
mounting is not specified by the manufacturer, the 
manufacturer should draw the purchaser’s attention 
to possible long term impacts of the vehicle mounting 
system, for example, vehicle body movements and 
cylinder expansion/contraction unless the pressure and 
temperature conditions of service. Where applicable 
the purchaser’s attention should be drawn to the need to 
provide installations such that liquids or solids cannot 
be collected to cause cylinder material damage. The 
correct pressure relieve device to be fitted should be 
specified. Cylinder valves, pressure relief of devices 
and connections should be protected against breakage 
in a collision. If this protection is the cylinder the 
decision and method of attachment should be approved 
by the cylinder. 


F-5.2 Factors to be considered include the ability of the 
cylinder to support any transferred impact loads and 
the effect of localized strain on cylinder stresses and 
fatigue life. 


F-6 IN-SERVICE INSPECTION 


F-6.1 The manufacturer should clearly specify the user’s 
obligation to observe the required cylinder inspection 


requirements (for example, re-inspection interval, by 
authorized personnel). This information should be in 
agreement with the design approval requirements, and 
should cover. 


F-6.1.1 Periodic Re-qualification 


F-6.2 Inspection and/or testing are required to be 
performed in accordance with the statutory authority. 


F-6.3 Recommendations for periodic re-qualification 
by visual inspection or testing during the service life 
should be provided by the cylinder manufacturer on the 
basis of use under service conditions specified herein. 
Each cylinder should be visually inspected at least 
every 48 months, and at the time of any re-installation, 
for external damage and deterioration, including 
under the support straps. The visual inspection should 
be performed by a competent agency approved or 
recognized by the regulatory authority, in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s specifications. 


57 


IS 15935 : 2021 


F-6.4 Cylinders without labels or stamps containing 
mandatory information or with labels or stamps 
containing mandatory information that is illegible 
in any way should be removed from service. If the 
cylinder can be positively identified by manufacturer 
and serial number a replacement label or stamping may 
be applied, allowing the cylinder to remain in service. 


F-6.4.1 Cylinders Involved in Collisions 


Cylinders that have been involved in a vehicle collision 
should be re-inspected by an authorized inspection 
agency. Cylinders that have not experienced any 
impact damage from the collision may be returned to 
service, otherwise the cylinder should be returned to 
the manufacturer for evaluation. 


F-6.4.2 Cylinders Involved in Fires 


F-6.5 Cylinders that have been subjected to the action of 
fire should be re-inspected by an authorized inspection 
agency, or condemned and removed from service. 


(Continued from second cover) 


Ovyners and users of cylinders should note that cylinders designed according to this standard are to operate safely, 
if used in accordance vvith specified service conditions for a specified finite service life only. The expiry date is 
marked on each cylinder and, it is the responsibility of the owner and user to ensure that cylinders are periodically 
tested as per norms laid down by statutory authorities. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (12095). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


