**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12042 (1987) : Method for determination of molybdenum by 
atomic absorption spectrophotometer [CHD 1: Inorganic 
Chemicals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 12042 - 1987 

(Reaffirmed 1998) 



Indian Standard 



KfETHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF MOLYBDENUM BY 

ATOMIC ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER 



UDC 543-422:54677 



® Copyright 19S7 

BUREAU OF KNDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BliAVAN* 9 BAHADUR SHAEl ZAFAR MARG 

NbW DiLLHl IIHOOJ 

Gf 2 September l^ST 



IS : 12042 . 1987 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF MOLYBDENUM BY 

ATOMIC ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER 



Chemical Standards Sectional Committee, CDC 1 
Chairman Representing 

Dr B. N. Mattoo Maharashtra State Forensic Science Laboratory, 

Bombay 

Members 

Dr S. K. Meghal ( Alternate to 
Dr B. N. Mattoo ) 
Shri p. K. Agarwal IDMA Laboratories, Chandigarh 

Shri K. D. Amre National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri S. B. Nanal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. A. Ashtaputre Ministry of Defence ( DGl ) 

Shri P, K. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Assistant Director General Directorate General of Health Services, New 

( PFA ) Delhi 

Assistant Secretary ( PFA ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. C. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Chief Chemist Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New 

Delhi 
Deputy Chief Chemist ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director ( Chemicals ) Department of Industries & Commerce, 

Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Deputy Director ( MCL ) ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. K. Kapoor Regional Testing Centre, New Delhi 

Dr J, K. NiGAM Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Shri N. S. Birdie ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. K. Pandya Sarabhai M. Chemicals, Vadodara 

Dr M. Pardhasaradhi Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Hyderabad 
Dr J. Madhusudan Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri Om Prasad Century Rayon. Kalyan 

Dr D. C. Prashar National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Dr A. K. Sarkar ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



(§) Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 12042 - 1987 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr G. Ramana Rao Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New 

Delhi 
Shri Roop Lal Shah ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. p. Sahakari Italab Private Limited. Bombay 

Shri S. S. Honavar ( Alternate ) 
Dr L. V. Sastry Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bom.bay 

Shri V. N. Sehgal Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New 

Delhi 
Shri V. S. Bisaria ^ Alternate ^ 
Dr N."r. Sen'Gupta" ^" " ' Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Shri B. B. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Shri G- S. Shukla Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Prof M. M. Tawui Khan Central Salt & Marine Chemical Research 

Institute, Bhavnagar 
Dr G. D. Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri Satish Chander, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Chera ) 

Secretary 
Shri M. Bakshi Gupta 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), BIS 



IS : 12042 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF MOLYBDENUM BY 

ATOMIC ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETER 

0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard Vy^as adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 16 February 1987, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Standards 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 

0.2 The atomic absorption spectrophotometric method is based on the 
fact that atoms present in ground state will absorb incident light of the 
same wavelength they emit when excited. When radiation from the given 
excited element, normally hollow cathode iarnp, is passed through the 
flame containing ground state atoms of that element, the intensity of the 
transmitted radiation will decrease in proportion to the amount of the 
ground state atoms present in flame. A hollow cathode lamp for the 
element to be determined provides the radiation. The metal atoms to be 
measured are placed in the beam of radiation by aspirating the sample 
solution into the flame. A monochrometer isolates the characteristic 
radiation from, the hollow cathode lamp and photosensitive device 
measures the attenuated transmitted radiation. Various elements 
including molybdenum can be precisely analyzed by this technique. 

0.3 Various products, where molybdenum estimation may be required, 
include metals and alloys, chemicals, ores and minerals, etc. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off', it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the method for the determination of 
molybdenum by atomic absorption spectrophotometer. 

2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

2.1 The sample is brought into solution by suitable treatment v/ith acid 
or acid combinations or by alkali fusion, diluted with distilled water. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 12042 - 1987 

filtered and suitable dilutions are made for aspiration into air-acetylene 
flame for better sensitivity into the nitrous oxide-acetylene flame. The 
standard solution is made in the same way for calibration. The most 
sensitive molybdenum line is 313'26 nm, however, other lines suitable 
for higher concentration can also be used. 

3, INTERFERENCES 

3.1 Calcium, iron, manganese, sulphate and strontium depresses the 
response in air-acetylene flame. The effects may be reduced by the 

addition of 0'5 percent — of aluminium or 2 percent — of ammonium 
^ m m 

chloride to both sample and calibration solutions or preferably by use 

of hotter flame. In the nitrous oxide-acetylene flame the response is 

slightly depressed in the presence of calcium and iron. The effect may 

be reduced by the addition of 0*5 percent — of aluminium chloride or 

m 

1 percent — of sodium sulphate to both sample and calibration 
m 

solutions. The sensitivity for molybdenum drops when pressure in the 

acetylene cylinder becomes low. The cylinder should be changed when 

pressure falls below 7 kg/cm^, 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Atomic absorption spectrophotometer having following parameters 
can be used for determination of molybdenum: 

a) Lamp current — depending on the lamp and instrument used. 

b) Fuel — Nitrous oxide-acetylene. 

Note — Acetylene flow rate is critical and must be carefully 
adjusted to give a flame with maximum 'feather' height with- 
out luminiscence. 

c) Band pass — depending on the instrument used normally 0'15 to 

0'20nm. 

d) Wavelength and working range. 

Wavelength (nm) Working Range ( /ig/ml ) 

Nitrous oxide-acetyle flame 
313'3 1 to 10 

320'9 10 to 100 

4.2 Safety Precaution — Follow the manufacturer's recommendation on 
igniting and extinguishing the flame. 



IS : 12042 - 1987 

5. REAGENTS 

5.1 Pure Molybdenum Powder — 99*99 percent. 

5.2 Concentrated Nitric Acid — See IS : 264-1976*. 

5.3 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — See IS : 265-1976t. 

5.4 Perchloric Acid — 70 percent. 

Note — Perchloric acid is a strong oxidizing agent. It will explode in contact 
with organic materials or by shock or heat and is strongly irritant. 

5.5 Standard Molybdenum Solution — Dissolve 1*0 g of molybdenum 
powder in 10 ml of hydrochloric acid and 10 ml of deionized water. 
Add ro ml of nitric acid. Dilute to 1 litre in a volumetric flask with 
deionized water to give 1 000 /tg/ml of molybdenum. Store in a poly- 
ethylene bottle. 

5.6 Ionization Buffer — Dilute potassium chloride solution ( 1 mg/ml ). 

6. SAMPLE PREPARATION 

6.1 Metals and Alloys — A suitable quantity of the sample is dissolved 
in 1:1 hydrochloric acid and perchloric acid ( 70 percent ) and heated 
until dense fumes are evolved; over-heating should be avoided, otherwise 
molybdenum gets precipitated. Cool, dilute and filter. Make up to 
known volume. A suitable dilution is made for the determination of 
molybdenum before aspirating into the flame. 

6.2 Chemicals — The sample is brought into solution by wet digestion 
with hydrochloric acid/perchloric acid. Filtrate is made up to suitable 
known volume. 

6.3 Ores and Minerals — Finely divided particles dissolved in hydro- 
chloric, perchloric and nitric acid mixture ( 2:2:1 ratio ). Dissolve the 
mass in 30 ml of acid mixture, heated to fumes, cooled, diluted and 
filtered to remove silicious matter. 

Residue is dried, ignited and fused with 0*5 g of borax. Extract in 
hydrochloric acid is taken and mixed with the original solution. The 
final solution is made up to volume. 

Note — All dilutions to be made with ionization buffer. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Optimize the response of the instrument by adjustment of burner 
height, flame and monochrometer as directed in the operation manual of 
the instrument. Aspirate water to get zero absorbance, when stable 



♦Specification for nitric acid ( second revision ). 
tSpecification for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ). 

5 



IS : 12042 - 1987 

response is observed, aspirate standard ( at least four solutions ) and 
note down absorbance. Aspirate sample to get absorbance of the sample. 
Prepare calibration curve by plotting the net absorbance value of the 
standard against concentration in Mg/m.l of molybdenum. Locate the 
print of the sample absorbance and calculate the concentration of 
molybdenum in the sample. 



8. CALCULATION 

10« M 



8.1 Molybdenum, percent by mass = — jtt^ — X 



where 

C = concentration of molybdenum in /xg/ml in final solution, 
V = volume in ml of the final solution, and 
M — mass in g"of the sample in final solution. 



