UDC 616'28;76 : 621'395'621'54: 534'86'089'6

JS : 10781-1984 JEC Pub 126 ( 1973 )
Indian Standard
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

SPECIFICATION FOR REFERENCE COUPLER FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF HEARING AIDS USING EARPHONES COUPLED TO THE EAR BY MEANS OF EAR INSERTS ( IEC Title : IEC Reference Coupler for the Measurement of HeaTing Aids Using Earphones Coupled to the Ear by Means of Ear Inserts )
National Foreword This Indian Standard, wh&`&identical with IEC Pub 126 ( 1973 ) ` IEC reference coupler for the measurement of hearing aids using earphones coupled to the ear by means of ear inserts', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of Acoustics Sectional Committee and approved by Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical in Indian Standards, attention is especially drawn to the following : Wherever the word `Recommendation' `Indian Standard'. Cross Reference In this Indian Standard, the following InternationalStandard place the following Indian Standard : International Standard IEC Pub 50 ( 08 ) International vocabulary, electro-acoustics electrotechnical is referred to. Please read in its with those used be read as

appears referring to this standard, it should

Corresponding Indian Stanalvd IS : 1885 ( Part 3/Set 6 ) - 1967 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 3 Acoustics, Section 6 Acoustical instruments ( Technically equivalent )

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provision of IEC Pub 126-1973 and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.

Adopted 14Scgtember 1984

I

8

March 198%IS!

Gr 4

INDIAN MAN.4K

STANDARDS INSTITUTION BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 10781-1984 IEC Pub 126( 1973 )

I.

Scope and object The object specified frequency of this recommendation impedance when is to describe determining a coupler hearing devices. for loading performance The coupler the earphone characteristics, coupled described with a

acoustic

the physical

in the to the

range 200 Hz to 5 000 Hz, of air-conduction or similar

aids using earphones

ear by means of ear inserts, e.g. ear moulds ment of an earlier 2 cm3 coupler.

is a develop-

The use of this coupler obtained; however, specifications

does not allow the actual data on hearing aids.

performance

of a hearing and ready means

aid on'a person

to be of

the 1 EC recommends

its use as a simple

for the exchange

and of physical

2. 2.1

Definition Coupler A coupler is a cavity of predeterrnined shape and volume, which is used for the testing of ear-

phones ,in conjunction with a calibrated microphone adapted to measure the pressure developed within the cavity (see I EC Publication 50 (08, International Electrotechnical Vocabulary, Electroacoustics).

3. _ 3.1

Construction

The coupler

shall be constructed

of hard, non-porous

and non-magnetic

material

and have a mass

of at least 100 g, including the microphone. The coupler consists essentially of a cylindrical cavity whose reactance is that of a volume of 2 cmS. The base of the cylindrical cavity usually consists of the diaphragm of a microphone of high mechanical pressure level in the coupler is measured. impedance, by means of which the sound

The external

diameter

of the coupler

should

be kept as small as possible

in order

to minimize in a

diffractiontil errors which might affect the measurements when the coupler has to be placed free sound field. The wall thickness, however, should not be less than 2 mm. 3.2 The cavity The volume of the cavity shall have an effective value of 2 cm3 i I o/o: the dimensions,

therefore,

shall be corrected for any front cavity associated with the microphone, impedance, the protective grid, etc. The correction may conveniently height of the cavity. The diameter of the cylindrical

for the finite diaphragm be made by adjusting the

cavity shall be not less than 18.0 mm and not greater than 21 .O mm.

(IEC

Page

7)

2

IS : 10781-1984 IEC Pub 126 ( 1973 )
A fine capillary tube, partially external air in order to equalize impedance of the cavity filled along its total length by a wire, shall connect the cavity to the the static pressure. This tube shall not affect the modulus of the 1 o/0 in the frequency range 200 Hz to 5000 Hz.

by more than

3.3

Calibrated

pressure

rtlicrophotte

The diameter of the free portion of the diaphragm of the calibrated exceed the diameter of the cylindrical cavity. Within the frequency magnitude of the mechanical impedance of the diaphragm tude of the mechanical impedance of a 2 cm3 cavity

pressure microphone shall not range 200 Hz to 5 000 Hz, the tha? 10 times the magniIf intermediate shall of the diaphragm

shall be greater

as seen from the diaphragm.

between IO and LOOtimes this cavity impedance, the mechanical impedance correspond to that of a pure stiffnes in the above frequency ran&. If it is necessary to use a microphone for which the diameter

of the free part of the diaphragm

is

less than the diameter cavity shall coincide. rigid, and the aperture

of the cavity of the coupler, If a probe tube microphone of the probe

the axes of the microphone and the cylindrical is employed, the base of the cavity shall be on the axis of the cylindrical of the microphone vibrations cavity.

shall be placed

The general response abnormal

construction

of the coupler is not affected

and mounting by spurious

shall be such that the transmitted along

of the microphone paths.

or by sound

3.4 3.4.1

Cotttwctioi2

of the

henritzg aifi to the coupler

Hearing

nid

kt+tlt itaert

earplmte

Where possible, the ear insert shall be replaced by an ear mould substitute consisting essentially of a rigid tube, coaxial with the cavity, of length IS $0.18 mm and internal diameter 3 %0.03 mm representing the tubular portion of an average ear mould.

The connection between the nub of the earphone and the ear mould substitute shall be made airtight by using a suitable wax or by some other sealing device, care being taken to avoid the inclusion of any extraneous The principal cavities features which might affect the performance of an example of the I EC reference of the earphone. coupler with ear mould substitute and

showing the connection of the earphone with the ear mould substitute are indicated page 13. Other forms than the one illustrated may be used, provided that they conform specifications.

in Figure I, to the above

If it is inappropriate to disconnect the ear insert from the receiver, the ear insert shall be connected directly to the entrance of the cylindrical cavity and shall be coaxial with it. A suitable wax or other device shall be used to ensure an airtight seal, care being taken to avoid the inclusion of any extraneous 3.4.2
Hearing

cavities
aidy

which might

affect the performance
type ad hearing

of the earphone.
spectacles

qf

the behin&he-ear

The hearing aid with its acoustic outlet attachment (e.g. elbow and flexible connecting tube of behind-the-ear instruments or nub and flexible connecting tube of hearing spectacles), shall be connected to the 2 cm3 coupler with ear mould substitute as described in Sub-clause 3.4.1 by means of a coupling device of rigid material, having the same internal diameter as the nominal diameter of the end of the acoustic outlet attachment i 2p( and a length of 5 `- 0.1 mm. The connection between the coupling device and the ear mould substitute shall be made airtight by using a suitable

(IEC Page 9)

JS :10781-19&a IEC Pub 126(1973) waxorby some other sealing device,

care being taken to avoid the inclusion of any extraneous cavities which might afrect the performance of the hearing aid.

The material, length and internal diameter of the connecting tubing-between the hearing aid and the coupling device shall conform to the manufacturer's specifications. On the hearing aid side, the flexible connecting tube shall be connected to the nub of a hearing spectacle or to the elbow, if any, of a behind-the-ear instrument. The flexible tube shall not be connected directly to the behind-the-ear-type of hearing aid if this aid is intended to be used with an elbow. Unless otherwise specified, the length of the flexible tube measured from the end of the elbow or from the end of the nub to the entrance of the 3 mm diameter rigid tube of the ear mould substitute shall be 25 i 1 mm. The principal features of an example of the I EC reference coupler with ear mould substitute and coupling device, showing the connection arrangement for a behind-the-ear hearing aid are indicated in Figure 2, page 15. In the example the internal diameter of the coupling device is chosen to be 2 mm in accordance with the tubing most commonly used. Other forms than the one illustrated may be used, provided that they conform to the above specifications.
Nure. The manufacturer's specifications for the dimensions of the tubing should be in accordance conditions found in practical use of the hearing aid. with the average

If for some unusual reason, it is impossible to simulate the average conditions of practical use with the ear mould substitute specified above in the coupler, an appropriate different system may beused iffully described.

3.4.3

Hearing aids of the in-the-ear type

w

The hearing aid shall be connected directly to the 2 cm3 volume cavity of the coupler as indicated in Figure 3, page 17. The connection between the hearing aid and the coupler shall be made airtight by using a suitable wax or by some other sealing device, care being taken to avoid the inclusion of extraneous cavities which might affect the performance of the hearing aid.

(IEC Page

II)

JS~: 10781-1984 JEC Pub 126 ( 1973 )

Earphone Airtight sent and support for nub of earphone

under test

0.6 Pressure

equalization

capillary

18

Ear mould substitute

Calibrated prossure microphone

Cavity 2 cm"

1 "/o effective

I

W87/ 73

Dimensions in mm Note. This diagram

is only intended as a schematic representation,

illustrating

the principle of construction.

FIG. 1. -

Coupling of an insert earphone

to the coupler.

5

(1EC Page 13)

JS : 10781-1984 JEC Pub 126 ( 1973 )
Elbow

I

Airtight seal and support for tube coupling device \ Connecting tube

Inside 0 2 nominal Inside 0 2 + 0.04 Effective length 25 & 1 Tube coupling device o 0.6 Pressure equalization length > 12.5 capillary

I

I-18 + 0.18

Wire 0 0.5

Ear mould substitute

_ O$fi

Airtight

seal

Calibrated pressure microphone

Cavity 2 cm3 ~7 18-21

:t 1 % effective

0088/73

No&s I. -- This diagram is only intended as a schematic representation, illustrating the principle of construction. 2. - The effective length of the tubing and the inside diameters of both the tubing and the coupling device (which are to be equal) should be as shown above unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer in order to meet the average conditions found in practical use of a particular hearing aid.

Dimensions in mm

FIG. 2

-

Coupling of a behind-the-ear

type of hearing aid to the coupler.

(IEC Page 15)

6

JS : 10781-1984 JEC Pub 126 ( 1973 )

Airtight seal and support for hearing aid

Hearing

aid

Wire Tip of hearing aid or insert should be even with cavity wall

0 0.5

I

0 0.6

Pressure equalization length 2 12.5 Calibrated pressure microphone

capillary

Airtight Cavity 2 cm3 & 1% effective 0 18-21

seal

/
0089/ 73

Dimensions in mm Note. This diagram is only intended as a schematic representation, illustrating the principle of construction.

FIG. 3.

-

Coupling arrangement

for an in-the-ear type of hearing aid.

7
Prlnted at &mm Printin

(IEC Page 17)
Press, Delhi. lndla

