( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS: 5075 -1985 -Indian

Standard

METHOD OF ROTATING BAR BENDING FATIGUE TESTING OF METALS (

First Revision )
Tests Sectional Committee,
Representing The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur

Methods of Physical
Chairman
SHRI

SMDC

3

P. K. CHAKRAVARTY Members

SHRI R. K. ABROL Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur ( Haryana , n " _ ,a.. .> SHRI 5. BONDE [ Alt-3Xate ) SHRI SVJIT KUIYIARBasv M. N. Dastur & Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. SEN GVPTA ( Allernate ) Quality Marking Centre, Amritsar SHRI K. K. BHATIA Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel SHRI R. N. BISWAS Plant ), Durgapur SHRI T. S. TEWA~I ( Alternate ) Usha Martin Industries Ltd, Calcutta DR A. CHAERABOETY SHRI H. MAHESWAIZY ( Alternate ) Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. K. CHERIAN SHRI PANZAJ DE ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore DR R. F. DAB~BAL SRRI V. V. PRABKV ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI M. K. DAS GTJPTA Directorate General of Technical Development SRRI K. G. GARG and Production ( Air ), New Delhi SHRI P. RA~HOTHAMA R.zo ( Alternate ) Blue Star Limited, Bombay SERI B. G. GEHANI SHRI G. S. SOXTI ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SH~I A. GI~OSH SHRI D. S. MAJVMDAR ( Alternate ) The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI S. A. HAQVE SHRI A. S. WAI.IA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Railways SHRI N. C. HORE SHRI S. R. DE ( Alternate ) Fuel Instruments & Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ichalkaranji SHRI S. V. KULKARNI SHRI J. V. KVLKARNI ( Alternate ) Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, SHRI S. KUMAR Durgapur ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1986 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:5075- 1985
( Continued

from page 1 )
Representing

Members

Avery India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. S. LAKS~MIN~RAYAN SHRI R. D. SHARY~ ( Alternate ) The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI C. B. LUNAWAT SHRI R. RAMA RAO ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI S. R. MAZUMUA~ SHRI A. K. CHAIRORORTY ( Alternate ) Associated Instrument Manufacturers' ( India ) Pvt SHRI V. N. NANDA Ltd, New Delhi SRRI S. C. TAIN i Alternate ) Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ' SHRI R. A. PA&A~J;~~AN ( CSIR ), Durgapur Steel Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela SHRI M. PRASAD Plant ), Rourkela SEIRIN. GOPALAKRISENA ( Alternate) National Laboratory ( CSIR ), Aeronautical SI~RI S. RADIIAI~I~IRRNAN Bangalore DR V. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Laboratory ( CSIR ), National Metallurgical DR V. Rao Jamshedpur Dn D. .J. CH.$~RAVA~TI I Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI R. N. SARA New Delhi SRRI S. K. PANDEY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence, Ordnance Factories Board, SHRI D. N. SARKAR Calcutta SHRI A. R. BASU ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI F. C. SHARMA Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) SHRI K. SWAMIAPPAN Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI H. 1~. TANEJA SHRI S. KUMAR ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant ), SHRI YADHVIR SINGI* Bokaro Steel City SRRI P. N. TRIP.ITHY ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-qjicia Member ) SHRI K. RAGHAVENDRAN, Director ( Stuc & Met ) Secretary SHRI JAGMOHAN SINGH Deputy Director ( Metals ), IS1

2

IS : 5075 - 1985 4

Indian Standard

METHOD OF,I ROTATING BAR BENDING FATIGUE TESTING OF METALS (

First Revision )
FOREWORD

0.
0.1 This Indian

Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1969. While reviewing this standard, it was decided to revise this standard with the following main modifications to bring it in line with the International Standard published on this subject: a) The scope has been changed to cover diameter between 5 and 12.5 mm, b) One of the recommended diameter changed to 9'5 mm ( see 4.2.1 ), and c) The minimum speed of testing per minute ( see 7.1 ). test pieces having nominal

d of the test piece has been
changed to 1 000 cycles

has been

0.3 The failures of metallic products may arise from numerous factors. Fatigue which results from dynamic loads ( repeated, periodic, cyclic, etc ), is one of them. The types of loading may be in axial tension or compression, cyclic bending ( rotation ), torsional or vibratory. The variation of loads due to temperature gradients does not fall within the purview of this specification. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IS0 1143-1975 `Metals - Rotating bar bending fatigue testing' issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rczkd ).

3

IS:5075

- 1985

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard prescribes the method for carrying out rotating bar bending fatigue tests on test piece having a nominal diameter between 5 and 12.5 mm without deliberately introducing stress concentrations. 2. PRINCIPLE

OF TESTS

2.1 The test consists of mounting

a test piece as a cantilever, with single point or two-point loading, or as a beam, with four-point loading. The test piece is rotated and subjected to a bending moment. The force giving rise to the bending moment do not rotate. The test is continued until failure occurs or until a predetermined number of stress cycles has been exceeded ( see 9 ). 2.2 Results of fatigue test may be'affected and where controlled conditions are required ance with IS : 196-1966". by atmospheric these shall be conditions, in accord-

3. SYMBOLS

USED
symbols have been used in this standard: Description Diameter piece; of the gripped test piece or loaded end of the test

3.1 The following
Symbols D d r

Diameter of the mum; and

where the stress is a maxistarts the

Radius at the ends of the test section which transition from the test diameter d.

NOTE - This radius need not be a true arc of a circle over the whole of the length between the end of the test section and the start of the enlarged ends for the test pieces shown in Fig. 1, 4 and 5.

4. TEST

PIECE
The test piece shall be: blended fillets at one or both ends,

4.1 Form of Test Piece -

a) Cylindrical, with tangentially (seeFig. 1,4and5); b) Tapered c) Toroidal In each ( see Fig. ( see Fig. 2 ), or;

3, 6 and 7 ). cross-section.

case the test piece shall be of circular
conditions for testing ( revised ).

*Atomospheric

4

IS:5035-1985

FIG. 1

PARALLEL TEST PIECE, SINGLE-POINT LOADING

STRESS

FIG.

2

TAPERED TEST PIECE, SINGLE-POINT LOADING

IS:5075-

1985

LOAD BENDING MOMENT

STRESS v!!!J

FIG. 3

TOROIDALTEST PIECE,SINGLE-POINT LOADING

BENDING MOMENT

LOAD

I

LOAD

1

STRESS

FIG. 4

PARALLELTEST PIECE,TWO-POINT LOADING

n

6

IS:5075

- 1985

iOAdS BENDING MOMENT

STRESS

FIG. 5

PARALLEL TEST PIECE, FOUR-POINT LOADING

FIG. 6

TOROIDAL TEST PIECE, TWO-POINT LCIADINC

IS : 5075 - 1985

STRESS v\1

FIG. 7

TOROIDAL TEST PIECE, FOUR-POINT LOADING

4.1.1 The form of the test piece shall depend on the type of loading to be employed. While cylindrical or toroidal test pieces may be loaded as beams, or as cantilevers with either single-point or two-point loading, the tapered test piece shall be used only as a cantilever with single-point loading. Fig. 1 to 7 show the bending moment and nominal stress diagrams for the ~various practical cases. The voiumes of material subjected to high stresses are not the same for different forms of test pieces, and they may not necessarily give identical results. The test piece in which the largest volume of material is highly stressed shall be preferred. 4.1.2 It is found from experience that for threaded test pieces of certain materials ( which are particularly hard or brittle ) the maintenance ratio of at least 3 : 1 between the threaded section and the test section is desirable.
NOTE - Intests of certain material a combination of high stress and high speed may cause excessive heating of the test piece. This effect may be reduced by subjecting a smaller volume of the material to high stress. If the test piece is cooled, the medium shall be such that it does not react with the material of the test pitce.

4.2 Dimensions of Test Piece fatigue determination shall have d f 0.05 mm.

All the test pieces the same nominal

employed for a diameter, that is, The recom-

4.2.1 The diameter d shall be between 5 and 12.5 mended values of d are 6, 7.5 and 9.5 mm.

mm.

4.2.2 For the purpose of calculating the load to be applied to obtain the required stress, the diameter of the test piece shall be measured to an accuracy of 0'01 mm. Care shall be taken that the surface is not damaged during the measurement of the test piece prior to testing. 8

IS : 5075 - 1985 4.2.3 For cylinderical test piece subject to constant bending moment ( see Fig. 4 and 5 ) the test piece shall be parallel within O-025 mm. For other forms of cylindrical test pieces ( see Fig. 1 ) the test section shall be parallel within 0.05 mm. The transition fillets at the ends of the test section shall have a radius not less that 3d. For toroidal test pieces, the section formed by the continuous radius have a radius not less than 5d. 5. PREPARATION OF TEST PIECE 5J Machining - Care should be taken to ensure that any cutting or machining operation required, either to rough out the test piece out of the blank or to machine it to size, does not alter the metallurgical structure or properties of the test piece. All cuts endured shall be such as to minimize work-hardening of the surface of the test piece. Grinding may be adopted particularly for harder steels in finishing the test pieces to size, ensuring adequate supply of coolant to obviate any undue heating of the surface. 5.1.1 Throughout the turning or grinding procedures the tool sharpness, tool setting, the conditions of the wheel and the grinding machine, and speeds and feeds shall conform to good workshop practice for the material commensurate with the requirements of 5.2 to 5.4. 5.2 Turning - It is and 5.2.2 be adopted. recommended that the procedures in 5.2.1

5.2.1 In rough turning the generally the diameter d plus to x + 0.5 mm, a succession The recommended depths of

test piece from a diameter x + 5 mm ( x is a suitable allowance for surface finishing ) of cuts of decreasing depth shall be made. cuts shall be l-25,0*75 or 0'25 mm.

5.2.2 From a diameter of x + O-5 mm to X, a further succession of cuts of decreasing depths shall be made. The recommended depths of cuts shall be 0.125, 0.075 or 0.05 mm, using for these finishing cuts. The feed in each case shall not exceed 0.06 mm/rev. 5.3 Grinding - For test pieces in material which cannot be readily turned, it is recommended that the finishing operations are carried out by grinding. Where the strength properties of the material are developed in heat treatment, this heat treatment may be carried out after rough turning to a diameter of x + 0.5 mm. The test piece shall then be ground to size. A succession of cuts of The recommended values for depth decreasing depth shall be made. of cut to oversize are: Depth of Cut, mm 0.030 0'005 0.002 5 9 Oversize, mm 0.1 0*025 Nil ( to size )

IS:5075-1985 5.4 Surface Finishing - When the test piece has been turned or ground to diameter x, it shall be polished either by hand or by machine, using successively finer grades of abrasive papers or cloths. Polishing shall generally be in the longitudinal direction, although intermediate stages may be done in any direction to ensure that longitudinal scratches made by the coarser grades of abrasive papers or cloths are removed. The direction of the final polishing stage should mainly be longitudinal. The polishing sequences employed shall be such that the finished test section has a surface texture of at least 0.025 pm CLA. It may usually be found satisfactory to arrange the sequence of polishing so that the last paper used is 600 grade waterproof silicon carbide paper. 5.5 Storage Prior to Testing - If there is a time interval between final preparation and testing of the test pieces, they shall be examined to ensure that no deterioration of the surface has taken place during the storage prior. If there is any deterioration, for example, corrosion pits, the test piece shall be repolished to remove any surface defects.
NOTE - The procedures given in 5.2,5.3 and 5.4 represent standard practice for a wide ranee of materials. It should not be inferred that thev are whollv aunlicable to all matehals and to all heat-treated conditions of these materials. For &ample, the allowance of 0'5 mm on diameter x, for heat-treatment prior to final grinding to size may not be adequate. The purpose of this allowance is to permit the removal of surface phenomena associated with the heat treatment procedure, such as decarburization or distortion, and the allowance shall be such as to ensure the complete removal of any features associated with such effects. Some fatigue investigations may be undertaken to study the behaviour of material with particular surface finishes, for example, rough-machined, fine machined, or the testing of material in the `as-received' condition, in which case special conditions would apply.

6. MOUNTING

OF TEST

PIECE

6.1 Each test piece shall be mounted in the testing machine in such a manner that stresses at the test section, other than those imposed by the applied load, are avoided. 6.1.1 If the bearings transmitting the load are secured to the test piece by means of slit collets, in certain cases it may be desirable for these to be positioned and fully-tightened before the test piece is mounted in the testing machine, in order to prevent- an initial torsional strain being imparted. A similar practice may be necessary if the method of securing is by means of an interference fit. 6.1.2 To avoid vibration during the test, coaxiality of the test piece and the driving shaft ~of the testing machine shall be maintained within close limits. Permissible tolerances are 2 0.025 mm at the chuck end and f0.013 mm at the free end ( if there is one ) for single-point and some 10

IS : 5075 - 1985
types of two-point loading testing machines. For -other types of rotating bending fatigue testing machines, the tolerance on eccentricity measured at two places along the actual test section shall be f0*013 mm. The required degree of coaxiality shall be established before applying any load.
NOTE - The recommendations of the testing machine followed when mounting test piece in the machine. manufacturer shall be

7. SPEED

OF TESTING

7.1 It is recommended,

that tests are carried out within the speed range 1 000 to 9 000 cycles per minute. However, speeds which cause whirling of the test piece shall be avoided. 8. APPLICATION

OF LOAD

8.1 The general procedure for attaining full load running conditions The testing machine shall be shall be the same for each test piece. switched on and the desired speed attained before application of load is The load shall then be applied incrementally or conticommenced. nuously until the required value is attained without shock and as quickly Small adjustments in operating speed may then be as is convenient. made if a particular frequency is required.
The accuracy of the applied bending moment shall be 1 percent.

9. ENDURANCES

9.1 The predetermined

number of cycles at which a test is discontinued depends on the material being tested. The S/N curve for certain materials shows a distinct change in slope after a given number of cycles such that later part of the curve is parallel to the horizontal axis. With other materials the shape of the S/N curve may be a continuous curve which will essentially become asymptotic with the horizontal axis. Where S/N curves of the first type are experienced, it is recommended that the endurance to be used as a basis for the determination be 107 cycles and, for the second type lo* cycles.

10. TEST

REPORT
shall be clearly defined

10.1 In reporting fatigue data, the test conditions and the test report shall include the following:

a) The material tested and its metallurgical conditions. Reference can usually be made to the appropriate Indian Standard t:, which the material was produced; b) Thermal treatment, if any, given to the test piece; condition of the test piece and c) The type, dimensions and surface the points of load application; 11

IS:5075-1985

4

When The method of stressing and the type of machine used. calibration of the testing machine does not comply with the appropriate part of this standard, the method used should be indicated; if this is

When practicable, the temperature of the test piece, e> significantly higher than that of the test environment;

f) The 9) The

frequency

of the stress cycles;

range of relative humidity if this is outside the range of 50 to 80 percent. The range of relative humidity should be measured every day throughout the duration of the test; deviation from the required basis of the conditions testing during the test; for example, of the test piece

h) Any ii> The k)

endurance 107 cycles; and

programme, failure

Criterion of failure, ( see Note ).

if other

than complete

NOTE - In the majority the criterion of failure is _ of fatigue ..~ _ determinations either the occurrence oi- a visible fatigue crack or complete fracture. It should be noted, however, that in particular applications other criteria, for example, plastic deformation of the test piece or rate of crack propagation, may be adopted to determine the end of the test.

10.1.1 It

in one of the forms

is preferable to represent the results of the test graphically of representation given in IS : 5619-1970*.

*Recommendations

for fatigue testing of metals.

12

