U DC 621'65'005`

".IS
Indian Standard

: 10596

( Part 2,&.- 1983
`K&flr&tiu A!

COD~E OF PRACTKE FOR SELECTION, ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PUMPS FOR I~NDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS
PART 2 INSTALLATION

. Scope -

Lays down general guidelines is not applicable

for installation

of pumps for industrial applications.

applications.

.l This standard

to pumps for agricultural

!. Installation - In order to ensure satisfactory operation of a hydraulic pump, prime-mover or transnission, it is essential to follow the installation and operating instructions given by the manufacturer. Zare shall be taken to see that the equipment, particularly the internal parts, is kept clean during nstallation and use. The fluid to be used for cooling, sealing and lubrication should conform as The following general recommendaegards quality and purity, to the manufacturer's specifications. ions are common to most hydraulic power pumps but specific instructions from the manufacturer should re carefully adhered to. Special conditions of use or operation may necessitate maintenance and ervicing operations particular to these uses. !.I Shipment - After final assembly, all flanges and exposed machined metal surfaces are cleaned of oreign matter and coated with an anti-corrosion compound such as grease, petroleum jelly- or heavy ril. For the sake of protection during shipment and erection, all pipe flanges, pipe openings and nozzles ,hould be protected by flange covers or by screwed-in plugs or by plastic or rubber caps. 2.1 .I It is a good practice to deliver the prime mover to the pump manufacturer where it can be The base plate should be drilled for assembled and aligned with the pump on a common base plate. Irime mover mounting but the final doweling to be performed at the site only after final alignment, f possible, the unit should be shipped assembled with pump and prime mover on a common base-plate, n cases where prime mover are shipped directly to the site, the base plate should be drilled at the job rite only. pump should be stored in a dry location if received before time. All protect2.2 Storage at Site -The ng arrangements of the pump parts should be left undisturbed. The bearings and couplings shall bc given due care to protect them from sand, grit and other foreign matter. Special precautions are needed if a pump is to be stored for extending storage of the equipment the manufacturer's instructions an extended period shall be followed. of time. FOI

2.2.1 If rust preventives have been applied on stored parts, they should be removed completely before final installation and the bearings should be relubricated. for maintenance is ensured. 2.3 Location - Location should be such that adequate accessibility Fo large pumps with heavy casings and rotors, a travelling crane or other facility for attaching a hois should be provided on the pump location. 2.3.1 As far as possible, location of pump should be closeto the liquid pump centreline should be kept below the liquid level in the reservoir. source. If practicable, the

2.4. Site Inspection - Just before the start of pump installation the package containing pump shall bl shifted to site and all materials shall be inspected for possible damage to internal parts due to prolon ged storage. In case the pump shaft is not free the pump may be dis-assembled for internal inspectiol and rectification. 2.5 Foundations - Foundation structure should be capable of offering rigid support to the full area a the base plate and to absorb shocks and strains which are normally expected to occur. In this regarl concrete foundation is found most satisfactory. Although most pumping units are mounted on bas plates, very large units may be mounted directly on the foundations by using sole plates under pum and prime mover feet. Misalignment is corrected by putting suitable metallic packings. 2.5.1 Foundation surface and pockets shall be chipped in order to roughen the concrete, and levelle to ensure 50 mm gap between base plate and foundation surface. The centre line and elevation sha
Adopted 30 June 1983

0 October 1983, I
INDIAN
MANAK

ISI I INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

Gr 3

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:10596(

PartZ)-1983

be marked prominently on the foundation. Anchor bolt holes shall be cleaned according to the length of anchor bolts. Foundation surface and anchor bolt holes shall be free from oil, rust, sand dust and any extraneous matter. Alternatively, each foundation bolt shall be surrounded by pipe sleeve, four diameters larger than the bolt. After pouring the concrete the pipe is held solidly in place but the bolt may be moved to conform to the corresponding hole in the base plate, later the space between bolt and sleeve is filled with grout at the time of grouting. 2.5.2 In case a unit is mounted on steelwork or other structure it should be supported in such a way that the base plate cannot be distorted or the alignment disturbed by any yielding or springing of the structure or of the base plate. 2.6 Alignment 2.6.1 Place the base plate on a flat even surface and align the pump and prime mover in case the duly aligned set is not received. Alignment of pump and driver shaft is of extreme importance for trouble free mechanical operation of the unit. The following are the steps to establish the initial alignment of the unit : a) Parallel Alignment - Check the two shaft axes for their concentricity. This should be done with the help of straightedge or dial gauge depending upon the type of coupling and extent of misalignment permitted by the manufacturer-of the coupling (see Fig. 1 ).

Method I Use of Straight Edge and FeelerlGauge

Method II Use of Dia Gauge FIG. 1 PARALLEL ALIGNMENT

2

-IS : 10596

( Part ~2 ) 1983

This should be checked b) Angular Alignment - Check the two shaft axes for their parallelism. with the help of feeler/taper gauge or caliper or dial gauge depending upon the type of coupling and extent of misalignment permitted by the coupling manufacturer (see Fig. 2 ).

-.

Method

I Use of Feeler/Taper

Gauge

Method

II Use of Caliper

Method

III Use of Dial

Gauge

FIG. 2 ANGULAR

ALIGNMENT

3

IS : 10596

( Part 2 ) - I983
above alignments should be established with the help of shims under pump or

2.6.1.l Both the the prime mover.

2.6.2 There should be a proper clearance between the faces of coupling hubs and shaft ends to avoid rubbing or pull on either pump or prime mover. Sufficient clearance will allow unhampered axial movement of the shaft of driving or driven elements to the limit of their axial clearances. 2.6.3 In case of motors with sleeve bearings decide the axial position of shaft by actually rotating the motor without coupling it. Limited end float couplings should be used in cases where motors are with sleeve bearings. 2.6.4 More sophisticated alignment methods such as optical instruments are to be used, particularly, for high speed turbine driven pumps. 2.6.5 Place the baseplate complete with the pumping set on the foundation and support the same on steel strips at frequent intervals between foundation and baseplate. The steel strips should extend Level the baseplate perfectly by adjusting the thickness of the full supporting edge of the baseplate. steel strips by shimming. After levelling tighten the nuts on foundation bolts by hand. Then grout the base. When the grouting (see 2.8) has set, gently but firmly tighten the foundation bolt nuts taking care not to distort the baseplate. 2.6.6 The initial alignment should be rechecked after the suction and discharge piping have been bolted to the pump. Only after ensuring proper alignment at this stage, all bolts should be tightened finally. 26.7 The alignment should be checked after a regular time interval especially when the pump handles hot liquid as there may be uneven strains. Pipe flanges at the pump should be disconnected after a period of operation to check the effect of the expansion of the piping and adjustment should be made to compensate for the same. 2.7 Flushing - Pump and piping should be copiously flushed with the fluid to be used in order to remove atI the traces of the corrosion inhibitors with which they might have been treated. 2.8 Electrical~controls - Check that the used, are compatible with the supply.
2.9 Grouting

voltage

and current requirement for all electrical controls, if

28.1 Grouting prevents lateral movements of the pumpbase, increases its mass to reduce vibrations and fills in irregularities in the foundation. Normally, grout is composed of one part pure portland cement and two parts building sand, with sufficient water to flow freely under the base. In order to reduce settling, it is recommended to mix the grout and let it stand for a short period and then remix it thoroughly before use. If required, more water may be added. 2.9.2 Before starting grouting work, the pumpset should be levelled properly,~with the help of a spirit level, by adjusting the thickness of the shims and/or positions of the wedges, on which it is resting on the concrete foundation block. After satisfactory levelling, foundation bolts should be tightened initially by hand. It is recommended that a frame work should be built around the pumpset base. Now the grout is poured until the entire space under the base is filled to the top of the underside. A stiff wire should be used through the grout holds to work the grout in and release air pockets. In order to prevent cracking due to rapid drying, the exposed surfaces of the grout should be covered by wet burlap. The frame work should be removed and exposed surfaces of the grout and foundations fi_nished smooth only after ensuring that the grout is sufficiently set. After 72 hours or more, the hold down foundation bolts should be finally tightened. 2.9.3 The foundation plate has to be rigidly maximum loads of machine are resting. 2.9.4 secured with the foundation at the areas where the

Usually the grout gains its full strength after 21 days,

2.10 Doweling of Pump and Prime MoverDoweling of both the pump and its prime mover should be done only after a final recheck of alignment with the coupling bolts removed and with the pump and 4

IS : 10596
prime mover at operating temperature. pump manufacturer.

( Part 2 ) - 1983
by

This shall be done wherever applicable and when specified

2.11 Piping-The suction pipe should be as direct and short as possible. If a long suction line is required, the pipe size should be suitably increased to reduce friction losses excluding the case of boiler feed pumps. Manufacturer should be consulted in case of boiler feed pumps. If a pump has to lift the liquid from a lower level, the suction piping should have a continuous rise towards the pump In case of a static suction head, avoiding high spots in the line causing the formation of air pockets. the pump suction piping should slope continuously downward to the pump. 2.11 .I It is recommended to provide an isolating valve between the pump suction -branch and the suction pipe in case of positive suction head, so that when necessary, suction pipe can be isolated Under from the pump by closing the suction side isolating valve when the pump is not in operation. no circumstances this isolating valve should be throttled for controlling the flow when the -pump is in ~operation. 2.11.2 A pump should be provided with a check valve and a discharge valve in the discharge line. The check valve is placed between the pump and discharge valve to check reverse flow in the event of unexpected prime mover failure or from reverse flow from another operating pump. The discharge valve is used when pump is to be primed or shut down for inspection and repairs. Suitable arrangement should be made in cases where it is difficult to operate the discharge valve manually. 2.12 Suction StrainerProper suction strainers are required in the suction lines of pumps not specially designed to handle foreign matter as large particles may close the pump, reduce the capacity or render it altogether incapable of pumping whereas small particles of foreign matter may cause damage by lodging between close running clearances. The size of the mesh for the strainer is generally recommended by the pump manufacturer. 2.13 Venting and Draining - Vent valves provide a means of escape for air or vapour trapped in the casing and should be installed at high points of the pump-casing waterways according to the recommendations of pump manufacturer. These valves are used during the priming of the pump or during operation if the pump should become air- or varpour-bound. Normally vented air or varpours are allowed to escape into the surrounding atmosphere except for the cases when pumps are handling inflammable or toxic or corrosive fluids. In such cases vents should be connected in such a way that they endanger neither the operating personnel nor the installation. The suction vents of pumps taking liquids from closed vessels under vacuum should be piped to the source of the suction above the liquid level. 2.13.1 If the drains are considered worth reclaiming, all the drain and drip connections piped to a point where it can be collected for reuse. 2.13.2 Venting is not necessary if the pump is self-venting type. should be

2.14 Relief Valves - The pressure developed in a positive discharge pump may exceed maximum design pressure. To protect these pumps against excessive pressure when the discharge is throttled or shut off, a pressure relief valve should be installed. Unless operation against a closed discharge is both in frequent and of very short duration, a relief valve with an external return connection should be used and the liquid from the relief valve may be piped back to the source of supply. 2.15 Surge Chambers - In many cases reciprocating pump installations require surge chambers when the suction or discharge lines are of considerable length, when there is an appreciable static head on the discharge, when the liquid to be pumped is hot, or when it is required to smooth out variations in. Centrifugal pumps, generally, do not require surge chambers. The type, size and the discharge flow. arrangement of the surge chamber should be chosen on the basis of ths manufacturer's recommendations. 2.16 Piping Strains - Piping should be such that they should not impose excessive forces and moments on the pump to which it is connected, since these might spring the pump or pull it out of the position. Piping flanges shall be brought squarely together before the bolts are tightened. The suction and discharge piping and all valves, strainers, etc, should be supported and anchored near to but independent of the pump,so that no strain will be transmitted to the pump casing. Allowable forces and ~moments on pump flanges should be considered while layout and supports for the pipes. 5 deciding the fixing

IS : 10596

( Part 2 ) - 1983

2.17 Expansion Joints-These are used in the suction and discharge piping to avoid transmitting any piping strains resulting from expansion when handling hot liquids, or by misalignment. Expansion joints may be formed by looping a pipe. Generally they are of the slip-joint or corrugated-diaphram type. However, they transmit to the pump a force equal to the area of the expansion joint times the pressure in the pipe. These forces can be of very significant magnitude, and it is impractical to design the pump casings, base plates, etc, to withstand such forces. When expansion joints are used, a suitable pipe anchor shall be installed between it and the pump proper. Alternately, the bars can be used to prevent the forces from being transmitted to the pump. 2.18 Warm-up Piping - In some specific cases it becomes necessary for a pump to come up to the In such cases provision should be made for a warm-up flow operating temperature before it is started. to pass through the pump. There may be a number of arrangements used to accomplish this. The pump manufacturer's recommendations should be sought in all cases as to the best means to provide an adequate warm-up procedure. 2.19 Instrumentation - A number of instruments are needed to have a check on the performance and condition of pump. A compound pressure gauge should be connected to the suction of the pump, and a pressure gauge should be connected to its discharge at the pressure taps which may be provided in the suction and discharge flanges. The location of the gauges should be such that they can be easily observed. 2.19.1 Depending upon the criticality of the installation by recording attachments. a flowmeter may be installed supplemented

2.19.2 Apart from these, pumps may have additional instrumentation vibration monitors, bearing or casing temperature indicators, etc.

such as speed indicators,

A block/isolation valve shall be installed in each instrument and gauge glass take off connection and shall be located as close to the line, vessel or pump as possible.

EXPLANATO~RY
fhis standard lays down the broad guidelines maintenance of pumps for industrial application. This standard his being issued in the following Part 1 Selection Part 2 Installation Part 3 Operation Part 4 Maintenance

NOTE
pertaining to selection, installation, operation and

four parts for easy reference :

Q
hinted at Printrade, New Delhi, India

