UDC

674'05

: 001.4

IS:11011
Indian Standard

-1984

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

GLOSSARY RELATING TO WOOD
1. scope - Covers the definitions their operation. 2. Definitions A

OF TERMS WORKING MACHINES

of

terms

relating

to

wood

working

machines,

components

and

2.1 Anti-Kick Back - Any device which prevents the material being flung against the infeed. devices are used on machines such as circular saw benches, panel planers and spindle moulders. 2.2 Arbor A rotating shaft or spindle on which cutter-head or saw blade, etc, is mounted.

These

2.3 Automatic Turning Machine - A turning mschine, either manua!ly or automatically fed, developing a pattern by means of shaped cutters, a templet or following a pre-determined master pattern, not necessarily circular in section. B 2.4 Backing Piece - A pieces of timber attached cut to prevent breakout of the tenon. 2.5 Back of Saw Machine workpiece emerges. 2.6 Back-Out 2.7 or Blade. etc to the fence of a machine

to support the piece
from which

being

The side or end of a machine as the rotation of the head.

or position

the

To feed in the same direction off or Snaking -

Blade. Running

A saw blade not cutting

along the intended

line of cut.

2.8 Blade. Saw, BandA continuous ribbon of alloy/carbon steel, toothed on the edge or edges mounted on the outer periphery of both the wheels, like a driving belt. Used for cutting either straight or curved work. 2.9
used

Blade, Saw, Circular for cutting material.

-

A machine driven circular disc of alloy steel with-teeth-round A tool for circular saw bench also suitable for cross cutting

the periphery and trenching

etc. 2.10 Blade, Saw, Circular, the body. Set is OptiOni3l.
2.11

HOIIOW Ground

-

A saw blade whose

rim and collar

zone

is thicker

than

Blade, Saw, trenching.

Dado -

A set of circular saw blades and section

of

blades

used

for

grooving

and

2.12 Blade. Saw, Inserted Tooth - A saw blade used on ripsaw machines or twin machines. The teeth are held in with spring clips or other devices and can be replaced. 2.13 Blade, Saw Plate A circular saw blade whose thickness is even throughout.

Canadian

saw

Requires set.

2.14 Blade, Saw, Skip Tooth The teeth are usually sharpened

A saw blade ( band or circular by grinding.

) with a larger pitch than normal blade.

2.15 Blade, Saw, Swage - A circular saw blade whose rim is thinner than the body. Used for cutting case timbers. Ground either right or left hand or tapered on both faces. ( Compare with blade, saw, thin rim ). 2.16 Blade, Saw Thin Rim with blade, saw, swage ). 2.17 A circular saw blade whose rim is thinner than the body.

( Compare

Bore ( Centre Hole Eye ) -

The hole in the centre of a circular saw blade or cutter head.

Adopted

17 August

1984 INDIAN
MANAK

0

December

1984,

ISI

Gr 5

STANDARDS
BHAVAN.

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHAUUA SHAH NEW DELHI 11.0002

IS:11011
2.18 Brazing -

-1984
A method of joining section a bandsaw of table blade by brazing. the side heads of a four-sided moulding and

2.19 Bridge
planing 2.20

- A removable machine. weld A method

between

Butt

of joining

a bandsaw

blade C

by welding

squared

ends face to face.

2.21 Chip Deflector the blade. 2.22 Chuck,

-

A small

angled

plate

on a machine

to deflect

sawdust

and

off-cuts

away

from

used in a router
2.23 Clearance,

Eccentric - A toolholder whereby the tool for accurate and repetitive work. ) Cutter Bolt The distance by which a ball

is eccentric

to the

toolholder

spindle.

( It is

the cutter race fitted

bolt

clears

the work being machined. for profile work on a

2.24 Collar, Ball spindle moulder.

Race - A slotted collar with It reduces templet wear.

on the outside

2.25 Collars, Spacing - Rings used to SeParatf? cutters between slotted collars or the head and nut of a spindle 2.26 Collet ( Ferrule, Socket ) cutter in the chuck of the router. A holding device that

or circular shaft.

saw

blades

or

to

fill

the

space

fits on the shank

of a router cutter to retain the

2.27 Cutter(s) - The blades of planning, moulding cutting end stock removal operations are done. 2.28 Cutter, Cocks Comb moulds and grooving. 2.29 Cutter, Creep A type of cutter

or any

other

wood

working

machines

by

which

( segment

of a saw

blade

)

used

for

dividing

multiple

The tendency -

of a cutter, cutters

not properly made especially

tightened,

to move

forward. chuck they are ground

2.30 Cutter, Eccentric Chuck without periphery clearance. 2.31 Cutter, Milled particular profile. 2.32 Cutter, Panel to Pattern

Router

for the eccentric

-

Profile

cutters

made

to a particular

section

and

that

will

only

cut

a

A straight

router

with

two

cutting D

edges.

2.33

Dog -

Steel

teeth

that

hold

the log firmly

against

the base and knees for dovetail are rounded

of a log carriage. in boxes, drawers, square hottoms of

Machine - One which cuts mortices/tenons 2.34 Dovetail The bottoms of both mortice and tenon components etc. hand cut dovetails. 2.35 Driven ( Live ) driven pulleys, etc. 2.36 Drop-on Refers to rollers to facilitate

joints used unlike the

handling

or to feed work

into

machines

or to power

To commence

a stopped

mould. the end of the work moulder. F piece is placed to avoid `Kickback'

2.37 Drop-on Stop -. Device against which when doing `dropping-on' work on a spindle

2.38 Face-Board ( False Fence ) - On a spindle fixed to both fences, thus filling the gap between face board. 2.39 Feather-Board used as a pressure

moulder, a thin piece of timber or plywood nailed the fences. The cutters then project through

or the

( Wooden Spring device on a spindle

1-

A piece moulder.

of timber

with

a series

of closely

spaced

saw

cuts,

2

IS:11011
2.40 Feed System, Power - The power mschanism that moves the timber through cutters of wood working machines at a given feed rate. 2.41 2.42 Fence The adjustable guide which A `tJ'-shaped determines the dimensions moulder the saw

-1984
blades or

of the timber being cut. and cast in one piece.

Fence, Horse-Shoe

fence for a spindle

2.43 Fence, Ring - A plain ring which is clamped to the table of a spindle moulder, over the top of the spindle, The outside of the ring is made slightly eccentric so that the sides are further away from the spindle than the front, The work piece is fed against the sides for the first cut and gradually brought round to the front for the final deep cutting. device consisting of a motor driving a 2.44 Frequency Changer ( Speed Changer ) - An electrical generator which produces higher frequency than the mains, thus allowing high speeds from the machine motor without gears, belts etc. 2.45 Front of Saw Machine/Blade, work piece is fed. etc The side or end of a machine or position from which the

G 2.46 Gap Wearing out of the cutting edge of a cutter. Metallic guards used on different machines to protect

2.47 Guard, Bonnet, Bridge and Other Types the cutter heads from external damage. 2.48 2.49 Guides Gullet Metal or wood jaws which space between

assist a bandsaw two consecutive

blade to cut straight. teeth on a saw blade.

The concave

2.50 Head Block it from rolling while 2.51 2.52

That part of a log carriage.mechanism .
it is being Cut longltudlnally

which.holds
blade.

the log

securely

and

prevents

by the saw

Head ( Cutter Head Cutter Blocks ) Head, Beading The last additional -

The rotating

member

to which moulding

cutters are attached. and planing are machine. to produce e

head on a four-sided individually

2.53 Head, Inserted Profile particular profile. 2.54

A head in which

shaped cutters

inserted

permanently

Head, So/id Profile - A solid machined to profile.

cutter

head

with

the

cutters

an

integral

part

of

the

head

and

2.55 Head, Throating - An additional head on a four-sided moulder able to be done by side heads because of projection difficulfy. 2.56 Haad, Under Cutting above the head. 2.57 Head Stock A head with a single slot in the top into

and planer,

for

making

cuts

not

which

a cutter

fits,

projecting

A driving

unit supporting

one end of the

work piece in a lathe.

2.58 2.59 2.60

/d/ar(s) Inching lnfeed -

-

Refers to rollers to facilitate Very slow, closely controlled,

handling

of pulleys,

etc, that are not power

driven.

step by step of a usually fast machine. material J is fed into a machine.

The side, end or position

from which

2.61 2.62

Jig -

A device used to hold the work piece in position A jig for correct positioning of cutters 3

while

it is being machined.

Jig, Setting

in a head.

IS : 11011 - 1984
2.63 Jointer ( Surface Planer. Buzzer ) - A hand fed surfacing their surfaces and squaring their edges of the timber.

and planing

machine

for

straightening

2.64 Jointing Device - A piece of equipment same cutting circle. The process of `jointing'

used to reduce cutters to a desired level on a head to the or `dressing' is carried out while the head is rotating.

2.65 Jointing Machine BoardA planing machine for accurately jointing the edges of boards so that The joint may when assembled for bonding they will fit together exactly into a flat compound board. The machine may also be used to produce be a plain butt joint or any variety of tongue and groove. all types of edge moulding. K 2.66 Kerf The width of the saw cut. out of the control of the

2.67 Kick Back - Occurs when the work piece jams, catches or is pulled operator by the saw blade or cutters.

L
2.68 Lathe, Back-knife beads, etc, are formed - A turning machine which follows the main shape from flat by profile knives mounted on back frame which is mechanically A machine on which timber tamplet. Cores, fed forwards. hollow

2.69 Lathe, Wood Turning or circular pattern.

is turned and formed into a cylindrical

2.70 Lead -

The inclining

of the fence slightly u;3on which

out of parallel ths log is placed

with the blade. for passing to and fro through the saw

2.71 Log Carriag? - Tha carriage blade of a log saw machine.

M 2.72 Mortiser, Chain - A machine for cutting chain consists of alloy steel links each carrying it leaves a round base to the mortice. The mortices in timber by means of an endless chain, small chisel-like cutters. On blind or stopped mortices

2.79 Mortiser, Chisel - A machine for cutting mortices in timber by means of an auger working in a square hollow chisel. The action of the tool is that the auger drills a round hole and the chisel follows, cutting out the corners to leave a square hole. 2.74 Mortiser, Reciprocating stroke. Used for heavy work. 2.76 Mwtiser, mortise. Slot A mortising A mortising machine with a chisel which has a rapid reciprocating

machine

with

a rotating

bit at the cutting

tool.

Cuts

a round

end

2.76 Moulding and Planing Machine, Four-sided sides of a piece of timber in one operation.

-

A machine

designed

for

planing

or moulding

all

0 2.77 Outfeed The side, end or position from which P 2.78 Packing - Felt, hemp, leather. timber or other material placed on both sides of the infeed half Packing provides support to the saw blade to minimize sideways deflections. a circular saw blade. 2.79 Pin, Former a guide for a jig. A pin placed in the centre of a router table, directly under the cutter and used of material emerges from a machine.

as

2.30 Pin, Lead in - A type of fence to assist the work piece entering the cutters of a spindle It is fixed to the table, close to the cutters and supports the work piece when it makes contact cutters. 2.81 Pin, Steady ( Locating Pin ) -A locating pin situated 4 in the fixed saw collar.

moulder. with the

IS:11011
2.82 2.83 work 2.84 work Pitch Planer parallel The distance from one tooth point to the next on a saw blade. that dresses faces and/or

-1984

( Panel Planer, Thicknesser with one or two horizontal

) cutter

A power fed machine blocks.

edges

of

Planer, Finger Feed - A planing machine designed to produce a geometrically is fed over the cutter blocks by a series of fingers carried on two endless chains. Cutter holders

plane

face.

The

2.85 Plates machine.

used

chiefly

for

straight

or

tapered

work

on

an

automatic

turning

2.86 P/ate, Finger - A removable removing the saw blade. 2.87 2.88 2.89 Pressure-Pad, Projection Push Stick Bar Roller. The distance A notched

section

of the table

of a saw

bench

to

give

access

for

fitting

or

etc -

Any

means projects

of holding

the work

in position

while

being

milled.

the cutter stick

past the cutter

head or collars. of timber past the blade.

used to push the end of a piece R

2.90 Relisher into wedges.

-

A machine

used after

the tenoning

machine

for cutting

haunches

and

converting

waste

2.91 Riving Knife - A safety device which the outfeed side of the saw blade to prevent

is part of the guard system of a circular the work piece binding on the saw blade. sunken Similar or in raised Some

saw

machine

at

2.92 Router Machine - A machine used for cutting any moulding, shaping or rounding inside and outside curves. moulder but the cutter works from above the work piece.

work, pierced respects to a

shape, spindle

S
2.93 Saddle - A shaped piece of suitable material which turning or wandering during its passage through a four-sided holds a moulding in place or stops moulding and planing machine. it

2.94 Sander, Beam - Similar in principle to the stroke sander but the sanding pad or beam is angled to the belt edge ( to clear swarf ) and sometimes a slower moving secondary belt with friction-less strips The work piece is traversed by attached to one surface, runs between the pad and the sanding belt. May be single or twin belt. hand beneath the sanding belt on a sliding table. 2.95 Sander. Beam, Automatic - Similar machine to a beam sander but the work piece is traversed May be single or twin belt. beneath the sanding belt on a power reciprocating table on a feed belt. 2.96 Sander, Belt, Portable `platen sanding' principle. A power driven hand tool which employs a small abrasive belt on the

2.97 Sander. Belt, Wide - An automatic abrasive belt machine designed to run a belt in 355 mm wide. Work pieces are conveyed under or over the abrasive belt by feed belts, Machines fall into three categories: rollers, or a combination of these. a) b) c) with with with a contact a platen wheel

excess chains

of or

( roll ) to back up the belt,
pad ), and and platen.

( sanding
wheel

both contact

2.98 Sander, Bobbin - A drum type sanding machine, with a drum usually of small diameter, in a vertical attitude extending through an angularly adjustable table. Used for sanding curved or shaped edges. 2.99 rear. Sander. Contour Contact wheels - A free running contact wheel type abrasive are soft and comfortable to accommodate profiles belt machine of contoured driven items. from the

2.100 Sander, Disc, Fixed -- A motorised machine in which otherwise secured to a steel disc back up plate. A work table guide fences are usually incorporated.

a coated abrasive d:sc is bonded or (often angularly adjustable) and stop or

5

IS : 11011 - 1984
2.101 Sander, Disc, Orbital ( Oxillating Sander ) - A power driven hand tool consisting of flat The pad is driven in a small cushioned pad over which is clipped a sheet of coated abrasive. Wat sanding models are available. narrow or bit by the motor.
2.102 Sander, Disc, Parallel - A twin disc sander with sanding discs inwardly opposed. One disc Via a capstan wheel the moving disc can be fed towards is fixed, the other is mounted on a slide. One use for the machine is the parallel sizing of drawers the fixed disc, Adjustable stops limit travel. and other pieces. 2.103 Sander, Disc, Portable - A powered hand tool which employs Right paid to back up an abrasive disc up to 230 mm in diameter. available. 2.104 Sander, Disc, Twin A disc sander a rubber or plastic flexible disc angled and vertical models are

with two discs on one spindle and two work tables,
sands generally round timber

2.105 Sander, Dowel - An abrasive belt machine which automatically work pieces on the feed through centreless grinder principle.

2.106 Sander, Drawer - A multi pulley platen type belt sander in which the belt runs over the go" end of the platen before being controlled in a triangular arrangement by the idle and live pulleys, The machine is used for sanding rebates and in particular rebate cabinet drawers. machine in which the 2.107 Sander, Drum, Multi - A semi-automatic belts, rollers or chains under or over two or more coated abrasive covered work is conveyed drums. is wrapped via feed

2.108 Sander, Drum, Open - A power driven drum or cylinder around which coated abrasive ( may be any size 1. The work piece is applied by hand. 2.109 Sander, Edge, Automatic - An edge sander which convey work past the abrasive belt (single side) or belts sanding of drawer sides. employs feed (double side).

a cover

of

belts, rollers or chains to Sometimes used for size

2.110 Sander, Edge, Double - A semi-automatic edge sander with two opposite belt heads. One head is horizontally movable so that the gap between can be varied according to the work piece width. The work piece is supported between the belts and the movable head when fed inwards via capstan type hand wheel, brings both sanding belts in contact to make parallel and finishes two opposing edges simultaneously. 2.111 Sander, Edge Vertical - An abrasive belt machine with vertical pulleys and a belt in a horizonta A table ( sometimes adjustable in plane. The belt is backed up by a flat, rigid platform or platen. two planes ) supports the work piece in such a manner that the edges of panels or faces of other work can be `squared' by the abrasive belt. Usually the abrasive belt oscillates vertically to break up grit lines and to clear swarf. 2.112 Sander, Moulding - A multi-pulley belt sander in which a shaped, idling contact wheel or shaped sanding pad (block) is mounted between two idling pulleys as a back up for the abrasive belt, The belt component is usually angularly adjustable in relation to a work support table ( or table adjustable to the belt ) to provide the desired attitude when sanding timber mouldings or profiles cut on panel edges. 2.113 Sander. Moulding, Automatic - Similar to the conveyed past the shaped contact wheel(s) or pad(s). moulding sander but the moulding is power

2.114 Sander, Moulding, Automatic, Double Belt - A similar machine to the automatic edge sander (twin belt) but by the use of shaped standing pads it is capable of conveying two parallel moulded With flat pads it can also accommodate square edges. edges past the sanding belts. 2.115 Sander, Moulding, Cross Band Veneer - A multi pulley automatic belt machine for sanding Small idler pulleys, adjustably mounted are used to veneered mouldings on a conveyer feed basis. Sanding pads for increasing pressure force the cross cutting belt around the profile of the moulding. in localized areas are also incorporated. 2.116 Sander, Orbital ( Oscillating Sander ) -- A powered hand tool consisting of a flat cushioned The pad is driven in a small, rapid orbit by the pad over which is clipped a sheet of coated abrasive. moter. 6

,

IS :

11011

- 1984

2.117 Sander, Platen - An abrasive belt sander with the belt running over a platfcrm or platen mounted between the driven and idle pullyes. The belt and platen attitude may be horizontal, horizontal/vertical ( belt running horizontal. pullyes vertical ) or vertical ( belt running vertical ). 2.118 Sender, Profile, Automatic - An abrasive belt machine incorporating a sanding pad which is applied to shaped work pieces (e.g. gun stocks) on the copying lathe principle. The sanding pad, mounted for articulation, is automatically traversed along the work piece to can on a copy master which reproduces the profile. 2.119 Sander, Reciprocating ( Striaight Line Sander 1 - A similar powered hand tool to the orbital sander but with the pad driven in a backwards and forwards motion. Twin pad is the usual form. Wet models are available. 2.120 Sander, ScrollA machine in which a tongue or stem carries an abrasive belt up through a work table and over a small diameter pulley or stationary head. A rubber idler pulley, contacting the abrasive side forces that section of the belt protruding above the work table to run parallel (i.e. back to back) in accordance with the diameter of the top pulley or head. Work performed by this machint includes sanding inside edges of scroll or fretwork. 2.121 Sander, Spool - A multi pulley abrasive belt machine that features a narrow belt and a small convex shaped contact wheel. The contact wheel is driven at high speed to produce normal bee speeds. Used to sand fluted or carved work. 2.122 Sander, Stroke ( Six Inch Hand Sander, Hand Block Sander ) An abrasive belt machine with the belt horizontally arranged over a vertically adjustable sliding table which can be traversed beneath the belt. With the work mounted on the table, sanding is effected by bringing the belt in contact by By traversing both pad and work table, large surface areas can means of a hand held sanding pad. be sanded. 2.123 Sander, Stroke, Automatic - A similar machine to the stroke sander but pad is rapidly traversed back and forth along the belt by hydraulic or mechanical in which means. the

sanding

2.123.1 Sanding pressure - is effected via a hand lever acting on the pad traversing component of Thus the operator merely brings the pad in contact and traverses the work. pad traversing the machine. Twin belt models are available. being performed automatically. 2.124 Sander, Stroke, Lever - A similar machine to the The operator mounted on a lever actuated traversing slide. lever action rather than by hand. 2.125 Sander, stroke sander but with the sanding pad applies sanding pressure to the pad by

Turning, Automatic - A machine that consists of a ferris wheel type work holding turned work (e.g. chair rungs) past stationary abrasive cloth. As the work piece comes in contact with the abrasive it automatically turns rapidly. Profiles are accommodated by Abrasive cloth slashed into narrow strips is backing up the abrasive with felt pads or bristle brushes. usually employed for more severe profiles.
device for conveying

2.126 Sander, Variety - An abrasive belt contours sander. with two or more soft contact different diameters, usually arranged a horizontal triangular attitude for accommodating contours of varying radii.

wheels profiles

of or

2.127 Sanding Head, Brush Backed - A drum type accessory which consists of a metal cage (similar Nylon or bristle brushes are radially disposed around the perito a ferris wheel) and an inner hub. The phery of the cage and the inner hub supports and winds up an assembly of coated abrasive strips. abrasive strips, which can be `slashed' or `plain' extend through slots in the cage and are backed up by the brushes during the sanding operation. 2.12% Sanding Head, Drum Pneumatic ( Pump Drum ) - A drum type accessory composed hub and a rubber tyre or sleeve which can be inflated to hold a coated abrasive belt. of a metal

2.129 Sanding Head, Wheel, Expanding - A drum type accessory made from felt or rubber with radial slits around the periphery which are designed to open auf under centrifugal force to hold an abrasive belt. 2.130 Sanding Head, Wheel Flap - A drum type accessory that consists of numerous die cut abrasive Disc flanges are cloth strips or `flaps' which are radially compressed and bonded into a wheel form. inserted into recesses in the flap wheel, for mounting to a power driven spindle. 7

IS :11011 - 1984
2.131 Sanding Head, Wheel Flail - A drum type accessory consisting of a metal hub with radially machined tee type slots around the periphery, abrasive cloth strips (usually 6 to 8 pieces) are secured to a Tee shaped key. This assembly is fitted to the slots in the hub and secured by side plates. Sanding action is a `flailing' one as opposed to the less flexible flapwheel. It consists of a 2.132 Sanding Pad - A sanding accessory for applying pressure to an abrasive belt. Covering the felt is body (usually timber) with felt or other cushioning material fixed to one surface. A handle or other means of applying the pad is provided on a frictionless material such as slip cloth. The contact surface can be flat or shaped to suit the opposite side to the frictionless contact surface. a particular contour. 2.133 Saw Bench system. A sawing machine as a whole, including the table or bench, blade and feed

2.134 Saw Machine, Band - The machine on which the band saw blade is mounted. Consists of two pulley wheels, one driven or `live' the other idle or `dead'. Tney may be set one above the other (vertical band saw machine) or side by side (horizontal band saw machine). According 2.135 down to the size and purpose, power feed system, fitting tables, etc, may be provided.

Saw Machine, on a log mill.

Band Re-saw - A band saw It has a fence but no carriage.

machine which re-saws timber after it is broken It is generally used for high production. mounted which is used

2.136 Saw Machine, Log Band Saw -- A large machine with a band saw blade It is usually provided with a log carriage. to handle extra large size logs. 2.137 Saw Machine, Band Scroll - A small Takes saw blades up to two inches wide. band saw machine used for

straight

and curved

work

2.136 Saw Machine, Cross-Cut, Over-Head - A saw machine with a circular saw blade or dado saw The machine may have a rise blades mounted on a slide carriage which traverses over a fixed table. and fall motion for trenching and the sliding carriage may also be capable of turning in the horizontal and vertical planes for compound angles cutting. 2.139 Saw Machine, Cross-Cut, Pendulum ( Docker, Swing Saw) - A cross-cut saw machine, containing a circular saw blade, mounted on a counter balanced arm pivoted above the work table. The counter weight is arranged SO that the saw has to be pulled forward through the timber, then automatically moves back. 2.140 Saw Machine, Cross-Cut Pendulum, Reverse - Similar to the overhead saw machine but the pivot is under the work table at about ground level. 2.141 Saw Machine, Cross-Cut, Universaladdition the head containing the cutting may be done. Similar to an overhead tool can be turned so that pendulum cross-cut

cross-cut saw machine but in ripping and grooving operations

2.142 Saw Machine, Cross-Cut Vertical Panel - This cross-cut saw machine is designed for cutting large panels of plywood, blockboard, hardboard and the like. The saw blade and motor are mounted on steeply inclined tracks and can be wound up and down on an endless chain by means of a hand wheel. ( Compare with dimension saw machine. ) 2.143 Saw Machine, board, particle board, (Compare with panel 2.144 Saw Machine, Dimensions - A machine used etc. to close tolerances. Usually cross-cut saw machine. ) Docking Name given to rough to cut large dimension has a large sliding table material such as hardto facilitate handling.

cross-cutting

saw machines

generally.

2.145 Saw Machine, Edger, Straight Line - A power fed rip saw machine designed for trimming edges of boards and ripping or flat cutting them rapidly and with great accuracy prior to surfacing, thicknessing and moulding. It consists of a table wilh a circular saw blade mounted erther above or below. The work piece is fed through the circular saw blade by an endless chain or travelling bed below and rollers on top. 2.146 which Saw Machine, Gang -- A saw machine operate with a reciprocating motion. consisting of a frame containing one or more saw blades

8

IS : 11011 - 1984
2.147 Saw Machine, Jig - This machine, which may be portable or static is used for cutting shaped frets. It is fitted with a single reciprocating action saw blade which can be quickly released for inserting in the frets. 2.148
Saw Machine.

Rip -

A machine used specifically

for sawing

timber along the grain. with a radially operating

2.149 Saw Machine. Rip, Radial Arm Power Feed - A rip saw machine Used to dimension cut stock of varying widths. power feed roller.

2.150 Saw Machine, Twin Breaking Down - The most commonly used breaking down saw machine It consists of two circular saw blades in line, one above and for the conversion of hardwood logs. slightly in front of the lower saw blade which is usually larger than the upper saw blade. saw teeth are bent or sprung to the periphery of the saw 2.151 Saw, Staggered Tooth - Alternate blade in a staggered manner so that the resultant cut will be wider than the thickness of the saw blade. 2.152 Saw, Wobble - A saw Used to cut a groove or trench. 2.153 Sleeve An attachment blade angled to the shaft by means of adjustable bevelled collars.

for en automatic

turning

lathe to which of a spindle

holders are fixed. is prevented from turning

2.154 Spindle Lock - The device whereby the spindle when tightening or loosening the spindle nut.

moulder

shaft projecting through a work table. 2.155 Spindle Moulder - Consists of a vertical revolving This planing machine is Cutters are held either on a block or in slotted collars mounted on the shaft. capable of producing straight and curved work rebating chamfering, moulding and shaping of all kinds. 2.156 Spindle Moulder. French - A spindle Used for small radius curved work. cutters. 2.157 2.159 Spindle Moufder, Left Hand Spindle

moulder moulder

with

a slot

placed

centrally

into

the

shaft

A spindle A spindle

running running

in a clockwise in an anti-clock

direction. wise direction.

Moulder, Right Hand -

moulder

2.159 Steady Travelling chattering.

A lathe attachment

used to support thin work against the cutter and prevent moulding irons can be fixed to produce

2.160 Sticker - A machine similar square turning, etc.

to surface planer in which

2.161 Stripping - The act of bringing circular saw blade to accurate roundness blade with piece of abrasive stone (See 2.64 1. 2.162 Swarf operations. Excess material

by touching

revolving

abraded from the surface of the work piece during T

sanding

or cutting

2.163 Table Rings ( Stove Rings Filter Rings ) spindle of a spindle moulder.

Rings

which

fill

up the table in the area around the

This provides the 2.164 Tailstock - The idle of `dead' centre of a lathe which has lateral movement. Live centre may also be used when necessary instead of dead grip for the work piece movement. centre. 2.165 Teeth The members which form the shape of the cutting blade, usually of the edge of a saw blade. skip tooth type with hardened teeth.

2.166 Teeth, Flame, Hardened Sharpened by grinding.

A saw

2.167 Tenoner, Double End - A machine designed to tenon both ends of a work piece simultaneously. The machine may also incorporate cross-cut saws for trimming ends to exact length and angle; various cutter heads that may produce any size of tenon. double tenon or dovetail. 9

IS : 11011

- 1984

2.168 Tenomr, Round End ( Round Tenoner 1 - This machine forms a tenon by a revolving cutter The travel of the cutter can be varied to produce any size of circular or working on a shaped cam. oval sectioned tenon or one with round ends and parallel sides ( see slot mortiser ).
2.169 Tenoner, Single End ( Tenoning and Scribing Machine ) - A machine for tenoning and scribing mouldings. It consists of two horizontal spindles with cutter blocks that can be raised or lowered independently to suit the thickness and position of the tenon required. Spur cutters are attached to the end of the cutter blocks to sever the fibres of the timber across the grain to produce a clean cut shoulder, Scribing cutter heads may be attached to vertical spindles. 2.170 Tension speed.

A condition

of stress in a saw blade

which

enables

it to

run

straight

at working

2.171 Throat Piece - A piece of suitable the infeed end of the saw blade.

material

situated

in the table

of

a circular

saw

machine

at

2.172 Tilting Device ( Tracking Device ) - The mechanism which tilts the table to a desired degree (generally 5' to 45") of a band saw machine to obtain a cut of the desired degree on the material while the blade runs true on the wheels. W 2.173 Wheel, Friction ( Friction the blade of a scroll band saw. Disc Thrust Wheel ) A small wheel which takes the

back

thrust

of

2.174 Wheel, Tensioning - A device which raises and lowers the top wheel so that working tension can be applied to the saw blade.

of a band saw machine

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard has been formulated generally based upon the experience of our industry. However, assistance has been derived from the Draft DR 72142 `Australian Glossary of Terms for Woodworking Machinery' issued by the Standards Association of Australia Committee TM/l - Glossary of terms relating to timber and woodwork. 10
Crinted sl Printrrds. New Delhi.

rndir

