**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n i im^VN^ ^^Ts^^ii ra^%^uiKa a «&^^ 



IS 15677 (2006) : Metering of natural gas 
[PGD 26: Weights and Measures] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Code of practice 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 15677 : 2006 

Hlfilcltf % ^f>T WH — frfcT ^ir.cli 

Indian Standard 

METERING OF NATURAL GAS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 



ICS 75.060; 75.180.30 



© BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



June 2006 Price Group 14 



Weights and Measures Sectional Committee, PG 26 



FOREWORD 

This Code was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by die Weights and Measures 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production and General Engineering Division Council. 

The transportation and distribution of natural gas through cross-country pipelines are the major business of the 
oil companies. Similarly, the accuracy of metering and regulating of gas at different delivery points are necessary 
for the consumer satisfaction. Considering the measurements of all the metering and fpr the consumer satisfaction, 
Bureau of Indian Standards has formulated this Code. To formulate this Code, BIS has taken considerable assistance 
from major oil and gas handling organizations of India. 

For further details on regulating stations for metering of Natural Gas, reference may be made to 'Code of Practice 
for Installation and Commissioning Natural Gas Dispatch Terminal^ . 

In preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: 

ISO 2 1 86 : 1 973 Fluid flow in closed conduits — Connections for pressure signal transmissions between 
primary and secondary elements 

Measurement of fluid flow by means of pressure differential devices inserted in circular 
cross-section conduits running full — Part 2 : Orifice plates 

Calculation of the uncertainty of a measurement of flow rate 

Production pressure testing requirements 

Natural gas-calculation of calorific value density, relative density and Wobbe Index 

Measurement of gas flow in closed conduits-turbine meters 

American Gas Authority Report for Orifice Plate Meter 

American Gas Authority Report for Energy Calculation 

American Gas Authority Report for Turbine Meter 

American Gas Authority Report for Compressibility and Super Compressibility (NX 19) 
for Natural Gas and Other Hydrocarbon Gases 

American Gas Authority Report for Ultrasonic Meters 

American Gas Authority Report for Mass Flow Meter 



ISO 5167-2: 2003 


ISO 5168: 


1998 


ISO 5208 : 


1993 


ISO 6976 : 


1995 


ISO 9951 : 


1993 


AGA3 




AGA5 




AGA7 




AGA8 




AGA9 




AGA11 





IS 15677 : 2006 



CONTENTS 



Title 

1. Score 

2. References 

3. Abbreviations 

4. Classification 

5. Meter Selection 

6. Design of Metering System 

Annex A Metering by Orifice Meters 

Annex B Periodical Inspection Card 

Annex C Periodical Inspection Card 

Annex D Witness Certificate for Orifice Plate Installation 

Annex E Metering by Turbine Meters 

Annex F Metering by Ultrasonic Meter 

Annex G Multipath Ultrasonic Meter Flow-calibration Issues 

Annex H Estimation of Uncertainty 

Annex J Secondary Instrumentation 

Annex K Gas Properties Related to Metering 

Annex L Calculation of Calorific Values, Density, Relative Density and 
Wobbe Index from Natural Gas Composition 

Annex M Installation and Commissioning 

Annex N Operation and Maintenance 

Annex P Gas Analysis and Recording Calorimeters 

Annex Q Safety Aspects 

Annex R Areas of Concerns of Existing Terminals and Corrective Actions 

Annex S Bibliography 



Page 
1 
1 
1 
1 

2 
3 

15 
18 
19 
20 
20 
23 
31 
35 
37 
39 
41 

42 
43 
45 
47 
49 
49 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 2007 

TO 

IS 15677 : 2006 METERING OF NATURAL GAS — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 

(Foreword, last para, lines 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15) — Substitute 
'American Gas Association'/'"' 'American gas authority'. 

(Page 28, Fig. 1 1) — Substitute *REPEATABIUTY'/or 'REPATABILITY'. 
(PG26) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 15677 : 2006 

Indian Standard 

METERING OF NATURAL GAS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 

1 SCOPE 3 ABBREVIATIONS 

1.1 This Code gives guidance on the specification, Speed-of-sound SOS 

design, installation, operation and maintenance of Ultrasonic flow meter USM 



IS 15677 : 2006 



4.1.1 Small terminal^ 000 to 50 000 SCMD) with and 
without condensate/dust should have (see Fig. 1 to 4): 

a) a pre-filter/dual pre-filter with a bypass/with 
condensate handling and storage unit 
arrangement. 

b) dual hot standby PCV/SDV combination. 

c) metering by flow meters with dedicated and 
reliable/un-interrupted power source flow 
computer system. 

d) suitably sized flow control device may be 
provided to protect over speed of turbine/ 
rotary piston meters. 

e) spot sampling at the trunk line with Gas 
chromatograph can be either online or 
laboratory type. 

f) flow computer may have communication port 
to enable hook up to SCADA system for 
remote monitoring. 

4.1.2 Medium terminal (50 000 to 1 000 000 SCMD) 
with or without condensate/dust should have (see 
Fig. 5 and 6): 

a) a dual pre-filter with condensate handling and 
storage facility. 

b) dual hot standby PCV/SDV combination. 

c) dual metering lines employing flow meters. 

d) suitably sized flow control device may be 



provided to protect over speed of turbine 
meters. 

e) spot sampling at the trunk line with Gas 
chromatograph can be either online or 
laboratory type. 

f) flow computer may have communication port 
to enable hook up to SCADA system for 
remote monitoring. 

4.1.3 Large terminal (Above 1 000 000 SCMD) with or 
without condensate/dust should have (see Fig. 7 to 9): 

a) a dual pre-filter with automatic condensate 
handling and storage facility. 

b) dual hot standby PCV/SDV combination. 

c) N + 1 metering lines employing flow meters, 
each meter run sized for 50 percent of the 
terminal capacity. 

d) suitably sized flow control device may be 
provided to protect over speed of turbine meters. 

e) on-line Gas chromatograph/auto sampler for 
gas analysis. 

f) flow computer may have communication port 
to enable hook up to SCADA system for 
remote monitoring. 

NOTE — SCMH is the unit instead of SCMD divided 
by 24 N is an integer and greater than 1 . 

5 METER SELECTION 



COMPARISON OF SALIENT FEATURES 



Factors Affecting 
Performance 


Type of Primary Sensing Meter 


Orifice 


Turbine 


Ultrasonic 


Accuracy 


< 1.0 percent can be 
achieved without flow- 
calibration 


0.5 percent achievable with flow- 
calibration at working conditions 


< 0.5 percent can be 
achieved with flow- 
calibration 


Rangeability 


3:1 


10:1 


50:1 


Accommodating future 
demand increase 


Orifice bore sizing DP 
range increase (limited to 
10 000 mm under extreme 
conditions) 


Additional meter runs required 
increase pressure 


Additional meter 
runs required 
increase pressure 


installation 


Long lengths of pipeline 
required depending on 
upstream fitting and Beta 


Relatively short lengths required 


Relatively short 
lengths required 


Permanent pressure loss 


Less than 0.0S MPa 


0.01 MPa at 4 MPa 


Negligible 


Over-ranging of flow 


Leads to buckling of 
orifice plates which can 
result in under-registration 


Rotor damage premature bearing 
damage. However 20 percent 
over-ranging is permissible for 
short durations. Meter to run at 
65 percent to 75 percent on 
continuous duty (OIML R 32) 


No damage, loss of 
signal is possible 



IS 15677 : 2006 



Factors affecting 
performance 


Type of primary sensing meter 


Orifice 


Turbine 


Ultrasonic 


Cyclic flow variations 


Generally over-registration 


Appreciable over-registration 


Not affected 


Cyclic pressure 


Resonance in impulse line 
can lead to large metering 
errors 


Damage to moving parts. Over- 
registration possible 


Not affected 


Gas impurities-solids 


Orifice edge erosion and 
debris built up at the up- 
stream 


Minimal effect on accuracy, 
until extensive damage to 
blades 


Not affected 


Liquids in gas 


Corrosion and erosion, 
leading to under registering 


Corrosion and rotor freezing 
possible damage to rotor and 
bearing failures 


Corrosion possible 


Stability 


Good stability can be 
achieved by regular 
maintenance of upstream 
filter, orifice plate installation 
and calibration 
of DP instruments 


Very good stability possible by 
regular lubrication of bearing 
and spin-time tests to check for 
increased friction 


Very good stability, 
self diagnostic 
features available 



6 DESIGN OF METERING SYSTEM 

6.1 Nature of the Gas to be Metered 

The gas being metered shall be clean, dry and non- 
corrosive. 

6.2 Types of Metering 

6.2.1 Orifice Meters 

The specification for orifice meters and guidance on 
their application is given in Annex A. To achieve 
the stated uncertainty levels on the primary metering 
equipment without prior calibration in Annex H shall 
be followed (see also IS 15675). 

6.2.2 Turbine Meters 

Guidance on use, installation and operation of turbine 
meters are given in Annex E. The accuracy achieved 
will be dependent on the initial calibration which should 
be performed at working conditions (see also 
IS 15676). 

6.2.3 Multi-path Ultrasonic Meters 

Multi-path ultrasonic meters are relatively new. 
Guidance on use, installations and operation is given 
in Annex F. Multi-path ultrasonic meters do not need 
calibration but they should be calibrated before use at 
near working conditions. These meters have the 
potential for accuracy comparable to that of orifice or 
turbine meters, operate on fundamental physical 
principles and have the capacity to be self-checking 
(see also IS 15674). 



6.2.4 Rotary Piston Meters 

For use of rotary piston meters (see IS 15673). 

6.2.5 Coriolis Meters 

For use of coriolis meters (see IS 15672). 
6.3 Metering Requirements 

6.3.1 The nature of flow is very important for the 
performance of the meter. The following is desirable 
to achieve intended accuracy levels: 

a) Flow should be steady, 

b) Flow should be free from pulsations, 

c) Flow shall be parallel to the axis of the 
upstream pipe work, and 

d) There should be no swirling motion. 

All pipe work fittings, for example, bends, tees, valves 
and regulators, will produce unstable, distorted velocity 
profiles. Those fittings whose cross-sectional area 
increases in the flow direction, for example, diffuser 
may generate the worst flow disturbances. 

6.3.2 In orifice plate meter installations, combinations 
of bepds in more than one plane should be avoided at 
the meter run inlet because they give rise to swirl. 
Small-scale features such as gasket protrusions or 
steps in the pipe may also cause significant effects on 
turbine and orifice meter accuracy and should be 
avoided. 

6.3.3 To stabilize and regularize the velocity profile 
downstream of pipe work fittings, straight pipe lengths 



IS 15677 : 2006 



A- 



CO 




9 ?i 



9 





* 



;l 



D 

Q 

"a 

C/5 

2 
w 
Q 

Z 

o 
U 

H 

D 

£ Q 
?S 

<*" 
£ o 
S o 

OtS o 

^2 
3o 

u. o 

* fN 

O w 

< 



LU 

> 

o 
5 

2 






IS 15677 : 2006 



fr 




I 



9 51 



S 



s 




-* 



I 

§ 

O 

Is 

2 o 

c p 



U 

& CO 







s 



o 



(N 



> 



6 



IS 15677 : 2006 



& 




1 



s 



I 




i_ 



l 



I 




I 



< 
© 

i 

J o 
C/3 O 



o 



IS 15677 : 2006 



& 





3 



IS 15677 : 2006 




n 






(/J 



o 
u 



o Q 

3§ 



go 



s o 



8 



Q 
w 

> 






IS 15677: 2006 



^r 



K 




IT Ti 





c/j 

U) 



O 

u 



3 

s 

OS 

w 
H 

2 



Q 

5 

u 

00 

o 
o 
o 

o 
o 
o 



s o 



O U 
2 o 

So 



(J 
S 



6 



IS 15677 : 2006 



— v -i 



h 







l\ \l 






^ 8 












I r-<5 






-3 



O 

u 

5 

S ^ 
h Q 
*S 

d CO 

s ° 

2 o 
C © 

M o 

w 

Si 

£ a 



< 



o 



10 



V. 



. 8 



IS 15677 : 2006 



i 



it 







s 

U. 



r 





i 



s 



§ 




I 



8 







O 

u 



3 o 
3 © 

H o 

w g 

j 2 

1 8 

is 

Q 
Si 






L 



I 



:i 



it 



IS 15677 : 2006 



^ 



»Kr 




. 8 





I 



\ 




^~i r: i 



U 
I- 

3 o 

H g 
w © 

o o 

s- 



s 



o 

■< 

Q 



6 



12 



IS 15677 : 2006 



should be included in which flow conditioners may, 
additionally, be used. 

6.4 Terminology 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

6.4.1 Pulsations — Optimum metering accuracy 
requires that the gas flow shall be free of pulsations. 
Large metering errors may occur if the pulsation level 
at the meter is excessive and has not been limited, for 
example, by a pulsation damper. 

Compressors located upstream or downstream of a 
meter may cause pulsations at the meter and, under 
certain operating conditions, pipe fitting and control 
equipment may also produce unsteady flow. 

Based upon the present state of knowledge of pulsation 
effects, the installation of pulsation dampers should 
be considered when the pulsation frequency is higher 
than 1 cycle/min and the pulsation amplitude of either 
the static pressure exceed ±5 percent of the absolute 
static pressure or the flow rate exceeds ±10 percent of 
the mean flow value. 

6.4.2 Velocity — The velocity profile at the approach 
to a meter may be critical to meter performance. In 
general, orifice plate meters require a more developed 
profile than turbine or ultrasonic meters. The gas 
velocity in pipe work associated with a flow 
measurement system should not exceed 30 ms~'. The 
mean velocity in headers, supplying parallel meter 
streams, shall be limited to 20 ms~*. 

6.4.3 Flow Rate — To accommodate future growth, 
and in particular for turbine meters consideration shall 
be given to using a smaller diameter tube in a run 
designed for a larger diameter meter tube. In the case 
of orifice plate meters, it would generally be the case 
that a full size pipe would be used and the plate would 
be changed. 

6.5 Installations (see Annex M) 

6.5.1 Mechanical Aspects 

In general, meters shall be installed upstream of any 
heater and pressure/volumetric regulation equipment 
to avoid swirls and ensure fully developed flow profile. 
However in certain metering installations, particularly 
where station inlet pressures fluctuate, it may be 
necessary to install the meter downstream of the heater 
and regulators. This may degrade the meter 
performance if sufficient care is not taken in ensuring 
fully developed flow profile. 

6.5.2 Consideration shall be given to fitting an 
additional line to all meter installations with a single 
working meter. The additional line may be designed 



to allow a future second metering stream to be installed 
under operating conditions that is to be double-val ved. 
For custody transfer metering, any lines shall be 
securely and demonstrably closed. 

6.5.3 The preparation of the design and general 
arrangement of a measurement system should take into 
account the overall pressure drop through the system. 

6.5.4 Meters shall not be fixed at low points in the 
pipe work system. All low points shall be fitted with 
drains. Provision shall be made for isolation, safe 
venting, draining and purging of the metering system. 
Any section of the pipe or fittings between two valves 
should incorporate a minimum of one vent and one 
drain. The vent shall be sized to permit reasonable 
venting times without causing excessive flows through 
the meter or excessive cooling. 

6.5.5 Special consideration shall be given to adequate 
lighting of areas where metering and instrumentation 
are located. 

6.6 Important Guidelines for Different Component 
Installation and Commissioning 

6.6.1 Valves for gas metering lines shall be.full bore 
ball valves upstream, of the meter. If the gas is dirty, 
ball valves are not ideal as grit/dirt can damage the 
seats and/or the ball. In these conditions, a gate valve 
or a twin seal valve/block and bleed valve may be used. 

6.6.2 To take care of passing valves, double valving 
shall be employed both upstream and downstream of 
the meter with the ability to vent the cavity between 
the two valves. 

6.6.3 Forced lubricated plug valves should not be used 
as grease may ingress into the line and deposit on the 
meter and in the meter tube. 

6.6.4 All valves should have position indicators to 
show clearly whether the valves are open or closed. 

6.6.5 All isolating valves shall be capable of being 
locked in the open or closed position to prevent 
unauthorized operation. 

6.7 Pipe Work Requirements 

Pipe work immediately adjacent to meters and orifice 
plate carriers shall be adequately supported and also 
protected by a non-metallic sleeve. Care shall be taken 
to ensure that there is no transfer of loading from the 
pipe work to the meter or carrier that may create 
unacceptable stresses in the meter or carrier body and 
flanges. 

6.8 Gas Cleaning System 

6.8.1 The gas shall be filtered to a level of 5 microns 
at 95 percent efficiency. 



13 



IS 15677 : 2006 



6.8.2 Facilities for gas cleaning at the immediate inlet 
to flow measurement system should include, as 
appropriate, one of the following: 

a) Fine filter, or 

b) Scrubbers) followed by fine filters, or 

c) Combined scrubber-filter unit(s). 

It is desirable to install two or more streams with 
suitable valving and connections to permit the main 
tilter to be maintained. 

6.8.3 If possible, scrubbers and filters shall be 
commissioned before the meters are brought on stream. 
This will allow removal of construction deposits which 
may be lying in the system, before the meter is 
commissioned. If this is not possible, regular inspection 
of the filtering section shall be carried out during the 
first weeks of operation. It is important to guard against 
bursting of filters by monitoring the differential 
pressure across the filter. In any case, the filtering 
media should never be removed altogether. 

6.9 Straight Pipe Lengths 

The straight length requirements both upstream and 
downstream of the meter shall be adhered to, if the 
minimum uncertainty is to be achieved. The straight 
length requirements imply that the pipe shall be 
circular, of an acceptable smoothness and free from 
protrusions from sources such as weld penetration or 
gaskets. 

These requirements are specified for orifice plate 
meters, turbine meters, ultrasonic meters and for 
coriolis meters. 

6.10 Calculation 

An appropriately configured computer shall be chosen 
to meet the required overall uncertainty. 

It currently available flow computers do not add 
significantly to the uncertainty of a flow measurement 
calculation and are carrying out the full calculation of 
the various flow quantities. Any approximation to these 
quantities may lead to loss of accuracy. Possible 
approximations that computers may use could affect 
the estimation of density (via compressibility), orifice 
discharge coefficient, orifice expansibility and turbine 
meter error curve. Complete specifications for the flow 
computer are dealt with somewhere else in this 
standard. 

6.11 Inspection 

A full metrological inspection shall be carried out 
before use if orifice meters are to be used without a 
flow calibration. Traceable instrumentation and 
specialist equipment for the measurement of orifice 



plate square edge shall be used. Full documentation of 
these inspections is required and shall be retained. 

6.12 If the gas is clean, dry (or single phase) and non- 
corrosive, then orifice plate or turbine or coriolis or 
ultrasonic meters may be chosen. The meter chosen 
should perform satisfactorily within the limits of their 
specification. 

If the gas fails to meet these criteria, it shall be accepted 
that some degradation of accuracy may occur. It is not 
possible to accurately predict the uncertainly on 
account of above. 

Hie presence of dirt may damage the square edge of 
an orifice plate and substantial amounts of liquid may 
alter the discharge coefficient. 

Turbine meter bearings may be affected by dirt and the 
presence of any liquid may also affect its accuracy. All 
meters may be affected by corrosive components in the 
gas. Great caution needs to be exercised in claiming 
specific levels of accuracy under such conditions. 

Reference shall be made for guidance on the factors 
affecting the choice of the primary metering equipment. 

6.13 Installation Defects 

6.13.1 Any electrical equipment associated with a 
meter installation shall be designed, constructed and 
installed in accordance with IS 2148. 

The hazardous area classification as given below, of 
the meter installation shall be determined by means of 
a full hazard assessment: 

a) Zone 0: An area in which an explosive gas/air 
mixture is continuously present or present for 
long periods. 

b) Zone 1 : An area in which an explosive gas/air 
mixture is not likely to occur in normal 
operation. 

c) Zone 2: An area in which an explosive gas/air 
mixture is not likely to occur in normal 
operation and, if it occurs, it will exist only 
for a short time. 

By implication, an area which is not classified as 
Zone 0, Zone 1 or Zone 2 is deemed to be non- 
hazardous or a safe area. 

Even in safe area, care shall be taken of any constraints 
imposed by any adjacent hazardous area. 

6.13.2 Where a meter is in a hazardous area, electrical 
equipment, for example, lighting and instrumentation 
shall be appropriately certified for safe use in the 
designated zone. If the required equipment is not 
certified or suitable for use in the designated area, it 
shall be fitted in a safe area or in a separate 



14 



IS 15677 : 2006 

compartment having gas-tight walls and outside access 6.13.7 Intrinsically safe circuits shall not be intermixed 

only to a safe area. with non-intrinsically safe circuits in the same multi- 

core c&ble 
6.13.3 Any electrical device and associated circuits, 

for examnle. a oulse transmitter, mounted in or on a * « a o-*^_. 



IS 15677: 2006 



For high pressure gas metering, the flange tapping 
configuration should only be employed. 

A-4 DESIGN RESTRICTIONS 

A-4.1 When metering high pressure gas to the accuracy 
required for custody transfer, the additional restrictions 
on the design shall be complied with. 

A-4.2 Concentricity, perpendicularity and the scaling 
of the orifice plate in the meter tube should meet the 
requirements of the standard and this is, generally, 
achieved by means of an orifice fitting. 

A-4.3 Dual chamber fittings (orifice) allow the plate 
to be removed while under pressure and these devices 
may be useful for regular inspection of the orifice plate. 
However, it shall be noted that such devices do not, 
normally, provide double isolation from line pressure 
which is a common requirement at high pressures. 

A-4.4 Beta Range Restrictions 

The orifice plate beta shall be within the limits of 0.2 
to 0.7S, in order to minimize the basic flow coefficient 
to an uncertainty of 0.6 percent it shall be within the 
limit of 0.3 to 0.6. 

Increasing the beta from 0.6 to 0.7S enables 95 percent 
more flow through the meter. However, the uncertainty 
may increase from 0.6 percent to 0.75 percent if the 
same concentricity of the orifice bore to the pipe 
diameter is maintained. 

The lower restriction of 0.2 limits the minimum flow. 

A-4.5 Reynolds Number Restrictions 

The minimum Reynolds number limitation is given in 
AGA 3 for flange tappings and D and D/2 tappings. 

A-4.6 Additional Metering Guidelines for High 
Accuracy 

The following criteria shall be achieved: 

a) The meter tube is designed and constructed 
to achieve the minimum uncertainty. 

b) The maximum differential pressure does not 
exceed 2 500 mm WC. However, a higher 
value may be used provided the following 
three points relating to orifice plate flatness 
are achieved. 

c) The elastic deformation of the orifice plate is 
less than 1 percent at the maximum differential 
pressure used. 

d) The uncertainty caused by elastic deformation 
of the orifice plate is less than 0.1 percent. 

e) The location of the orifice pressure tap holes 
relative to the upstream edge of the orifice 
bore remains within the specified tolerance 



for the complete range of differential pressure 
(see IS 15675). 

A-5 PIPING LAYOUT 

To design an orifice metering system there may be a 
number of options available based on the maximum 
and minimum beta used, the upstream piping 
configuration, the gas properties and the temperature 
and pressure of the gas being metered. In addition, for 
large gas metering station, the decision is, generally, 
taken to have a spare meter run to permit maintenance/ 
removal of an orifice plate/inspection/check calibration 
while the remaining runs operate at maximum capacity. 
A further option for a metering station which could 
exceed the maximum flow rate may be to use a dual 
chamber orifice fitting and insert a high beta plate 
during the period of high flow. 

From the calculation, it is possible to determine the 
inside diameter of the orifice meter run and the number 
of meter tubes to be used. Orifice meters with a single 
differential pressure transducer and a single plate have 
a restricted turn-down ratio of typically 3:1. 

The use of techniques such as stacked differential 
pressure transducer or auto-rearranging (Smart) 
transducer, makes it is possible to increase the turn- 
down ratio. Different ratio plates can be used to increase 
the turn-down ratio for an individual run and the overall 
installation turn-down may be extended still further by 
utilizing multiple meter runs. 

To achieve the minimum uncertainty value, differential 
pressure transducers shall be operated towards their 
maximum span. Under no circumstances DP less than 
20 percent of the maximum shall be considered for 
custody metering. 

Having determined the diameter and number of meter 
runs, the upstream and downstream lengths of pipes 
shall be determined by reference to meter selection as 
above which gives the upstream pipe work 
configuration 

Good metering practice should include upstream 
straight lengths or flow conditioners in accordance with 
AGA 3, to reduce swirl and generate a developed 
velocity profile. 

As most pipe work prior to metering is complex, there 
is high probability of swirl and asymmetric flow in the 
metering streams. 

A-6 MATERIALS 

The materials employed for gas metering installation 
shall be capable of withstanding die gas composition 
under all conditions that may be experienced over the 
lifetime of the metering. 



16 



IS 15677 : 2006 



Any meter tube pipe not exceeding 600 mm diameter 
shall be seamless wherever possible. Above 600 mm, 
longitudinally S.A.W. (submerged arc welded) pipe 
shall be used. 

The pipe shall be inspected internally to ensure that it 
complies with the dimensional and surface finish 
tolerances specified in ISO 5167. 

The flanges in the vicinity of the orifice plate shall be 
match-bored to the pipe and also dwelled/retained in 
such a manner that there is no internal step in the meter 
tube. 

On orifice fittings, the internal diameter, surface finish, 
concentricity and position and condition of the pressure 
tap holes shall be carefully manufactured and inspected 
to ISO SI 67 or an equivalent standard. 

The orifice fittings should be generally, cast. 

The orifice plate shall be manufactured from stainless 
steel plate. The petrology of the plate shall meet the 
requirements of ISO 5167. 

A-7 CALIBRATIONS AND TESTING (see Fig. 10) 

The orifice meter tube shall be checked and recorded 
for conformity to ISO 5 167 with particular care being 
taken in the 2D upstream and downstream of the orifice 
plate. 

The orifice plate should also be thoroughly checked. 
Annexes B, C and D give the data sheets used to record 
the results of periodic inspection and witness of 
installation. For custody transfer metering, the plates 
shall be certified by an independent authority. 

In addition to checking the meter tube and plate 
assembly, instrumentation associated with orifice 
metering, such as the differential pressure/pressure 
transmitter, temperature, density/GC units and the flow 
computers shall be calibrated. 

All measuring instruments used for these calibration 
checks should have traceability to national/ 
international primary standards. 

Orifice metering has a distinct advantage over most 
other forms of metering with respect to calibration as 
simple meteorology can be used to check that the 
meter conformance to the standard ISO 5167. An 
additional uncertainty of 0.5 percent to the flow 
coefficient has to be added if shorter upstream lengths 
are adopted. 

If an uncertainty better than 0.6 percent in the basic 
discharge coefficient is essential, then the unit shall be 
flow tested over the appropriate range of Reynolds 
numbers in a calibration laboratory. All the associated 
upstream and downstream piping and instrumentation 
should be used during the test to give a precise value 



for the unit uncertainty better than 0.5 percent may not 
be achieved. 

A-8 PERFORMANCE OF ORIFICE METERS 

Temperature shall be measured downstream of the 
orifice up to and including 5D. 

For higher accuracy. The temperature at the upstream 
pressure taping is required for the correction of orifice 
and pipe dimensions and in the calculation of density 
if it is not directly measured. 

For high accuracy metering applications. A 
temperature gradient across the primary device shall 
be considered and an appropriate correction applied. 

In an orifice metering device. The orifice bore required 
for optimum metering shall be calculated. This is an 
iterative calculation since the diameter is related to the 
beta which is, in turn, a function of the discharge 
coefficient. 

To ensure the velocity flow profile at the orifice plate 
is fully developed and free from swirl, the required 
upstream straight lengths of piping should conform to 
AG A 3. These lengths are given in terms of multiples 
of D and, consequently. The larger the diameter of the 
tubes chosen the longer the metering station will be. 
Similarly, the larger the beta the longer is the meter 
tubes. 

The meter design shall be based on the largest expected 
beta to be used in service. 

A-9 INSTALLATION 

To ensure that calibrated meter tubes are not adversely 
affected by the installation, they shall be installed in 
such a manner that: 

a) There is no ingress of dirt or grit into interior 
of the tube, 

b) There is no step or gasket protrusion between 
flanges, 

c) The position of the valves is accurately known 
and there is never a time when metering is 
taking place with a partially opened valve, 

d) They are well supported and the pipe work 
remains straight, and 

e) Precautions are taken to ensure that no 
pulsations from upstream or downstream 
compressor are transmitted to the meters. 

The following precautions shall be taken for installation 
of orifice plate: 

a) The plate should not be installed until the line 
has been flushed out, 

b) The plate should be protected from surface or 
edge damage during handling, 



17 



IS 1S677 : 2006 



c) The plate should be inserted with the shmp edge 
filing upstream and the bevel down stream, 

d) The standard should be for a sharp square edge 
orifice, and 

e) The orifice plate should be checked in a 
routine manner to assess any deterioration. 



If wet gas or dirt is present, the orifice should, 
preferably, be installed in a vertical line. If die meter 
has to be installed in a horizontal line, die meter line 
shall be inclined to a drain point to stop built up of 
water or dirt against the plate which give inaccurate 
results. 



THICKNESS EOF THE PLATE 



^i I- 



UPSTREAM 
FACEA 




% .DOWNSTREAM FACES 

P 

% S\ ANGLE OF BEVEL F 

II ^TRCKNESaAOF 

I" THE ORIFICE 
AXIAL CENTRE-LINE 



DIRECTION OF FLOW 
DOWNSTREAM EDGES 



TOP OF PLATE WHEN 
INSTALLED 




DRAIN HOLE IF 
PRESENT DIAMETERS 



Fig. 10 Orifice Plate 



ANNEXE 

(Clause A-7) 

PERIODICAL INSPECTION CARD 



Station: Certificate No.: 

Flow range: Date: 

Register No.: 

Carrier type: 

Manufacturer of plate (if applicable): 

Manufacturer's serial No. of plate (if applicable): 

Identification Tag: 

Plate outside diameter A • 

Pipe internal diameter D « 

Orifice bore diameter (specified) « 

Orifice bore diameter (measured) d m 

Drain hole diameter c - 

Ambient temperature / » 



mm 
mm 

, mm 
mm 
mm 

..°C 



18 



IS 15677 : 2006 



SI No. 


Requirement 


Acceptable 


Unacceptable 


i) 


Orifice bored 






H) 


Flatness of upstream face, A 






iii) 


Smoothness of upstream face, A 






iv) 


Plate thickness, E and downstream face, B 






v) 


Edge thickness, E 






vi) 


Angle at bevel, F 






vii) 


Upstream edge, G sharpness 






viii) 


Diameter of orifice, d 






ix) 


Drain hole diameter, c 







Inspected by: 
Certified by: . 



Date: 



ANNEX C 

(Clause A-7) 

PERIODICAL INSPECTION CARD 

Certificate No.: 

Owner of plate: 

Plate identification No.: 

Station: 

1 . Pipe and Plate Dimensions 

Specified bore diameter, d » Pipe internal diameter, D (mean) 

Measured bore diameter, d (mean) = Temperature when measure 

2s Measurement Stations 



19 



IS 15677 : 2006 



ANNEX D 

(Clause A-7) 

WITNESS CERTIFICATE FOR ORIFICE PLATE INSTALLATION 



Station: . 



Flow range: 



Meter tube serial No.: 

Station tube No. (multi-tube stations only): 



Register No.: 



Serial No. of orifice plate certificate: 

Orifice bore diameter (specified) 

Orifice bore diameter (measured) 

Drain hole diameter 

Ambient temperature 

Flatness 

Condition of plate on arrival 

New identity tag fitted 

This is to certify that 



Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory 
Undamaged/Damaged 

Yes/No 



.mm 
.mm 
.mm 
...°C 



a) The above described orifice plate was dimensionally checked, visually inspected and correctly fitted to 
the orifice at the above station. 

b) There are no obvious defects in the carrier or pipework. 



Date. 



.and witnessed by on behalf of . 

and on behalf of 



ANNEXE 

(Clause 6.2.2) 

METERING BY TURBINE METERS 



E-l INTRODUCTION 



A turbine meter is a flow measuring device in which 
the dynamic forces of the flowing fluid cause the 
turbine wheel to rotate with a speed approximately 
proportional to the rate of volume flow. The number 
of revolutions of the turbine wheel is the basis for 
the indication of the volume passed through the 
meter. 

A second turbine wheel may be included in the 
mechanism, designed to rotate at a significantly slower 
speed than the first due to die difference in blade angles 
of the two rotors. A change in rotational speed between 
the two rotors for a given fluid velocity will indicate a 



shift in calibration conditions, for example, a change 
in bearing friction, flow pulsations or a change in flow 
profile. 

E-2 CONSTRUCTION 

Meters shall be designed and manufactured in 
accordance with IS 1S676. 

E-3 MATERIALS 

The meter body and the internal mechanism shall be 
manufactured by materials suited for the service 
conditions and resistant to attack by the gas which the 
meter is to handle. Exterior surfaces of the meter shall 
be protected as necessary against corrosion. 



20 



IS 15677 : 2006 



Where meters incorporate removable meter internals, 
flow calibration at actual conditions shall be done even 
if pre-calibrated internals are used. 

E-4 METER ELEMENTS 

E-4.1 Body Shell 

The meter body shell and all other parts comprising 
the gas containing structure of the meter shall be 
constructed of suitable materials and designed to handle 
the pressures and temperatures for which they are rated. 

The length of the meter between the ends of its inlet 
and outlet connections shall be equal to or less than 
5 times the nominal connection size (DN). For 
interchangeability, a length or 3 times the nominal 
connection diameter is preferred. 

The inlet and outlet connections of the meter should 
conform to recognized standards. 

E-4.2 Pressure Tap Dimension 

Circular taps should have a minimum bore diameter of 
3 mm and maximum bore not greater than 12 mm. 

The direction of flow at the inlet of the meter shall be 
clearly and permanently marked. 

E-5 MARKING 

The following minimum information shall be marked 
on the meters: 

a) Manufacture's name or trade-mark, 

b) Serial number, 

c) Maximum allowable operating pressure, and 

d) Flow range. 

E-6 PERFORMANCE 

E-6.1 Accuracy 

Maximum acceptable error shall be ± 1 percent between 
<7vM« ^d °- 2 <7vMtx> and 2 percent between <7 vMin and 
02 <7 vMlx . 

E-6.2 Flow Rates 

The maximum and minimum flow rates shall be 
specified for the gas densities for which the meter will 
operate, within the specification of meter performance. 

Under normal circumstances, the rated maximum flow 
rate should never be exceeded. The rangeability of gas 
turbine meters should extend with an increase in 
metering pressure, due to greater kinetic energy being 
available. The range ability at the working conditions 
can be defined by the following equation: 

, *c(Pw)° 5 



(Pc)° 



where 

R w = rangeability at working conditions, 

R c = rangeability at calibration conditions, 

p w - gas density at working conditions, and 

p c ■ gas density at calibration conditions. 

The increase in rangeability of gas turbine meters with 
increase in pressure is caused by a reduction in the 
minimum flow rate ? vMin and not an increase in 
maximum flow rate ? v mix- 

E-6.2. 1 An individual calibration of each meter shall 
be made. The results of this calibration shall be 
available on request together with a statement of 
conditions under which the calibration took place. 

E-6.2.2 Calibration Data 

The calibration data provided shall include: 

a) error at ? vMin and all the following flow rates 
that are above 9^ such as 0. 1 , 0.2S, 0.4 and 
07of?vM«and<7 vM «> 

b) name and location of the calibration facility, 

c) estimated uncertainty of the method, and 

d) nature and conditions (pressure and 
temperature) of the test gas. 

E-6.2.3 The meter should be calibrated at conditions 
as close as possible to the conditions under which the 
meter, is to operate, together with the specific lengths 
of upstream and downstream pipe work, and include 
any flow conditioning devices. 

The facility at which the calibration is carried out shall 
be traceable directly to the primary national standards 
of mass, length and temperature. 

E-6.2.4 The performance of the meter should not be 
adversely influenced by the installation conditions of 
the test facility. 

E-6.3 Overloading 

The meter shall be designed to be capable of, 
occasionally, running 20 percent above the maximum 
flow rate at working conditions for a period of 30 min 
without damage or affecting the error curve of the meter. 

E-6.4 Pressure Range 

The gas pressure range, over which the meter is 
designed to perform within standard performance 
specification, shall be stated. 

E-6.5 Temperature Range 

The gas and ambient temperature range, over which 
the meter is designed to perform within standard 
performance specification, shall be stated. 



21 



IS 15677 : 2006 



E-6.6 Readout and Output 

E-6.6.1 General 

The meter shall be provided with an output which may 
consist of a mechanical and/or electrical counter 
totalizing the throughout of the meter and/or an 
electrical pulse rate signal and/or a rotating shaft the 
speed of which represents the flow rate through the 
meter. 

E-6.6.2 Counters 

The number of digits in a counter shall be such that it 
shall show, to within one unit of the last digit, a 
throughout equal to at least 10 000 h of operation at 
the maximum flow rate. 

Any counter should indicate the throughout of the 
meter in SI units. The counter should clearly and 
unambiguously state what die counter indicates and 
its resolution. 

On a mechanical or electronic counter, the numerals of 
the counter shall be a minimum of 4 mm high and 
2.5 mm wide. The change of numerals shall be such 
that the advance of one figure at any point of the 
counter must be completed which the last figure of the 
next lowest range describes the last tenth of its course. 

When the only output of the meter is a mechanical 
counter, the readout should enable the meter to be 
calibrated with the required accuracy at the minimum 
flow rate in a reasonably short time. The smallest 
division of the least significant digit of the counter or 
test element should, therefore, be smaller than the 
minimum hourly flow rate divided by 400. 

Provision shall be made for covering and sealing the 
free ends on any output shafts when they are not being 
use. The value per revolution of an output shaft, 
expressed as 1 tr ■ ... m 3 , (that is, 1 rev of the shaft 
equals or approximates to ( N V m 3 ) and the direction of 
rotation and maximum allowable torque shall be 
marked on that shaft or an adjacent point on the meter. 

The number of electrical pulses, per m 3 indicated by 
the counter, shall be stated on the meter. The number 
of pulses representing a cubic metre (that is, meter 
factor) on meters without mechanical indexes shall be 
defined for the maximum flow rates. The equation used 
to calculate the flow rate using pulses and meter factor 
(K) is as follows: 



V 



pulses 
Kxt 



E-6.7 Installation 

E-6.7.1 General 

Turbine meters shall be operated within the specified 



flow range and operating conditions to ensure the 
desired accuracy and normal life. The turbine meter 
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
recommendations. 

Premature wear and damage to turbine wheel may be 
caused by over speeding, pulsating flow at|d pipeline 
debris. 

E-6.7.2 Pipe Lengths 

Although the accuracy of gas turbine meters is not as 
sensitive to flow disturbances caused by upstream 
fittings as orifice plate meters, care shall be taken to 
ensure the flow velocity profile presented to the meter 
inlet is free from swirl and reasonably well developed. 
While most turbine meters have integral straightening 
vanes in the meter inlet, an additional flow conditioner 
upstream of the meter, is recommended for high 
asymmetric velocity profiles shall be avoided 
particularly upstream of the meter. 

The type and position of any flow straightening device 
and the upstream and downstream straight pipe lengths 
should conform to those recommended by the 
manufacturer. 

The effect of flow disturbances on measurement 
accuracy is dependent on the meter design. 

The recommended pipe lengths shall be regarded as 
minimum. 

E-6.7.3 Pulsation Effects on Accuracy 

Turbine meters should not be used to measure flows 
that are rapidly pulsating since they may invariable 
overestimate the flow of gas. For example, a flow rate 
which varies sinusoidally by +20 percent about the 
mean flow rate could cause a turbine meter to 
overestimates the flow by up to 2 percent. Large 
pulsations in flow or pressure shall be avoided as they 
can cause premature failure of the meter mechanism. 

E-6.7.4 Filters and Strainers 

Strainers shall be used when the presence of damaging 
materials in the gas stream can be anticipated. 

Foreign substances in a pipeline can cause serious 
damage to turbine meters. Strainers shall be sized so 
that at maximum flow there is a low pressure drop and 
shall be installed so that there is no flow distortion. 
For the maximum degree of meter protection, a dry- 
type or separator-type filter shall be installed upstream 
of the meter. 

It is recommended that the differential pressure across 
the filter be monitored to maintain it in good condition 
and thus prevent, flow distortion caused by die build 
up of pipeline debris. 



22 



IS 15677 : 2006 



E-6.7.5 Meter Bypass 

The provision of a valvcd bypass around the meter if 
an interruption of the gas glow during meter 
maintenance etc should not be accepted. 

E-7 MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION 

E-7.1 An adequate frequency of inspection and good 
maintenance practice shall be followed to maximize 
turbine meter accuracy. 

The time between meter inspection periods is 
dependent on the gas condition and meter performance. 

Meters used in dirty gas applications will require more 
frequent attention than those with clean gas. Where 
oiling points arc provided, the manufacturers' 
recommendations regarding frequency of oiling, 



at lower flow rates, the performance of the bearings 
shall be monitored. Turbine meter bearings shall be 
always purchased from OEM. Indigenization shall be 
avoided. 

Degradation of bearings and increased friction will 
cause the meter to under-register particularly at lower 
flow rates. 

The condition of the bearings shall be checked, when 
necessary, by means of a spin-down test and comparing 
the results with either the manufacturer's specified 
spin-down times or the results of tests carried out on 
the new meter at the time of installation under identical 
conditions. Where necessary, the manufacturer's 
recommended remedial action shall be followed. 

Spin-down tests are carried out in a draught-free 



IS 15677: 2006 



F-3.2 Designer Company, that designs and constructs 
metering facilities and purchases multipath ultrasonic 
meters. 

F-3.3 Inspector Representative of the Designer, who 

visits the manufacturer's facilities for quality assurance 
purposes. 

F-3.4 Manufacturer Company, that designs, 
manufactures, sells and delivers multipath ultrasonic 
meters. Company that operates multipath ultrasonic 
meters and performs normal maintenance. 

F-3.5 Signal Processing Unit, the portion of the 
multipath ultrasonic meter that is made up of the 
electronic microprocessor system. 

F-3.6 USM Multi-path Ultrasonic Meter, for 

measuring gas flow rates. 

F-4 OPERATING CONDITIONS 

F-4.1 Pressures 

Ultrasonic transducers used in USM require a 
minimum gas density (a function of pressure) to ensure 
acoustic coupling of the sound pulses to and from the 
gas. Therefore, the designer shall specify the expected 
minimum operating pressure as well as the maximum 
operating pressure. 

F-4.2 Temperatures, Gas and Ambient 

The USM should operate over a flowing gas 
temperature range of (-) 25° to 55°C. The designer 
shall specify the expected operating gas temperature 
range. 

The operating ambient air temperature range shall be at 
a minimum (-) 25° to 55°C. This ambient temperature 
range applies to the meter body with and without gas 
flow, field-mounted electronics, ultrasonic transducers, 
cabling, etc. 

The manufacturer shall state the flowing gas and 
ambient air temperature specifications for the multipath 
ultrasonic meter, if they differ from the above. 

F-4.3 Gas Flow Considerations 

The flow rate limits that can be measured by a USM 
are determined by the actual velocity of the flowing 
gas. The designer should determine the expected gas 
flow rates and verify that these values are within the 
<7Min> <l\ and 4W specified by the manufacturer. The 
accuracy requirement for operation within qr Min , q x and 
qr Mtx stated. The designer should take into account the 
maximum velocity for noise and piping safety (erosion, 
thermo wave vibrations, etc) in design. 

USM have the inherent capability of measuring flow 
in either direction with equal accuracy; that is, they 



are bi-directional. The designer should specify if bi- 
directional measurement is required so that the 
manufacturer may properly configure the SPU 
parameters. 

F-4.4 Upstream Piping and Flow Profiles 

Upstream piping configurations may adversely affect 
the gas velocity profile entering a USM to such an 
extent that measurement error occurs. The magnitude 
of the error, if any, will be a function of the meter's 
ability to correctly compensate for such conditions. The 
designer should consult the manufacturer and review 
the latest meter test results to evaluate how the accuracy 
of a USM may be affected by a particular piping 
installation configuration. 

F-5 METER REQUIREMENTS 

The meter body and all other parts, including the 
pressure-containing structures and external electronic 
components, shall be designed and constructed of 
materials suitable for the service conditions for which 
the meter is rated, and in accordance with any codes 
and regulations applicable to each specific meter 
installation, as specified by the designer. 

F-5.1 Meter Body 

F-5.1.1 Maximum Operating Pressure 

Meters shall be manufactured to meet the requirement 
of common pipeline flange. The maximum design 
operating pressure of the meter shall be the lowest of 
the maximum design operating pressure of the 
following: meter body, flanges, transducer 
connections, transducer assemblies. 

The required maximum operating pressure shall be 
determined using the applicable codes for the 
jurisdiction in which the meter will be operated and 
for the specified environmental temperature range. The 
designer should provide the manufacturer with 
information on all applicable codes for the installation 
site and any other requirements specific to the operator. 

F-5. 1.2 Corrosion Resistance 

All wetted parts of the meter shall be manufactured of 
materials compatible with natural gas and related fluids. 

All external parts of the meter shall be made of a non- 
corrosive material or sealed with a corrosion-resistant 
coating suitable for use in atmospheres typically found 
in the natural gas industry, and/or as specified by the 
designer. 

F-5.1.3 Meter Body Lengths and Bores 

The manufacturers should specify overall face-to-face 
length of the meter body with flanges, for each flange 



24 



class and diameter. The designer, as an option, may 
specify a different length to match existing piping 
requirements. 

The USM bore and the adjacent upstream pipe along 
with flanges should have the same inside diameter to 
within 1 percent of each other. For bi-directional 
applications, both ends of the meter shall be considered 
upstream. 

F-5.1.4 Ultrasonic Transducer Ports 

As natural gas may contain some impurities (for 
example, light oils or condensates), transducer ports 
shall be designed in a way that reduces the possibility 
of liquids or solids accumulating in the transducer 
ports. 

If specified by the designer and available from the 
manufacturer, the meter shall be equipped with valves 
and necessary additional devices, mounted on the 
transducer ports in order to make it possible to replace 
the ultrasonic transducers without de-pressurizing the 
meter run. In that case, a bleed valve may be required 
in addition to the isolation valve to ensure that no 
pressure exists behind a transducer before releasing 
the extraction mechanism. 

F-5.1.5 Pressure Tap 

At least one pressure tap shall be provided for 
measuring the static pressure in the meter. Each 
pressure tap hole shall be between 3 mm and 10 mm 
nominal in diameter and cylindrical over a length at 
least 2.5, times the diameter of the tapping measured 
from the inner wall of the meter body. 

The tap hole edges at the internal wall of the meter 
body shall be free of burrs and wire edges, and have 
minimum rounding. 

For a meter body with a wall thickness less than 8 mm, 
the hole shall be 3 mm nominal in diameter. 

Female pipe threads shall be provided at each pressure 
tap for a 6 mm NPT or 12 mm NPT isolation valve. 
Turning radius clearance shall be provided to allow a 
valve body to be screwed directly into the pressure 
tap. Pressure taps can be located at the top, left side, 
and/or right side of the meter body. Additional taps 
may provide the designer with flexibility in locating 
pressure transducers for maintenance access and proper 
drainage of gauge line condensates back into the meter 
body. 

F-5.1.6 Miscellaneous 

The meter shall be designed in such a way that the 
bodies will not roll when resting on a smooth surface 
with a slope of up to 10 percent. This is to prevent 
damage to the protruding transducers and SPU when 



IS 15677 : 2006 

the USM is temporarily set on the ground during 
installation or maintenance work. 

The meter shall be designed to permit easy and safe 
handling of the meter during transportation and 
installation. Hoisting eyes or clearance for lifting straps 
shall be provided. 

F-5.1.7 Meter Body Markings 

A nameplate containing die following information shall 
be affixed to the meter body: 

a) manufacturer, model number, serial number 
and month and year manufactured; 

b) meter size, flange class and total weight; 

c) internal diameter; 

d) maximum and minimum storage temperatures; 

e) body design code and material, and flange 
design code and material; 

f) maximum operating pressure and temperature 
range; 

g) maximum and minimum actual (at flowing 
conditions) volumetric flow rate /h; 

h) direction of positive or forward flow; and 
j) purchase order number, shop order number 
and/or user tag number (optional). 

Each transducer port shall be permanently marked 
with a unique designation for easy reference. If 
markings are stamped on the meter body, low stress 
stamps that produce a rounded bottom impression 
shall be used. 

F-5.2 Ultrasonic Transducers 

F-5.2.1 Specifications 

The manufacturers should state the general 
specifications of their ultrasonic transducers, such as 
critical dimensions, maximum allowable operating 
pressure, operating pressure range, operating 
temperature range and gas composition limitations. 

The manufacturer should specify the minimum 
operating pressure based on the ultrasonic transducer 
model, USM size and expected operating conditions. 
This minimum pressure shall be marked or tagged on 
the USM to alert the operator's field personnel that the 
meter may not register flow at reduced pipeline 
pressures. 

F-5.2.2 Rate of Pressure Change 

Sudden depressurization of an ultrasonic transducer 
can cause damage if a trapped volume of gas expands 
inside the transducer. If necessary, clear instructions 
shall be provided by the manufacturer for 
depressurization and pressurization of the meter and 



25 



IS 15677 : 2006 



transducers during installation, start-up, maintenance 
and operation. 

F-5.2.3 Exchange 

It shall be possible to replace or relocate transducers 
without a significant change in meter performance. This 
means that after an exchange of transducers and a 
possible change of SPU software constants directed by 
the manufacturer, the resulting shift in the meter's 
performance shall not be outside the limits of the 
performance requirement. The manufacturer should 
specify procedures to be used when transducers have to 
be exchanged, and possible mechanical, electrical or 
other measurements and adjustments have to be made. 

F-5.2.4 Transducer Tests 

Each transducer or pair of transducers shall be tested 
by the manufacturer and the results documented as part 
of the USM quality assurance programme. Each 
transducer shall be marked or tagged with a permanent 
serial number and be provided with the general 
transducer. If the SPU requires specific transducer 
characterization parameters, each transducer or 
transducer pair should also be provided with test 
documentation that contains the specific calibration test 
data, calibration method used and characterization 
parameters). 

F-5.3 Electronics 

F-5.3.1 General Requirements 

The USM electronics system, including power supplies, 
microcomputer, signal processing components and 
ultrasonic transducer excitation circuits, may be housed 
in one or more enclosures mounted either in field or 
remote and are referred to as a Signal Processing Unit 
(SPU). 

Optionally, a remote unit containing the power supplies 
and the operator interface could be installed in a non- 
hazardous area and connected to the SPU by multi- 
conductor cable. 

The SPU should operate over its entire specified 
environmental conditions within the meter 
performance requirements. It should also be possible 
to replace the entire SPU or change any field 
replacement module without a significant change in 
meter performance. 

The system should contain a watch-dog-timer function 
to ensure automatic restart of the SPU in the event of a 
programme fault or lock-up. 

The meter should operate from a power supply of 
nominal 120 V ac or 240 V ac at SO or 60 Hz or from 
nominal 12 V dc or 24 V dc power supply/battery 
systems, as specified by the designer. 



F-5.3.2 Output Signal Specifications 

The SPU shall be equipped with at least one of the 
following outputs: 

a) serial data interface; and 

b) frequency, representing flow rate at line 
conditions. 

The meter may also be equipped with an analog 
(4-20 mA, dc) output for flow rate at line conditions. 
Flow rate signal shall be scaleable up to 120 percent of 
the meter's maximum flow rate, j^. 

A low-flow cutoff function shall be provided that sets 
the flow rate output to zero when the indicate flow rate 
is below a minimum value (not applicable to serial data 
output). 

Two separate flow rate outputs and a directional state 
output or serial data values shall be provided for bi- 
directional applications to facilitate the separate 
accumulation of volumes by the associated flow 
computers) and directional state output signal. 

All outputs shall be isolated from ground and have the 
necessary voltage protection to meet the electronics 
design testing requirements. 

F-5.3.3 Electrical Safety Design Requirements 

The design of the USM, including the SPU, shall be 
analyzed, tested and certified by an applicable 
laboratory, and then each meter shall be labelled as 
approved for operation. Intrinsically safe designs and 
explosion proof enclosure designs are generally 
certified and labelled. The designer must specify 
requirement to achieve a more conservative installation 
design. 

Cable jackets, rubber, plastic and other exposed parts 
shall be resistant to ultraviolet light, flames and 
grease. 

F-5.4 Computer Programmes 

F-5.4.1 Configuration and Maintenance Software 

The meter shall be supplied with a capability for local 
or remote configuring of the SPU and for monitoring 
the operation of the meter. As a minimum, the software 
shall be able to display and record the following 
measurements: flow rate at line conditions, mean 
velocity, average speed of sound, speed of sound along 
each acoustic path and ultrasonic acoustic signal quality 
received by each transducer. As an option, the 
manufacturer can provide these software functions as 
part of the meter's embedded software. 

F-5.4.2 Inspection and Auditing Functions 

It shall be possible for the auditor or the inspector to 



26 



IS 15677 : 2006 



view and print the flow-measurement configuration 
parameters used by the SPU; for example, calibration 
constants, meter dimensions, time averaging period and 
sampling rate. 

Provisions shall be made to prevent an accidental or 
undetectable alteration of those parameters that affects 
the performance of the meter. Suitable provisions include 
a scalable switch or jumper, a permanent programmable 
read-only memory chip or a password in the SPU. 

F-5.4.3 It shall be possible for the auditor to verify 
that all algorithms, constants and configuration 
parameters being used, in any specific meter, are 
producing the same or better performance as when the 
meter design was originally flow-tested or when the 
specific meter was last flow-calibrated and any 
calibration factors were changed. The auditor may have 
to rely on the manufacturer for portions of this 
verification because of the proprietary nature of some 
USM algorithms. 

NOTE — Clause 5.4 J is an optional clause. 
F-5.4.4 Alarms 

The following alarm-status outputs should be provided 
in the form of fail-safe, dry, relay contacts or voltage- 
free solid-state switches isolated from ground: 

a) Output invalid: when the indicated flow rate 
at line conditions is invalid; 

b) Trouble: when any of several monitored 
parameters fall outside of normal operation 
for a significant period of time (optional); and 

c) Partial failure: when one or more of the 
multiple ultrasonic path results is not usable 
(optional). 

F-S.5 Noise Issue in Ultrasonic Meter 

The speed of sound measured by a USM, the 'measured 
SOS' (MSOS), is influenced by: 

a) gas composition, 

b) pressure, 

c) temperature, 

d) changes in the geometry of the measurement 
section, and 

e) changes in transit time measurement (by the 
meter). 

The speed of sound may be calculated from measured 
values of pressure, temperature and gas composition 
using AGA 10 the 'theoretical SOS' (TSOS). 

F-5.6 Absolute SOS Comparison 

If both MSOS and TSOS are available they may be 
compared: absolute comparison. 



Differences between MSOS and TSOS may indicate; 

a) Asynchronous determination of MSOS and 
TSOS due to fluctuations in gas composition 
and analysis time lag. 

b) Malfunction of: 

1) USM, 

2) Pressure measurement, 

3) Temperature measurement, and 

4) Gas composition measurement. 

c) Depositions on the transducers) and/or meter 
body which changes the path length. 

Statistical techniques may be helpful for monitoring 
MSOS and TSOS over time. 

F-6 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

This section specifies a set of minimum measurement 
performance requirements that USM must meet. If a 
meter is not flow-calibrated, the manufacturer shall 
provide sufficient test data confirming that each meter 
shall meet these performance requirements. The 
designer may also specify that a meter be flow- 
calibrated. If a meter is flow-calibrated, then it shall 
meet the same minimum measurement performance 
requirements before the application of any calibration- 
factor adjustment. 

The amount of calibration-factor adjustment, therefore, 
shall be within the error limits stated in the performance 
requirements. This is to ensure that a major flaw in the 
meter is not masked by a large calibration-factor 
adjustment. Calibration-factor adjustments are made 
to minimize a meter's measurement bias error. The 
designer is referred to Annex A and for an explanation 
of the methods and benefits of flow-calibrating a meter 
and for calibration-factor adjustment. The design 
should also follow carefully. Any installation effect will 
add to the overall measurement uncertainty. 

For each meter design and size, the manufacturer shall 
specify flow-rate limits for <? Min , q x and q Mw as defined 
in. Each USM, whether flow-calibrated or not, shall 
perform within the more accurate measurement range 
for gas flow rates from q x to q MMX and within the less 
accurate range for gas flow rate less than q x but greater 
than or equal to ? Mlx as defined. 

F-6.1 General 

The general flow-measurement performance of all 
USM shall meet the following requirements, prior to 
making any calibration-factor adjustment. 

F-6. 1.1 Large Meter Accuracy 

USM 300 mm (nominal) diameter size and larger shall 
meet the following flow-measurement accuracy 



27 



IS 15677 : 2006 



requirements, prior to making any calibration-factor 
adjustment. 

Maximum Error: 

±0.7 percent for q x <> q. : £ q^ 

±1.4 percent for q Min * 9j < 9, (see Fig. 1 1) 

F-6. 1 .2 Small Meter Accuracy 

USM less than 300 mm (nominal) diameter shall meet 
the following flow-measurement accuracy 
requirements, prior to making any calibration-factor 
adjustment. Note that the requirements for the sma 1 ler 
meters have been relaxed slightly because of the 
difficulty in measuring acoustic transit times in 
turbulent gas flow when the path lengths are shorter. 

F-7 INDIVIDUAL METER TESTING 
REQUIREMENTS 

Prior to the shipment of each USM to the designer or 
the operator, the manufacturer shall perform the 
following tests and checks on each meter. The results 
of all tests and checks performed on each meter shall 
be documented by the manufacturer and submitted to 
the designer or the operator. 

F-7.1 Leakage Tests 

Every USM, complete with transducers and transducer 
isolation valves (if used), shall be leak-tested by the 



manufacturer after final assembly and prior to shipment 
to the designer or flow-calibration facility. The test 
medium shall be an inert gas, such as nitrogen. The 
leak test pressure shall be 1.2S times maximum 
working pressures maintained for a minimum of 
IS min, with no leaks detectable with a non-corrosive 
liquid solution or an ultrasonic leak detector. This leak 
test does not preclude the requirements to perform a 
hydrostatic qualification test. 

F-7.2 Dimensional Measurements 

The manufacturer shall measure and document the 
average internal diameter of the meter, the length of 
each acoustic path between transducer faces and the 
axial (meter body axis) distance between transducer 
pairs. 

The average internal diameter shall be calculated from 
a total of 12 inside diameter measurements or the 
equivalent determined by a coordinate measuring 
machine. Four internal diameter measurements (one 
in the vertical plane, another in the horizontal plane 
and two in planes approximately 45° from the vertical 
plane) shall be made at 3 m cross-sections: 

a) near the set of upstream ultrasonic 
transducers, 

b) near the set of downstream transducers, and 

c) halfway between the two transducer sets. 



ZERO - FLOW READING < 12 mm /mc( FOR EACH PATH) 




- EXPANDED ERROR LIMIT ♦ 1.4 % ( q ,< q t ) 



SMALL METER ERROR LIMIT ♦ 1.0 % 
LARGE METER ERROR LIMIT + 0.7 % 



LARGE METER ERROR LIMIT - 0.7 % 
SMALL METER ERROR LIMIT - 1.0 % 



- EXPANDED ERROR LIMIT- 1.4 %(q,<q t ) 



9mln <lt 



<lmax 
FLOWRATE(q,) 

Fio. 1 1 Performance Specification Summary 



28 



IS 15677 : 2006 



If the acoustic path lengths or the axial distances 
between ultrasonic transducer pairs cannot be directly 
measured, then the unknown distances shall be 
calculated using right-angle trigonometry and distances 
that can be measured directly. Where the measurement 
of angles is difficult and the result is imprecise, such 
measurements shall not be used to calculate the 
required distances. 

The meter body temperature shall be measured at the 
time these dimensional measurements are made. The 
measured lengths shall be corrected to an equivalent 
length at a meter body temperature at ambient condition 
by applying the applicable coefficient of thermal 
expansion for the meter body material. The individual 
corrected lengths shall then be averaged and reported 
to the nearest 0.01 mm. 

All instruments used to perform these measurements 
shall have valid calibrations traceable to national/ 
international standards. 

These measurements and calculations shall be 
documented on a certificate, along with the name of 
the meter manufacturer, meter model, meter serial 
number, meter body temperature at the time 
dimensional measurements were made, date, name of 
the individual who made the measurements and name 
of the inspector if present. 

F-7.3 Zero-Flow Verification Test (Zero Test) 

To verify the transit-time measurement system of each 
meter, the manufacturer shall perform a Zero-Flow 
Verification Test. The manufacturer shall document 
and follow a detailed test procedure that includes the 
following elements, at a minimum. 

After blind flanges are attached to the ends of the meter 
body, the meter shall be purged of all air and 
pressurized with a pure test gas or gas mixture. The 
selection of the test gas shall be the responsibility of 
the manufacturer. However, the acoustic properties of 
the test gas must be well known and documented. 

The gas pressure and temperature shall be allowed to 
stabilize at the outset of the test. The gas velocities for 
each acoustic path shall be recorded for at least 30 s. 
The mean gas velocity and standard deviation for each 
acoustic path shall then be calculated. 

Adjustments to the meter shall be made as necessary 
to bring the meter performance into compliance with 
the manufacturer's specifications and the specifications 
stated in this report. 

If the measured speed-of-sound values are compared 
with theoretical values, the theoretically determined 
value shall be computed using a complete 
compositional analysis of the test gas, precise 



measurements of the test gas pressure and temperature 
and the equation of state used in 'Detail 
Characterization Method". 

As part of the test procedure, the manufacturer shall 
document the ultrasonic transducer serial numbers and 
their relative locations in the meter body. The 
manufacturer shall also document all parameters used 
by the meter; for example, transducer/electronic transit- 
time delays, incremental timing corrections, and acoustic 
path lengths, angles, diameters and other parameters 
used in the calculation of the gas velocity for each 
acoustic path. The manufacturer should note if the 
constants are dependent on specific transducer pairs. 

The manufacturer may also implement a zero-flow 
offset factor, in engineering units of positive or 
negative m/s. This zero-flow offset factor would be 
applied to the meter's flow rate output. Use of this factor 
is intended to improve the accuracy of the low gas 
velocity measurements, while not significantly affecting 
the accuracy of the higher velocity measurements. This 
zero-flow offset factor, if used, shall be documented 
by the manufacturer. 

F-7.4 Flow-Calibration 

If specified by the designer, the USM shall be flow- 
calibrated. If a flow-calibration is performed, the 
following nominal test flow rates are recommended, 
at a minimum: q Mm9 0.10 ? Mtx , 0.25 <? MiX , 0.40 q Max , 
0.70 <7 MiX , and q Max . The designer may also specify 
additional flow-calibration tests at other flow rates. 

Flow-calibration tests shall be performed at a gas 
pressure, temperature and density near the expected 
average operating conditions as specified by the 
designer. Tests at any other specific pressure 
temperature and gas density range may be performed, 
if necessary. The designer may also require that specific 
piping configurations and/or flow conditioners be used 
during flow-calibration, understanding that differences 
in upstream piping configurations may influence meter 
performance. 

It is recognized that it may not be possible to test large 
USM up to their maximum capacity because of the 
limitations of currently available test facilities. In such 
cases, the designer may specify a lower flow rate 
instead of q^^ The manufacturer should state on an 
applicable documents if a reduced ? Max was used during 
flow-calibration tests. 

The upstream flange and piping internal diameters 
should match and be aligned with the meter under test. 

The test measurements performed by a flow-calibration 
facility shall be traceable with current calibration 
certificates to the applicable national/international 
standards. Any property or thermo physical values (for 



29 



IS 15677 : 2006 



example, density, compressibility, speed of sound, 
critical flow factor, etc) used during flow-calibration 
shall be computed from * Detailed Characterization 
Method Equation of State (see Annex G)\ 

F-7.4.1 Calibration Factors Adjustment 

If a meter is flow-calibrated, the calibration factors 
should normally be applied to eliminate any indicated 
meter bias error. Some suggested methods of applying 
calibration factors are: 

Using flow-weighted mean error (FWME) over the 
meter's expected flow range. 

Using a more sophisticated error correction schedule 
(for example, a multi-point or polynomial algorithm, a 
piece-wise linear interpolation method, etc) over the 
meter's range of flow rates. 

For bi-directional flow-calibrations, a second set of 
calibration factors may be used for reverse flow. If an 
offset factor Was established during the zero-flow 
validation tests, it may be revised based on the results 
of the flow-calibration to optimize the meter's overall 
accuracy performance. The manufacturer shall 
document such a change in this factor and alert the 
operator that the zero-flow output may have some 
intentional bias in order to improve accuracy at q Min . 

F-7.4.2 Test Reports 

The results of each test shall be documented in a written 
report supplied to the designer or the operator by the 
manufacturer. For each meter, the report shall include, 
at a minimum: 

a) name and address of the manufacturer, 

b) name and address of the test facility, 

c) model and serial number, 

d) SPU firmware revision number, 

e) date(s)ofthetest, 

f) name and title of the person(s) who conducted 
the tests, 

g) a written description of the test procedures, 
h) the upstream and downstream piping 

configurations, 
j) a diagnostic report of the software 
configuration parameters, 



k) all test data, including flow rates, pressures, 
temperatures, gas composition and the 
measurement uncertainty of the test facility, 
and 

m) a description of any variations or deviations 
from the required test conditions. 

At least one copy of the complete report shall be sent 
to the designer or the operator and one copy retained 
in the manufacturer's files. The manufacturer shall 
ensure that the complete report is available to the 
operator on request, for a period of 10 years after 
shipment of any meter. 

F-7.5 Quality Assurance 

The manufacturer shall establish and follow a written 
comprehensive quality-assurance programme for the 
assembly and testing of the meter and its electronic 
system (for example ISO 9000). This quality assurance 
programme shall be available to the inspector. 

F-8 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS (see 
Annex M) 

This section is directed to the designer to ensure that 
the USM will be installed in a suitable environment 
and in a piping configuration that allows the USM to 
meet the expected performance requirements. 

F-9 MAINTENANCE (see Annex N) 

The operator should follow the manufacturer's 
recommendations for maintenance. Periodic 
maintenance could be as simple as monitoring several 
SPU diagnostic measurements, such as signal quality 
and speed of sound for each acoustic path. For example, 
it may be possible to detect an accumulation of deposits 
on the transducer faces by measuring a reduction in 
the received ultrasonic pulse strength. 

When possible, the operator should verify that the USM 
measures near zero when no gas is flowing through the 
meter. When performing this test, the operator should 
bypass or defeat any low flow cut-off function and be 
aware that any meter-run temperature differences will 
cause thermal convection currents of gas to circulate 
inside the meter, which the USM may measure as a 
very low flow rate. 



30 



IS 15677 : 2006 



ANNEX G 

(Clause F-7.4) 
MULTI-PATH ULTRASONIC METER FLOW-CALIBRATION ISSUES 



G-l FLOW-CALIBRATION BY MULTI-PATH 
ULTRASONIC METER 

The flow-measurement accuracy permits a multipath 
ultrasonic meter to have a maximum error of up to 
±7 percent and a maximum peak-to-peak error of 
7 percent for gas flow rates between q t and ? Max . for 
meters (nominally) 300 mm in diameter or greater. 
Similarly, for meters (nominally) less than 300 mm in 
diameter, the maximum error can be as much as 
± 1 .0 percent and the maximum peak-to-peak error can 
be 0.7 percent. As the following example illustrates, 
multi-path ultrasonic meters may operate within these 
allowable measurement accuracy envelopes, but still 
produce significant and costly errors in terms of the 
measured gas volume. One effective means, of 
minimizing the measurement uncertainty of a multi-path 
ultrasonic meter is to flow-calibrate the meter. 

Example: 

A multi-path ultrasonic meter manufacturer rates the 
flow capacity of 200 mm diameter USM as follows: 

q„» - 2 476.25 mVh 
q t - 212.25 mVh 
q m - 106.125 mVh 

Flow-calibration of this meter at a test laboratory yields 
the following results, after averaging multiple test runs 
near each of the recommended nominal test rates 
(RNTR). 

The flow-calibration data from Table 1 are plotted as 
open circles on Fig. 12. 

To estimate the error in the volume of gas measured 



by this meter, assume that, in field service, the gas is 
typical pipeline-grade quality and that it flows through 
the USM at a rate of 1 709.75 mVh (that is, roughly 
0.7 qr MiX ) at a line pressure of 4 137 kPa. For this 
operating condition, the flow-calibration data indicate 
that the meter will underestimate the flow rate by 
0.372 percent (see Table 1). If this flow rate is held 
constant for a year, the resulting measurement error is 
nearly 90 million standard cubic feet of gas per year. 
Also, note that the error, in terms of the measured 
volume of gas, is proportional to the square of the UM 
diameter, so a comparable percentage error for a 
500 mm diameter meter would be more than 
500 million standard cubic feet of gas per year. 

Also note, from the example above, that the magnitude 
and direction (that is, overestimation or 
underestimation) of the measurement error of the USM 
is a function of the flow rate. That is, in this case, the 
UM over predicts the flow rate on the low end of the 
operational range and under predicts on the high end 
of the range. Furthermore, the meter error can be 
substantially corrected by using the flow-calibration 
data. The following discussion explains how test-flow 
data can be used to correct or minimum meter error. 

NOTE — The individual data points in Fig. 12 represent 
averaged values for multiple test runs near each of the 
recommended nominal test rates. 

G-2 METHODS FOR CORRECTING A USM 
FLOW-MEASUREMENT ERROR 

The above example demonstrates the potential value 
of minimizing a USM measurement inaccuracy or 
uncertainty. The total flow-measurement error of a 



Table 1 Flow-Calibration Data for an 200 mm Diameter USM 

(Clause G-l) 



SI 


RNTR 




Nominal Test Rate 


Actual Test Rate — 


Meter Reported 


USM Error" 


No. 








Reference Meter 


Rate 










mVh 


mVh 


mVh 


Percent 


O) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


I) 


<7mio 




106.12S 


98.342 5 


99.276 4 


+0.953 


») 


0.10 qu» 




247.625 


194.987 


195.722 8 


+0.376 


III) 


0.25 q*m 




619.062 5 


622.034 


620.053 


-0.318 


iv) 


0.40 <7mu 




990.5 


1 069.768 


1 066.401 


-0.315 


v) 


0.70 9mm 




1 733.375 


1 709.745 


1 703.377 


-0.372 


vi) 


?Mm 


Late* 


2 476.25 2 447.95 
has been rounded to the nearest whole acf/h. The 


2 438.979 
'USM Error' is based on 


-0.366 


"The 


"Meter Reported H 


the values for the 'Meter 


Reported Rate* prior to 


rounding and the 'Actual Test Rate- Reference Meter'. 







31 



IS 15677 : 2006 



i r 



MAXIMUM ERROR LIMIT 



fc 



\ 



\ 



\ 



\ 



— — — o- 



PEAK-TO-PEAK ERROR « 0.057% ( q ,>jq ^ 



MAXIMUM ERROR LIMIT 



,6 i III II I I I 

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 

V^max (PERCENT) 

Fig. 12 Uncorrected Flow-Calibration Data for 200 mm Diameter USM 



100 



USM consists of two parts: (a) random (or precision) 
errors, and (b) systematic (or bias) errors. Random 
errors can be caused by various influences on a meter's 
operation. Random errors normally follow a certain 
statistical distribution. The magnitude of the random 
error can usually be reduced by acquiring multiple 
measurement samples and then applying accepted 
statistical principles. Systematic errors normally cause 
repeated USM measurement readings to be in error 
(for some unknown reason) by roughly the same 
amount. In most cases, flow calibration of a USM can 
help eliminate or, at least, minimize the measurement 
error of the meter. Operational experience has shown 
that, in most cases, the major portion of the total flow- 
measurement error of an uncalibrated USM is due to 
systematic error. 

Due to machining tolerances, variations in component 
manufacturing processes, variations in the meter 
assembly process and other factors, each USM has its 
own unique operating characteristics. Thus, to 
minimize a particular USM flow-measurement 
uncertainty, the manufacturer can flow-calibrate a 
USM and then use the calibration data to correct or 
compensate for the USM measurement error. More 
than one error correction technique is available to the 
manufacturer, depending on the meter application and 
the needs of the operator. 

Following is a description of an error correction 
technique that utilizes a single calibration-factor 



correction the flow-weighted mean error (FWME) 
factor. If a USM flow-measurement output is linear 
over the operational flow range of the meter, the FWME 
correction method is effective at minimizing the 
measurement uncertainty of the meter. Other single 
calibration-factor correction techniques are also 
available. If a USM flow-measurement output is non- 
linear over the meter's operational range, more 
sophisticated error correction techniques can be 
applied. For instance, a higher order curve fit algorithm, 
such as a second- or third-order polynomial equation 
can be used to characterize the meter's output, based 
on the available test data. An exhaustive discussion of 
the various meter error correction techniques is beyond 
the scope of this discussion. The designer or operator 
should consult with the manufacturer regarding the 
available options for a particular USM. 

G-3 EXAMPLE OF A FLOW-WEIGHTED MEAN 
ERROR (FWME) CALCULATION 

The calculation of a meter's FWME from actual flow- 
test data is a method of calibrating a meter when only 
a single calibration-factor correction is applied to the 
meter's output. Application of this factor to a USM 
output is similar to the use of an index gear ratio in a 
turbine or rotary flow meter. As noted above, use of 
the FWME factor is only one of several alternative 
methods of adjustment to a USM calibration to 
minimize the flow-measurement uncertainty of the 
meter. 



32 



IS 15677 : 2006 

The example used in G-l will now be used to For this example, the FWME is -0.309 3 percent and 

demonstrate how to calculate the FWME for 200 mm the single calibration factor, F, is calculated to be 

diameter USM that has been flow-calibrated under 1.003 1. By multiplying the USM output by 1.003 1 

operating conditions similar to those that the meter (that is, by applying the calibration factor), the 



IS 15677 : 2006 



I 



1.6 
1.4 

1.2 |- 
1.0 

0.8 h 
0.6 
0.4 l- 
0.2 h 
0.0 



:<?■ 



g -0.2 
K -0.4 
-0.6 
-0.8 
-1.0 
-1.2 
-1.4 
-1.6 



i 1 1 r 



MAXIMUM ERROR LIMIT 



i r 



^ 



FWME- CORRECTED 



fc\ 



\ 



X v-tfr 



/X) O 

/UNC ORRECTED 



A - — -• U^ ^ 



c 



MAXIMUM ERROR LIMIT 



J. 



X 



± 



J. 



J 



10 



20 



30 



40 50 

V<*max 



60 70 80 

(PERCENT) 



90 



100 



Fig. 



13 Uncorrected and FWME-Corrected Flow-Caubration Data 
for 200 mm Diameter USM 



performance requirements while operating under the 
influences and disturbances specified in the current 
revisions of OIML R 6, 'General Provisions of Gas 
Volume Meters', and OIML D 1 1 , 'General Requirements 
for Electronic Measuring Instruments'. OIML is the 
Organization Internationale de Metrologie Legale, that 
is the International Organization of Legal Metrology. 
OIML publishes these documents for the expressed 
purpose of harmonizing national performance 
requirements and testing procedures for gas meters. 

For the climatic conditions the requirements shall be 
for class 4K3, open locations with average climatic 
conditions, thus excluding polar and desert 
environments. For the mechanical conditions the 
requirements shall be for class 3/4M5, locations with 
significant or high levels of vibration and shock for 
example, transmitted from adjacent compressors. The 
combination of these two conditions leads to OIML 
class F for determining the severity, level for each 
test. 

Type test includes flow tests for the determination of 
the L Min of the calibration facility in order to find the 
upstream piping configuration defining a reference 



flow condition. This will be the preferred set up for 
conducting the flow-calibrations. 

G-4.2 Accuracy 

The accuracy limits of 6.1.1 shall be met within q MMx9 
design and ? MiB . 

The tests shall be conducted under undisturbed flow 
conditions with the following flow rates: 120 percent 
100 percent, 70 percent, 40 percent, 25 percent, 
10 percent, 5 percent of qr Mlx design. 

The duration of one measurement shall be at least 300 s, 
3 times 1 00 s or 400 Dl K(where D is the inner diameter 
of meter and Pis the mean flow velocity), whichever is 
larger. 

The repeatability test shall be conducted for at least 
one flow rate below q % and at least one flow rate above 
q t . For each of these flow rates 1 single measurements 
shall be taken with the duration of the measurement as 
given above. 

For the reproducibility test the same meter shall be 
tested under exactly the same installation conditions 
with a time difference of at least 1 month. 



34 



IS 15677 : 2006 



ANNEX H 

{Clause 6.2.1) 
ESTIMATION OF UNCERTAINTY 



H-l INTRODUCTION 

The purpose of uncertainty analysis is two-fold. At the 
design stage, it identifies weaknesses in the design of 
the metering installation and indicates the action 
necessary to eliminate them. It also permits the 
estimation of the level of uncertainty likely to be 
achieved in practice. 

For existing installations, it serves a similar purpose 
in identifying possible modifications should the 
predicated level of uncertainty be too high. 

An uncertainty analysis should, always, be carried out 
during the design of a new installation. 

H-2 GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

Whenever a measurement of flow rate is made, the 
value obtained is simply the best estimate of the true 
flow rate which can be obtained form the experimental 
data. In practice, the true flow rate may be slightly 
greater or less than this value. The following describe 
the calculations required in order to arrive at a statistical 
estimate of the interval within which the true flow rate 
may be expected to lie. 

H-3 UNCERTAINTY 

Owing to the very nature of physical measurements, it 
is impossible to effect the measurement of a physical 
quantity without error. The usefulness of the 
measurements greatly enchanced if a statement of the 
possible error accompanies the result but it is rarely 
possible to give an absolute upper limit to the value of 
the error. It is, therefore, more practicable to give an 
interval or range within which the true value of the 
measured quantity can be expected to lie with a suitably 
high probability. This interval is termed the uncertainty 
of measurement and the confidence level associated 
with the uncertainty indicates the probability that the 
interval quoted will conclude the true value of the 
quantity being measured. 

There is a fundamental difference between error and 
the uncertainty of a measurement, which is that the 
former is, by definition, unknown whereas the latter 
may be estimated. 

H-4 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN UNCERTAINTY 
AND CONFIDENCE LEVEL 

The uncertainty and the confidence with which it can 
be used are closely related; the wider the uncertainty, 
the greater is the confidence that the true measurement 



will be encompassed by this range. This applies even 
where the confidence level cannot be calculated, for 
example where the error is systematic in nature. Where 
the shape of a probability distribution is known it is 
often possible to calculate a new value for the 
uncertainty of measurement for a different probability 
from a given uncertainty and associated probability. It 
is, however, necessary to reach a compromise between 
choosing, at the one extreme, a very narrow uncertainty 
range with a low confidence level and, at the other, a 
wide uncertainty range with a high confidence level. 
Nevertheless, the confidence level is an essential part 
of the uncertainty statement. 

Given the adequacy of the data available, the choice of 
the confidence level at which to work is therefore 
determined by the implications for those who will use 
the measurement result. For flow measurement, the 
adoption of 95 percent as the confidence level to be 
associated with the uncertainty statement is a suitable 
compromise between the considerations given above, 
and will be the policy for these procedures whenever 
confidence levels can be stated. 

H-5 RANDOM AND SYSTEMATIC ERRORS 

Random errors are inherent in any installation and are 
those errors that fluctuate from moment to moment and 
can be reduced to insignificant levels by taking a large 
number of measurements. 

They may be significant when single or a few flow 
rate measurements are made but will have a minor 
effect when estimating the total flow rate of gas passed 
over substantial periods of time. Where spot 
measurements of flow are used for control purposes, 
random effects may be significant. These are best 
taken into account by performing duplicate calculation 
to those shown in the following examples, in which 
the systematic uncertainties shall be replaced by 
estimated random uncertainties for each parameter. 
However, the Metering Standards for Gaseous 
Petroleum Measurements do not require this 
distinction to be made between random and systematic 
components. 

A major source of errors arises from the performance 
of instruments in the field and deviation from their 
initial calibration. These are random in nature and can 
be minimized by regular recalibration. 

Systematic errors derive from the manufacture or 
calibration of equipment and their magnitude cannot 



35 



IS 15677 : 2006 



be reduce by repeated measurement. When flow rate 
measurement of the highest accuracy is required, 
systematic uncertainties can be sometimes reduced by 
having instrumentation calibrated by a number of 
laboratories which derive their traceabilities from 
separate independent primary standards. 

In the following examples, it will be noted that, although 
a large number of parameters contribute to the overall 
uncertainty, most uncertainty calculation are dominated 
by no more than five parameters. Neglect of the other 
parameters does not, significantly, change the overall 
results. 

All the examples are presented with uncertainty 
expressed as percentages for clarity. 

H-6 INDEPENDENCE OF VARIABLES 

The simplest estimation of uncertainty occurs when 
the contributing effects are all independent of each 
other. For example, consider a turbine meter with a 
density transducer installed. The mass flow rate will 
be given by: 

'"" K 

where 

q m « mass flow rate, 

/ = turbine meter frequency output, 

K - meter factor, and 

d = density transducer output 

Uncertainties can be combined on a root sum of squares 
basis. Hence the uncertainty of the mass flow rate is 
given by: 



E m -(E* + E} + Ep* 



where 



E - denotes the uncertainty on the mass flow q m , 
E t = denotes the uncertainty on the turbine meter 

frequency, 
E k = denotes the uncertainty on the meter factor, 

and 
£ p - denotes the uncertainty on the density factor. 

In this equation, the frequency of the turbine meter, its 
meter factor and the density transducer output are all 
treated independently of each outer. However, is some 
installations, the parameters will not be independent 
and due allowance for this must be made. This is most 
simply achieved by the use of sensitivity factors as 
described below. 

H-7 SENSITIVITY FACTORS 

Consider the case of density determination by the 
measurement of pressure, temperature and gas 



composition. An error in pressure measurement creates 
an error in density, since. 



PM 
RTZ 



where 



R - universal gas constant, 
T B absolute temperature, 
P - pressure, 
M - molecular weight, and 
Z = compressibility factor. 

It also creates an error in Z, which then creates a farther 
error in the calculated density. 

The interdependence of P, f, M and Z is treated by 
calculating sensitivity factors. The sensitivity factor is 
defined as the percentage change in the calculated flow 
caused by 1 percent error in anyone variable. It can be 
calculated from the equation: 



St 3 






where 



S « sensitivity factor, and x denotes the parameter 
concerned and .y is another variable. 

In the case considered l percent error in pressure results 
in a l. 21 percent error in density, and 1 percent error 
in temperature results in a 1 .84 percent error in density. 
An error of 1 percent is molecular weight can be shown 
to generate an error of 1.32 percent in density for this 
particular example. 

Hence the sensitivity factors for this case are: 

S p - 1.21 
S l * 1.84 
S - 1.32 

in 

It shall be noted that the International Metering 
Standards for Gaseous Petroleum Measurements 
assume that there is no interdependence between P 9 T, 
A/, and Z and hence the sensitivity factors in those 
standards are taken as unity. 

The effect of sensitivity factors is illustrated in 
Case 1 and Case 2. The following indicate how 
systematic uncertainty can be estimated for various 
types of meters and installations. 

H-7.1 Case 1: Turbine Meters 



Parameter 

Meter factor 
Z 



Individual 
Uncertainty 

0.5 

0.25 



Sensitivity Variance 



0.25 
0.06 



Total error. 0.72 percent. 



36 



Overall uncertainty in Flow measurement = SQRT 
(Total variance). 

The use of more than one meter can reduce the overall 
uncertainty as the sensitivity of meter factor is modified 

H-7.2 Case 2: Orifice Meters 



IS 15677 : 2006 

if the meters are calibrated at different laboratories. If 
they are calibrated at the same laboratory, as commonly 
happens, then the overall uncertainty will not be 
reduced. 



SI No. 


Parameter 


Individual Uncertainty 


Sensitivity 


Variance 





Discharge Coefficient 


0.65 


1 


0.42 


•0 


Orifice Bore 


0.1 


2.3 


0.05 


iii) 


Pressure 


0.2 


1.21 


0.06 


»v) 


temperature 


0.2 


1.84 


0.14 


v) 


Flow Computer 


0.1 


1 


0.01 


vi) 


Density 


0.3 


0.5 


0.02 


vii) 


Differential Pressure 


0.25 


0.5 


0.02 


viii) 


Expansibility 


0.05 


1 





ix) 


Meter Tube Bore 


0.1 


0.3 







Total Variance 






0.68 



Total error: 0.82 percent. 

Overall uncertainty in flow measurement » SQRT (Total variance). 



ANNEX J 

{Clause 1.1) 

SECONDARY INSTRUMENTATION 



J-l REQUIREMENT 
INSTRUMENTATION 



FOR SECONDARY 



Dependant on the type of meter selected, the 
requirement for continuous measurements and the 
output required, for example, mass actual volume, 
volume at base conditions or energy and the system 
uncertainty the appropriate secondary instrumentation 
shall be installed. 

For custody transfer purposes, secondary 
instrumentation shall have calibrations traceable to 
appropriate International Standards. 

J-2 STANDARD UNITS 

J-2. 1 The gas may be metered in volume or mass units; 
volumes shall be measured in cubic metres. 

Where volume units are used, they shall be converted 
to standard reference conditions which shall be 
specified. The reference conditions are 15°C 
temperature and 1.033 kg/cm 2 absolute pressure. 

J-2.2 Standard Volume Flowrate, tf v| 

The instantaneous standard volume flow rate of gas 



q sl shall be calculated using the following 
expression: 

where 

q = mass flowrate, and 

p s = density (kgnr 3 ) at standard reference 
conditions. 

J-2.3 Energy Flow rate, q y 

The instantaneous standard energy flow rate, q t shall 
be calculated using the following expression: 



q = q CV 



where 



CV = calorific value of the gas (Mjnr 3 ) at the same 
standard reference conditions as used for q . 

J-2.4 Details of Secondary Instrumentation 

The live measurement is required for pressure and 
temperature to derive flow. Live measurement of 
pressure, temperature and gas composition shall be 
used to derive density and real relative density. 



37 



IS 15677 : 2006 



Improvements in accuracy may be made by using a 
measured temperature to correct the diameters of the 
meter tube and orifice plate. 

J-2.4.1 Differential Pressure Transmitters 

Differential pressure transmitters have a significant 
effect on the overall accuracy of an orifice meter and 
should, therefore, be selected and installed to meet the 
required system uncertainty limits. 

For custody transfer use, this range shall be limited 
to 3: 1. 

This is approximately equivalent to 2: 1 of flow due to 
the square root effect of orifice meters. 

Where the range of an orifice meter needs to be 
increased, two or more differential pressure 
transmitters shall be installed in parallel, each operating 
over a part of the range. The ranges should overlap 
and the switch-over points be selected to minimize the 
uncertainty of the system. 

A single 'Auto-rearranging' (Smart) differential 
pressure transmitter may be used provided that it does 
not take longer than 5 s to change between ranges. The 
flow computer should use the value prior to rearranging 
during the rearranging process. 

Differential pressure transmitters shall be of good 
proven design and sturdy construction. They should 
have good linearity and repeatability with negligible 
mounting position effects. High quality transmitters 
shall be selected with the best accuracy and minimum 
temperature and pressure effects. 

An overall uncertainty of 0.2 percent of span, or better, 
shall be achieved. 

These accuracy levels can only be achieved by proper 
installation and calibration. 

The transmitters shall be mounted adjacent to the meter 
tube in a weather proof enclosure and consideration 
shall be given to its temperature control for optimum 
accuracy. 

the impulse lines from the transmitter to the meter 
tube shall be as short as possible and installed to be 
self draining such that any condensation formed drains 
back into the meter tube. 

J-2.4.2 Density 

Density shall be calculated using pressure, temperature 
and gas composition using an equation of state. Gas 
density and compressibility are related by the following 
formula: 



where 

p, - calculated upstream density, in kgm 3 ; 
P, = measured upstream pressure, in kPa; 
7, = upstream temperature, in K; 
M m = molecular weight of the gas; 
R - universal gas constant (»8 314.34 J/K); 
and 

Z, = gas compressibility factor at line 
conditions. 

Alternatively the density shall be calculated from the 
live measurement of real relative density (RD) using 
the formula: 



P.= 



_ *flpMir^ g Z s 



TO 



where 



p^ ■ density of air at base conditions, in kgm 3 ; 
P = pressure at base conditions, in kPa;' 
T = base temperature, in K; and 
Z s = gas compressibility at base conditions. 

(^ r )(Z,) 

The method used to calculate density is dependent upon 
the availability of live measurements, for example, gas 
composition or RD, and the accuracy required. 

J-2.4.3 Pressure Measurement 

On orifice meters, the pressure shall be measured at 
the plane of the upstream pressure tapping ideally, 
the orifice carrier should have two pairs of tappings: 
one pair for differential pressure and the other for 
pressure. 

Pressure transmitters shall be of a proven design and 
sturdy construction. They should have good linearity 
and repeatability with negligible mounting effects. 
Transmitters shall be selected to have an uncertainty 
of 0.15 percent of span or better. 

The pressure transmitters shall be mounted and installed 
in the same manner as the differential pressure 
transmitters detailed in J-2.4.1. 

J-2.4.4 Temperature Measurement 

For accurate temperature measurement, a platinum 
resistance thermometer may be used. 

J-2.5 Flow Computers 



IS 15677: 2006 



Each flow computer should, 

a) accept inputs from the flow meter and 
appropriate combinations of pressure, 
temperature, relative density and calorific 
value instruments. 

b) continuously calculate the actual volume flow 
of gas from the flow meter output and preset 
calibration data which may be interpolated 
from the respective flow meter calibration 
curve, entered into the flow computer. 

c) convert the actual volume to mass and/or 
standard volume flows and/or energy units. 



The meter flows shall be integrated and stored 
in totalizers. These totalizers shall be non- 
resettable and be protected against power 
failure. 

J-2.5.2 Selection of flow computers shall be done with 
RS ports for hook up with the SCADA system for 
remote monitoring and control. 

Each flow computer should have the self monitoring 
alarm functions and communications capabilities. 

The uncertainty of the calculations performed by 
the flow computes are normally, better than 
0.001 percent. 



ANNEX K 

(Clause 1.1) 

GAS PROPERTIES RELATED TO METERING 



K-l GENERAL 

In the measurement of gas, a number of physical and 
chemical properties are necessary for the calculation 
of the metered quantities. For example, flow 
measurement used for transfer purposes is, generally, 
combined with the calorific value of the gas to obtain 
the energy supplied. For orifice and turbine meters, it 
may be necessary to know the Reynolds number and 
hence viscosity and line density, to apply corrections 
to the meter's calibration constants. 

The design of the metering system is, therefore, 
influenced by the requirements for which the 
measurement is being made for flow measurement 
applications, the designer has a choice of routes through 
the use of secondary instrumentation or through 
computation of relevant properties from gas 
composition measurements. 

Dependent upon the application the principle gas 
properties which may be needed for flow measurement 
include: 

a) viscosity, 

b) isentropic exponent, 

c) calorific value, 

d) gas composition, and 

e) water vapour content. 

Whether the determinations are made by on-line 
instrumentation or by off-line analysis, it is essential 
that the properties measured or determined are 
representative of the gas being metered. 



K-2 SAMPLING 

K-2. 1 Sampling shall be carried out at line conditions 
to provide a representative portion of the gas to an 
instrument for analysis or for sensing some physical 
property. 

In the case of sampling for on-line measurement, the 
frequency and volume of the sample will be dictated 
by the requirements of the on-line instrument. In the 
case of off-line measurements, the sampling may be 
manual or automatic. 

Where pipelines carry gas of which the composition 
varies with time, sampling shall be continuous and 
automatic. However, where the gas is of nominally 
constant composition, samples may be taken manually. 
Where the flow rate varies, then consideration shall be 
given to flow proportional sampling or continuous on- 
line measurement. 

K-2.2 Certain precautions shall be taken during 
sampling. These should include, as a minimum, that: 

a) the sampling point is located downstream of 
flow disturbances and where the gas is 
homogeneously mixed. A sampling point 
should not be located in a stagnant or dead 
end pipe section. 

b) sample lines shall be placed above horizontal 
plane of the pipe and slope so that any liquids 
separating out can be returned to the pipe or 
separated from the sample. The line shall be 
kept as short as possible. 



39 



IS 15677: 2006 

c) materials used be such that there is no The frequency of sampling shall be programmed to 

chemical interaction with components of the operate on a time or on a flow-weighted basis. 

tfas_nr their condensates. _. _ ... . _^ 



IS 15677 : 2006 



ANNEX L 

(Clause K-4) 

CALCULATION OF CALORIFIC VALUES, DENSITY, RELATIVE DENSITY AND WOBBE 
INDEX FROM NATURAL GAS COMPOSITION 



L-l CALORIFIC VALUE 

L-l.l Super Calorific Value 

The amount of heat which could be released by the 
complete conversion in air of a specified quantity of 
gas, in such a way that the pressure p x at which the 
reaction takes place remains constant, and all the 
products of combustion are returned to the same 
specified temperature /, as that of the reactants, all of 
these products being in the gaseous state except for 
water formed by combustion, which is condensed to 
the liquid state at /, 

Where the quantity of gas is specified on a molar basis, 
the calorific value is designated as // s (/, /?,) 

Where the quantity of gas is specified on a volumetric 
basis, the calorific value is designated as 
H s (/, /?,) V (t 2 p 2 ). Where t 2 and p 2 are the gas volume 
(metering) reference conditions. 

L-l. 2 Inferior Calorific Value 

The amount of heat which would be released by the 
complete combustion in air of a. specified quantity of 
gas, in such a way that the pressure p x at which the 
reaction takes place remains constant, and all the 
products of combustion are returned to the same 
specified temperature t x as that of the reactants, all of 
these products being in the gaseous state. 

On molar, mass and volumetric bases, the 
inferior calorific value is designated respectively as 
//(/, />,)//,(/, />,), and //,[(/, Pl ). V{t 2 p 2 )}. 

L-2 DENSITY 

The mass of a gas sample divided by its volume at 
specified conditions of pressure and temperature. 

L-2.1 Relative Density 

The density of a gas divided by the density of dry air 
of standard composition (see Annex B) at the same 
specified conditions of pressure and temperature. The 
term ideal relative density applies when both gas and 
air are considered as fluids which obey the ideal gas 
law, the term real relative density applies when both 
gas and air are considered as real fluids. 



L-3 WOBBE INDEX 

If the flow of the fuel across a burner orifice varies 
then it follows that the energy produced during 
combustion will also change. The Wobbe Index is 
defined as the amount of energy introduced to the 
burners. 



Wobbe index = 

L-4 COMBUSTION 
INDEX (CARI) 



Calorific value 



(Specific gravity/ 2 

AIR REQUIREMENT 



The volumetric flow of a fuel gas through a burner 
orifice (restriction) is dependent upon the specific 
gravity of that fuel. Therefore, the amount of air 
required for complete combustion of a fuel will vary 
with the density of the fuel gas. The Combustion Air 
Requirement Index (CARI) is a dimensionless 
parameter indicating how much air is required for the 
stoichiometric combustion of a fuel gas. 



CARI = 



Air/Fuel ratio 
(Specific gravity/ 



L-5 ENTHALPY OF TRANSFORMATION 

The enthalpy of transformation of a substance from 
state A to state B is the thermodynamic terminology 
for the amount of heat release which accompanies the 
transformation between states. A positive heat release 
is taken by convention to be a numerically identical 
negative enthalpy increment. The quantities enthalpy 
of combustion and enthalpy of vaporization therefore 
have meanings which shall be contextually self- 
evident; the term enthalpy correction refers to the 
(molar) enthalpy of transformation between the ideal 
and real states of a gas. 

L-6 IDEAL GAS AND REAL GAS — AN IDEAL 
GAS IS ONE WHICH OBEYS THE IDEAL GAS 
LAW 

p.V m = Z(T.p).R.T 

where Z(T.p) is a variable, often close to unity, and is 
knows as the compression factor. 



41 



IS 15677 : 2006 



ANNEX M 

(Clauses 6.5 and F-8) 

INSTALLATION AND COMMISSIONING 



M-l INSTALLATION 

M-l.l General Requirements 

M-l. 1.1 In selecting the location of the meter, 
consideration shall be given to the requirements for 
access to operate and maintain it. 

M-l. 1.2 The meter and secondary instrumentation 
shall be installed in accordance with certification 
requirements and should take account of the 
manufacturer's instructions and the relevant standards 
and codes of practice. 

M-l. 1.3 The installation should not be subject to 
extremes of temperature or vibration and shall be 
designed and constructed to suit the environment in 
which it is located, particularly, if offshore. Adequate 
weather protection shall be installed. 

M-l. 1.4 The meter shall be installed with the 
required pipe work configuration, by-passes, flow 
straightness, filters etc, as detailed in the relevant 
sections of this standard. Isolation valves shall be 
fitted at the inlet and outlet of each meter run with a 
vent valve to facilitate the isolation and venting of 
the meter run for maintenance. Double block and 
bleed valves shall be used where maintenance 
includes opening parts of the system which, normally, 
contain pressure. 

M-l. 1.5 Careful consideration shall be given to the 
choice and operating requirement of secondary 
instrumentation and the possible need to house 
equipment in temperature controlled enclosures, or a 
meter house, to minimize ambient temperature effects 
upon the accuracy of the equipment. 

M-l. 1.6 For meters used for custody transfer and 
taxation purposes applications, secondary 
instrumentation shall be installed in a meter house. The 
meter house should have lighting, temperature 
controlled and have adequate ventilation. 

M-l.1.7 On all installations, provision shall be made 
for the connection and operation of calibration 
equipment. 

M-l. 1.8 All meters, secondary instrumentation and 
equipment associated with the metering system shall 
be clearly labelled. The label should state the 
instrument identification number and its function. 

M-l. 1.9 Material certification for all pressure 
containing parts shall be retained. 



M-l. 2 Mechanical Installation 

M-l. 2.1 The meter associated pipe work should 
conform to the relevant pipe work installation code and 
be welded and flanged accordingly. 

M-l .2.2 The pipe work shall be supported immediately 
upstream and downstream of the meter such that no 
distortion occurs within the meter body. 

M-l.2.3 For optimum accuracy, consideration shall be 
given to thermal insulation of the meter run and 
secondary instrumentation, particularly if the meter 
system is likely to be subjected to extreme temperature 
changes due to solar or wind chill effects. 

M-l. 2.4 Secondary instrumentation impulse pipe work 
shall be installed to provide a true reading or, in the 
case of analyzers, a representative sample. The impulse 
pipe work should: 

a) be connected to the centre line, 

b) have a full bore isolation valve as close as 
possible to the connection, 

c) have a slope from the instrument back to the 
pipeline. If this is not possible then catch pots 
shall be installed at the low point in the 
impulse lines, 

d) have a facility at the instrument to allow 
isolation, venting and calibration, and 

e) be adequately supported and mechanically 
protected be thermally insulated. 

M-l.2.5 Instrumentation should, where possible, be 
mounted on a stand at a height suitable to allow 
convenient access for maintenance and calibration. 

M-1.3 Commissioning 

To ensure that any metering system meets its design 
performance specification, a series of tests shall be 
performed before use. 

This is particularly important in the case of metering 
systems used for custody transfer. 

M-l.3.1 Manufacturer's Tests 

Meters requiring calibration, for example, tuibine meters, 
shall be calibrated over the working ranges of pressure 
and flow, at an approved facility, to determine the meter 
characteristics (ideally using the process fluid). 

On orifice meters, the meter tube and orifice plate shall 
be dimensionally checked for compliance with the 
standard. The measurements recorded are important as 



42 



IS 15677 : 2006 



dimensions derived from them will be used in the flow 
calculation. 

Flow computers and database computers shall be tested 
at the manufacturer's premises to ensure that the 
required calculations are performed accurately, using 
the correct equations, and that any reports generate by 
the system are correct. 

All secondary instrumentation shall be tested at the 
manufacturer's premises and calibration certificates 
issued. 

M- 1.3.2 Pre-commissioning 

Following installation, the metering system pipe work 
shall be pressure tested and the electrical equipment 
checked to ensure safe and reliable operation. 

The operation of all equipment, particularly automatic 
and manual isolation and vent valves shall be checked. 

The secondary instrumentation and flow computers 
shall be calibrated and all constants used in the 
calculations checked. Where possible, a full system 
test shall be carried out. 

Calibration equipment shall be certified by an 
accredited calibration laboratory traceable to national/ 
international standards. 

M-l.3.3 Commissioning 

The metering system pipe work shall be cheeked to 



ensure that no swarf or debris is present and then be 
tested and purged. The system may be pressurized up 
to the closed inlet valve. 

With the outlet valve closed, the meter shall be slowly 
pressurized, ideally through by-pass around the inlet 
valve. When the meter tube is pressurized to full line 
pressure the inlet valve shall be opened. The outlet 
valve should then be slowly opened to ensure that the 
orifice plate or turbine meter is not damaged due to 
excess live flow. 

The maximum flow rating of the meter should never 
be exceeded. 

Orifice plates and turbine meters could be damaged 
whereas, with ultrasonic meters, the signal might be 
lost but no permanent damage would occur. 

Particular care shall be exercised during 
commissioning when the downstream pressure is likely 
to be lower that the upstream pressure and there is a 
possibility that the maximum flow rating may be 
exceeded. 

On all meters, wherever possible the initial gas flow 
shall be through a by-pass and not the meter, or the 
secondary instrumentation shall be isolated. The 
orifice plate meters used for custody transfer shall be 
inspected to check for damage to the upstream face 
and edge. 



ANNEX N 

{Clause F-9) 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 



N-l GENERAL 



N-l.l To ensure that the metering system continues 
to perform to its design accuracy, routine inspections 
and calibration shall be based on the required system 
accuracy, the meter performance and any changes to 
the process parameters. A record of all calibration 
results and equipment changes shall be kept. 

N-1.2 Regular inspection and maintenance of certified 
electrical equipment shall be carried out in accordance 
with the certification requirements and should take 
account of the manufacturer's instructions and any 
relevant standards. Documentation and records shall 
be kept to enable explosion-protected electrical and 
electronic equipment to be maintained in accordance 
with its type of protection. 

N-l. 3 The operation of the meter run and by-pass 



valves shall be checked to ensure that they are capable 
of being fully opened and fully closed and that any 
status indication is correct. The valves shall be tested 
to ensure that they do not leak. Any leaks, wire seals, 
etc, used to indicate closure of by-pass valves shall be 
checked routinely for integrity (ree Annex R). 

N-1.4 Relevant safety procedures concerning positive 
isolation of high pressure gas shall be followed when 
removing meters, orifice plates or other fittings form 
the line. 

N-1.5 The pressure differential across filters shall be 
checked at predetermined intervals and filters cleaned/ 
changed when necessary. 

N-2 TURBINE METERS 

N-2.1 Turbine meters shall be removed from the line 



43 



IS 15677 : 2006 



and examined for corrosion or other damage. At regular 
intervals, the turbine meter shall be sent to an approved 
facility for calibration as detailed in E-6.2.3. 

N-2.2 When the operation of a turbine meter is 
suspected, it shall be removed from the line for 
inspection and a spin-down test carried out in a draught 
free environment. Comparisons of measured spin- 
down times with the manufacturer's as new values will 
give a good guide to the condition of the meter. 

N-2.3 Turbine meters that require periodic lubrication 
shall be lubricated in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instruction. 

N-3 ORIFICE PLATES 

N-3.1 Orifice plates shall be removed for routine 
inspections or after a disturbance, for example a filter 
rupture or excessive differential pressure across the 
plate. 

N-3.2 The orifice plates shall be examined visually 
to ensure that no damage has been sustained, with 
particular attention to the upstream square edge of 
the orifice bore and the upstream face. The upstream 
face of each plate shall be examined with a straight 
edge to ensure that no warping or distortion has 
occurred. 

N-3.3 The orifice fitting shall be examined to ensure 
that no debris is present to prevent the proper seating 
of the orifice in the carrier. 

N-3. 4 On metering systems used for taxation 
purposes, the orifice plates shall be measured and 
certified for conformance with AG A 3 by a recognized 
authority. 

N-4 CALIBRATION OF SECONDARY 
INSTRUMENTATION 

N-4.1 Differential Pressure Transmitters 

N-4. 1.1 For optimum accuracy in the case of orifice 
meters, differential pressure transmitters shall be 
calibrated at the operating pressure. 

On applications where optimum accuracy is not a 
requirement, differential pressure transmitters may be 
calibrated at ambient pressure and the effects of 
pressure shift, which can be considerable, included in 
the uncertainty calculations. 

N-4. 1 .2 In both cases, calibrations shall be carried out 
using a certified dead-weight tester traceable to national 
standards. 

Calibration can be achieved directly using a dead- 
weight tester, or indirectly, using a secondary standard 
of knoyn repeatability that has been verified against a 
certified device. 



N-4. 1.3 Ambient calibration shall be carried out with 
a differential dead-weight tester connected to the high 
pressure port of the transmitter and with the low 
pressure port open to ambient pressure. 

N-4. 1.4 Calibrations shall be carried out with a 
differential dead-weight tester connected to both high 
and low ports of the transmitter: The high static 
pressure is applied to the low port while the high static 
pressure plus the differential pressure are applied to 
the high port. 

This type of dead-weight tester is susceptible to 
vibration and is, therefore only suitable for permanent 
installation in a laboratory or, in some cases, a meter 
house. 

N-4. 1.5 When using either ambient or high pressure 
differential dead-weight testers, consideration shall be 
given to correcting the weight values for local gravity 
and temperature to obtain the required accuracy. 

N-4. 1.6 When use of a high static differential dead- 
weight tester is not practicable, the footprint method 
shall be used as an alternative method of high static 
pressure calibration. 

The differential pressure transmitter shall be calibrated 
at an approved laboratory operating at high static 
pressure and ambient pressure. 

This calibration provides a footprint which indicates 
the extent of any shift in calibration due to pressure. 
Provided that the footprint values are repeated in the 
field at the ambient pressure, allowing for corrections 
in gravity and temperature, then the transmitter is 
assumed to be within calibration at high static 
pressure. 

A high static zero check shall be carried out in addition 
to the footprint check. Transmitters shall be foot printed 
annually. 

N-4.2 Pressure Transmitters 

Pressure transmitters shall be isolated from the process 
pipe work and calibrated with a certified dead-weight 
tester, either directly or indirectly, by the use a 
repeatable secondary standard which has been verified 
against a certified device. 

N-4.3 Temperature Elements 

A certified temperature device shall be placed in test 
thermowell, adjacent to the measuring element, and 
die reading compared under flowing conditions. If a 
test thermowell is not available them the measuring 
element shall be removed form the line and both 
devices placed in closed proximity in an insulated 
container in a suitable medium at, approximately, the 
normal operating temperature. 



44 



IS 15677 : 2006 



N-4.4 Gas Chromatographs 

The gas chromatographs should automatically perform 
a calibration daily, using a calibration gas prepared 
gravimetrically or a standard gas similar to the process 
gas which is traceable to national standards. 

N-4.5 Flow Computers 

N-4.5.1 Prior to the start of the tests, the constants entered 
in the flow computer shall be recorded and checked. 

N-4.5.2 Checks shall be carried out on the following: 

a) Analogue to digital conversion; 

b) Frequency inputs; 



c) RTD temperature input; 

d) Digital to analogue conversion; 

e) Calculation of density, relative density and 
calorific value from the gas; 

f) Composition; 

g) Calculation of flow rate; and 
h) Integration of flow rate. 

N-4.5.3 When checking the calculation and 
integration of flow rate, using keypad values, all 
keypad inputs shall be return to live inputs on 
completion of tests and all constants recorded and 
checked. 



ANNEX P 

(Clause! A) 

GAS ANALYSIS AND RECORDING CALORIMETERS 



P-l GAS ANALYSIS 

P-l.l Chemical Composition of Natural Gas 

Natural gas is a naturally occurring gas mixture, 
consisting mainly of methane. Table 4 outlines the 
components and ranges for these values. 

There is no guarantee of the following composition at 
your location nor as a system average. The exact 
composition at any site will vary among the different 

Table 4 Chemical Composition of Natural Gas 



SI Component 

No. 

(1) (2) 



Analysis Range 

(Mole Percent) (Mole Percent) 

(3) (4) 



i) 


Methane 


94.9 


87.0-96.0 


H) 


Ethane 


2.5 


1.8-5.1 


iii) 


Propane 


0.2 


0.1-1.5 


iv) 


ISO-Butane 


0.03 


0.01-0.3 


v) 


n-Butane 


0.03 


0.01-0.3 


vi) 


ISO-Pentane 


0.01 


trace-0.14 


vii) 


n-Pentane 


0.01 


tracc-0.04 


viii) 


Hexane plus 


0.01 


trace-0.06 


ix) 


Nitrogen 


1.6 


1.3-5.6 


x) 


Carbon dioxide 


0.7 


0.1-1.0 


xi) 


Oxygen 


0.02 


0.01-0.1 


xii) 


Hydrogen 


trace 


tracc-0.02 


xiii) 


Specific gravity 


0.585 


0.57-0.62 


xiv) 


Gross heating value 
(MJ/m 5 ), dry basis !) 


37.8 


36.0-40.2 



'> The gross heating value is the total heat obtained by complete 
combustion at constant pressure of a unit volume of gas in air, 
including the heat released by condensing the water vapour in 
the combustion products (gas, air, and combustion products taken 
at standard temperature and pressure). 



regions. The average heating value will depend on the 
mix of gas supplies and therefore can vary from the 
value listed in Table 4. 

P-1.2 Sulphur 

Sulphur content is 5.5 mg/m 3 which includes the 
4.9 mj^m 3 of sulphur in the odourant (mercaptan) added 
to gas for safety reasons. 

P-1.3 Water 

The water vapour content of natural gas is less than 
80 mg/m 3 , and is 16 to 32 mg/m 3 . 

P-1.4 Combustion Properties of Natural Gas 



Ignition point 


593°C 


Flammability limits 


4 percent to 16 percent 




(volume percent in air) 


Theoretical flame 


1 960°C 


Temperature (stoichiometric 




air/fuel ratio) 




Maximum flame velocity 


0.3 m/s 


Relative density (specific 


0.585 


gravity) 




Wobbe index (Btu/scf) 


1328 


NOTE — There is no guarantee that the combustion properties 


at your location will be exactly as shown. The properties shown 


are an overall average on the Union Gas system. 



P-1.5 Chemical Absorption Methods 

Chemical absorption techniques are used for analyzing 
individual components which may be indicative of the 



45 



IS 15677 : 2006 

quality of the gas or the efficiency of combustion of particularly of higher hydrocarbons. Some gas 

the gas. The component may be quantified by the direct chromatography systems work on the basis of trapping 

change in volume, the intensity of colour of the higher hydrocarbon are back flushed through the system 

absorbent, a measurement of the heat generated when and quantified. 



absorbed on a reactive surface, etc. 



It is necessary to carry out regular calibrations, using 

c+anrlor/4 f*Arti'fi*sl mivhtMe rtf aaaa* **f aimJU. 



P-4 RECORDING CALORIMETERS 

The recording calorimeter operates on the principle of 
metering a quantity of gas mixing it with a metered 
quantity of air burning it in a suitable combustion 
chamber and cooling the flue gases in a heat exchanger 
with a metered quantity of air or water. The temperature 
rise of the gas or water is accurately measured and the 
calorific value inferred from a calibration using a gas 
of known calorific value. 

In the recording type calorimeters, the meters for 
measuring the gas, the air for combustion and the 
exchange air are geared together in a common water 
bath so that a constant air to gas ratio is obtained. As 
ambient temperature and pressure variations affect each 
of the metes equally, the calorimeter is insensitive to 
ambient conditions. Repeatability of the instrument is 
of the order of 0.3 percent. Calibration is obtained by 
burning a pure sample of methane or a certified gas 
mixture of known calorific value. 

More recent instruments operate on a ratio of gas and 



IS 15677 : 2006 

air for combustion. The products of combustion are 
checked by an absorptive catalyst for excess oxygen 
(or fuel) and the above ratio is altered as appropriate. 
Variations in the ratio of sampling of the gas and air 
volumes are proportional to the change of calorific 
value. 

Instruments operating on the above ratio principle use 
either a zirconium oxide sensor or a thermocouple to 
determine when the instrument is burning the gas/air 
mixture at the stoichiometric ratio. For the alkane series 
of hydrocarbons. The calorific value and above ratio 
have a linear relationship and the instrument is, 
normally, calibrated using pure methane. For this 
principle, the presence of unsaturated gas will increase 
the uncertainty of measurement. The overall 
uncertainty of measurements is, typically, 0. 1 5 percent. 

These instruments can be fitted with micro processors 
to process the data and control auto-calibrations as 
programmed. 



ANNEX Q 

(Clause 1.1) 

SAFETY ASPECTS 



Q-l QUALITY OF GAS 

Most gases that are distributed are non-corrosive. 
Quantities of dust or sand left from the construction 
phase may however be present. Though most gases 
are treated to have a very low hydrocarbon dew point, 
it does happen that liquid hydrocarbons find their way 
into the system. Means for draining filters should 
therefore be provided. This draining system may either 
of manual or automatic type. Gases should have a low 
water dew point to prevent hydrate formation. Water 
also increases the risk of corrosion. 

Q-2 HAZARDOUS AREA CLASSIFICATION 
AND ELECTRICAL SAFETY 

In a well designed and constructed gas terminal there 
shall be no leakage of gas. If any relief valves are 
present, their outlet shall be well above the installation 
or building. The only times when the occurrence of 
an explosive mixture can be expected is therefore 
during maintenance, and then only for short periods 
when a part of the installation is de-pressurized and 
taken apart. This would indicate that if a station is 
zoned at all, it shall be rated as a very low hazard 
(zone 2 for the European CEN 500 14 standard). Still, 



in practice stations are often zoned more hazardous 
(for example, CEN 50014 zone 1). The zoning of the 
station will have to be known before a proper design 
can be made. 

Any electrical equipment associated with a meter 
installation shall be designed, constructed and installed 
in accordance with an appropriate standard. The 
hazardous area classification as given below, of the 
meter installation shall be determined by means of a 
full hazard assessment. 

a) Zone 0: An area in which an explosive gas/air 
mixture is continuously present or present for 
long periods. 

b) Zone 1 : An area in which an explosive gas/air 
mixture is not likely to occur in normal 
operation. 

c) Zone 2: An area in which an explosive gas/air 
mixture is not likely to occur in normal 
operation and, if it occurs, it will exist only 
for a short time. 

By implication, an area which is not classified as 
Zone 0, Zone 1 or Zone 2 is deemed to be non- 
hazardous or a safe area. 



47 



IS 15677 : 2006 



Even in safe area, account shall be taken of any 
constraints imposed by any adjacent hazardous area. 

Where a meter is in a hazardous area, electrical 
equipment, for example, lighting and instrumentation 
shall be appropriately certified for safe use in the 
designated zone. If the required equipment is not 
certified or suitable for use in the designated area, it 
shall be fitted in a safe area or in a separate 
compartment having gas-tight walls and outside access 
only to a safe area. 

Any electrical device and associated circuits, for 
example, a pulse transmitter, mounted in or on a meter 
shall be suitable for use in a Zone 2 hazardous area as 
a minimum requirement 

Metering installation may incorporate a variety of 
electrical supplies, both ac and dc. Power cables 
(220 V and above) for lighting and motors etc shall be 
separated by at least 0.3 m from instrument cables to 
minimize pick-up in instrument circuits. 

Instrument and control cabling shall be screened cable 
with twisted conductors to be used to avoid pick-up. 
Cable armouring and screens shall be correctly earthed 
in accordance with the system and certificate 
requirements. All metering equipment's shall be 
immune to EMI/RFI interferences. 

Cable screens and armour shall be insulated from the 
pipe work, especially where cathodic protection 
systems exist. Where intrinsically safe systems are 
employed, the cable parameter shall conform to the 
system certificate. 

Intrinsically safe circuits shall not be intermixed with 
non-intrinsically safe circuits in the same multi-core 
cable. 

Q-3 EARTHING 

The whole of the electrical installation shall be earthed. 
Where sites have a cathodic protection, specialist 
advice may be required. 

Q-4 LIGHTNING PROTECTION 

If a nearby lightning strike could cause damage to 



equipment and render it unsafe in a manner that is not 
obvious, the installation shall be protected again static 
discharge. 

If there are reasonable grounds to believe that there is 
possibility of hidden, unsafe failures due to a lightning 
strike then suitable protection shall be provided in the 
form of either: 

a) A lightning barrier plus a certified protective 
device, or 

b) A lightning barrier suitable for Zone 2 
hazardous area apparatus, as appropriate. 

Q-5 NOISE 

Most of the noise in a regulator station is generated by 
the gas travelling at high velocity through the regulator 
ports. The sound is transferred to the piping which in 
turn radiates it into the environment. The noise in a 
station therefore not only emanates from the regulator 
but also from the piping, in particular downstream. 
There are several ways to reduce the noise. Some 
regulators have special cages to break down the 
velocity more gradually. Some have different valve 
constructions with the same objective. All silent 
regulators are bigger and more expensive. 

Heavier pipe walls and larger diameters generally help 
to reduce the noise as does external insulation, 
specifically of the downstream pipe work. 

Q-6 STAND-BY INSTALLATION 

With modern materials and proven operating principles 
present regulators and fittings are extremely safe and 
reliable. However, safety codes and regulations often 
demand additional safety devices. These codes have 
long traditions and vary considerably between 
countries. Before a station can be designed, all the 
relevant codes and standards valid for the particular 
site have to be known. The quality control and 
assurance for pressure vessels and piping also vary 
considerably among countries. Environmental 
concerns are mainly for the noise issuing from the 
station. The venting of gas to the atmosphere may also 
be restricted. 



48 



IS 15677 : 2006 



ANNEX R 

(C/ouraN-1.3) 

AREAS OF CONCERNS OF EXISTING TERMINALS AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS 



SI No. Area of Concern 

i) Validation of orifice plates/ 
turbine meter 



ii) Meter installation improper 

iii) Improper meter selection 

iv) Compositional analysis of 
natural gas 



v) Flow control 



vi) Erratic power supply 

vii) Integrity of flow computer 

viii) Condensate handling, 

ix) SCADA/Communication 



Prdposed Corrective Action 

1) Validation of orifice plates (inspection/dimension check as per 
ISO) to be done every 2 years. 

2) Proving of turbine meters at working conditions every 2 years. 



Station design as per ISO/AGA standards to mitigate the 
installation effects on the meter accuracy. 

Meter type to be compatible with the gas quality. 

Installation of flow proportional auto sampling system/on-line 

GC for large consumers. 

Spot sampling for medium and spot sampling at trunk line for 

small terminals with centralized lab GC. 

Installation of the suitably sized volumetric remote flow control 

device in order to control the consumer for flow regulation for 

large consumers. 

Local control with throttling valves for medium and small 

terminals. 



1) 
2) 
1) 



2) 

1) 
2) 

1) 
2) 



Installation of properly designed UPS. 

Installation of stand alone solar powered metering system. 

Remote, on-line flow computation verification recommended 
using the real time measuring inputs in the SCADA system. 
Sealing of custody transfer instrumentation system. 

Provide automatic condensate handling and stoarage facility. 

Installation of reliable voice and data communication system for 
remote monitoring. 



ANNEX S 

(Informative) 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 



OIML R 6 : 1989, General provisions for gas meters. 

OIML R 32 : 1 989, Rotary piston gas meters and turbine 
gas meters. 

VIM: 1984, International vocabulary of basic and 
general terms in metrology (BIPM, IEC, ISO, 
OIML). 

ANSI B46.1 American National Standards Institute. 

A.G.A. Engineering Technical Note M-96-2-3, 
Ultrasonic Flow Measurement for Natural Gas 
Applications, American Gas Association, ISIS 
Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, VA 22209. 

A.G.A. Transmission Measurement Committee Report 



No.7, Measurement of Gas by Turbine Meters, 
American Gas Association, ISIS Wilson 
Boulevard, Arlington, VA 22209. 

A.G A. Transmission Measurement Committee Report 
No.8, Compressibility Factors. Natural Gas and 
Other; Related Hydrocarbon Gases, American Gas 
Association, ISIS Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, 
V A 22209. 

NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 1996 Edition, 
National Fire Protection Association, Battery 
March Park, Quincy, MA 02269. 

API Manual of Petroleum Measurement Standards 



49 



IS 15677 : 2006 



Chapter 21, September 1993, Flow Measurement 
UsU Electronic Metering Systems, American 
Petroleum Institute, 1220 L Street NW, 
Washington, DC 20005. 

ASTM Designation: E 1002-96, Standard Test Method 
for Leaks Using Ultrasonics, American Society 
for Testing and Materials, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, 
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959, U.S.A. 

Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49-Transportation, 
Part 192 (49 CFR 192), Transportation of Natural 
Gas and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal 
Safety Standards, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC 20402. 

GERG Technical Monograph 8 (1995), Present Status 
and Future Research on Multi-path Ultrasonic Gas 



Flow Meters, Christian Michelsen Research AS, 
the GERG Project Group and Programme 
Committee No. 2 — Transmission and Storage, 
Groupe Europ6en De Recherches Gazieres. 

OIML R 6 General provisions for gas volume meters, 
1989 (E), International Recommendation, 
Organization Internationale de Metrologie Legale, 
Bureau International de Metro 1 ogie:Ugale, 1 1 , rue 
Turgot-75009 Paris-France. 

OIML D 1 1 General requirements for electronic 
measuring instruments, 1994 (E), International 
Document, Organization Internationale de 
Metrologie Legale, Bureau International de 
Metrologie Legale, 1 1 , rue Turgot-75009 Paris- 
France. 



50 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced ill any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing 
the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the neect arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
4 BIS Catalogue' and Standards: Monthly Additions*. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. PG 26 (1013). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 



Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



website : www.bis.org.in 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telephones 

f 2323 7617 
L 2323 3841 

r2337 8499, 2337 8561 
12337 8626,2337 9120 

r 260 3843 
1260 9285 

r2254 1216, 2254 1442 
12254 2519,2254 2315 

r2832 9295, 2832 7858 
12832 7891,2832 7892 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco rinting Press, Delhi 



