( Reaffirmed 2006 )

~~mw
Indian Standard

?

RECOMMENDED PRACTICEFORDESIGN AND FABRICATION',OF IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTS PRIOR TO GALVANIZING AND METAL SPRAYING
( Second Revision )

ICS 77.140.01; 77.060; 25.220.040

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDAR'DS
ZAFAR MARC

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August

1998

Price Group

6

Metallic

and Non-Metallic

Finishes

Sectional

Committee.

MTD 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Metallic and Non-Metallic Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1971 and was revised in 1985. The Comm$ree felt the need for further revision in order to widen the scope of standard to provide guidelines to fabricators both in the field of hot dip galvanizing as well as sprayed metal coatings, So in this revision requirements for design and fabrication of metal articles prior to sprayed metal coatings have also been added. Further, additional details for design factors in the area of hot dip galvanizing have been provided in this revision. Time and money are often wasted due to the faulty design of articles for the coating process to be applied. Finishing is only one part of the manufacturing process and should not be viewed in isolation while considering the overall costs and quality. The general principles described in this standard will assist in achieving the desired results for hot dip galvanized and sprayed coatings. There is a great need to take the characteristics of the possible finishing processes into account at an early design stage and to regard finishing as an essential part of the production process rather than as an incidental necessity wafter production. A design that has considered essential features of the finishing process can effectively reduce the time and trouble and hence the cost of producing a good finish. Early consideration of the product requirements would help the designers to ensure that products can be satisfactorily finished with serviceable coatings without any compromise of other design objectives. In the preparation a) of this standard assistance has been derived from the following publications: Part 7Sprayed Metal

Recommendations for the Design of Metals Articles that are to be Coated. Coatings (BS 4479:1990), issued by the British Standards Institution. Guidance document: Metal Coating for the Corrosion Protection ISO/TC 107&C N 413, issued by the International Organization

b)

of Iron and Steel in Structures for Standardization.

IS 6159 : 1998

Indian Standard

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FORDESIGN AND FABRICATION OF IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTS PRIOR TO GALVANIZING AND METAL SPRAYING
( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard describes the precautions in design and fabrication that should be taken to obtain good quality hot-dip galvanized coatings and metal sprayed coatings on iron and steel products. 1.2 Section A deals with recommendations for design of metal components prior to hot dip galvanizing and Section B deals with recommendations for the design of metal articles prior to sprayed metal coatings. 1387 :1993 IS No.
Tale

Part 13 Hot-dip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners
(second revision)

General requirements for supply of metallurgical materials Chilled iron shots and grits for use in foundries Sprayed coatings aluminium and zinc on iron and steel

4683: 1968

2 REFERENCES
The-following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. 1367 Title

5905: 1989

4586:19X9

(paa 13) : 1983

Technical supply conditions for threaded steel fasteners:

Recommended practice for metal spraying for protection of iron and steel

SECTION A Recommendations 3
PRECAUTIONS ___-. of Molten __ Zinc

for Design of Articles to be Coated by Hot Dip Galvanizing
requires means for the access and drainage of molten metal, and means for the escape of gases and sullage from internal compartments and pockets (venting). Some typical examples for the design details for venting and draining are illustrated in Fig. 1 to 14.

3.1 Access and Drainage

For complete protection molten zinc should be able to flow freely to all parts of the surfaces of the item to be galvanized. Accessibility to molten zinc

IS 6159 : 1998

0
0
External stiffeners should have the corners cropped to eliminate `dead pockets' Internal diaphragms on small box sections must have large `crops' in the comers FIG.

FIG. 1

2

-_----_a ,---,-,t,_

Cl
0 0
Intempl diaphragms on large box sections to have cropped comers and `manhole'. FIG.

If holes can be provided in the loc&ons indicated a cleaner Memish-free coating will be obtained FIG.

3 2

4

IS 6159

Angle bracing should, if possible, be stopped short of the main boom flange.

Structural hollow sections. venting and draining. On holes should be provided other at top and bottom. can be cut at the end of

Provision must be made for vertical members, drilled diagonally opposite each Alternatively, a `V' notch the member. 6

FIG.

5

FIG.

ww
1
External stiffeners for beams and channels should have the comers cropped. FIG. 7 3 FIG. 8

1

If contacting surfaces cannot be avoided, as with these channels then the edges of the contacting areas should be continuously welded and a hole drilled through both members to eliminate the danger of an explosion in the galvanizing bath. If this is not possible' then welding should be intermittent.

IS 6159 : 1998

Hole location

for vertical

and angled sections

shall be as shown in examples

A and B by arrows

on the drawing.

Each vertical and angled section shall have two holes at the top and bottom, 18Q' apart in line with horizontal members as indicated by arrows. Size of holes should preferably be equal and the combined area of the two holes at either end of the vertical and angled sections ( that is, area C and D, or area E and F) should be at least 30 percent of the cross-sectional area. End Plates
I

Horizontal

:

2 and 3

Most desirable - completely open `same diameter'. Equal substitutes - Openings as shown should be 30 percent

of the areas of the inside diameter.

FIG. 9 PIPETRUSS 76 mm AND LARGER

The above drawing

illustrates

desirable

design features

for fabrication

of harmrail

that requires

galvanizing.

I
2 3 4 and 5

Ventholes shall be as close to the weld as possible and not less than 9.5 mm in diameter.
Internal holes shall be the full inside diameter of the pipe for best galvanizing quality and lowest galvanizing cost.

Vent holes in end sections or similar section shall be a minimum
Any device used for erection be attached after galvanizing. in the field that prevents full 6penings

12.7 mm ia d&meter. on ends of horizontal rails and vertical lees shall

Vent holes shall be visible on the outside

of any pipe assembly.

FIG. 10 HANDRAIL 4

IS 6159 : 1998

The above drawing illustrates in the design of the handrail. 1

an acceptable

alternative

if full internal holes (the full inside diameter of the pipe) are not incorporated

Each vent hole shall be as close to the weld as possible, must be 25 percent of the inside diameter of the pipe, but not less than 9.5 mm in diameter. The two holes at each end and at each intersection shall be 180' apart and in the

proper location as shown.
2 3 and 4 Vent holes in end sections Any device used for erection be. attached after galvanizing. or in similar sections shall be at least 12.7 mm in diameter. full openings on ends of horizontal rails and vertical legs shall

in the field that prevents

Vent holes shall be visible on the outside of any pipe assembly. FIG. 11 HANDRAIL-ALTERNATIVE

AVOID

PREFER

Pipe connections to hollow vessels should be arrangedto assist venting and draining. FIG. 12 Ho-w 5 VESSELS

IS 6159 : 1998 AVOID

Internal bosses should be avoided be plugged after hot dipping.

wherever

possible,

if not an extra tapped hole should be included

in the fabrication

and this may

FIG. 13 ENCLOSED CAVITIES

Large open top tanks should be braced to minimize distortion. in the comers.

Where angles are used on the rim of the iank, apertures

should be provided

FIG. 14

OPEN TANKS

6

IS 6159 : 1998 3.2 Overlapping or Contacting Surfaces 3.8.2 If any surfaces of a part are machined or if any members of an assembly are excessively rusted, the entire assembly should be sand- or shot-blasted or wire brushed. 3.9 Size and Shape Before design and fabrication, the dimensional limitations on size and shape imposed by the galvanizing facilities should be determined. Objects larger than the length of the galvanizing bath may be galvanized by `double dipping', that is, immersing part of the fabrication and then reversing it either for length or depth to galvanize the part which was left uncoated on the first dip. 3.10 Blast-Cleaning Hot-Rolled Parts

Wherever contacting surfaces cannot be avoided they should be completely sealed by welding. This will prevent the rusting of surfaces not amenable to galvanizing. The welds themselves should be free of pinholes. 3.3 Steel Sheet in Contact Surfaces with Other

All oil, grease, paint or lacquer should be removed from contacting surfaces before assembly. Grease or oil become volatile at galvanizing temperature and will generate gas which will prevent the zinc from sealing the contact edges. All steel should be degreased before pickling and in the case of folded assemblies hefore folding and assembling. 3.4 Welding All recognized welding procedures may be used provided it is ensured that the welding slag is removed before pickling by suitable mechanical means. 3.5 Enclosed Sections

Heavy scale present on the non-machined surface will require longer pickling time during which the machined surface will be damaged by over-pickling. Therefore, whenever any surfaces on a hot-rolled part are machined, the entire pieces should be blasted clean prior to machining. 3.11 Movable Parts

Tube assemblies and sealed cavities such as tanks require adequate venting and drainage holes. The galvanizer should be consulted about the size and location of these holes. 3.6 Pipe Assemblies On welded pipe assemblies, full open mitre joints should always be used. Under no ctrcumstances should a blind section be included in any pipe assembly (see 2.8). Steel floor flanges instead of cast iron floor flanges should be used in pipe railings. 3.7 Labels and Markings

The design should provide sufficient clearance to permit free movement of movable parts after galvanizing. Generally a clearance of 0.8 mm is sufficient. 3.12 Threads To maintain free fit, oversize tapping of nuts and tapped holes is required when the bolt or male thread is hot-dip galvanized. In this regard, allowance on diameter for female threads as recommended in IS 1367 (Part 13) shall be followed. 3.13 Castings The quality of galvanized coatings on coatings depends largely on the design, surface finish and preparation for galvanizing. The following practices are recommended.

Permanent identification mark should be deeply punched or embossed in a `standard' position on each of the members. An effective method is to put the identification on weld metal, which may be done, in some cases, using dots of weld metal as a code to reduce the number of letters and figures required. Alternatively, the identification can be punched on a light metal tag which can be welded to the structure at a suitable location. 3.7.1 Temporary identification marks for use during fabrication should be made with a material, which is removed during acid pickling. 3.8 Assemblies of Different Materials

4 Use large fillet radii; b) Use large pattern members;

c>If any

machining is done on a portion of the casting, the entire casting should be thoroughly sand- or shot-blasted if a uniform finish is required;

4 Internal

3.8.1 If a uniform galvanized finish is required, combinations of cast iron, cast steel, malleable iron and steels of different analysis or surface condition should not be used in the same assembly. If cast materials are included in the assembly, they may require to be shot- or sand-blasted before pickling.

threading should be done after galvanizing in case of through holes @nd threading shall be done after galvanizing in case of blind holes; and and Grey iron castings should be heat-treated to prevent embrittlement during galvanizing. Following heat treatment and prior to galvanizing, castings should be sandor shot-blasted.

Malleable e>

7

IS 6159

: 1998 SECTION B

Recommendations for Design of Metal Articles to be Coated by Spraying
4 DESIGN 4.1 General OF ARTICLES

the subsequent removal of grit, and to permit complete and uniform application of the sprayed coatings. ii) Structures should be designed so that corrosion has the greatest difficulty in establishing and may be focal point from which it can spread. As major corrosive factors are moisture and dirt in which marine and industrial corrosive agents can collqct and concentrate, this factor demands cleanness of design and the elimination of all features that might facilitate lodging or retention of moisture and dirt. iii) The overall design should be planned to facilitate full inspection, ease of cleaning, and maintenance. 4.3 Design
4.3.1 Features

Sprayed metal coatings are produced industrially by melting the coating metal and projecting it in the form of a dispersed spray onto the surface to be coated. Metal spraying is normally a `cold' process and the heat input to the material being sprayed may be kept low. The greatest volume of protective metal spraying is done with aluminium or zinc on iron or steel. Other materials can be deposited, ranging from tin and tin alloys, copper and copper alloys, steels and stainless steels, to nickel alloys (and some ceramics). The corrosion resistance of metal sprayed coatings may be enhanced by the application of specially formulated sealers. These sealers not only extend the useful life of the coating but provide a smoother finish and give colour as desired. The multilayer conventional paint systems are generally less advocated. Expert guidance from the processor should be obtained at the design stage. 4.2 Process Metal spraying for protection involves two distinct stages, namely, surface preparation and metal spraying. 4.2.1 Surface
Preparation

The increased use of welded construction, and the general simplification of design that has resulted, have made the following design recommendations easier to meet. Good design for welding has much in common with good design for protection since, in general, design features that are difficult to weld are also difficult to protect by metal spraying.

Surface preparation by grit blasting is the most commonly applied method, using chilled iron grit to IS 4683. The surfaces to be coated should be completely free from loose particles and dust. 4.2.2
Metal Spraying

4.3.2 Figures 15 to 22 illustrating preferred/ deprecated design features for articles to be sprayed metal coated are given in Annex A. 4.3.3 Many of the design recommendations given in (a) to (i) are equally applicable to any engineering structure exposed to corrosive attack, irrespective of the precise method of protection proposed and, in such cases, reference should also be made to IS 6586.

Metal spraying is effected by manual means or automatic equipment, and both control andinspection of sprayed metal coatings have been covered in IS 5905. 4.2.3 Design Consideration

a>Any

design features that introduce, `shadowing', that is, the prevention of easy access for grit-blasting or for metal spraying to relevant surface areas, are highly undesirable and should be avoided. and metal spraying the materials are projected essentially in straight lines, the design should facilitate an approach at 90" to the surface being treated. The approach angle should never be less than 45" to the surface. both the grit-blasting nozzle with its attached high pressure, relatively inflexible air hose and the metal spraying pistol with its attachments operate at nozzle distances of between 150 mm and 200 mm, there should be at least 300 mm access length in front of any surface to be treated. deep pockets angles should be avoided

The efficiency and economy of satisfactory surface preparation, as well as subsequent metal spraying, are influenced by the design considerations described below: Components and structures to be metal sprayed should be designed from the outset with metal spraying clearly in mind. Failure to do so is almost certain to increase the difficulties and costs of application, and also to reduce the overall service life. The important be observed: guidelines given below should

b) Since in both grit-blasting

c>As

i) The design should ensure that all surfaces are fully accessible for surface preparation, for
8

4 Narrow gaps, blind crevices,
and acute interior

as these features liable to prevent uniform surface preparation and. coating application are likely causes of locally impaired corrosion resistance. Similarly, small section `E' or `T' stiffeners and deep, narrow, channel sections are likely to create `blind' areas that can be neither adequately prepared nor sprayed. Their use should, therefore, be avoided and `flats' or `bulk-flats' stiffeners adopted instead. Enclosed spaces, for examptc, tyke, should have adequate manholes to give the operators full access to all internal surfaces. A second outlet should also be provided &rom& w&b essential positive dsation taxi be arranged. M-blasting creates a considerabIe volume of dust, which has to be quickly and positively removed in the imarx& of clean surface finish and operating visibility. Metal spraying in a confined space also generates metal dust fumes and heat, and the maintenance or reasonable working conditions required very good ventilation, in addition to M in&per&r& air supply to the operator's protective helmet. If conventional blasting methods are used for tm internal surface preparation of tanks or other internal spaces, provision should be made for the removal of heavy grit accumulations.The availability of adequate access manholes and ventilation outlets can considerably simplify grit removal, with the use of heavy duty vacuum cleaners. Alternatively, the use of blasting equipment employing closed-circuit vacuum recovery of spent grit prevents any heavy grit accumulations from arising. Further, the constant cleaning of the grit minimizes the dust problem. This equipment also considerably simplifies final removal of grit residues and dust which, if left, can provide centres for the initiation of corrosion. Baffles and fittings inside tanks and enclosed spaces should be made removable to facilitate processing. If this is not possible, special attention should be given an access to all surfaces of such fittings. For the satisfactory preparation and metal spraying of internal surfaces of hollow and tubular members, the limitations imposed by access' and `nozzle distance' requirements should be considered. Generally, short straight sections greater than 100 mm diameter can he metal sprayed by the use of special

attachments to the blarting and spraying equipment. Bent t&es and small hollow sections below 100 mm diameter are, however, exceedingly difficult to process Saisfactorily , and &eir use should be avoided unless agreed m~ually.

j)

For components axr$ structures subjected in service to thermal S&J&, rapid expansion and contraction, or henvy vibration it is important that the design should Eaduce expansion and contraction to a minimlsurn and should incorporate fully &qua&e stiffening of the

4.4 CorrcJ&on-I_

G&&es

4.4.1 Crevices ano narrow gapx which arise when back-to-back angles are , w where stiffeners are welded on by short intermittent fill& welds on alternate sides, should be avoided as t&ay am difficult to protect. Continuous welds should be p&&r&. 4.4.2 Butt joints should be us-ad ia preference to lap joints unless the later are se&~! off by continuous smooth welds. 44.3 Corners should pm&ably be rounded since they are easier to protect than those that are square. They also simplify inspection, cleaning and maintenance, and minimize dirt and moisture retention. 4.4.4 Rounded edges are hirable in order to provide greater surface area to take the protective coating uniformly and to overcome the difficulty of attaining adequate coating thickness or sharp edges. Coatings on sharp edges are also more susceptible to damage.
NOTE - Where there are large `edge' areas (for example, on expanded metal) subject to atmospheric corrosion, it is generally considered preferable to use zinc coating rather than aluminium because zinc gives better cathodic protection to steel.

4.4.5 Blind crevices, narrow gaps, lap joints, pockets, chemicals and horizontal flat surfaces are potenfial points for corrosion attack arising from retention of moisture and dirt including the grit used in surface preparati0n.Whereve.r possible, design provision should be made for evaporation, run-off or drainage of moisture either bjl ~presetting or provision of wellplaced and adequate drainage holes (see Pig. 7).

4.4.6 Wetting surfaces to be joined by welding should be totally sealed by beads of welding to prevent entrapment of blasting grit and to prevent the ingress of moisture to untreated areas.

IS 6159 : 1998

ANNEX

A

(Ckwse 4.3.2) AVOID SMALL SECTION STIFFENERS OR 7 BEAMS OR

PREFER

BULB FLATS

FIG. 15 ACUTE INTERIOR ANGLE

AVOID

PREFER

CONTINUOUS WELD SMOOTH AND CLEANED OF SLAG AND WELD
UNLESS INTERIOR OF CHANNELS IS

PROTECTED BEFORE WELOlNG

FIG. 16 BLIND CREVICES

AVOID

PREFER

INtERM1lTEWT STIFFENER WELDS PACKING RUN LOSE TO WEB

,-CONTINUOUS LONG

WELD StME GfVES

FIG. 17 NARROWGAPS
10

IS 6159 : 1998 AVOID PREFER

ANGLES BACK (INSIDE CAWD7

TO BACK BP

FE.

18 CREVICES

AVOID

PREFERI%

LAP JO$NTS WITH

LAP JOINTS FULLY SEALE 0 CO~NTINUOUS WELDS SHOOTH AN0 FREE FROM SLAG AND WELD SPATTE
FIG. 19 LAP JOINTS

AVOID

PREFER

FIG. 20 CORNERS AVOID PREFER

FIG. 21 FLAT SURFACES

AVOID

PREFER

FIG. 22 POCKETS
11

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to marking and quality certification promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright

of

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be. addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards

An~cndmcnts arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments! Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard alon, ~7with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. MTD 20 (3919).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued

Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 3375, 323 9402
Kcgional Central Ol`t`ices

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone

: Shah Zafar Marg

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 :

323 7617 1323 3841 337 8499 3378561 337 8626, 337 9120 60 3843
I

Eastern

l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. CALCUTTA 700054 Sector

Road,

Maniktola

Northern

: SC0 335-336, 60 2025

34-A, CHANDIGARH

160022

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 235 1519, 235 2315 : Mankalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400093 Marol, Andheri

600113

235 0216,

235 0442

Western

(East)

832 9295, 832.7891,

832 7858 832 7892

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAI,PUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, Ph : 57268&

