( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

NON-CONIFEROUSSAWN TIMBER (BAULKSAND SCANTLING)-SPECIFICATION
(Second Revision)

UDC

6740038.6

, 0 BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October 1992

&ice GCOUP 5

Timber Sectional

Committee,

CED 9

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Coniferous sawn timber in the form of baulks and scantlings are covered in IS 190 : 1991 `Specification for coniferous sawn timber ( baulks and scantlings ) (fourth revision )`. This specification has been formulated as an adjunct to IS 190 : 1991 to cover non-coniferous timber. A major proportion of nonconiferous timber is marketed in the form of baulks and scantlings which are sometimes used, as they are, and sometimes further converted for various end uses. A standard which would guide the selection of non-coniferous timber was considered essential in view of the large quantity of timber produced and the variety of timber involved. This specification is intended to meet that purpose. This standard was first published in 1958. It was first revised in 1976 wherein modifications were made in the extent of prohibited and permissible defects, and based on these defects, sawn timber had been graded into three grades ( see 6.1 ). In this second revision Amendment No. 1 issued to earlier version has been incorporated, which give the sizes of sawn timber which are generally available, and provisions for prohibited and permissible defects have been modified. The permissible limits for centre heart have been further modified to accommodate the cases where the sawn timber is to be used as such, that is, without any further conversion. Based on the experience gained in the use of some other sawn timbers, the list of species given in Annex A has been updated. Further the foreign timber species in use in India have also been included. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the sfme as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 1326 : 1992

Indian Standard

NON-CONIFEROUSSAWNTIMBER (BAULKSAND SCANTLINGS)-SPECIFICATION (Second Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard covers the requirements of nonconiferous sawn timber in the form of baulks and scantlings. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 Following Indian standards adjuncts to this standard:
IS No. 401 : 1982 Title Code of practice

5.2 Measurement 5.2.1 Length The length shall be measured from end to end in metres correct to 0.01 m. Any end portion of sawn timber that has become rounded or damaged shall be excluded from length measurement. 5.2.2 Width and Thickness for preparaThe width and thickness shall be measured the narrowest place in mi!limetre correct 10 mm. 5.2.3 Volume The volume shall be computed in cubic metres correct to three places of decimal by the product of length, width and thickness on the basis of accepted sizes. 6 REQUIREMENTS 6.1 Grading The non-coniferous sawn timber shall be of three grades, that is, special grade,. Grade 1 and Grade 2, depending upon prohibited and permissible defects (see 7 ). 6.2 Requirements 6.2.1 Timber shall be air-seasoned to a moisture content not exceeding 20 percent within a depth' of 13 mm from the surface, excluding 300 mm from each end. 6.2.2 Timber shall be either sawn or axe-hewn. Anv axe-hewn timber shall be reasonably even. Ah-pieces shall have fairly straight and parallel sides and rectangular cross sections. 7 PROHIBITED DEFECTS AND PERMISSJBLE AND GRADING at to

are necessary

707 : 1976

tion of timber ( third revision ) Glossary of terms applicable to timber technology and utihzation ( second revision ) Code of practice for seasoning 1141 : 1973 of timber (first revision ) Specification for trade names 1150 : 1976 and abbreviated symbols for timber species ( second revision) Method of measurement and 3364 ( Part 2) : 1976 evaluation of defects in timber : Part 2 Converted timber (jrst
revision )

3 TERMINOLOGY

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given is IS 707 : 1976 shall apply. 4 SPECIES The species of timber covered by this specification shall be as given in Annex A and Annex B. The nomenclature and abbreviations of various species are based on IS 1150 : 1976. 5 DIMENSIONS AND MEASUREMENTS 5.1 The dimensions of the sawn timber shall be as ordered. However, the sawn timber is generally available in the following lengths and cross sections: Length : 1 m, 1.5 m, 2-O m, 2.5 m, 3.0 m and 3.5 m. Cross 200 200 250 and Section : mm x 100 mm x 150 mm x 125 300 mm x mm, 200 mm x 125 mm, mm, 200 mm x 200 mm, mm, 250 mm x 150 mm, 150 mm. 1

7.1 Prohibited Defects The sawn timber of all the three grades shall be free from spiral or twisted grain, warp, any kind of decay or live insect attack. Special grade sawn timber shall be free from centre heart, wane, cup shakes, borer holes ( dead infestation ), sapstain ( blue stail: ) and knots also. Grade 1 shall be free from cup shakes also ( see also Table 1 ).

IS 1326: 1992

Table 1 Permissible Defects for Different Grades of Non-Coniferous Sawn Timber ( Clauses 7.1 and 7.2 )
SI No.

Defects (2) Cross grain

Special Grade (3) Cross grain shall be permissible up to a maximum deviation of 1 in 15

Grade 1 (4) Cross grain shall be permissible up to a maximum deviation of 1 in 10

Grade 2 (5) Cross grain shall be permissible up to a maximum deviation of 1 in 8 The end splits at each end shall be measured and the length added together. The total length of the solits shall not exceed lob mm per metre run of the length a) Live knots up to 35 mm in diameter shall be provided permissible these are not grouped or located in such a as to affect manner unduly the yield and strength of the converted timber. Live knots from 35 mm to 50 mm in diameter shall be permissible to the extent of 3 knots per metre length of the piece provided these not grouped or are located in such a manner as to affect unduly the yield and strength converted of the timber. Live knots from 50 mm to 75 mm in diameter shall be permissible to the extent of one knot per metre length of the piece b) Dead knots up to 15 mm in diameter shall be permissible provided these are not too numerous and are not located in such a manner as to affect unduly the vield on conversion and-usefulness of the Dead sawn timber. knots from 15 mm to 25 mm in diameter shall bc permissible to the extent of three knots per metre of length of the piece and for more than 25 mm and up to 35 mm, two knots per metre length are permitted. Knots more than 35 mm in diameter shzll not be permitted Permissible

(1) i)

ii)

End-splits

The longest end split at each The longest end splits at each end shall be measured end shall be measured and and the length added togethe lengths added together. ther. The total length of The total length of longest the longest splits shall not splits shall not exceed 60 exceed 80 mm per metre mm per metre run of the run of the length length Not permissible a) Live knots up to 25 mm in diameter shall be permissible provided these are not arouoed or located in such `a manner as to affect unduly the yield and strength of the converted timber. Live knots from 25 mm to 35 mm in diameter shall be permissible to the extent of 3 knots per metre length of the piece provided these are not grouped or located in such a manner as to affect unduly the yield and strength of the converted timber. The live knots from 35 mm to 50 mm in diameter shall be permissible to the extent of one knot per metreJength of the piece

iii)

Knots

bj Dead knots up to 15 mm in diameter shall be permissible to the extent of not more than IWO knots per metre length of the piece and dead knots frbm 15 mm to 25 mm in diameter shall be permissible to the extent of one knot per metre length of the Diece. Knots more than -7Sn)rn in diameter shall not be permitted

iv)

Sapwood

If not distinguishable sapwood shall be permissible up to 100 percent otherwise permissible up to 25 percent of the cross-sectional area of the piece

If not distinguishable sapwood shall be permissible up to 100 percent, otherwise up to 50 percent of the cross-sectional area of the piece

IS 1326 : 1992 Table 1 ( conchded )
Sl No. (1) VI Defects (2) Surface checks Special Grade (3) Surface checks not exceeding 7 mm in depth in any faca shall be permissible. In case one of the faces is free from checks the opposite face may have individual checks up to 10 mm in depth and not more than 5 in number Grade 1 (41 Grade 2 (51

Surface checks not exceedSurface checks not exceeding 12 mm in depth in ing 10 mm in depth in any any face shall be permisface shall be permissible. sible. In case one of the In case one of the faces is faces is free from checks free from checks the oppothe opposite face may site face may have indivihave individual checks dual checks up to 15 mm in up to 20 mm in depth depth and not more than 5 and not more than 5 in in number number Permissible Permissible

vi)

Sapstain ( blue stain 1 Wane

Not permissible

vii)

Not permissible

Wane shall be permissible up to one-fifth of the width on a broad face, and up to one-third of the width on the narrow face provided that one broad face and one narrow face is completely free from this defect. Wane shall not be present in more than 30 percent of the total number of pieces accepted at any one time

Wane shall be permissible up to one-fourth of the width on a broad face, and one-third of the width on the narrow face provided that one broad face and one narrow face is completely free from this defect. Wane shall not be present in more than 30 percent of the total number of pieces accepted at any one time Borer holes ( dead infestation 1 shall be permissible on two faces only provided such holes are not deeper than 10 mm and are scattered, on a single face only provided they are not deeper than 20 mm and are well scattered a1 If baulks and scantlings are to be converted further: Centre heart shall be permissible provided it is not farther than 50 mm from the nearest edge and is sound and boxed

viii)

Borer hole ( dead infestation 1

Not permissible

Borer holes ( dead infestation 1 shall be permissible on one face only provided such holes are not deeper than 10 mm and well scattered

ix)

Centre heart

Not permissible

al If baulks and scantlings are to be converted further : Centre heart shall be permissible provided it is not farther than 25 mm from the nearest edge and is sound

bl If baulks and scantlings are to be used as such : Centre heart shall be permissible provided it is farther than 50 mm from the nearest edge

b) If baulks

and scantlings are to be used as such:

Centre heart shall be permissible . . farther provtEt! 9 `km from the nearest edge Cup-shake shall be permissible up to a total length of 150 mm when measured along the arc and up to a maximum of. 150 mm in depth provided they appear only on

x)

Cup-shake

Not permissible

Not permissible

3

IS 1326 : 1992
7.2 Permissible Defects

The defects to the extent specified in Table 1 for the different grades of non-coniferous sawn timbers shall be permissible. The defects shall be measured according to IS 3364 ( Part 2 ) : 1976. 8 PROPHYLACTIC
TREATMENT

Application of end coating on the timber shall be done soon after the inspection of timber. 10 MARKING
10.1 Immediately after inspection, each piece of timber shall be legibly and indelibly marked on one of the faces at a distance of about 300 mm from the end with the following:

All timbers may be given prophylactic treatment as specified in IS 401 : 1982subject to agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 9 END COATINGS To prevent and to minimize end cracking, splitting, etc, the ends of each baulk and scantling, up to a distance of 150 mm, or at least 25 mm more than the iength of larger split ( whichever is more ) shall be adequately coated with any of the materials mentioned in IS 1141 : 1973.

a) Name of species ( see Abbreviations in Annex A ); b) Dimensions of the piece; c) Supplier's name or initials or registered trade-mark, if any; d) Year of supply; and e) Grade.
10.1.1 The piece of timber with the Standard Mark.

may also be marked

ANNEX A (
Foreword

and

Clause

4 )
TIMBERS
Abbreviated Symbol

NON-CONIFEROUS
Standard Trade Name

SPECIES
Botanical

OF INDIAN
Name

Aglaia Aini Amari Anjan Arjun Ash Axlewood ( Bakli ) Babul Bael Bahera Ballagi Banati Benteak Bhendi Bijasal Birch Black chuglum Black Locust Black Wattle Blue Gum Bola Bonsum Boxwood Bruguiera

Aglaia spp. Artocarpus hirsutus Amoora wallichii Hardwickia binata Terminalia arjuna Fraxinus spp. Anogeissus latifoiia Acacia nilotica ( Syn. A. arabica ) Aegle marmelos Terminalia bellirica Poeciloneuron indicum LophopetaIum wightianum Lagerstroemia lanceolata Thespesia populnea Pterocarpus marsupium Betula alnoides Terminalia manii Robinia pseud-acacia Acacia mearnsii Eucalyptus glob&s Morus laevigara Phoebe spp. Buxus sempervirens Bruguiera spp. 4 ~

AGL AIN AMA ANJ ARJ ASH AXL BAB BAE BAH BAL BAN BEN BHE BIJ BIR BCH BLO BWA BLG BOL BON BOX BRU

IS 1326 : 1992 Standard Trade Name Bo tanica 1 Name Manilkara spp. Casuarina equisetifol ia Celtis australis Michelia spp. Artocarpus chap!asha Buchananin lanzan Chukrasia velutina ( Syn. 6'. tabularis ) Schima wallichii Sagcraea elliptica " Cinnamomum spp. Swintonia jloribunda Polyalthia fragrance Grewia tiliifolia Dillenia spp. Mansonia dipikae Miliusa velutina Wightia spp. Diospyros spp. " .I .: Abbreviated Symbol

Bulletwood Casuarina Celtis Champ Chaplash Charoli Chickrassy Chilauni Chooi Cinnamon Civit Debdaru Dhaman Dillenia Dipika ( Lapse ) Domsal Dudhi Ebony Elm ,Gardenia Garuga Gamari Gluta Gurjan Haldu Haldu Sopa Hathipaila Hill Mahua Hiwar Hollock Hollong Hoom Hopea Horse Indian Indian Irul Israeli Jaman Jarul Jathikai Jhand Jhingan

BUL cxs CBL CHM CHP CHO CHI CHL coo CIN CIV DEB DHA DlL DIP DOM DUD EBO ELM GAR GAU GAM GLU CUR HAL US0 HAT HMA HSW HOL HON HO0 HOP HCH ICH 1OA ,- IRU

( Other than U. marmorate )
Ulmus wallichiana Gardinia spp. Garuga pinnata Gmelina arborea Gluta travancorica Dipterocarpus spp. Adina cordifolia . ' " :*

Adina oligocephala Ptrerospermum acerifol'ium' Diploknetna butyracea Acacea lelrcophloea Terminalia myriocarpa Dipterocarpus macrocarpus' Miliasa tomentosa ( Syn. Saccopetalum tomentosum > Hopea spp. Aesculus indica Castanopsis spp. Quercus spp. Xylia xylocarpa Acacia tortilis Syzygium spp. Lagerstroemia / '

Chestnut Chestnut Oak Babul

,,

: IB4, JAn/r
speciosa
s Yj ' / L.

Knema attem4ata Prosopis cineratia

Lanneh coromandelica? I, : ( Syn. grandis ) $.

JAR JAT JHA I JHI. 1

IS 1326 : 1992 Standard Trade Name Botanical Name Atalantia monophylla Altingia excelsa Anthocephalus cadamba Mitragyna parvifo lia Litsea wigh tiana Albizia odoratissima Heloptelea integr ifolia Pongamia pinnata Mesua Joribunda Artocarpus integrifolius Cullcnia exelsa Bridelia spp. Sonneratia apetala Acacia catechu Terminalia paniculata AIbizia lebbeck Careya arborea Holarrhena antidysenterica Schleichera oleosa Hymenodictyon excelsum Artocarpus lakoocha Duabanga sonnera t ioides Terminalia alata Eucalyptus citriodara Legerstroemia Machilus spp. Swietenia spp. Madhuca rongifolia Shorea assamica Mangifera indica Accr spp. Mesua ferrea Vitex spp. Morus spp. Terminalia chebula Zanthoxylum rhetsa Acrocarpus fraxinifoiius Bursera serrata Eucalyptus tereticornis Pterygota alata Azadirachta indica Milingtonia hortensis Quercus semicarpifolia OIea spp. Pterocarpus dalbergioides Slereospermum parvijlora Abbreviated Symbol

Jungali Nimbu Jutili Kadam Kaim Kainji Kala-siris Kanju Karanji Karol Kathal Karani Kasl Keora Khair Kindal Kokko Kumbi Kurchi Kusum Kuthan Lakooch Lampat i Laura1 Lemon-scented Gum Lendi Machilus Mahogany Mahua Makai Mango Maple Mesua Milla Mulberry Myrobalan Mullilam Mundani Murtenga Mysore Gum Narikei Neem Nimi-chambeli Oak Olive Padauk Padri

spp. 6

JNI JUT KAD KAI KAJ KS1 KAN KRN KAO KAT KAR KAS KEO KHA KIN KOK KUM KUR KUS KUT LAK LAP LAU LGU LEN MAC MAG MAU MAK MAN MAP MES MIL MUL MYR MU1 MUN MUR MGU NAR NEE NCH OAK OLI PAA PAD

IS1326:1992
Standard Trade Name Botanical Name Palaquium ellipticurn Parrotiopsis jacquemontiana Melia azedarach Exbucklandia populnea Hardwickia pinnata Cynometra polyandra Aphanami is polystachya Calophyllum spp. Xylocarpus spp. Lagerstroemia hypoleuca Mallotus philippensis Planchonia andamanica Parishia insignis Eucal.vptus camaldulensis Soymida febrifuga Dalbergia latifolia Hevea brasiliensis Elaeocarpus spp. Albizia procera Shorea robusta Boswellia serrata Ougeinia dalbergioidcs Chloroxylon swietenia Bembax ceiba Mesua assamica ( Syn. K<J)tea assamica ) Grevillea robusta Albizia chinensis Dalbergia sissoo Leucaeno ieucocephala Heritiera spp. Shorea talura Albizia spp. Palaquium polyanthum Tectona grandis Hopea odorata Podocarpus merifolia Cedrela toona Bischojia javanica Vateria indica Terminalia procera Dysoxylum maiabaricum Terminalia bialatu ( sapwood ) Canarium spp. Salix
SpQ.

Abbreviated Symbol

Pali Parrotia ( Pohu ) Persian lilac Pipli Piney Ping Pitraj Poon PL~SSUC Pyinma Raini Red Bombwe Red Dhup River-red Gum Rohini Rosewood Rubberwood Kudrak Safed Siris Sal Salai Sandan Satinwood Semul Sianahor ( Kayea) Silver Oak Siris .SiSSOQ Suhabul Sundri Talura Taprie Siris Tali Teak Thingan Thitmin .Toon IJriam Vellapine White Bombwe White Cedar White Chuglam White Dhup Willow Ye\5 Yon

,-

Taxus baccata Anogeissus acumit;ata

PAL PAR PLI PIP PIN PIG PIT PO0 PUS PYI RAI RBO RDH RGU ROH ROS RUB RUD SSI SAL SAA SAD SAT SEM SIA SOA SIR SIS SUB SUN TLR TSI TAL TEA THI THT TOO URt VEL WBO WCE WCH WDH WlL YEW YON

IS 1326 : 1992

ANNEX ?.>
SI No. Standard Trade Name

B

( Clause4 )
TIMBERS Abbreviated Symbols Country from Where Imported* (5)

IMPORTED

Botanical Name

(1)

(2)
Mitragyna stipulosa Pterocarpus soyauxii Afrormosia angolensis Shorea albida Amoora cucullata

(3)

(4)
ABU APA AFR ABA AM0 BLU

1. Abura 2. African padauk 3. Afrormosia 4. Alan Batu 5. Amoora 6. Balau I Selangan Batu )j 7. Bhtangor

Shorea atrinervosa, S. foxworthyi, S. glauca, S. laevis, S. materialis, S. maxwelliana. S. submontana and S. sumatrana Calophyllum btflorum, C. calaba, C. canum, C. coriaceum, C. depressinervosum, C. jerrugineum ? C. inophyllode, C. inophyllum, C. macrocarpum, C. pulcherrimum, C. sclerophyllum, C. symingtonianum, C. tetrapterum and C. wallichianum BischoJia javanica Newtonia glandulifera africanum.

A A A M PNG M

BIN

M

8. 9. 10. 11.

Cedar Java Dahoma Dark-Red Merantii Duriani

and

Piptadeniastrum

CJA DAH DME DUR

PNG A M M

12. 13. 14. 15.

Iroko Kapur Kempas Keruingt

Shorea argenttfolia, S. curtisii, S. ovata, S. paufij?ora and S. platyclados Coe!ostegia borneensis, C. gr$ithii, Durio carinatus, D. grandiflorus, D. graveolens, D. lowianus, D. malaccensis, D. oxleyanus, D. singaporensis, D. wyatt-smithii, D. zibethinus, Neesia altissima, N. Kostermansiana, N. malayana and N. synandra. Chlorophora excelsa Dryobalonops aromatica, D. beccarii, D. keithii, D. lanceolata, D. oblognifolia and D. rappa Koompassia malaccensis Dipterocarpus apterus, D. baudii, D. chartaceus, D. concavus, D. confertus, D. cornatus, D. costatus, D. costulatus, D. crinitus, D. dyeri, D. gracilis, D. lgrandiflorus, D. kerrii, D. kunstleri, D. Iowii, D. obtusifolius, D. rotundtfolius, D. sublamellatus and D. verrucosus Shorea dasyphylla, S. hemsleyana, S. johorensis, S. lepidota, S. leprosula, S. ovalis, S. palembanica, S. parvifolia and S. teysmanniana Hopea beccariana, H. dryobalanoides, H. dyeri. H. ferruginea, H. glaucescens, M. grifithii, H. latifolia, H. mengarawan, H. montana, H. myrtifoiia, Ii. nervosa, II. odorata, H. pubescens, H. sangal, H. sublanceolata and H. ,sulcata 8

IRO KAU KEM KER

A M M M

16.

Light-Red Merantij

LME

M

17.

Merawant

MER

M

IS 1326 : 1992 Sl No. Standard Trade Name Botanical Name Abbreviated Symbols Country from Where Impor f ed* (5)

(1)
18.

(2)
Merbatu

(3) Maranthes corymbosa, Parinari costata, P. elmeri, P. oblong$olia, P. rigida and P. rubiginosa

(4)
MEB

M

19. 20. 21.

Merbau ( Kwila ) Intsia bijuga and I. palembanica Mersawa Anisoptera costata, A. curtisii, A. laevis, A. marginata, A. megistocarpa and A. scaphula Nyatoht Ganua curtisii, G. kingiana, G. motleyana,

MRB MEA NYA

M, PNG M M

Palaquium clarkeanum, P. gutta, P. hexandrum, P. hispidum, P. impressinervium, i. maingayi, P. microphyllum, P. obovatum, . oxleyaflum, P. regina-montium, P. rostratum, P. semarant, P. xanthochymum, Pa yena dasphylla, P. lanceolata, P. maingayi and P. obscura Planchonella maingayi and Pouteria malaccensis Aucocumca klaineana Shorea collina, ochrophloia S. guise, S. kunstleri and S.

22. 23. 24.
25.

Nyatoh Kuning Okoume Red Balau Resak-f

NKU OK0 RBA RES

M A M M

Co tylelobium malayanum, C. melanoxylon, Vatica bella, V. cuspidata, V. flavida, V. havilandii, V. heteroptera, V. lowii, V. maingayi, V. mangachapoi, V. nitens and V. scortechinii Entandophragma cylindricum Terminolia brassii Terminalin katikii, T. macadamii, T. sepicans, T. solomonensis T. oreadznn, *

26.

27. 28. 29. 30.

Sapele Terminalia Brown Terminalia Pale Brown Group Terminalia Pale Yellow Group Terminalia Red Brown Group Terminalia Yellow Brown Group Tualang Utile Vitex White Meranti

SAP TBR TPB TPY TRB

A PNG PNG PNG PNG

Terminalia archboldiana, T. complanata, T. longespicata canaliculata, T. catapha, Terminalia T. impediens, T. kaernbachii, T. eddowesii, T. microcarpa, T. morobensis and T. rubiginosa Terminalia megalocarpa, T. steenisiana, T. calamansanai Koompassia excelsa Entandophragma utile Vitex cofassus Shorea agami, S. assamica, S. bracteolata, S. hypochra, S. henryana, S. dealbata, S. lamellata, S. resinosa and S. roxburghii
s. hopeifolia,

31.

TYB

PNG

32. 33. 34. 35.

TUA UT1 VIT WME

M A PNG M

36.

Yellow Meranti

Shorea dolichocarpa, S. faguetiana, S. gibbosa, S. longisperma, S. maxima and S. multiflora

YME

M

Africa *AM - Malaysia PNG - Papua New Guinea *Actual species of timber which species have been mentioned.

are marketed

under

this trade

name are many more.

But here,

O&'

major

9

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bnrean of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory Institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

No part of these publications BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publicationo Revision of Indian Standards

may be reproduced in any the free use, in the course of type or grade designations, ), BIS.

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or edition. following reference: Dot : No. CED 9 ( 4618 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH 160036 600113 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 I 37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 I 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 1 632 92 95, 632 78 91, I
37 85 61

37 86 62
53 16 40

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurla. Indip

