( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 ( Superseding IS : 3641-1976 1

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF THE ELECTRO-ACOUSTICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF HEARING AIDS
PART 1 GENERAL AIR-CONDUCTION MEASUREMENTS HEARING AIDS FOR

Acoustics Sectional

Committee,

LTDC 5

National Members

Chairman DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ) New Delhi Representing

SHRI SANDEEP AHUIA Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI K. R. GURUMURTHY( Afternate ) Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI R. K. BHATIA SHRI T. R. WADHWA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New SHRI K. CAANDRACHUDAN Delhi SHRI I. S. VEDI ( Alternate ) NatiFe;ki Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New DK A. F. CHHAPGAR SHRI P. K. GHOSH SHRI SHANKAR( Alternafe ) DR P. N. ~GUPTA SHRI R. K. JAIN Rail way Board, Ministry of Railways, New Delhi

Department of Electronics, New Delhi Electronic Component Industries Association ( ELCINA ), New Delhi, SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL KRISHAN LAL SHRI B. S. RUPRAI ( Alternate ) Bolton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRI J. S. MONGA SHRI M. S. MONGA ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. S. MWKHERJEE SHRI SUPRIYA ROY ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1984 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyrighf Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part bv any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :10776( Part l)- 1984
( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing

DR ( KUMARI) SHAILAJA NIKAM SHRI K. D. PAVATE SHRI M. X. KAP~K~R ( Alternate PROFB. S. RAMAKRISHNA SHRI S. L. REDEY SHRI M. M. JCJSHI (Alternate REPRK~ENTATIVE SHRI M. SANKARALINOAM
)

All lIr$:re

Institute

of

Speech

& Hearing, Research

Central Electronics Engineering Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani
)

Central University, Hyderabad Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and Tho Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Films Division, Bombay Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi

SHRI R. S. ARORA( AIternate ) Directorate General of All India Radio, SHIU A. K. SEN New Delhi SHRI W. V. B. RAMALIN~AM ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) CDR P. K. SINHA LT R. S. DATTA( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERINTENLXN~ SURVEYOR OF WORKS( Foot ) SURVEYOR OF Wo~lrs I/l%o~ ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 (X-o&i0 Atfember ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN. Director ( Electronics ) Secretary SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

Panel for Hearing Aids and Audiometers,
DR M. PANCHOLY

LTDC 5:P4

Emeritus Scientist National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ) New Delhi
Members

SHRI SYEDP. BASHEER DR SOHAN SIN~H ( Alternate ) DR A. F. CHHAPGAR DR P. GHOSH SHRI PHIROZE A. Pastor JAMAS SHRI R. N. NARANG DR(KUMARI)SHAILAJA NIKAM SHRIE.R.
RAMACHANDRAN

Radiocraft of India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi of Medical Sciences, All India Institute New Delhi Arphi Incorporated, Bombay Alpslnternational Pvt Ltd, New Delhi All lI;~clx_e Instttute of Speech & Hearing, Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay, TlteB2;r;;tron of Otolaryngologrsts of Indra,

DR P. C. SAGAR

2

IS:

10776( Part l)- 1984

India-n Standard
METHODS OF MEASURE-MENT OF THE ELECTRO-ACOUSTICAL C,HARACTERISTICS OF HEARING AIDS
PART 1 GENERAL AIR-CONDUCTION MEASUREMENTS HEARING AIDS FOR

0. FOREWORD
0 1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 January 1984, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division.Council. 0.2 The determination ~of the electro-acoustic characteristics of a hearing aid requires test methods that are clearly defined and reproducible to provide information that can be resonably related to the use of such devices and to facilitate the exchange of information on hearing aid performance. 0.3 This standard is designed to be a basic document specifying a wide range of measurement methods from which those applicable to particular needs can be selected. lt is not necessarily intended that all measurements described herein should be made in every case. The test methods described include numerous hearing aid performance parameters that are felt to be significant in predicting the suitability of a hearing aid for various applications. 0.4 The purpose of this standard is to describe measuring methods for the evaluation of the electro-acoustical characteristics of hearing aids. The methods are chosen first of all to be practical and reproducible, and consequently they are based on some fixed parameters chosen arbitrarily to a certain extent. This should be taken into consideration when comparisons are being made between test results for hearing aids of different models and manufacture, and in each case it is advisable to examine to what extent the arbitrarily chosen parameters will influence the comparison of such test results. 0.5 The test results obtained by methods specified in this standard express the performance under the conditions of the test and may 3

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 deviate substantially practical conditions from the performance of use. of the hearing aid under

0.6 It is not the intent of this standard to restrict the variety of hearing aid performance and characteristics available, nor to inhibit in any way advances in the state of the art. 0.7 The methods of measurements for the characteristics of hearing aids were earlier covered by IS : 3641-1976*. This standard is now superseded by the series of standards listed in 0.8.1. These methods have been revised keeping in view the revision of the corresponding IEC Publication. 0.8 A series of Indian Standards is therefore, being brought out covering characteristics which are useful for their specifications and the methods of measurements of the electro-acoustical characteristics of hearing aids. 0.8.1 These methods of measurement are being covered in a series of standards consisting of the following parts : Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 General measurements Additional measurements pick-up coil Iinput Additional measurements gain control circuits Fx air conduction for hearing hearing aids

aids with induction

for hearing aids with automatic of hearing aids with bone

Measurement of characteristics vitxator outputs

0.9 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 118-O ( 1983 ) `Hearing aids : Part 0 Measurement of electroacoustical characteristics' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.

0.10In reporting

the result of a test made in accordance with this standald, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-196OT. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) specifies the methods of measurement of physical performance characteristics of air-conduction hearing aids based on a flee field technique.
*Method 01 measurements on hearing aids (first revrsion ). tRules for rounding off numrrical values ( revised ).

4

IS : 10776 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following terms and definitions in addition to those given in IS : 1885 ( Part 3/See 5 J-1966* shall apply. 2.1 Acoustic Coupler - A coupler is a cavity of predetermined shape and volume, which is used for the electro-acoustic measurements of earphones in conjunction with a calibrated microphone adopted to measure the pressure developed within the cavity. 2.2 Substitution Method - 4 method of measurement in which the hearing aid and the microphone employed to measure the free field sound pressure, are placed alternately at the same `point in the sound field. 2.3 Comparison Method - A method of measuremedt in which the hearing aid and the microphone employed to measure the free-field sound pressure are placed simultaneously at two different points symmetrical with respect to the axis in the sound field.' 2.4 Pressure Method - A method of measurement in which the input sound pressure level is controlled Close to the sound entrance opening of the hearing aid by a pressure calibrated controlling microphone, thus substantially eliminating diffraction effects from the hearing aid. 2.5 Simulated in-situ Method - A method of measurement in which the hearing aid is mounted upon an artificial head and torso in order to simulate the acoustical effects of an average adult wearer. 2.6 Reference Orientation ( of a Hearing Aid ) - The orientation of a hearing aid in the test enclosure with respect to the sound source, which corresponds to the orientation of a hearing aid under actual use on a person facing the sound source. 2.7 Reference Point ( of a Hearing Aid ) .- A point on the hearing aid chosen for the purpose of defining its position, normally ,the centre of the main sound entry to the aid. 2.8 Test Point - A position in the test enclosure to which the measurements of the free-field sound pressure level are referred and at which the reference point of the hearing aid is located for test purposes. 2.9 Supply Voltage - The voltage at the battery hearing aid with the hearing aid switched on. 2.10 Acoustic Gain operating conditions. terminals of the

At a specified frequency and under specified The difference between the sound plessure level

*Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 3'Acoustics, Section 5 Speech and hearing.
5

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 developed in the acoustic coupler by the hearing aid and the sound pressure level measured atthe test point. 2.11 Full-on Acoustic Gain - At a specified frequency and under essentially linear input-output conditions, the acoustic gain obtainable from the hearing aid measured with the gain control at maximum ( full-on ) and at stated settings of the other hearing aid controls.
2.12 Maximum Acoustic Gain at a Specified Frequency -

possible acoustic gain that can be obtained specified frequency.

from the hearing

The highest aid at the

2.13 High-Frequency Average ( HFA ) Full-on Gain the 1 000, 1 600, and 2 500 Hz values of full-on gain.

The average of

2.14 Saturation Sound Pressure Level - The highest possible sound pressure level obtainable in the acoustic coupler from the hearing aid at a specified frequency.
NOTE - The saturation highest input level.

sound

pressure

level does not necessarily

occur

at the

2.15 Saturation 2.16 Maximum

Sound Pressure Level Curve - Saturation level expressed as a function of frequency.
Saturation Sound Pressure Level -

sound pressure

The highest paint of

a saturation

sound pressure

level curve.

2.17 Output Sound Pressure Level for au Input Sound Pressure Level of 90 dB ( OSPL,, ) at a Specified Frequency - The sound pressure level produced in the acoustic coupler with an input sound pressure level of 90 dB at the specified frequency and the gain control in the full-on The abbreviation for this term is OSPLoO. position. 2.18 OSPL,, Curve OSPLBo expressed as a function of frequency. The average of the

2.19 High-Frequency Average ( HFA ) OSPLBo 1 000, 1 600, and 2 500 Hz values of OSPL,,.

2.20 Reference Test Frequency - The frequency, at which the setting of the gain control is made in relation to OSPLW to obtain a reference The reference test frequency shall be test position of the gain control. 1 600 Hz. 2.21 Reference aid gain control coupler of 15f of 60 dB at the Test Gain Control Position - The setting of the hearing which provides an output sound pressure level in the I dB less than OSPLW for an input sound pressure level If the gain available will not reference test frequency. permit this, the full-on gain control position of the hearing aid should be used. 6

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984
2.22 Reference Test Gain -

The acoustic gain of the hearing aid at the reference test frequency with the setting of the gain control to the reference test gain control pdsition.

2.23 Frequency Response - The sound pressure level developed in the acoustic coupler by the hearing aid -expressed as a function of frequency under specified test conditions for constant input free-field sound pressure level. 2.24 Comprehensive Frequency Response Curves - A family of frequency response curves obtained with the gain control in the reference test gain position using a series of input sound pressure levels to exhibit the inputoutput characteristics of the hearing aid over its full range of operation. 2.25 Basic Frequency Response Curve - The frequency response curve obtained at the reference test gain setting with an input sound pressure level of 60 dB. 2.26 Steady State Input-Output Graph - The graph illustrating the output sound pressure level as a function of the input sound pressure level at a stated frequency and gain control setting, both expressed in dB on identical linear scales. 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MEASUREMENTS

3.0 The acoustic test procedure specified in this standard is based on the free-field technique in which the hearing aid is placed in a plane progressive wave, ~with the -earphone coupled to a standardized coupler, and the sound pressure generated by the hearing aid in the cavity of the coupler being measured by a condenser microphone. The measurements specified are based on the substitution method in which the reference point of the hearing aid is made to coincide with the test point chosen on the axis of the sound source. 3.1 Atmospheric Conditions for Measurements - Unless otherwise specified, all the measurements shall be made within the following atmospheric conditions : 15 to 35" c Temperature -less than 80 percent Relative humidity Air pressure 86 to 106 kPa ( 1 bar = lo5 Pa ) NOTE - The temperature at which measurements are carried out shall be
recorded.

3.2 Frequencies of Measurements 3.2.1 Reference Test Frequmcy - Unless otherwise specified, reference test frequency for measurements shall be 1600 Hz.
7

the

fS : 10776 ( Part I ) - 1984 3.2.2 Frequency Range - The `frequencies cover a range of at least 200 to 8 000 Hz. for measurements shall

3.2.3 Test Frequencies - ,For measurements made at a number of frequencies, the frequencies shall be selected from Table 1 of IS : 22641963*. 3.3 Reference Sound Pressure - The reference sound pressure level with respect to which all sound pressu-re levels are specified is 20 PPa. 3.4 Magnetic Field Strength in A/m or mA/m. The magnetic field strength is expressed the freesimulated over the from the in 3.5.1

3.5 Test Environment d Measurements shall be made under field conditions in anechoic chambers or outdoors or under free-field conditions. Free-field conditions may be assumed region `of space over which the -sound pressure variations inverse law do not exceed f 1 dB. The conditions specified and 3.5.2 should be ensured during the measurements.

3.5.1 Measurements shall be made with the sound source and the microphone in a location which is free from disturbing elements in the form of standing waves, wind, stray magnetic and electric fields, and acoustical noise. 3.5.1.1 The total disturbing voltage due to wind, stray magnetic and electric fields, and acoustic noise shall be at least 10 dB below the output resulting from the applied signal. 3.5.1.2 The pressure at the microphone position, due to reflections from the surrounding objects, shall be at least 10 dB below the pressure of the sound waves arriving directly from the source. 3.5.2 It is also necessary to ensure that the sound pressure produced in the coupler by the earphone is at least 10 dB above sound pressure which the sound source energizing the hearing aid may produce directly in the coupler. 3.6 Unless otherwise specified, all measurements shall be carried out without using an ear insert or ear mould which is normally to be regarded as incorporated in the coupler employed. 3.7 Accuracy of Measurements shall be stated in the test report. *Preferred frequencies for acoustical The accuracy of all measurements

measurements.

IS

:10776( Part l)- 1984

3.8Graphical Representation
rithmic scale for frequency,
used ( see IS : 8159-1976* 4. TEST EQUIPMENT Requirement ).

of Heariug Aid Characteristics - A logasound pressure, amplification, etc, shall be

4.1 Acoustical

for the Test Enclosure

4.1.1 The test enclosure shall provide essentially free-field conditions over the ~frequency range 200 to 8 000 Hz. Essentially free-field conditions are considered established when the sound pressure level at the positions 100 mm in front of and behind the test point do not deviate

from the inverse distance law (+-

law ) more

than =L-2 dB from 200 the positions 100 mm, SPL shall not deviate in the frequency range obstacles shall not be the sound field.

to 400 Hz and fl dB from 400 to 8 000 Hz. At right, left, above and below the test point, the more than C 1 dB from the SPL in the test point 200 to 8 000 Hz. The hearing aid and any other present in the test enclosure during the testing of

NOTE - As the testing of hearing aids is often undertaken in small test enclosures it is essential that the characteristics of these small enclosures are known and that they compare or simulate favourably with the larger chamber meeting the above requirement. If the above requirement is unlikely to be met a comparision should be made between an anechoic chamber and a smaller enclosure.

4.1.2 The sound pressure level of the ambient noise in the free-field test enclosure in the frequency range 200 to 8 000 Hz shall be sufficiently low to ensure that the reading shall drop at least 10 dB when the test signal is switched off.

4.2 Sound Field at the Test Point - The sound source shall be capable of producing at the test `point requisite sound pressure levels between 50 and 90 dB constant over the frequency range within the following tolerances : when the substitution method is used : fl dB Over the frequency 200 to 5 000 Hz, and f 1'5 dB over the frequency range 5 000 to 8 000 Hz;
range

when the comparison method is used : 31 1'5 dB over the frequency range 200 to 3 000 Hz, and + 2 dB over the frequency range 3 000 to 8 000 Hz. The frequency of the sound source shall be within rt 2 percent of the indicated value.
*Specfication diagrams. for scales and sizes for plotting frequency characteristics and polar

9

IS :10776( Part l)- 1984
The total harmonic distortion of the acoustical signal of the sound source shall not exceed 1 percent up to an input SPL of 70 dB and 2 percent for an input SPL greater than 70 dB and up to 90 dB. For distortion measurement the total ~harmonic distortion of the acoustical signal of the sound source shall not exceed 0'5 percent. 4.3 Acoustic Coupler - For ail measurements the reference coupler, in accordance with IS : 10781-l-984* shall be used. 4.4 Equipment for the Measurement of Acoust~ic Coupler Sound Pressure Level - The equipment used for measurement of the coupler sound pressure level produced by the hearing aid, shall comply with the following requirements. 4.4.1 The calibration of the sound pressure level measurement system shall be accurate within f 0'5 dB at a specified frequency.
NOTE - The calibration of the microphone to ensure that it remains within the permitted should be repeated sufficiently limits during measurements. often

/

4.4.2 The pressure sensitivity level of the measuring microphone shall be frequency independent within f 1 dB in the frequency range 200 to 3 000Hz and within f 2 dB in the range 3 000 to 8 000 HZ relative to the pressure sensitivity level at 1 000 Hz. 4.4.3 Total harmonic distortion in the measuring equipment shall be less than 1 percent for sound pressure levels up to 130 dB in the frequency range 200 to 5 000 Hz and less than 3 percent for sound pressure levels above 130 dB and up to 145 dB. 4.4.4 The sound pressure level corresponding to hum, thermal agitation and other noise sources shall be sufficiently low to ensure that the reading shall drop at least 10 dB when the $est signal is switched off. For this purpose a high-pass filter not affecting frequencies of 200 Hz and above may be employtd.
NOTE Noise level should be indicated on the response curve.

4.4.5 The output indicator used shall give rms indication within tolerance of f 0'5 dB at a signal crest factor of not more than 3.

a

NOTE 1 - If under certain conditions it is necessary to use a selective measuring system in order to ensure that the response of the hearing aid to the signal can be differentiated from inherent noise in the hearing aid, the use of the selective system should be stated in the report. NOTE 2 - It is well known that the type of output indicator employed may influence the test results significantly if a non-sinusoidal voltage is being measured. Such anon-sinusoidal voltages may be preser`t when making measurements with high input level.

--*Specification earphones coupled for reference coupler for the measurement of hearing to the ear by means of ear inserts (under prifzt). aids using

IO

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 4.4.6 Since the calibration of the acoustic coupler depends on ambient conditions especially the atmospheric pressure, corrections for such a dependence shall be made when necessary (see 3.1). 4.5 Equipment for Automatic Sweep Frequency Recording - The equipment shall be capable of maintaning at the test point all requisite sound pressure levels between 50 and 90 dB within such tolerances as specified in 4.2. The indicated frequency on a recorder chart shall be accurate The automatically recorded values shall not within f5 percent. differ more than 1 dB from the steady state value over the frequency range 200 to 5 000 Hz and not more than 2 dB above 5 000 Hz up to 8 000 Hz. 4.6 Calibration of Free-Field Sound Pressure Level - The calibration of the free-field sound pressure level shall be accurate within * 0'5 dB at a specified frequency. The free-field sensrtivity level of the measuring microphone shall be frequency-intlependent within f 1 dB in the frequency range 200 to 5 000 Hz and L\ithin f 1'5 dB in the range 5 000 to 8 000 Hz relative to the free-field sensitivity level at a specified frequency.
NOTE - For the comparison method it is recommended phone should be used as control microphone. 5. CONDITIONS that a half-inch micro-

OF MEASUREMENTS the position is chosen, of the sound so that the sotirce fixed requirements

5.-l Choice of Test Point - With in the test enclosure, a test point of 4.1 are fulfilled.

The distance from the sound source to the test point shall be sufficient to prevent interaction betweerr the sound source and the hearing aid when the latter is located at the test point. Usual!y a distance of 0'5 to 1'5 m from the sound source is chosen. When makrng measurements using the substitution method, the test point is usually on the axis of the sound source. When making measurements using the comparison method, the test point is chosen about 30 to 60 mm off the axis.
microphone to the NOTE - A distance of 60 to 120 mm from the control hearing aid is usually sufficient when both the hearing aid and the control microphone have small physical dimensions.

The positioning

choice of the test point shall allow of the test object within f 10 mm. 11

for

a reproducible

IS:10776(Part 1) - 1984 5.2Calibrating
tion of the methods.
the Sound Field -

sound

field differs

The technique used for the calibrafor the substitution and comparison

5.2.1 Substitution Method - The calibration of the sound field at the test point is made, with the hearing aid absent, note being made of the electrical input to the sound source required to provide the sound pressure levels desired for a particular test.

5.2.2 Comparison Method - The sound pressure at the t:st point is kept constant using a control microphone and the equipment mentioned in 4.5. The hearing aid is placed at the position specified in 5.3. 5.3 Locating
the Hearing Aid for Test

5.3.1 Reference Point and Reference Orientation of the Hearing Aid The reference point chosen for a particular hearing aid shall normally

be the centre of the main microphone If another report. reference

opening area. in the

point is being used it should be stated

The hearing aid is placed in the test enclosure orientation.

in the reference

A hearing aid for which the reference orientation cannot be accurately defined (see 2.6) shall be placed with the surface in which the reference point is located, facing towards the sound source in such a way that the direction of the incident sound is perpendicular to the surface where the reference point is located. The reference point (see 5.1). point of the hearing aid shall coincide with the test should be taken for the hearvicinity of the not introduce or mechanical mechanical or

5.3.2 Mechanicai Support for the Hearing Aid - Care thdt neither the coupler nor the mechanical support ing aid will appreciably disturb the sound field in the hearing aid at the test frequencies used, and tbey should spurious effects arising flom mechanical resonances vibrations, nor should they in any respect affect any acoustical property of the hearing aid under test.

The hearing aid shall be placed in the free-field without any baffle or other device simulating the body or parts of the body of a wearer. The ear simulator shall be SO placed in relation to the sound field as to produce the least distortion in that field at the sound entry of the hearing aid. 12

IS : 10776 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 5.4 Normal Operating Conditions, for the Hearing Aid The normal hearing aid conditions to apply for measurements when no other conditions are prescribed are as given in 5.4.1 to 5.4.6.

5.4.1 Location ding to the method

The hearing aid is located of measurement used.

as described

in 5.3 accor-

5.4.2 Battery or Supply Voltage - The type of power source used and The measurements shall be made at the supply voltage shall be stated. the supply voltage stated by the manufacturer within f 2 percent tolerance.
NOTE - Either a battery of the type normally used in the hearing aid, particularly discharged to avoid typical high initial voltage,, or a suitable power supply that simulates the partially discharged voltage and Internal impedance of real batteries of the type normally used may be employed. ,

5.4.3 position

Gain Control - Full-on or other used positions

gain position shall be stated.

and

reference

test

gain

5.4.4 Other Controls - The setting elected for the tone control shall In general, the basic setting, that be stated in the report on test results. is, that giving the widest frequency range, shall be selected in preference to settings in which the low or high frequencies are attenuated. If, however there are reasons for regarding some ot,her setting as more representative of the normal use of the hearing aid, these settings may Abe adopted provided they are clearly described in $he report. All other control settings should be chosen to give the highest OSPLB,, and the highest acoustic gain. If this is not possible, the setting giving the highest OSPL,, should be selected. All control settings selected shall be stated in the report on test results. 5.4.5 Sound Outlet Systems - The particular system, that is, insert earphone, acoustic tubing, etc, to be used shall be stated (see IS : 107811984*). 5.4.6 Accessories Used in Connection with the Hearing Aid Microphone accessories to be used shall be stated. Opening - The particular 6. MEASUREMENTS

6.0 Data should be quoted for that part of the frequency 200 and 8 000 HZ over which the output of the hearing least 10 dB when the signal source is switched off.
6.1 Saturation Sound Pressure Level ( see 2.14 ) ,- The test is to determine the highest possible sound pressure
*$XCifiCatiOn

range between aid falls by at purpose
level

of this
that the aids

using earphones

for the reference coupler for the measurement of hearing coupled to the ear by means of ear inserts ( underpr& 1%

13

IS :10776( Part 1) - 1984
hearing aid is capable of producing in the coupler allowing all possible settings of the hearing aid controls and the values of input sound pressure level and frequency.

6.1.1 Test Procedure
6.1.1.1 Turn desired positions.

the gain control

full-on

and set other controls

into

611.1.2 At a given frequency increase the input SPL until the maximum value of the coupler SPL is obtained, and record the SPL. 6.1.1.3 Repeat the procedure at a sufficient number within the frequency range 200 to 8 000 Hz. of frequencies

6.1.1.4 Plot the coupler SPL against frequency. From this curve determine the maximum saturation sound p~ressure level. This test procedure is particularly adapted to point-by-point measurement. If automatic recording methods with constant high input SPL is used it is important to secure that .the test results obtained with the results over the frequency range of interest correspond obtained using the point-by-point measurement.
NOTE-The output signal at saturation will contain high levels of distortion products, therefore, the methods of measurement may influence the level measured. If the output signal is measured through a filter centred at the frequency of the test signal, this may result in lower levels than may be achieved using a wide band instrument. It is therefore,,recommended that wide bend measurements only should be made for the purpose of this measurements described in this standard.

6.2 Sound Pressure Level Curve for an Input SPL of 90 dB (OSPL,, Curve) The purpose of this test is to determine the frequency response of the soudd ptessure level obtained in the coupler when using an input SPL of 90 dB and the gain control in a full-on positlon.
( see 2.17 ) -

6.2.1 Test Procedure
6.2.1.1 Turn desired positions.

the gain control

full-on

and set other controls

into

6.2.1.2 At a given frequency increase the input SPL until the maximum value of the coupler SPL is obtained, and record the SPL.
6.2.1.3 Adjust the input SPL to 90 dB at a suitable frequency. 6.2.1.4 Vary the frequency of the sound source over the recommended frequency range from 200 to 8 000 Hz keeping the input SPL constant at 90 dB and record the SPL in the coupler.

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 6.3 Full-on Acoustic Gain Frequency Response ( see 2.11 and 2.12 ) - The purpose of this test is to determine the full-on acousstic gain obtainable .with the hearing aid. The output SPL in the coupler is measured at full-on gain control setting with an input SPL sufficiently low to ensure essentially linear input-output conditions. 6.3.1 Test Procedure
6.3.1.1 Turn desired positions.

the gain

control

full-on

and set other controls

into

6.3.1.2 At a suitable frequency adjust the input SPL to 60 dB or, if essentially linear input-output conditions to 50 dB SPL.' Essentially linear input-output conditions are considered to exist if at all frequencies within the range 200 to 8 000 Hz a change of the input SPL of 10. dB c:iuses a change of the recorded output level of 10 f 1 dB. The input SPL shall be stated.
this does not produce
NOTE- For hearing aids with certain circuit arrangements, for example, pushpull aids, non-linear input-output characteristics may be observed over a large portion of the operating range.

6.3.1.3 The frequency response with full-on gain is measured by varying the frequency of the sound source over the recommended frequency range 200 to 8 000 Hz keeping the input SPL constant. 6.3.1.4 The full-on acoustic gain is plotted may be reported for a specified frequency.
versh

frequency

and

6.3.1.5 HF-average full-on gain - The HF-average full-on gain is the average of the 1 000, 1 600, and 2 500 Hz full-on gain values. 6.4 Comprehensive Frequency Response and Basic Frequency Response ( see 2.23 and 2.25 ) - The purpose of this test is to show the effect of input sound pressure level on the frequency response of the hearing aid. The resulting family of curves will depict the comprehensive frequency responses and will indicate the input-output characteristics of the hearing aid. 6.4.1 Test Procedure
6.4.1.1

Adjust the gain control
set other controls

to the reference
into desired positions.

test

gain

position

( See 2.22 ) and

6.4.1.2 Vary the frequency of the sound source over the recommended frequency range 200 to 8 000 Hz keeping the input SPL constant at 50, 60. 70, 80 a3B and 90 dB or with such other input sound pressure levels as will adequately show the behaviour of the hearing aid at varicus input levels.

kS : 10776 ( Pdrt 1) - 19'84 6.4.1.3 The frequency response is plotted as the coupler SPL versus frequency at constant input SPL, with a curve for each of the input sound pressure levels used. The curves will thus be parallel curves with a distance of 10 dB between neighbouting curves in the range where essentially linear input-output relations apply. 6.4.1.4 The basic frequency input level of 60 dB.
microphones mag be measured reference orientation.
NOTE The basic frequency

response
curve

( see 2.25 ) is the curve at an
for hearing aids with directional of stated orientations relative to the

response

in a number

64.2

Frequent y Range -

The test procedure

is:

a) from the manufacturers determine the average response levels; b) subtract 20 dB; c) draw a horizontal reduced level;

specified frequency response curve, of the 1 000, 1 600, and 2 500 Hz

line parallel

to the frequency

axis at the curve curve

d) note the lowest frequency fi at which intersects the horizontal line; and e) note the highest frequency f2 at which intersects the horizontal line. and 6.4.2.1 The frequency range of the hearing as being between fi and f2.
6.5 Effect of Tone dontrol

the response the response

aid shall be considered

Position on the Basic Frequency ResponseThe purpose of this test isto-show the effect of tone control position on the basic frequency response of the hearing aid. 6.5.1 Test Procedure
6.5.1.1

Adjust the tone control in the hearing aid according

to 5.4.4.

6.5.1.2 Adjust the gain control to the reference test gain position ( see 2.22 ) and set other controls into desired positions. 6.5.1.3 Vary the frequency of the sound source over the recommended frequency range 200 to 8 000 Hz, keeping the input SPL constant at ~60dB. 6.5.1.4 Repeat the test with the tcne control settings available. 16

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 6.5.1.5 The frequency response at the various tone control settings should be plotted together with the basic frequency response as the coupler SPL verstfs frequency. 6.6 Effect of Gain Control Position on Frequency Response - The purpose of this test is to show the effect, if any, of gain control positions on the frequency response of the hearing aid. 6.6.1 Test Procedure 6.6.1.1 Proceed as mentioned under 6.3.1.1,6.3.1.2 and 6.3.1.3. downward

6.6.1.2 Adjust the gain control from a full-on position in approximately 10 dB steps at the reference frequency.

6.6.1.3 At each setting of the gain `control vary' the frequency over the recommended range from 200 to 8 000 Hz keeping the input SPL constant. 6.6.1.4 The frequency responses at each gain control should be plotted as the coupler SPL wws frequency. position

6.7 Characteristics of the Gain Control - The purpose of this test is to determine the characteristic of the gain control, expressed as acoustic gain relative to full-on acoustic gain verStlS mechanical settings of the control. 6.7.1 Test Procedure 6.7.1.1 Turn the gain control full-on. low value at the

6.7.1.2 Adjust the input SPL to a sufficiently reference frequency ( see 6.3.1.2 ). 6.7.1.3 Determine the acoustic gain.

6.7.1.4 Repeat the tests with a sufficient number of the gain control to cover the range of the control.

of other settings

6.7.1.5 The acoustic gain is plotted relative to the full-on acoustic gain iersus settings of the gain control, using a linear scale for the positions of the control. 6.8 Effect on the Full-on Acoustic Gain of Variation of Battery or Supply Voltage - The purpose of this test is to determine the effect on the full-on acoustic gain of variation of battery or supply voltage. 6.8.1 Test Procedure 6.8.1.1 Proceed as mentioned under 6.7.1, 6.7.2 and 6.7.3. 17

IS : 10776( part 1) - 1984 6.8.1.2 Repeat the test for various values of the supply voltage within the speciEed voltage range for normal operation of the battery.

6.8.1.3 Plot the full-on acoustic gain relative to the full-on obtained at normal battery voltage, versus voltage.

gain

6.9 Effect on the Full-on Acoustic Gain of Variation of Internal Resistance of Battery or Supply - The purpose of this test is to determine the effect on the full-on acoustic gain of variation of internal resistance of battery within the resistance range of interest for the battery types recommended for the hearing aid.
6.9.1 Test Procedure 6.9.1.1 Proceed

as mentioned under 6.7.1, 6.7.2 and 6.7.3. supply voltage for various values at

6.9.1.2 Repeat the test at a constant of the internal resistance.

6.9.1.3 Plot the acoustic gain relative to the gain obtained normal internal resistance versus internal resistance.

6.10 Effect on OSPL,,, of Variation of Battery or Supply Voltage The purpose of this test is to determine the effect on OSPLDo of variation of battery or supply voltage. 6.10.1 Test Procedure
6.10.1.1

Turn the gain control full-on. to the reference frequency (see 2.20).

6.10.1.2 Adjust the frequency

6.10.1.3 Adjust the input SPL to 90 dB.

6.10.1.4 Measure the OSPLB,,. 6.10.1.5 Repeat the test for various values of the supply within the voltage range for the hearing aid. 6.10.1.6 Pl-ot the OSPLBO values normal battery voltage versus voltage. 6.11 Battery Current battery current. 6.11.1 Test Procedure
6.11.1.1 With the gain control in the reference test gain position measure the battery current at the reference test frequency and at an input SPL of 60 dB. 18

voltage

relative

to the value obtained at the

The purpose

of this test is to determine

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 6.11.1.2 The direct-current mg characteristics: a) An accuracy measuring system shall have the followat the value of current measure;

of f 5 percent

b) A direct current resistance not exceeding SO/I, when I is the current being measured, in milliamperes; and c) An alternating the frequency current impedance not exceeding range 200 to~8 000 Hz. 1 ohm over

NOTE - One method of realizing (c) is to bypass the current meter with an 8 000 /LF capacitor. The capacitor should not shunt the battery or power supply.

6.12 Measurement of Amplitude Non-linearities in Hearing Aids - The purpose of this test is to determine the degree of the amplitude nonlinearity in the sound output under specified conditions. The amplitude
a)

non-linearity

can be described by the degl,ee of :

Harmonic Distortion---

Distortion products generated by the action of a non-linear transfer function at integer multiples of the test signal frequency.

The harmonic distortion products appear at frequencies above the input signal frequency. This means that for hearing aids at higher frequencies they may fall outside the frequency range of the earphone as measured in a coupIer. For the lower frequency range, the harmonic distortion products give a suitable description of the non-linearity. b) Intermodulation Distortion - Distortion products generated by the action of a non-linear transfer function on an input signal composed of at least two signals of different frequencies. Intermodulation distortion products, for instance those measured by the difference-frequency distortion method, are more sensitive to non-linearity in the higher frequency range than are harmonic distortion products. 6.12.1 Harmonic Distortion
6.12.1.1 Harmonic distortion is measured using an input signal of one sinusoidal tone having the frequencyf. The distortion products have the frequency nf, n being an integer. Total harmonic distortion, or harmonic distortion of the nth order, is defined as the ratio of the

19

IS : 10776 < Part 1) - 1984 output sound pressure of the total harmonic distortion products, or at the frequency nf respectively, to the total output sound pressure and can be expressed as a percentage or in decibels. The tot&l harmonic distortion is given by the formula

and harmonic

P$ + P,2 + Pd2 + . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J PI" + P22 f Pa2 + Pa" +...... distortion of the nth order by the formula Pn2 J
P,2 + P22 + P32 + P42 i- . . . . . .

where, PI is the sound pressure of the fundamental frequency of the signal in the coupler and P2, P,, Pd........J'n are the sound pressures of the harmonic components of the second, third, fourth......nth order. 6.12.1.2 Test Procedure \ a) Adjust the gain control of the hearing aid to the reference test gain position. The position of other controls shall be stated in the report, preferably these should be set to a position that gives the widest bandwidth.
NOTE - The reference test gain position is defined as the setting of the hearing aid gain control so that the output sound pressure level in the acoustic coupler, at the reference test frequency~with a pure-tone input sound pressure level of 60 dB, is 15 dB less than the output sound pressure level at the test frequency for a 90 dB input sound pressure level with the qain control of the hearing aid full-on. If the gain available will not permit this, the full-on gain control position of the hearing aid should be used. The reference test frequency is 1 600 Hz but for certain hearing aids a higher frequency may be frequency appropriate, for example, 2 500 Hz. In this case, the reference should be stated.

b)

Vary the frequency of the sound source over the frequency range 200 Hz to 8 000 Hz with an input sound pressure level of 70 dB and analyze the output signal for levels at the harmonic frequencies nf or record the total harmonic distortion content. The bandwidth of the filter should be stated. For continuous recording, the skeep rate shall be such that the response does not differ more than 1 dB from the steadystate value at any frequency. In the event that the response curve rises 12 dB m-ore between any -test frequency and its second harmonic, distortion tests at that frequency may be omitted.

NOTE 1 -In case quencies used shall be

spot frequencies

are used

for

measurement,

the fre-

Amongthe preferred frequencies. 20

IS : 10776( Part 1) - 1984
NOTE 2 - A total harmonic distortion meter, whose function is described by the first equation of 6.12.1, measures the residue after the fundamental Thus noise: such as ambient noise in the test space component is removed. or self-noise in the hearing aid, wilI appear as a distortion product. The reading of distortion on the distortion meter should decrease by at least 10 dB when the input signal is turned off. Otherwise, the accuracy of the measurement will be degraded.

If required, repeat the procedure described in item (b) with other input sound pressure levels. d) Plot the harmonic distortion against the frequency of the sound source verStLJ the input sound pressure level.
c)

6.12.2 Intermodulation

Distortion - Dffference-Frequency

Distortion -

Difference-frequency distortion is measured using an input signal composed of two sinusoidal signals5 and fs, shaving amplitudes within 1'5 dB,f2 being higher in frequency thanfi. The levels of the second order&. - fi, -and the third order 2fi - fi, distdrtion products shall be measured and expressed as a percentage or in decibels referred to fhe Higher order components may also be measured. output level offs. 6.12.2.1 Test procedure
a)

Adjust the gain control of the hearing aid to the reference test gain position. The position of other controls shall be stated in the report. b) Adjust the frequencies of the test signals fi and f2 such that fa-fl = 250 Hz.

NOTE- Frequency differences other than 250 I+ may be appropriate and when used the frequency difference should be stated, for example, if the signal-to-noise ratio is too low at 250 HZ, a higher frequency difference may be used.

4 Select a suitable number of frequencies fl and f2 of the sound

source or sources within the frequency range 350 to 5 000 Hz, maintaining the selected difference frequency and keeping the sound pressure level of each of the two test tones at 64 dB. Measure the sound pressure levels at the frequencies f2 -fi and `2f1 --f2 with a suitable filter. The output level at the filter terminals should decrease by at least 10 dB when the test signal fi is switched off. The bandwidth of the filter should be stated. with respect to input level is deemed to be significant, repeat the procedure described in (c) at other appropriate input levels. Plot the difference-frequency distortion products as two curves or tabulate them for each input level, one for the 21

4 If additional information 4

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984 second order, and one for the third order products tion of the higher frequency (f2). as a func-

NOTE- Although the upper limit of the frequency range is restricted to 5 000 Hz, it is recognized that a considerable amount of intermodulation distortion may occur at higher input frequencies.

6.13 Effect on Amplitude Non-linearities Supply Voltage and Internal Impedance
tude non-linearity ation of internal

of Variation

of Battery or

6.13.1 The purpose of this test is to determine the effect on the ampliof variation of battery or supply voltage and of variimpedance o-f the battery or the power supply. 6.13.2 Repeat the procedure
voltages within

described
the

in 6.12,
stated

using

appropriate
aid

battery or supply manufacturer.

range

by the hearing

6.14 Internal Noise Generated in the Hearing Aid - The internally generated noise in the hearing aid can be measured in a simple manner

as described in 6.14~1, or alternatively as described in 6.14.2. The method results.

analyzed in third-octave bands, used shall be reported with the

6.14.1 Simplified Method-With this method, the internally-generated noise is expressed as an equivalent input noise level. The ambient noise in the test space shall be negligible. NOTE- Without measuring the spectrum of the ambient noise in the test space,
as in the third-octave band method, it is difficult to assess its contribution to the total noise level measured in the coupler. Therefore, care should be taken to ensure that this ambient noise does not influence the test results.

6.14.1.1 Test procedure
a ) Adjust the gain control of the hearing aid approximately to the reference test gain position. For the purpose of this test

a precise
position

position
of other

of the gain control is not required. controls shall be stated fin the report.

The

NOTE - The reference test gain position is defined as the setting of the hearing aid gain control SOthat the output sound pressure level in the acoustic coupler, at the reference test frequency with a pure-tone input sound pressure level of 60 dB, is 15 dB less than the output sound pressure level at the test frequency for a 90 dB input sound pressure level with the gain control of the hearing aid full-on. If the gain available will not permit this, the full-on gain control position of the hearing aid should be used. hearing

The reference test frequency is 1 600 Hz, but for certain aids a higher frequency may be appropriate, for example, 2 500 Hz. In this case, the reference frequency

should be stated. 22

IS : 10776 ( Part 1) - 1984

b)

Measure the output sound pressure level Ls in the acoustic coupler at the reference test frequency with a pure-tone * input sound pressure level L, of 60 dB.
NOTE - For automatic gain control ( AQC ) hearing aids, an input sound pressure level of 60 dB may be too high and should be reduced to In a lower level which ensures essentially linear input-output conditions. this case, tho input sound pressure level should be stated.

cl Switch off the sound source and measure the sound pressure

level Le in the coupler caused by the internally generated noise. To determine that the noise in the coupler and the coupler microphone system is adequately low, the measured noise should decrease by at least 10 dB when the hearing aid is turned off. d ) Calculate the equivalent input noise level LN as follows: LN = Lz - ( L, - L, ) where L2 = the sound pressure level in the coupler as measured in (c); h = the sound pressure level in the coupler at the reference test frequency as measured in (b); L, = the input sound pressure level at the reference test frequency ( 60 dB ).

6.14.2 Third-Octave Band Analysis Method ( see Fig. I ) - With this method the internally generated noise as a function of frequency is expressed in terms of the equivalent input sound pressure level in third-octave bands ( see IS : 6964-1973* ). 6.14.2.1 Test procedure

a) With the sound source switched off, the sound pressure level

of the ambient noise in the test space shall be measured in third-octave bands with centre frequencies lying in the frequency range 200 Hz to 5 000 Hz. The ambient noise level in the test space shall be at least 10 dB below the equivalent input noise level as calculated in (e); of the hearing aid to the reference test gain position as described in 6.14.1, using the third-octave band filter centred at 1 600 Hz; ure level of the output noise in the coupler
band filters

-b ) Adjust the gain control

cl With the sound source switched off, measure the sound pressfor third-octave
*Octave, half-octave and third-octave for analysis of sound nad

vibrations. 23

IS : 10776( Part 1) - 1984

bands with centre frequencies in the range 200 to 5 000 Hz ( Example A ). To determine that the noise in the coupler and the coupler microphone system is adequately low, the measured noise should decrease by at least 10 dB when the hearing aid is turned off;

4 For the same gain control setting, determine the acoustic gain

for pure tones as the difference between output and,c"I;`h", sound pressure levels at the centre frequencies third-octave filters (Example B);

The gain should be determined using a stated input sound pressure level of either 60 dB or a lower level if necessary to ensure essentially linear input-output conditions of the hearing aid. AGC aids in particular may require lower input sound pressure levels.
out by continuous
NOTE Measurements mentioned recording. under (a), (c) and (d) may be carried

e ) The equivalent input noise level for each third-octave band is obtained -by subtracting the pure-tone gain as measured in (Cd)) from the noise output level as measured in (c) ( Example
. Equivalent input noise levels for frequency bands in which the pure-tone gain varies by more than 10 dB per third-octave should be identified as it may be difficult to interpret the results. NOTE

24

IS : 10776 ( Part 1 ) - 1983

LO 0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2 5

FREQUENCY

__I_

lo

kH bands for

of the sound-pressure level -of noise output in third-octave the reference test gain position of the~gain control

0.2

0.5

I

2

5

IO kH2 level

FREQUENCY ------w
IB.

Recording of the acoustic gain for pure tones with an input sound pressure of 60 dB and the reference test gain position of the gain conttol

1 t
0.1 o-2

I I I lllll
0.5
1

I I
2

I I`IIIIII
5 10

J
ktiz

FREQUENCY
1C. Calculated equivalent input noise sound pressure

----alevels

FIG. 1

EXAMPLESOF THE DETERMINATION OF THE EQUIVALENT INPUT NOISE LEVEL OF A HEARING AID

25

