**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2597-2 (1967) : Code of practice for the use of electron 
tubes, Part 2: Special quality receiving tubes [LITD 4: 
Electron Tubes and Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 2597 (Part II) -1967 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRON TUBES 

PART II SPECIAL QUALITY RECEIVING TUBES 



First Reprint MARCH 1982 
( Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 621*385 




© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



January 1968 



IS : 2597 ( Part H ) - 1967 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTJCE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRON TUBES 

PART II SPECIAL QUALITY RECEIVING TUBES 



Electron Tubes and Valves Sectional Committee, ETDC 39 



Chairman 
Shri G. R. Suhramanian 



Representing 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 



Members 

Dr S. S. S. Aoarwaxa Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR).Pilani 
Shri P. N. Dkobhakta Directorate General of Technical Development 

Shki B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Maintenance Engineer All India Radio 

Shri J. S. Monga All India Radio Merchants' Association, Bombay 

Shri V.J. Bhatt ( Alternate ) ( Bombay ) 
Shri D. N. Chaudhcri ( Alternate ) ( Calcutta ) 
Shri L. S. V. E as war (Alternate ) ( Madras ) 
Representative Directorate General of Research and Development, 

Ministry of Defence 
Prof S. Sampath In personal capacity ( Indian Institute of Technology, 

Madras ) 
Shri K. T. Shastry Directorate of Technical Development and Pro- 

duction ( Air ), Ministry of Defence 
Shri P. M. Shank ar Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Sree Pbakash Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri A. V. Ramachandra Rao ( Alternate ) 
Staff Officer, Electrical Naval Headquarters 
Engineering ( Design ) 
Staff Officer, Electrical 
Engineering ( Material 
Radio) (Alternate) 
Shri K. N. Tiwari 



Shri R. C. Pande ( Alternate ) 



Directorate General 
Defence 



of Inspection, Ministry of 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 2597 ( Par t II )- 1967 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri B. R. V. Vardan Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Ministry of 

Civil Aviation 
Shri G. H. Vaze Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri S. Venkataraman Radio, Electronic and Television Manufacturer!* 

Association of India, Calcutta 
Shri A. K. Gopalakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. S. Ven rates war an, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 
Shri N. Srinivasan 
Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



Panel for Receiving Valves, ETDC 39 : PI 

Convener 

Shri K. N. Tiwari Chief Inspectorate of Electronics, Ministry of 

Defence 

Members 

Shri A. V. Ramachandra Rao Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 
Shri K. S. Sree Prakash Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 



IS ! 2597 ( Part H ) - 1967 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRON TUBES 

PART II SPECIAL QUALITY RECEIVING TUBES 
0. FOREWORD 

(hi This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 18 May 1967, after the draft finalized by the Electron 
Tubes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

0.2 This code is intended to give general guidance to the designers of 
electronic equipment to be supplemented by data sheets from the tube 
manufacturers, so that optimum efficiency, performance, life and the 
intended special requirements can be obtained. 

0.2.1 This part of the code covers recommendation applicable to special 
quality receiving tubes and is intended to be used in conjunction with 
IS: 2597 (Part I)- 1964*. 

0.3 The term 'Special Quality Tubes' refers to types with one or more 
attributes such as resistance to damage from mechanical vibration and 
shock, stability of characteristics, close tolerances or long life. These 
attributes are necessary to an exceptional degree because these tubes are 
used in conditions different from or more rigorous than those normally 
experienced in domestic radio and television receivers. Special quality 
receiving tubes are primarily intended for service in mobile communica- 
tion, civil aircraft, industrial electronics, repeaters, computers, equipment 
for the armed services and space communications. 

0.3.1 In repeaters and computers, tubes are expected to have 
particularly long life but are not subjected to appreciable mechanical 
shock. Under the same conditions certain types of dc amplifiers require 
tubes of high electrical stability during normal life. In equipment for the 
armed services, civil aircraft, mobile telecommunications and industrial 
electronics, tubes are required to withstand moderate conditions of 
vibration and shock over a moderate length of life. On the other hand 
in projectiles and guided missiles, tubes must withstand particularly severe 



•Code of practice for the uie of electron tubes : Part I Commercial receiving tubes. 

3 



IS: 2597 (Part II) -1967 

conditions of vibration and shock over the comparatively short operational 
life required. For space communications, however, long operational life 
may be necessary. 

0,4 This code is based to a large extent, on B.S. Cp (1005) : 1962 • The 
use of electronic valves ' issued by the British Standards Institution. 

0.5 Explanatory paragraphs given under some of the clauses have been 
indicated in italics. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part II) covers recommendations for the use of special 
quality receiving tubes. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard (Part II), the definitions of terms as 
given in IS : 1885 (Part IV/Section I)-1973f and those given in 2 of 
IS : 2597 (Part I)- 1964+ shall apply. 

3. CHOICE OF TYPES 

3.1 Manufacturer's published data will indicate the special features 
which have been introduced and the benefits of these special features will 
best be realized by paying careful attention to treatment and operating 
environments of the tube. 

3.2 Examination of the published data will indicate the particular type of 
application for which the tube was designed but it could not be assumed 
without consultation with the tube manufacturer that those characteristics 
for which no specific claims are made are necessarily better than those 
of normal tubes. For example, types for which n$ reduction in 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( r$vis$d). 

fElectrotechnical vocabulary : Part IV Electron tubes, Section 1 Common terms. 

{Code of practice for the use of electron tubes : Part 1 Commercial receiving tubes. 



IS: 2597 (Part II). 1967 

microphony is claimed will not necessarily be better in this respect than 
normal tubes and tubes stated to have high stability of characteristics with 
respect to time may be subject to a normal spread from tube to tube. 

4. RATING 

4.1 Ratings are the set of limiting values defining the operating conditions 
within which the tube can be expected to give satisfactory performance. 
These are so chosen that failure rate, life and performance are sufficiently 
satisfactory. The expectation of life generally decreases continuously as 
the ratings are approached. Exceeding the rating accelerates the decline. 
Barring a few exceptions the more conservative the use of the tube with 
respect to ratings the greater is the life expectancy and reliability. 

4.2 The first maximum or minimum rating reached should be the 
limiting factor. All ratings are not mutually compensating, for example, 
it is not safe to assume that one rating (say, maximum anode voltage) may 
be exceeded provided a corresponding reduction is made in some other 
rating (for example, anode current), although this may be permissible in 
some instances. Further, a rating variation authorized for a particular 
tube type is not necessarily applicable to another similar type. Use of 
tubes in applications where the absolute maximum ratings are exceeded 
should be done only in consultation with the tube manufacturer. 

5. HEATERS 

5.1 Improved life and reliability will be obtained by working to closer 
heater tolerance than those suggested in 3.4.2.2 and 3.4.2.3 of IS : 2597 
(Part I)- 1964*. The order of improvement in life and reliability which 
may be obtained in any particular instance depends on a number of 
factors such as the design features of the tube and the nature of the 
application. It is, therefore, recommended that the circuit designer 
should consult the tube manufacturer in each particular case {ste 5.1.1 
and 5.1.2). > 

5.1.1 When tubes are to be used in civil aircraft, advice should be 
nought from the tube manufacturers and from the approving authority 
about the special operating conditions to its service. For example, where 
three tubes having 6*3 volt heaters (of the same current rating) not 
specifically approved for series operation are run in series, a regulated 
power supply of 19 ± 1 V should be used. 

5.1.2 Where a number of tubes are required to be operated in civil 
aircraft in series from supplies other than a regulated 19 ± 1 V supply 



♦Code of practice for the use of electron tubes : Part I Commercial receiving tubes. 



IS t 2597 (Part II)- 1967 

each particular arrangement should be the subject of special consideration 
during the consultations referred to in 5.1.1. 

6. VIBRATION AND SHOCK FATIGUE 

6.1 Certain tubes are rated for use in various conditions of vibration and 
shock which will be specified by the manufacturer. The maximum shock 
for which the tubes are rated is stated in terms of 'g' (the value of 
acceleration due to gravity). The maximum vibration conditions are 
defined similarly but the frequency range may also be specified. In both 
cases the direction and manner in which it is permissible to apply shock 
and vibration may be defined in the ratings. The application of shock 
and vibration sets up stresses in the tube structure which these tubes have 
been specially designed to withstand. Nevertheless it is essential that 
vibration and shock should never be exceeded or these stresses will result 
in such distortion of the tube structure that performance, life and 
reliability will be impaired. 

7. CIRCUIT DESIGN 

7.1 The failure rate of the tube will depend to a large extent upon the 
conditions of its use and the adoption of the recommendations specified 
in 7.1.1 to 7.1.3 will contribute to equipment reliability. 

7.1.1 Reliance on Characteristics — It is generally a good practice to so 
design circuits that the minimum of reliance is placed upon the values 
or stability with time of individual characteristics (for example, 
conductance or the point at which grid current starts). Nevertheless if 
such design unduly increases the number of components or tubes this 
shall be taken into account when estimating the overall reliability. 

7.1.2 Choice of Valve Operating Point — The operating conditions should 
be such that those minor changes in tube characteristics which may occur 
during life will not greatly affect the electrode dissipation of the tube 
itself [see also 3.10.2 of IS: 2597 (Part I)-1964*]. The expected direction 
of change in electrical characteristics shall also be taken note of. Based 
on the analysis of life test data, the tube manufacturers may supply this 
information. 

For example, operating conditions close to the specified life conditions; the 
amount of change to be expected in such characteristics as mutual conductance; 
leakage current and leakage between sections of dual types are usually indicated. 

7.1.3 Heater or Filament Characteristics — Particular attention is drawn 
to 5. 



•Code of practice for the ute of electron tubes ; Part I Commercial receiving tubes. 

6 



IS : 2397 ( Part II ) - 1967 
9. HEATER SURGES 

8*1 Parallel Operation — It is desirable that surges be avoided as far 
as possible, preferably by either gradual application of voltage or by the 
use of a surge limiting device. 

8,2 Series Operation — Particular attention is drawn to 3.4.2.3 of 

IS: 2597 (Part I)- 1964*. When tubes are run with series connected 
heaters, heater current switching surges can be reduced to very small 
proportions by the use of a thermistor in series with the heater chain. It 
should be remembered that such an arrangement will limit the current- 
surge effectively only when starting from cold so that at least 5 minutes 
should elapse after the heater supply has been switched off before it is 
switched on again. 

8*3 Switching — If possible, HT voltage should be applied after the 
cathode is hot, particularly in the case of tubes such as rectifiers operating 
at a high value of cathode current and peak inverse voltage. This applies 
particularly when the frequency of the supply is appreciably above 50 c/s. 

The random failure rate of certain tubes may be increased by an 
increase in the frequency of heater switching; nevertheless the actual total 
possible emission life of the cathode will be increased if heaters are 
switched off during standby periods since prolonged standby operation 
with heaters energized increases the rate at which the cathode interface 
impedance builds up ( see 9). 

8.4 Component Variation — The use of components which may 
vary significantly in value or in characteristics during life or from batch 
to batch should be avoided. 

8.5 Parallel Systems — The use of discrete systems or stages in parallel 
which are arranged to come automatically into operation in the event of 
failure of one system is common engineering practice and Jeads to a 
considerable increase in reliability. When the use of tubes in parallel if 
being considered, the effect of possible inter-electrode short circuits in one 
tube on the operation of tubes in parallel, on the power supplies, and on 
the circuit as a whole should be considered. 

9. EFFECTS OF INTERFACE IMPEDANCE GROWTH 

9.1 Particular attention is drawn to the recommendation given \n 3*14.1 
ot IS : 259? (Part I)- 1964*. There is danger of loss of performance when 
tubes are run with a very low cathode current or with no cathode current 
at all, particularly when they are required to give high pulse current 
affgf a period of low current operation. 



•Code of practice for the I4|e pf electron tubet : Part I Commercial receiving tubet. 

7 



IS : 2597 ( Part II)- 1967 

§•2 Unless the manufacturer's data specifically permit for this type of 
operation it should not be assumed that the tubes concerned are suitable 
for this type of operation; the manufacturer should be consulted and 
adequate tests carried out on a sufficient number of tubes to ascertain 
whether the tubes are suitable or not. 

Formation of interface resistance may be minimized by avoiding standby 
operations wherever possible or at least restricted to short periods of time. 

10. MOUNTING 

10.1 The method of mounting of a special quality tube should be such as 
to reduce to a minimum the vibration or shock transmitted to the tube by 
way of the base cap or other connections. An anchor point should be 
provided sufficiently close to the base in the case of tubes having flexible 
leads to prevent resonances from building up and causing a fatigue 
fracture of the lead. 

The use of a tube holder or screening can, of which any part is resonant at a 
vibration frequency present in the equipment may significantly increase the amplitude 
of the vibration transmitted from the chassis to the tubes to vibration exceeding its 
maximum rating. 

11. TEMPERATURE CONSIDERATIONS 
11.1 Envelope Temperature 

11.1.1 High envelope temperature may cause early life failure in tubes. 
The majority of high envelope temperatures, particularly of the miniature 
types, is caused by the use of screening cans which trap a layer or air 
round the tube and so prevent convection cooling. They also reflect heat 
back to the tube. 

11.1.2 Where a screening can has to be used it should be a close fitting 
one, firmly connected to the chassis and its inside surface should be black. 
It should have as many points of contact as possible with the tube 
envelope and should be capable of giving good contact when used with 
limit sizes of envelopes. 

11.1.3 Where there is no metal chassis to act as a heat sink, as in the 
case of printed circuits, an alternative method of cooling the screening can 
such as radiating fins or forced air cooling should be employed. 

11.1.4 In all cases of doubts the internal dissipation of the tube should 
be reduced in consultation with the tube manufacturer. 

11*1.5 Attention is also drawn to the atmospheric pressure limitations 
outlined in 3.3.3 of IS : 2597 (Part I)- 1964*. If a tube is used at high 



•Code of practice for the use of electron tubei : Part I Commercial receiving tubes. 

8 



IS i 2597 ( Fart H) -1967 

altitude the total internal dissipation may have to be reduced by about 
50 percent as there is insufficient air to provide the necessary cooling. 

12. HANDLING 

12.1 It is of great importance that special quality receiving tubes should 
undergo the minimum of handling before being placed in service and this 
requirement should be brought to the notice of all responsible supervisory 
and operating personnel. 

12.2 Excessive handling, particularly unnecessary insertion into and 
withdrawal from tube holders may create stresses in the base of all-glass 
tubes with semi-rigid pins and will result in premature failure. It is, 
therefore, strongly recommended that if special quality receiving tubes 
are subjected to extensive acceptance testing before being placed in 
service, this should be carried out on a sampling basis only. The tube 
should not be placed in the equipment until this has been tested and 
found to be satisfactory with a set of tubes kept for this purpose. In this 
connection particular attention is drawn to recommendations in 3.5.1 
to 3.5.6 of IS : 2597 (Part I)- 1964*. 

13. PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE 

13.1 For some types of tubes the failure rate tends to decrease after a 
relatively short period of operation and to remain thereafter at a 
substantially stable level. There is considerable evidence that tubes 
become stabilized in the particular circuit in which they are operating. 
Arbitrary replacement of tubes which have reached this stage is obviously 
undesirable. 

13.2 However, where sufficient life data have been established by the 
tube manufacturer or other competent authority, it may be possible to 
indicate an approximate time at which the rate of failure is subsequently 
liable to increase seriously and thus to suggest a time at which 
replacement of the tubes will result in more reliable operation of the 
equipment. 

13.3 Preventive maintenance to remove potential failures may be 
instituted in consultation with the equipment designer and the tube 
manufacturers at certain specified times during the life of the equipment. 
An increase for a short period, in heater voltage to slightly beyond the 
upper limit likely to be reached during the subsequent period of 
equipment operation will indicate potential failures due to increase of 
grid current or inter-electrode leakage current in those circuits where 



•Code of practice for the use of electron tubes: Part I Commercial receiving tubes. 

9 



IS : 2597 ( Part II ) - 1967 

these characteristics are likely to be critical. It is desirable that such test 
should be made with the equipment operating at the maximum ambient 
temperature reached in normal operation. Similarly a decrease, for a short 
period, of heater voltage to slightly below the lower limit likely to be 
reached during' the subsequent period of equipment operation will indicate 
potential failures due to falling cathode emission and growth of cathode 
interface impedance (resistance) in those circuits where those characteristics 
are of importance. 

13*3.1 This procedure may enable tubes approaching the state of 
inadequate performance for the particular application to be detected and 
replaced. 



10 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Length 


metre 


m 


Matt 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


second 


s 


Electric current 


ampere 


A 


Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 


temperature 






Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 


Amount of lubatance 


mole 


mot 


Supplementary Units 






QOAMTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 


Plane angle 


radian 


rad 


Solid angle 


steradiap 


sr ! 


Derived Units 






QOAITTITY 


Unit 


Symbol Definition 


Force 


oewton 


N i N - 1 kg.m/s 1 


Energy 


joule 


J 1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W | W « 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 1 Wb - 1 V.i 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 1 T - 1 Wb/m» 


Frequency 


herts 


Hz 1 Hx - 1 c/s (s-») 


Electric conductance 


tiemens 


S IS - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 1 V - I VV/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 1 Pa - 1 N/m« 


INDIAN STANDARD^ INSTITUTION 




Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 


NEW DELH1 110002 


Telephones 1 26 60 21, 27 01 31 


Telegrams : Manaksanstha 


Region*! Offices: 




Telephone 


Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 


BOMBAY 400007 37 97 29 


Eastern : 5 Chowrlnghee Approach 


CALCUTTA 700072 27 50 90 


Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, 


Adyar 


MADRAS 600020 4124 42 


Northern : B69, Phase VII 




S.A.S. NAGAR - 
(MOHALI) 160051 


Branch Offices: 






'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur AHM AD ABAD 380001 2 03 91 


*F f Block, Unity Bldg, Naras)mhara)a Square 


BANGALORE 560002 2 76 49 


Gangotrl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar BHOPAL 462003 6 27 10 


22E Kalpana Area 




BHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 


6-8-56 C L. N, (Supta Marg 




HYDERABAD 500001 ' 22 1043 


R 14 Yudhiftet Marg, C Scheme 


JAIPUR S02005 6 98 32 


117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 




KANPUR 208005 4 72 92 


Patliputra Industrial Estate 




PATNA 800013 6 26 08 


Hante* Bldg ( 2nd Floor ), Rly Station Road 


TRIVANDRUM 695001 32 27 



Printed at Arose Pre**, New Delhi, India 



