( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS:5182(PartIII)-1970

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF AIR POLLUTION
PART Ill RADlOACTlVlTY Hazards Sectional ( PARTICULATE) Committee,
Representing Directorate General, Factory Advice Service & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour, Employment & Rehabilitation ), Bombay

IN AIR 18

Chemical
Chairman SKRI S. FL Bms~

CDC

Members Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI D. R. CHA~RJI SHRI T. R. ANANTHAWAN ( Alternate ) CHEMIST & METALLURCI~T - II, Railway Board (Ministry of Railways ) RESEARCH,DESIGNS & STANDARDS ORGANIZATION, LUCKNOW Association, Indian Chemical Manufacturers' DR D. CHOUDHURY Calcutta SWRI D. K. SIRKAR ( Altrmate ) Central Public Health Engineering Research Institute SHRI J. M. DAVE ( CSIR 1. Naenur Ministry of'$et&um & Chemicals SHRI J. M. GUHA Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR JAGDISHSHANKAR of Technical Development Directorate General SHRI JOGINDER SINGH ( Ministry of Industrial Development & Company Affairs ), New Delhi Department of Explosives ( Ministry of Industrial SHRI S. N. LAHIRI Development & Company Affairs ), Nagpur __ SHRI S. C. ROY (Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) DR C. N. K. MURTHY SHRI R. S. AOARWAL ( Alternafe ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI NARENDRASINGH DR IL J. BALAKRISHANA( Akcrnafe ) Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ),`Dehra Dun SHRI T. S. NAYAR SHRIMATILALITHA B. SXNGH ( Altewwte ) Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of SHRI P. S. RAMACHANDRAN Health, Family Planning & Urban Development ), New Delhi SHRI R. BALAWFIRAMANYAN ( A[fernate ) National Chemical Industries, New Delhi SHRI SANTOKH SINCH SHRI PRITHIPAL!%NGH( Alternate ) ( Continuedonpage 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STAhDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR DELHI NEW

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Is:5182(PartIII)-1970 ( Contirattdfrom
page 1 ) Representing Hindustan Organic ( Maharashtra ) Director General, Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani

Members SHRI D. S. SASTRY
SHRI B. SINGH (Alternate) SEW D. DAS GUPTA, Director ( Chem )

IS1 ( Ex-&20

Member )

Secretary

DR A. K. BHATTACHARYA Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI

Air Pollution Subcommittee,
Convener
SHRI J. M. DAVE

CDC 18 : 5
Research Institute

Central Public Health Engineering ( CSIR ), Nagpur

Members SHRI D. U. HATTIKUDUR SHRI V. K. RANADE DR R. K. DUTTA ( Altcrnute ) DR M. N. RAO DR V. SADASIVAN SHRI P. R. Bnmr? ( Alternate ) SHRI K. S. SONAYAJI SHRI S. A. SUBRAMANIAM DR D. G. VYAS

DR G. C. DAS

Calcutta Municipal Corporation, Calcutta Cement Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Bombay Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing ), New Delhi Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad

2

IS : 5182 ( Part III ) - 1970

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF AIR POLLUTION
PART III RADIOACTIVITY ( PARTICULATE) IN AIR

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 March 1970, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 Radioactivity in air arises out of natural processes and man's activities in the field of nuclear energy. It can be present either as particulates or in the form of gases and vapours. 0.2.1 Natural radioactivity in the atmosphere is due principally to radon and thoron, which are inert gases, and their daughter products which are particulate and hence get attached readily to minute dust particles present in the atmosphere. As radon-222 and thoron ( radon-220 ) diffuse into the atmosphere from the earth's crust where they are formed by decay from the naturally occurring radioactive ores, the concentrations of these gases and their daughter products vary quite widely with place, time and meteoCertain radionuclides ( such as C-14 and H-3 ) are rological conditions. produced in small quantities in the upper layers of the atmosphere by the action of cosmic rays. 0.2.2 Among the contributions from man's activities to the radioactivity in air, fallout from nuclear weapon tests and releases from mining and radiochemical laboratories and from processing of radioactive minerals, operation of nuclear facilities, may be mentioned. 0.3 Measurement of airborne radioactivity in the environment is required when it is necessary to obtain its value at a given place, to know how it changes from time to time or to determine how it is affected by different known parameters. 0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ),

3

IS : 5182( Part III ) - 1970 1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard prescribes the method for the collection and measureIt describes methods of calculation ment of particulate radioactivity in air. to obtain the gross and the long-lived beta radioactivity in the atmosphere. 2. TERMlNOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, shall apply. 3. SAMPLING -The most easily available and convenient method for 3.0 General sampling of particulates from air is the filtration technique. It consists of collecting the radioactive material from a measured volume of air on a filter paper or mat. 3.1 Filtration Assembly - The assembly illustrated in Fig. 1 consists essentially of a sampling head, flowmeter for reading the rate of flow of air through the system and a suction device. A means of regulating the flow may also be incorporated. the definitions given in IS : 4167-l 966*

SAWLING

HEAD

FIG. 1

ASSEMBLYOF FILTRATION APPARATUS

3 .I .l S~nzplin,n Head - The designed as to provide uniform the mtire face of the sampling is shown in Fig. 2. - __--_ *Glossary of terms relating to air

sampling head or a filter holder should be so air velocity ( known as face velocity ) across area of the filter. A typical sampling head

pollution. 4

IS : 5182( Part III ) - 1970
FILTER PAPER

All dimensions in millimetrcs. FIG. 2 SAMPLING HEAD

It provides an effective filter area of 25 mm diameter. When the size of the filter to be accommodated is smaller than that represented in the A mechanical support such as f@u+e, a smaller filter head has to be used. a wire gauze, sometimes with a ( 0 ' ring, is provided to hold the filter pa er &-tight at the edges and to prevent displacement or rupture ofthe fi Pter The back-up screen or the support used is normally during sampling. firmly fixed on the main piece when required to hold brittle filters ( such as the membrane type ) or soft filters such as of the glass fibre type. 3.1.2 Filter -The filter paper for any specific sampling work is selected after considering many factors : cost, availability, resistance to flow that It may be noted may be permitted, efficiency of collection desired, etc. here that papers of high filter efficiency are usually those of high resistance also. 3.1.2.1 The all-cellulose filter papers such as Whatmanoffer high mechanical strength and are widely used for air sampling mainly However, being not very uniform, the resistance to because of low cost. air flow and consequently the collection efficiency vary from sample to sample. 3.1.2.2 Where almost 100 percent papers such as of the cellulose-asbestos filters also offer very high efficiency. efficiency is required, mixed filter type are much in use. Glass fibre

millipore filters ) which combine high 3.1.2.3 Membrane filters collection efficiency even for su L micron particles with relatively low resistMillipore filters ance are among the most efficient filter media available. 5

IS : 5182 ( Part III ) - 1970
consist of thin membranes of cellulose esters perforated with tiny uniform conical holes. Being fragile they require special sampling heads for use. 3.1.3 Flow-Measuring Device - Dry or wet gas metres may to record the total volume of air passed directly. Rotameters gauges may be used to give rates of flow of air. be employed or float-type

3.1.4 Suction Device ( or a Source of Vacuum) -This may be a pump or an ejector which uses steam or compressed air, having the capacity for sampling rate varying between 20 to 200 litres per minute. -When the long-lived radioactivity in air is 3.2 Period of Sampling required, it is sometimes necessary to choose a high rate of sampling and the sampling may be performed for a long time such as a few hours, whereas if the gross activity is required, the sample need be taken from a relatively small volume of air and hence a low flow rate would be adequate. 4. MEASUREMENT

OF RADIOACTIVITY

4.1 General -After

the sampling is over, the radioactivity of the filter paper with the collected material on it is measured. Knowing the total volume of air sampled, the specific radioactivity of the atmosphere may be calculated. 4.2 Couating 4.2.1 A typical arrangement used for counting the beta radioactivity of filter paper air samples is shown in Fig, 3. It consists of an end-window Geiger-Muller counter. A lead housing for the counter is used in practice ( not shown in figure ) in order to keep the background count rate low. The filter paper sample is kept below the counter soon after the sampling is over. When the location of sampling is not near the counting laboratory, however, some delay is involved between the end of sampling and the start of counting, and this should be reported. 4.2.1.1 Instead of a Geiger-Muller counter tive thin plastic scintillator may also be used. as th deetector, beto sensi-

4.2.1.2 By using electronic counting set-up the total counts registered in any given time may be obtained and hence the count rate in counts per minute, 4.2.2 When the count rate is high, as in the initial stages, the counting time may be 6 to 10 minutes. But when the activity falls down, larger counting periods ( say 20 to 60 minutes ) may have to be employed, 4.2.3 By subtracting the background count rate of the counter obtained without using any sample, the net count rates due to the sample may be calculated. 6

IS : 5182( Part III ) - 1970
/-GLASS

/-METAL CYLINDER i CATHODE 1

THIN WIRE (ANODE 1

,-

Gt ASS

BE AD

A

rMICA

WINDOW

i-FlLlER

PAPER

SPMPLE

FIG 3. END WINDOW GEIGER-MULLERCOUNTERFOR COUNTING FILTER PAPER SAMPLE

7

ISs 5182 ( Part III) - 1970 The efficiency factor of the E5ciency( the fraction of the total disintegrations in the sample counted ) should be first obtained by using a standard radiation. This factor, f, should be used to convert the minute ( cpm ) into disintegrations per minute ( dpm ).
4.3 Counter

counting set-up that is actually source of beta net counts per

the period of collection 4.4 Calculation -Let min and the average rate of sampling be u litres volume of air sampled V = vt litres.

of sample be equal to t per minute. Then total

4.4.1 Gross Activity - Let the net activity of the filter sample ( after subtracting the background of the counter) be C counts per minute at a delay time of about 10 to 15 minutes after the sample collection is over. The air activity may then be expressed as 10s C/ Vf disintegrations per minute per cubic metre. 4.4.2 Long-Lived Activity

4.4.2.1 By counting the filter paper sometime after the collection of the sample is over, thus allowing the natural activity to decay out, it is possible to evaluate the long-lived component of the activity in air. 4.4.2.2 The natural activity of the air is largely a mixture of radium-B and thorium-B. The former has a half-life of 26.8 min and accounts usually for about 90 percent of the natural air activity. Thorium-B has a half-life of 10.6 hours. 4.4.2.3 radium-B is time. This ponent will disintegrates a calculation is applied as thorium-B: A period of about 4 hours which is more than 8 half-lives of permitted to elapse before the sample is counted for the first ensures that more than 99.5 percent of the radium-B comhave decayed. If one has to wait till almost all thorium-B it would delay obtaining the results for three days. Instead, based upon two counts separated by approximately 24 hours follows to remove the fraction of the total count due to

Let cl be the net count rate obtained at a delay time of tl hours and cs the net count rate at a delay time, tz hours after the end of sampling, the second counting being done after 24 hours of the first counting. The count rate due to the long-lived 53 -cl
e --hf

beta activity

is then given by

C=

I--e-At
( ts fI ) and h the

decay

where t is the time interval between the counts, constant of thorium-B ( 0.065 4 hour-l ). 8

IS : 5182 ( Part III ) - 1970 Then the long-lived = 4.5 Correction CIVf 2%xlOs beta activity = 4.5 x 10 --1* x c/Vf microcuries Paper per millilitre

for EfEciency of Filter

4.5.1 The calculations in 4.4 assume that the efficiency of the filter paper of particulates carrying the radioactivity. is 100 percent for retention When this assumption is not correct, the values are to be corrected after evaluating efficiency of the filter paper. 4.5.2 Efficiency for retention of the particles on the filter paper used may be experimentally obtained if an absolute filter paper ( such as the millipore filter ) is kept behind the routine filter while collecting the sample. By obtaining the gross count rates for the two filter papers for the same delay time ( time elapsed after the end of sampling ), the efficiency of the routme filter paper may be calculated. 5. REPORTING THE RESULTS

5.1 The results of measurement of the radioactivity in air may be reported in a suitable form, such as the proforma given below: MEASUREMENT OF RADIOACTIVITY INAIR

a) Location: b) Date of collection : . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 Period of collection :... . . . . . . h to ..,...... h = t minutes d) Average rate of sampling, ZJ= . . . . . . . . . litreslminute 4 Total volume of air sampled V = v.t = . . . . . . . . . . . . litres f 1 Background of the counting set-up = . . . . ..counts per minute, Efficiency factor of the counter, f = 639
observed count rate with the standard source theoretical count rate of the standard source h) Count rate of the filter paper sample min after collection = . . . . . . . . .cpm j) Netcountrate,C=(h)-(f) k) Gross beta activity between . . . . . . min

cpm

and . . . . . . . . .

= . . . . . . cpm in air = lo3 C/Vf = . . . . . . . . .dpm/ms

9

xsr518!2(PartnI)-1970
m) Count rate of the filter paper . . . . . . . . . cpm n) Net count sample after a delay of tr hours =

rate at delay of 1, hours, sample

cr = . . . . . . . ..cpm after a delay of t, hours =

p) Count rate of the filter paper . . . . ..cpm q) Net count rate at delay oft, r) Count rate due to long-lived

hours, cs = . . . . ..cpm activity, t, - cIe- Xt -= c= cs -Al 1 -e

. . ..cpm

where X = 0,065 4 h-1, t = t, s) Long-lived beta activity

in air = 4.5 x IO-10 c/vf =... . . . . . .l&i/cm9

10

