( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS: 1393 - 1961

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TRAINING AND TESTING OF OXY-ACETYLENE WELDERS
Welding
chairman SHRI K. K. RAO Msmbns SHRI K. SRR! Stral Sam F. D. AGARWAL V. BADAMI Directorate Development of Technical Wing, Development of Commerce [ Ministry of De&cc Ministry of Railways

General

Sectional

Committee.

SMDC

14

Ministry

& Industry

N. C. BAGCHI P. K. V. CHALLAM SHRI

Government Test House, Calcutta Asiatic Oxygen & Acetylene Co. Ltd., National Metallurgical Laboratory Army

Calcuttn Jamshedpur Ltd., Calcutta

M.

MITRA

( Ahernatc) ( CSIK), The Aluluinium Engineer-in-Chief's Tata Indiau Ministry Inspection Engineering Oxygen of Manufactuiing Branch, & Locomotive Limited, Calcutta Company Co. Ltd., Private

SHRI B. N. DAS
MR. A. P. FORSYTH P. GHOSH SHRI c.

Headquarters Tatanagar

SHRI N. I<. GHOSH SHRI M. K. M~OKERJEE (Allmate) SHRl R. GHosH SHRI J. MULIYIL (A/tern&) JOINT Dmecro~ SHRI V. SHRI B. N. RESEARCH ( M & C ) ( Ahnate) R. SUBRAYANIAN YAIUMDAR

Railways Wing, Directorate General of Supplies Works, Housing Sr Supply) of Ordnance Fxtories ( Ministry fi Disposals

(Ministry of

SHRI HARNAN' SINGH ( dltcrnale

)
Director& Geoeral Calcutta of Defencc! ), ) Iotegral J. B. ) Chittaranjao Public Central Nickel Boilera Centr.ll Director, Works Boilcrb SectionsI Public IS1 Locomotive Deportment, Board l3ureau Committee, Works ( Ex-o&in Ltd., Works, ( Xi&try Chittaranjan of Works, Ltd., ISI Delhi EDC 40, Housing Bombay & Supply ) Madras Coach Factory, Perambur Electrodes Advani-Oerlikon

SHHI D.

R.

MALIK ( Alte*nab

SHRI A. SQUNDRARAJ DR. GOKALANANDA SHR~ S. V. SHRI N. V. SHRI N. B. SHRl P. s. NADKARNI VISVANATH

MUKHERJEE ( Alfern&

( Yrivote )

Ltd.,

Bombay

PANDIT RADIA REUDY

REPRESENTATIVE SHRI B. G. SASTRY SHRI S. N. SEN GUPTA SHXI J. P. SINGLA SHRI T. N. Deputy VELU (S & M) SHRI B. S. KRISHNAMACHAR, Director

Information

( Private )

Depdrtmeot, Mcmhcr )

New

Hindu~tan

Shipyard

Visakh:~patoxu

(Secrdury)

Panel
SHRI R. Gaos~

for Codv of Practiw for Training and `I`t,sting of Oxy-Acetylene Wcltlvrs, SAIDC 14/P4
Inrlixn Oxygen Limited, Calcrltt.3

INDIAN
\IAN.Zl<

STANDARDS
RH.\il.IN, 9 w:`vv ILIHADUR Dl:.I.Hl

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAP.\R M.ZRCI

I IOOCL?

IS: 1393 - 1961 CONTENTS
PAGE 4 6

0. 1.

FOREWORD SCOPE

... ...

... ...

... ...

... ...

... .,..

PART I 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
TERMINOLOGY. . . SYMBOLS MATERIAL ... ... ... ... ...

GENERAL
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

SELECTION OF TRAINEES . . .

LENGTH OF COURSE, HOURS OF INSTRUCTION AND TRIAL ... ... ... PERIOD OF INSTRUCTION RECORD BOOK ... ... ... ...

PART II EQUIPMENT AND TESTING FACILITIES AT THE TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT 8. 9.
APPARATUS ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .,. ... ...

SUPERVISION . . .

10. REFERENCE MATERIALS . . .

AND DUTIES OF INSTRUCTOR . . . 11. QUALIFICATIONS

PART III 12. GENERAL
...

COURSE OF INSTRUCTION
... ... ... ... :.. ...

12 12

13. INSTRUCTIONIN WEI_IXNG PRACTICE

14. EXERCISES- SECTIONI WELDING OF MILD STEEL SHEETS UP TO 3.15 mm IN THICKNESS AND TUBES UP TO 60 mm IN ... DIAMETER AND WALL THICKNESS up TO 1.60 mm 15. EXERCISES-SECTION
II WECIXNG OF CAST IRON, ALUMINIUM, RRASS AND MANITAT,OXYGEN CUTTING AND FLANGE ... ... ... ... GOUGING ...

12

21 29 31

16. ASSESSMENTOF CHECK TEST WELDS IN SECTIONSI AND II 17. INSTRUCTIONIN WELDING THEORY . . . 2
... ...

IS: 1393 - 1961

PAGE PAkT IV TESTS FOR WELDERS 18. GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . FOR
...

33 33 45 45 47 47 47 48 52 5.5 58 61 63 74 75 77 `

19. INITIAL QUALIFICATION TESTS

20. RE-TEST FOR INITIALQUALIFICATIOK TEST . . . 21. ANNUAL TESTS . . . 22. PERIODICCONTROL TEST
24.

. . . . . .

23. RE-TESTS FOR ANNUAL TEST AND PERIODIC CONTROL TEST

POSITIONFOR TEST WELDS

APPENDIX A APPENDIX R APPENDIX C

RECOMMENDED FoRM FOR RECORD ROOK ACCESSORIESAND EQUIPMENT Hmxmwimm TRAINING ESTABIJSH~IENT FOR WELDERS

REcoMnlENnEn DESIGN OF POSITIONIN(; EQUIPIMENT

APPENDIX L) RECOMMENDEDFORMOFTRAINEE APPENDIX E APPENDIX F APPENDIX G APPENDIX H APPENDIX J

PR~GRESSCHART

RECOMMENDED SYLLARIJS FOR TKAINJNC; COURSE DETAILED SUGGESTIONSCOVERING EACH SECTION AND GROUP OF EXERCISES . . . . . . RECOMMENDED SAFETY KLJLES SUGGESTED METHODS SPECIMENS . . .
...

. . .
. ..

. . .
. ..

FOR PREPARING ETCHED

EQUIVALENT fpsVALUES OF METRIC VALUES USED IN THE STANDARD . . . . . . . . .

IS: 1393 - 1961

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TRAINING AND TESTING OF OXY-ACETYLENE WELDERS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 14 August 1961, after the draft finalized by the Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 The Planning Commission of India, while investigating the problems of shortage of steel in India, concluded that greater development in the use of welded construction would contribute appreciably to the economic and efficient use of steel. The use of welding in India has lagged far behind the use of this method of fabrication in other countries. On the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the Indian Standards Institution launched a Steel Economy Project to promote efficiency and economy in the use of steel for fabrication purposes and to introduce measures to encourage the more rapid development of the welding industry in India. 0.3 Oxy-acetylene welding is used on the whole range of commercial ferrous and non-ferrous metals and alloys. Materials,, such as highcarbon and alloy steels, can be welded by oxy-acetylene welding provided the joints if required, can be properly heat treated before and after welding. Cast iron machinery frames 30 cm or more thick at the fracture point have been repaired by either fusion or braze welding ( nonfusion welding ). Sound welds are produced in other materials by appropriate variations in technique, heat treating, pre-heating, etc. Generally speaking, oxy-acetylene welding is no longer used in structural work in mild steel, if arc welding plant is available, except in the case of relatively thin-gauge material. 0.4 Progress in the use and acceptance of welding as a fabricating medium depends greatly upon the quality of the welding being done in the country. The value and utility of welding are judged mainly on the competency and knowledge displayed by the welder. The need for men, more skilled in the art of welding, has led to the establishment of these recommendations for the training and testing of welders. 0.5 With the increasing acceptance of welded fabrication for major structures, the uniform maintenance of a high degree of proficiency in welding 4

IS:1393-1961 is essential fbr the adequate protection of the public as well as the sound development of the welding industry. In addition to the initial qualification tests for judging the ability of the trainee, periodic re-tests and special trade qualification tests are essential in maintaining high standards of proficiency. Although there is a general agreement on the properties to be determined and test procedures to be used in judging the qualifications of a welder, there is a certain divergence in the details of the test procedures and number of tests required. The exercises and qualifying tests recommended in this code are considered minimum for assuring proper qualifications for normal welding in thin gauge mild steel, sheets and tubes, aluminium, brass, and cast iron, and will produce a welder with a degree of skill and knowledge that will be of immediate value to his employer and he, by gaining experience on simple work, will be able The exercises and qualito progress rapidly to work of greater difficulty. fying tests recommended are not intended to train welders for special types of welding, such as welding of boilers, industrial pipelines, etc. More stringent requirements may be necessary for qualifying welders for a special type of work if there is a definite code, specification or procedure control for that type of work or the materials to be used. 0.6 Adequate training facilities and safe and convenient working conditions are essential adjuncts to the proper instruction of a trainee. This code includes recommendations on the type of equipment essential for proper instruction in welding. Basic rules for safety in t%e handling and care of equipment are also included. The welder shall be made conscious of economy in the use of materials and shall be capable and cognizant of the need to make the fullest use of all filler rods and other materials he is working with. 0.7 Drawing upon the experience of established training institutions in India and abroad, this code has been formulated with a view to serving as a guide in organizing and planning the work of the trainee's underFurthermore, taking a course of study in welding technique and theory. due weightage has been given to the need for international co-ordination among standards and test procedures prevailing in different countries of the world. These considerations led the Sectional Committee to derive assistarice from the following documents: B.S. AWS 1295:1946
TESTS FOR USE IN THE TRAINING OF WELDERS. British Standards Institution.

B 2.1-1945 CODE OF MrNrhUJ,u REQUIREMENTS FOR INSTRUCTION OP WELDING OPERATORS. American Welding Society. code,

0.8 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard.

0.9 All quantities and dimensions appearing in this standard have been given in metric system. Corresponding fps values to which the industry has been accustomed are given in Appendix J for information. 5

IS: 1393 - 1961 1. SCOPE 1.1 This code recommends minimum requirements for a course of instruction in manual oxy-acetylene welding and cutting --as applicable to light engineering industry ( Section I ) and to general engineering industry ( Sections I and II ) and prescribes certain standard tests comprising the initial qualification tests at the training establishment and subsequent annual and periodic tests for practising welders.
NOTETraining for welding in overhead position has been omitted from the scope of this Code in view of its very limited application in light and general engineering industry.

1.2 The principal objectives of the course of instruction covered'by the code are: 4 to coach the trainee in the fundamental techniques and safe practices of oxy-acetylene welding and cutting, of the proper methods of b) to give the trainee a good understanding oxy-acetylene welding and cutting, c) to enable the trainee to acquire enough skill in oxy-acetylene welding and cutting to pass the qualification tests prescribed in this code, and 4 to provide the trainee with a basic knowledge of the theory of oxy-acetylene welding and cutting. 1.2.1 The course of instruction is not expected an _ experi_ to ._.produce _ _ enced welder, but rather a welder with enough skill and knowledge so that he will be of immediate value to industry as a welder on less difficult work and will be able, by gaining experience in industry, to progress rapidly to work of greater difficulty and responsibility. 1.3 The standard tests prescribed in this code comprise the following: a) Initial Qualijication Test - The test which the trainee shall be required to pass before completing his course of training. The passing of this test indicates that the welder has enough basic skill and knowledge to be of value to industry as a welder; and b) Annual and Periodic Tests - The check tests designed to be applied at regular intervals for ensuring that a welder actually engaged on work has continued to maintain a standard of proficiency as required by the initial qualification test. PART I 2. TERMINOLOGY to oxy-acetylene 2.1 For the purpose of this code, all terms relating welding and cutting, unless otherwise defined in this code, shall have the meaning assigned to them in IS: 812-1957 Glossary of Terms Relating to Welding and Cutting of Metals. 6 GENERAL

IS: 1393 - 1961 3. SYMBOLS 3.1 For the purpose of this code, the symbols used, unless otherwise defined in this code, shall have the meaning assigned to them in IS: 8131956 Scheme of Symbols for Welding. 4. MATERIAL 4.1 Steel-Steel used as parent metal for training and testing, according to the provisions of this code, shall be of general weldable quality specified in *IS: 226-1958 Specification for Structural Steel. In the case of mild steel tubes, only those tubes having wall thicknesses up to 1.60 mm shall be used. 4.2 Cast Iron - Cast iron plates used as parent metal for training and testing, according to the provisions of this code, shall conform to *IS: 2101950 Specification for Grey Iron Castings ( machinable quality ). 4.3 Aluminium - Aluminium used as parent metal for training and testing, according to the provisions of this code, shall be of quality designated SlA or SlB or SlC as specified in *IS : 737-1955 Specification for Wrought Aluminium and Aluminium Alloys, Sheet and Strip ( For General Engineering Purposes ). 4.4 Brass - Brass used as parent metal for training and testing, according to the provisions of this code, shall be of quality as specified in IS: 410-1959 Specification for Rolled Brass Plate, Sheet, Strip and Foil ( Revised ). 4.5 Filler Rods - Filler rods used for training and all tests according `to the provisions of this code, shall conform to the requirements of 9.1 or 9.2 for welding of steel, 10.1 for fusion welding of cast iron, 11.2 for welding of brass, 11.3 for bronze `or braze welding ( non-fusion welding ) of cast iron and 13.3 for welding of aluminium of IS: 1278-1958 Specification for Filler Rods and Wires for Gas..WeTding. 4.6 Fluxes - Suitable fluxes, where required, shall be used. 5. SELECTION OF TRAINEES

5.1 Trainees selected to receive the instwction recommended in this code shall have the following qualifications i a) Ability to understand the language of instruction; b) No physical or mental disability that precludes safe operation of welding equipment or interferes with full performance of duties ir. industry; and c) The minimum age requirements prescribed in the State and Central labour laws applicable in the State in which the instruction is conducted. *Under revision. 7

IS: 1393 - 1961 6. LENGTH OF COURSE, HOURS OF INSTRUCTION TRIAL PERIOD OF INSTRUCTION AND

6.1 Length of Instruction in Welding Practice-The instruction shall be so organized that each trainee shall be required to devote a minimum of 200 hours for both sections of the course ( see 14 and 15)` that is 100 hours for each section, to actual welding, exclusive of time spent in witnessing demonstrations by the instructor, preparing plates for welding, testing specimens and receiving instructions in welding theory. 6.2 Length of Instruction in Welding Theory - Not less than 50 hours ( 25 hours for each section ) shall be devoted to instruction in welding theory prescribed in Part III ( see 17 ). 6.3 Length of Weldin@ Practice in Any One Day - The length of time spent by the trainee in actual welding practice in any one day shall not exceed seven hours with a break of at least half an hour after the first four hours. 6.4 Trial Period of Instruction - In the beginning of the course, there shall be a trial or probationary period of a week but not exceeding 40 hours, the period to be determined by the training establishment, during which the instructor shall observe the aptitude and interest of the trainee and determine whether in the interest of all concerned the trainee should continue the course. 7. RECORD BOOK

7.1 Upon completion of the course and fulfilment of the requirements prescribed in this code, the trainee shall be granted a record book indicating that the trainee has passed the tests prescribed in Part IV. Further these tests together with the results of the said tests shall be listed on the If the trainee has passed some but not all the initial qualmrecord book. fication tests prescribed, the tests which the trainee has not-taken or has failed. to pass shall be permanently indicatedin the book. 7.2 The record book shall have additional pages for recording the results of annual tests taken by the welder. Additional pages may also be provided for recording any periodic and special tests, for example, welding in special steels, pipe welding, etc, which the welder may take. A recommended form for this book is given in Appendix A. PART II EQUIPMENT AND TESTING FACILITIES TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT AT THE

8. APPARATUS 8.1 Welding Table -Each trainee shall be provided with a welding table preferably topped with firebrick ( suggested type of table is shown 8

IS: 1393 - 1961
in Fig. 1 ). The welding school shall have an area with sufficient clear floor space to allow adequate freedom of movement for the trainees and the instructors and placing of oxygen and acetylene cylinders ( if supplies from cylinders are used ). 8.2 Positioning Jig - Suitable positioning jigs shall be provided to facilitate the execution of the welding tests prescribed in Part IV. Suggested designs of such equipment are given in Appendix H. 8.3 Equipment

Accessories

The training establishment shall provide all apparatus and equipment necessary for the safe and proper esccution of the welding course prescribed herein. A list of accessories and equipment recommended for a training establishment is given in Appendix C. 8.4 Filler gods and Wires - There shall be an adequate supply of filler rods and wires of the types and sizes required for the exercises prescribed in Part III. 8.5 Material for Welding --- An adequate supply of mild steel, cast iron, aluminium and brass plates of the required quality shall be provided for the exercises prescribed in Part III. 8.6 Testing Apparatus - The training establishment shall possess apparatus suitable for preparing and testing the test specimens as prescribed in Parts III and IV or shall arrange for preparation and testing of test specimens elsewhere. 9. SUPERVISION restricted

-

for Oxy-Acetylene

Welding

and

Cutting

and

Other

9.1 Number

to not- more than

of Trainees

per

12 trainees

Instrucror

- Each in attendance

shop class shall per instructor.

be

9.2 Record of Trainees' Progress - X record shall be kept of each trainee's progress, showing the number of hours of individual practice and the results of all tests prescribed in Parts III ant1 IV. A recommended form of trainee's progress chart is given in Apl~~~ndis I).

10. REFERENCE

MATERIALS

10.1 Outline of Course - At the start of the course, a prepared outline indicating the syllabus of the course, the tests required, and the subjects to be covered"in the related instruction shall be made available to the trainees. A specimen syllabus for the course is given in Appendix E.
10.2 Welding Publications - The training cstablishmcnt shall available for trainees' use suitable rrfcrcncc matcrinl on welding prising books, manuals, periodicals, codes, standards, cxtc. have com-

11. QUALIFICATIONS 1111 General-The
or more instructors,

AND

DUTIES

OF INSTRUCTOR

instructions prcscribcd in this code ma)' bc given by one provided each instructor in welding practice possesses

.

I

PLAN

--

_____

-~_---__-----~

ELEVATION
NOTE 1 -Mild steel angle 50 x 50 x 5 mm. All
FIG. 1

NOTE 2 -Mild in millimetres.

steel tee

50 X 50

X 5 mm.

dimensions

FIREBRICK TOPPED TABLE ( FIREBRICKS NOT SHOWN)

10

IS: 1393 - 1961 the qualifications `prescribed under 11.2.1 and each instructor in welding theory possesses the qualifications prescribed under 11.2.2. In addition, each instructor shall have the ability to present effective demonstrations and explanations of those portions of the course which he is to teach. 11.2 Qualifications of Instructor in weld-

11.2.1 Each instructor giving any portion of the instruction ing practice shall possess the following qualifications:

a) A minimum of three years' experience as a welder or welding supervisor, of which at least two years shall have been spent as manual oxy-acetylene welder ; b) Proven ability of this code; to pass all the tests prescribed for trainees in Part IV and

c) A practical knowledge of the physical the welding processes; d) Familiarity

properties

of the metals

with the topics in welding theory covered in Part III ; and used in yelding and relating to welding.

e) Familiarity with the codes and specifications capability to read simple engineering drawings

11.2.2 Each instructor giving any portion of the instruction in welding theory ( see 17 ) shall have a thorough knowledge of the subjects in which he gives instructions. 11.3 Duties of Instructor - The instructional staff shall be charged with the responsibility of giving instructions in welding practice and welding The duties shall include: theory, as prescribed in Part III. a) Planning instruction in accordance with the course outlined in this code keeping in virw the following four basic steps of instruction: 1) Prepiring the trainee for new instruction; 2) Using appropriate methods for presenting tion ( demonstration, illustration, explanation, 3) Providing proper supervision and guidance applying his new knowledge and skill; and the new instrucdiscussion, etc ); to the trainee in

4) Supervising and checking tests assigned to trainees, b) Instructing the trainee to work safely, emphasizing establishment's safety regulations.

the

training

cl

Observing acceptable shop management practices, 1) care, control and conservation of materials and 2) shop cleanliness and orderliness. Keeping attendance records and recording 11 trainees'

such as: and equipment;

4

progress.

IS: 1393 - 1961 PART III 12. GENERAL 12.1 The instruction shall consist of welding ing theory. The practical and theoretical interspersed and related one to the other. instruction in safety precautions, protection care of equipment. 13. INSTRUCTION IN WELDING practice and lectures in weldtraining .should be suitably The training shall start with of person and protection and COURSE OF INSTRUCTION

PRACTICE

13.1 Instruction in welding practice shall be given by means of a scrits of exercises which shall conform to thr rcquircments prescribed in this Part. The course of instruction has been divided into two srctions as follows: Section I - Covering welding of light gnug:c mild steel sheets _up to 3.15 mm thick and tubes up to 60 mm diamctcr and wall thicknrs~ 1.60 mm ( which find considerable use in light engineering industry ) ; and Section II-Covering welding of cast iron, aluminium, brass and manual osygcn cutting nnd flame gouging. The combined sections would cover the needs of gcncrnl engineering industry for manufacture and mninttnnncc work. 13.1.1 The exercises prescribed in the two diffcrcnt sections shall be performed on mild steel, cast iron, nluminium and brass, on the thicknesses appropriaterto rach individual cxercisc. The plates used shall be reasonably free frqm estrancous matter, such as rust, scales, paint, etc, and For execution of each exercise, defects which ndvcrscly nffcct welding. the trainee shall have a welding unit for his exclusive use. 13.1.2 The importance of maintaining the correct flame characteristics as applicable to welding of diffcrerit metals to obtain welds of uniformly good quality and the importance of proper cleanliness, joint preparation, blow pipe and rod angles and the use of fluses ( where necessar). ) shall be emphasized during each esercise. 13.1.3 After completing each group of exercises the trainee shall be required to pass the check tests prescribed for that group, designed to demonstrate whether he has acquired a satisfactory degree of skill in the techniques covered by that group of esercises. 13.1.4 Detailed suggestions covrring each section and group of esercises are given in Appendix F. 14. EXERCISES - SECTION I WELDING OF MILD STEEL SHEETS UP TO 3.15 mm IN THICKNESS AND TUBES UP TO 60 mm IN DIAMETER AND WALL THICKNESS UP TO 1.60 mm 14.0 Welding cserciscs in these groups shall bc carried out with a neutral flame. 12

IS: 1393 - 1961 14.1 Exercises in Section I Group A

14.1.1 Fitting up of Equipment, Adjustment of Flame altd Deposition of in Group A shall be designed to instruct the Weld Beads -Exercises trainee to fit up the equipment, set the gas pressures, to light and adjust the flame and to deposit beads of correct width and build-up with 1.60 mm diameter mild steel filler rods and to make butt welds in 1.60 mm mild The following exercises shall be included in steel sheet in flat position. this group :
a) Fitting up of equipment and adjustment of gas pressures; b) Lighting and adjustment of the flame - neutral, oxidizing ( excess oxygen ) and reducing ( excess acetylene ) flames ( see Fig. 2, 3 and 4); and
maintenance of a constant flame at the desired adjustment is Generally, for steel the flame should be neutral, that is the inner cone should be sharply defined with a very slight haze or flicker at the end of it. This haze or flicker provides ati ` indicator `, which by its disappearance will show when the flame is tending to become oxidizing ( seeFig. 3 ).

most important.

NOTE-The

C)

Bead welds without and with filler rods in Aat position.

Frti.

2

NEUTRAL

I'LAME

FIG. 3

OXIDIZING FLAME

clams

a,

mmn ruthout
Goqqk,

Flame

as I**"

",,h

Welder's

Welder's

Go99kr

FIG. 4

REDUCING FLAME

13

I

IS : 1393 `- 1961
The exercises in Group A shall be performed by the forward welding technique ( see Fig. 5 ). 14.1.2 Check Tests wn Exercises in Section I - Group A -No specific tests are prescribed for this group. ,The trainee shall be able to adjust He shall be able to deposit the flame to. the three different conditions. beads with or without filler rods. The bead welds made with a filler rod shall be straight and have even build-up free from undercutting and shall not show presence of oxidation or burning. 14.2 Exercises

in Section I -

Group B

14.2.1 The exercises in Group B shall be designed to instruct- the trainee in the technique of making butt welds in 1:60 mm mild steel plates' in flat

FIG.

5

FORWARD

WELDING

IS: 1393 - 1961 and vertical positions and in 3.15 mm thick plates in flat position. cises on the following types of welds shall be included in this group; shall be performed by forward technique:
WELD

Escrwhich

EDGE PREPARATION

4 b) 4

Butt welds

in 1.60 mm mild steel plate

in

flat position Butt welds in 1.60 mm mild steel plate in 1 h vertical position ( vertical upward ) Butt welds in 3.15 mm thick plates in flat position J

1
see Fig. 6

NICK

BREAK

/-SAW

CUT

c6

6

*Weld to be stopped and restarted within central 50 mm of run. Specimen to be tested by nick breaking. **Gap T/2 for flat Dosition, and T for vertical position, where T is the tbickness of specimen.
All dimensions FIG. 6 BUTT in millimetres. WELD SPECIMEN

15

IS: 1393 - 1961 14.2.2 Ckeck Tests 018 Exercises in Sectio~z I - Group L' - The trainee shall be required to make three cheek test specimens conforming to the requirements stated in Table I.

TABLE SPECIMEN

I

SPECIMEN DESCRIPTION OF JOINT (2)

WELDS FOR CHECK TESTS SECTION I - GROUP B
\vELIIING

ON

EXERCISES

IN

NO. (1) 1

P0s1Ti0~ (3)

JOINT
PRI~PARATI~S .\ND OTHER

PROCEDURE WELDING

FOR

DETAILS (4)

6)
Weld to be made in a single run with 1.60 mm diameter filler rod \Veld to be made in a single run with 1.60 mm diameter filler rod ( upward method ) Weld to be ma& in a single run with 3.15 mm diameter filler rod and no back sealing run

Butt weld in 1.60 mm nuld steel sheet >,

Flat Vertical

Fig. 6 I'ig. 6

2

3

Butt weld in 3.15 mm mild steel sheet welding

Flat technique

Fig. 6 is to be employed

NOTEForward is to be permitted.

14.2.3 Each weld shall be inspected, visually for surface appearance and condition, penetration, size and contour checked with a suitable weld gauge, and then ruptured for internal esamination. Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions given under 16. 14.3 Exercises in Section I - Group C 14.3.1 The exercises in Group C shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making butt welds in 3.15 mm mild steel plates in vertical position, corner welds in 1.60 mm mild steel plates in flat and vertical positions and fillet welds in 1.60 mm mild steel plates in horizontal-vertical position. Exercises on the following types of welds shall be included in this group:
WELD EDGE PREPARATION

4 b)

Butt welds in 3.15 mm mild steel sheet in vertical. position Corner welds in l-60 mm mild steel sheet in flat position 16

Fig. 6 Fig. 7

IS: 1393 - 1961 WELD Corner welds in 1.60 mm mild steel sheet in vertical position I'illvt weld in 1.60 nun mild steel sheet in horizontal-\wtical position EDGE PREPARATION Fig. 7

Fig.

8

J-

DISCARD

150

:TCH

TEST

SPECIMEN

--I
50* 1

I._
DISCARD NO GAP

\

*Wr*ld to 1x2 stopped

;LIICI rcst;utctl

within central

SO mm of run.

Specimen

to be

.III tlinlcnsi~ms 1;IC. 7
CORNER

in millimctrcs.
\vriLD SPECIMEN

17

IS :1393- 1961

0

I

s

CARD

150

:TCH

TES'

SPECIMEN

58

DI

S

CARD

.

100 -

I

100

IS: 1393 - 1961 14.3.2 Check Tests on Exercises in Section I - GYOU~J C -The trainee shall be required to make three specimen welds conforming to the requirements stated in Table II.

TABLE

II

SPECIMEN

WELDS FOR CHECK SECTION I-GROUP
\VELDIh-ti POSlTION

TEST C JOIN

ON

EXERCISES

IN

SPECIMEN NO.

DESCRIPTION
OF JOINT

PROCOUURti \\`ELDIXG

FOR

PRBPARAT~ON AND OTHER

DETAILS

(1)
4

(2)
Butt weld in 3.15 mild steel mm sheet Corner weld in 1.60 mild steel mm sheet Corner weld in 1.60 mm mild steel sheet Fillet weld in 1.60 mild mm steel sheet

(3)

(4)

(5)
\\.eld tu lx made in a single rull with 2.50 mm ur l-60 mm diam&cl- Lillcr rod ( up\vartl method ) \Yeltl to I)r made in a single r11n with 1.60 mm tliamrtcr tiller rod \Velcl to bc mxlc in a single run with 1.60 mm diameter filler rod ( upuxrtl ,nc\Vcltl

Vertical

Fig. 6

5

Flat

Fig. 7

6

Vertical

Fig. 7

7

Horizuntalvertical

Fig. 8

to bc made in a single run with 1.60 mm diameter filler rod

NOTE - l;orward \veitling tcclmiquc is tu be employed corner welds no back sealing run shall be permitted.

and in the case uf but1 and

14.3.3 Each meld shall be inspected visually for surface appearance and condition, penetration, size and contour checked with a suitable gauge and then ruptured for internal examination. Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions given under 16. 14.4 Exercises in Section IGroup D 14.4.1 The cserciscs in Group 11 shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making welds `in thin-walled mild steel tubes -- butt welds, branch joints and tube-to-plate joints in downhand position. Exercises on thr following types ot welds shall bc included in this group. \\`Er.n weld in 25 mm out4c~ tliamc~tcr, 1.60 mm wall thickness tlrbcs in flat position, turning through 180` 19 E:rxe
PHIcT~ARATI~N

a) Butt

Fig. 9

IS: 1393 - 1961 WELD EDGE PREPARATION

W Welds of branch joints in 25 mm outside diameter tube, 1.60 mm wall thickness, angles 90" and 45" in flat position turning the assembly through 180" cl
Welds in sheet to tube ( fillet ) -sheet 1.60 mm, tube 25 mm outside diameter, wall thickness 1.60 mm, angles 90" and 45" in horizontal-vertical position

Fig. 10

Fig. 11

t
m-w f

rT= 1.60mm
------

+---GA';
II
-__-______

shall be required to make two test specimen welds conforming requirements stat& in Table III. 20

14.42

Cluck l`csts ou E.vr~cises in Sectiotz I -

Groalp I) -The

trainees to the

IS: 1393 - 1961

All

90" Angle FIG. 11 TUBE-TO-SHEET FOR CHECK I -GROUP

IlB JOINTS TEST D

45" Angle

TABLE

III

SPECIMEN

WELDS SECTION

ON

EXERCISES

IN

( CZause 14.4.2 ) SPECIMEN No. (1) 8 DESCRIPTION OF JOINT \VELDiNG POSITION JOINT PREPARATION AND OTHER DETAILS (4) PROCEDURE FOR WELDING

9

(2) Tube25 mm outside diameter, wall 1.60 mm thickness to sheet l-60 mm thick angle 90" Tube to TubeBranch Joints

(3)

(5)
Weld as specified in Fig. 12 to be made with 1.60 mm diameter filler rod in W"e;&`irspecified in Fig. 13 to be made with 1.60 mm diameter filler rods in one pass. The assembl) may be turned through 180"'

Horizontalvertical and Flat horizontal-vertical

Fig.

12

Fig. 13

NOTE -Forward

welding technique is to be employed.

14.4.3 Each weld shall be inspected visually for surface appearance and condition, size and contour checked with a suitable gauge, and then sectioned for internal examination. Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions given under 16. 15. EXERCISES - SECTION II WELDING OF CAST IRON, ALUMINIUM, BRASS AND MANUAL OXYGEN CUTTING AND FLAME GOUGING 15.0 Exercises in this section are extensions of those in Section I, covering welding of aluminium, brass and cast iron ( fusion and braze 21

IS: 1393 - 1961
TEE TO BE CUT INTO FOUR BY SAWING AND SECTIONS POLISHED AN0 ETCHED PIECES TO BE

DElAllS

OF WELD

FIG.

12

`;\I1 dimensions WELD SPECIMEN

in millimetres. OF TUBE-TO-SHEET

JOINT

welding ) and manual oxygen cutting and flame gouging. This section is intended for the trainee who is able to complete successfully the course of training scheduled in Section I. 15.1 Exercises in Section II - Group E 15.1.1 The exercises in Group E shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the techniques of making butt welds in pure aluminium and brass sheets 22

IS: 1393- 1961
I

TO BE SAW CUT INTO i. PIECES AND SECTIONS TO BE POLISHED AND

ETCHEO

,

le+J

t_--c-&MN
5 MAX
DETAILS Of WELD

__~__ t
_-----s-v-

_~~~_

} ___~__ _-_I __---------

I

I
j -4

I___
FIG. 13
WELD

_ _~~~~~~~~ ~__
A11 dimensions
SPECIMEN

in millimetres.

OF TUNE-TO-TUBE BRANCHJOINT Th,e following types of welds shall be inEDGE PREPARATION pure alumiFig. 6 pure alumiFig. 14

up to a thickness of 3.15 mm. cluded in this group: \VELD

a) Butt welds in 1.60 mm thick nium sheets in flat position b) Butt welds in 3.15 mm thick nium sheets in flat position

c) Butt welds in 1.60 mm thick brass sheets in flat position 23

Fig. 6

IS: 1393 - 1961
WELD ~DCE PI<$X?AIZATION

d) Butt welds in 3.15 mm thick brass sheets in flat position
NoTE-T?~uI~c conditions: For alumininm - nrutral For brass - oxidizing. u?th a slight

Fig. 14
and

haze of excess acetylene,

150

1 !
F1c.14

D

I

S

A

R

D

-f
BREAK TEST SPECIMEN

NICK

SC?

1
I S A R D

D

14A

1413 *\Veld to be stopped cut and nick broken. and restarted within central 50 mm run. Specimen to be

All dimensions SPECIMEN

in millimctres. IN ALUMINIUM OH BRASSSHEET

BUTT WELD

24

IS: 1393 - 1961 15.1.2 Check Tests on Exercises in Section II - Grozt$ E - The trainee shall be required to make two test specimen welds conforming to the requirements in Table IV.
TABLE IV SPECIMEN WELDS SECTION FOR CHECK II -GROUP TEST E ON EXERCISES IN

SPECIMEN NO. (1)

DESCRIPTION or` JOINT

WELDING POSITION

JOINT P-'REP.~RATIoN AND OTHER DETAILS

PROCEDURE WELDING

FOR

(2) Butt weld

(3)

(4)

(5) \Veld to be made in a single rnn with 3.15 mm diameter filler rod \Veld to be made in a single rnn with 3.15 mm diameter filler rod and no back sealing

10

mm thick pure aluminium sheet Butt weld in 3.15 mm thick brass sheet

i,, 3.15

Flat

Fig.

14

11

Flat technique is to be

Fig.

14

iYwrE - Forward welding run is to be permitted.

em~luyed

15.1.3 Each weld shall be inspected visually for surface appearance and condition, penetration, size and contour checked with a suitable gauge, and then ruptured for internal examination. Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions given under 16. 15.2 Exercises in Section II - Group F 15.2.1 Exercises in this group shall be designed to instruct the trainee in thl: technique of making butt welds in cast iron by the fusion and braze welding technique in flat position. The following types of welds shall be included in this group:
1VEL.D

EDGE PREPARATION Fig. 15(A)

4

Butt welds in cast iron plates 10 mm and 12 mm thick in flat position by the fusion technique b) Butt welds in cast iron plates 10 mm and 12 mm thick in flat position by the braze welding technique
NOTE -- Flame

Fig. 15(A) or Fig. 15(B)

conditions: welding --- strictly neutral, and welding --~ slightly oxidizing.

For fusion For braze

15.2.2 Check Tests OR Exercises ijt Scctimt II - Group F -The shall bc required to mnkc two test spccimcn wcltis conforming requirements stated in Table V. 25

trainee to the

IS:1393- 1961

NOTE -

158 x11 Corners roUll&d. All dimensiuns in millimetrus. FIG. 15 UUTT WELD IN C.4sT IRON

I'L,%TE

26

IS:1393

- 1961

l-5 MAX

-50

-

-

50 -

DISCARD

-

Ti
50 4 150

I

NICK

BREAK

ff

iT

SPECIMEN

50

1
DISCARD

1
.\I1 dimensions FIG. 16 Hun \VELII in miliimetres.
PLATE

SPECIMEN IN CAST IRON

IS:1393-

1961
The following
WELD

in flat position. group :

types

of welds shall

be included

in this

EDC;E PREPARATION Fig. Fig. 15(A) or 15(B)

a)`Butt welds in cast iron plates 10 mm and 12 mm thick in vertical position by braze welding technique b) Depositing hardfacing rods on 10 mm thick plates in flat position (plate preparation, flame condition, etc, according to the directions of the makers of the rod)

-

153.2 Ckeck Tests ON Exe&es in Section II - Group G - The trainee shall be required to make one test specimen weld conforming to the requirements stated in Table VI.

TABLE
SPECIMEN NO. (1)

VI

SPECIMEN
DESCRIPTION OF JOINT

WELD FOR CHECK SECTION II -GROUP WELDING
POSITION

TEST G

ON

EXERCISES

IN

JOINT PREPARATION AND OTHER DETAILS

PROCEDURE FOR WELDING

(2)

(3)

(4)
Fig. IS(h), or Fig. 15(B) and Fig. 16 Weld with to 5

(3)
be made mm rod

14

Butt weld in cast iron plate 10 mm
thick by the braze welding technique Vertical

( upward method )

NOTE -

No specific test is prescribed

for testing

the trainee on hardfacing.

15.3.3 The weld shall be inspected visually for surface appearance and condition, penetration, size and contour checked with a suitable gauge, Each weld shall be assessed and then ruptured for internal examination. on the basis of provisions given under 16.
15.4 Exercises in Section II - Group H 15.4.1 Exercises in this group shall be. designed to instruct the trainee in manual oxygen cutting and flame gouging. The .following exercises shall be included in this group: a) The trainee sh'hll receive training in the handling and operation of hand-cutting blow pipe, in cutting plntcs and sections and in piercing holes in plates ; and

28

IS:1393-1961 b) The trainee shall receive training in the handling of flame-gouging blow pipe, in making grooves on plates, of welds and in rivet cutting. and operation in the removal

15.4.2 Check Test on Exercises in Sectioft II - Groz~f~ H - The trainee shall be required to make two test specimens conforming to the requirements stated in Table VII.

TABLE SPECIMEN No. 15 16

VII

SPECIMEN FOR SECTION

CHECK TEST ON II - GROUP H

EXERCISES

IN

DESCRIPTIOI\' OF BORIC A 75mm square to be cut in the centre of a plate of size 150 mm x 150 mm and 12 mm thick A fillet weld to be removed from a tee joint

15.4.3 The test specimens

are to be assessed

as under:

a) Mawal Cutting - The ability of the trainee to start the cut by piercing a hole and to make a reasonably clean cut following the profile as nearly as possible bearing in mind the limitations of manual oxygen cutting. ability b) Flame Gouging -The without damaging the plates. of the trainee to remove the weld

15.4.4 If the trainee successfully performs these two check tests ( see 15.4.2 ), he should be deemed to have qualified for manual oxygen cutting and flame gouging, initial qualification tests. 16..ASSESSMENT OF SECTIONS I AND CHECK II TEST WELDS welds, IN the factors given

16.0 In the assessment of the under 16.1 and 16.2 shall receive

check test consideration.

16.1 Inspection Before Fracture 16.1.1 Factor 1 - Dimensions of Weld Deposit -The dimensions The size of the weld shall be as specified weld shall be checked. may be slightly over but not under.

of the and it

16.1.2 Factor 2 -Shape of Proj;le - The profile of the weld is affected In the case of butt by the position of the joint, but it shall be uniform. and corner welds, the profile shall be slightly convex and in the case of fillet weld, it is usually slightly concave. 29

IS : 1393- 1961 16.1.3 Factor 3 - U~ciformity of Swface - The height and spacing of the ripples shall be uniform, these being indicative of the quality of workmanship. 16.1.4 Factor 4 - Degree of Undercut The weld joint shall be free from undercut rences may be disregarded. Undercutting is undesirable. but slight intermittent occur-

16.1.5 Factor 5 - Smoothness of Joints Where Welding is Recommended The joints in the weld run, where welding has been recommended, shall be as smooth as possible and shall show no pronounced hump or crater in the weld surface. 16.1.6 Factor 6 -Freedom from Surface Defects - The surface weld shall be free from porosity, cavities and burnt-on scale. of the

16.1.7 Factor 7 -Penetration Bead in Butt Welds-A slight penetration bead shall be present and it should be reasonably uniform in width and appearance. Occasional occurrences of lack of penetration bead may be disregarded. 16.2 Inspection of Etched Sections and Weld Fractures - Inspection of etched sections and weld fractures gives information concerning degree of fusion, degree of root penetration, gas cavities and quality of weld metal. 16.2.1 Factor 8 -Degree the whole area of the joint of Fusion surface. Fusion shall be complete over

16.2.2 Factor 9 - Degree of Root Pegzetration, Butt and Fillet Welds Defects are most likely to occur at the root of the weld and, in this position, they are liable to have the maximum effect in reducing the strength of the weld. A close examination of the root shall, therefore, be made. In butt welds, the penetration should extend to the underside of the plates producing a penetration bead of the right size. In fillet welds with good rapt penetration the weld metal should reach the corner.
NOTE 1 - In tube to tube branch joints, in a joint, fillets being at the crotches.

both butt and fillet welds will appear welding `technique,

NOTE 2 - In case of welding of cast iron by the braze the joint shall show satisfactory penetration and adhesion.

16.2.3 Factor 10 - Gas Cavities and Irzlusions - Unless they are caused by the use of unsuitable material, they are attributable to the quality of workmanship, the desired result being to achieve uniform appearance and freedom from cavities and flux entrapments ( where flux is used ). In fusion welding of mild steel, cast iron and aluminium where neutral flame is used, and in fusion welding of brass or braze welding of cast iron where oxidizing flame is used, incorrect welding technique may result in rough porous, discoloured and lustreless appearance in the fracture.
NOTE - In case of fusion welding or braze welding of cast iron, isolated blowholes or concentration of pinholes in the weld metal shall be regarded as grounds for rejection but isolated pinholes shall not be so regarded.

30

IS:139317. INSTRUCTION IN WELDING THEORY

1961

17.1 General - Each trainee shall receive training in subjects related to the theory of welding for at least 50 hours, that is 25 hours each for Sections I and II ( see 6.2 ). The instructor shall be responsible for seeing that each trainee acquires a satisfactory knowledge of the subjects covered in the course. The instruction, when possible, shal! be supplemented by films or other visual aids. 17.2 Safety in Welding - The instruction course shall be so designed as to make the trainee aware of the necessity for observing the safety precautions under the following three general headings: Protection of Person, that is, proper footwear, clothing, goggles with proper shade of lens, adequate ventilation, etc. Protection of Property, that is, safeguarding combustible material, protection from flying sparks and flame, availability of fire protection equipment, etc. Protection and Care of Equipment, that is, storage and handling of oxygen and acetylene cylinders, carbide and acetylene generator ( where low pressure system is used ), operation of pressure regulators, handling of blow pipe, care 0' hose and hose connections, welding tips, etc. 17.2.1 The instruction in safety shall he given before the trainee is permitted to use any welding equipment. A list of recommended rules of safety is given in Appendix G and should be used in this instruction. 17.2.2 welding Code of Welding For detailed instructions for safety and health requirements in and cutting operations, reference should be made to IS: 818-1957 Practice for Safety and Health Requirements in Electric and Gas and Cutting Operations.

17.3 Welding Equipment - Instructions in this subject shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the principles of blow pipe and regulator design and functional aspects, in fitting and dismantling eqmpment ( not stripping down into various components ), flame adjustment, care of equipment, etc. 17.4 Welding Techniques - Instructions in this subject shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the various welding techniques - forward, rightward or backward, all-position rightward, vertical and double operator vertical, flames to be used for welding various metals and alloys, selection of correct size of tips to be used, edge preparation, etc. 17.5 Welding Terms and Symbols - Instructions in these subjects shall be designed to acquaint the trainee with the more important terms relating to oxy-acetylene welding and the standard symbols used for detailing welds and weld sizes on drawings. The instructions in welding terms and symbols should be based on IS: 812-1957 and IS: 813-1956 respectively. 31

IS: 1393 - 1961 17.6 Welding Metallurgy - Steel Only ( With Special Reference to Sheet Metal Welding ) - Instructions in this subject shall bc designed to give the trainee an clcmcntary knowledge of the mctallurgicnl and thermal factors in the welding of steel, with particular rcfcrcncc to weiding of sheet m&al. 17.7 Welding Metallurgy - Cast Iron, Aluminium, Brass and Bronze - Instructions in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an elementary knowlcdgc of the metallurgical and thermal factors in the welding of these metals, their special welding techniques, limitations, postweld treatment, flux residue removal treatment, etc. iu this subject shall be 17.8 Welding of Castings - Instructions designed to give the trainee a knowledge on the tt,chniques of welding castings - ferrous and non-ferrous metals, the object and necessity for pre- and post-heating, methods of preparation of fracture, etc. 17.9 Hardfacing - Instructions in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an elementary knowledge of different types of hardfacing rods and their applications, preparation for hardfacing, etc. 17.10 Oxygen Cutting - Instructions in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an elementary knowledge of the principles of oxygen cutting, effects of different elcmcnts in steel on cutting, precautions to be taken in cutting alloy steels, etc. 17.11 Inspection and Testing of Welds - Instructions in this subject shall be designed to acquaint the trainee with the more common methods of weld inspection and testing, as applied to welds made both in the shop and in the field, and may be given in the form of a'discussion of the trainee's welds before and after testing. The instructor,shall point out such factors In the overall study of as may have caused defects in the specimen. this subject, destructive and non-destructive methods of testing shall be covered. 17.11.1 For inspection of welds, reference should *Is : 822Code of Practice for Inspection of iVelds. be made to

17.12 Characteristics of Filler Rods - Instructions in this subject shall be designed to familiarize the trainee with the different types of filler rods used in osy-acetylene welding. 17.13 Costing-Instructions in this subject shall include a study of elements of estimating material requirements and factors affecting welding cost. 17.14 Possibilities and Limitations of Welding - The trainee shall, through discussions and demonstrations, be given an appreciation of the limitations and possibilities of oxy-acetylene welding. __..~ ~.. ~__
*Under preparation.

32

18. GENERAL 18.1 These tests shall be of the following a) Initial qualification test, b) Annual c) Periodic test, and test. to show that the welder is familiar with Approval of welders for works of special special trade or approval tests. control three types:

18.2 These tests are designed the usual welding techniques. nature may demand additional 18.3 Annual as required.

tests and periodic control tests are to be done by the employers,

19. INITIAL

QVALIFICATION

TESTS

19.0 General-The initial qualification tests shall be conducted after the trainee has completed all the requirements prescribed in Part III of tests would comprise of eight tests. this code. The initial qualification The details of test pieces and test procedures for these tests shall be as given under 19.1 to 19.8. 19.1 Test No. 1 - Oxy-Acetylene Plate 3.15 mm Thick 19.1.1 Parent Metal -The code. parent Butt metal Welds in Mild Steel in the

shall

be as specified

19.1.2 Position - The test welds shall position as follows : Flat Vertical

be deposited 0" )

in the appropriate

( slope O", rotation ( slope 90" )

19.1.3 Assembly for Welding - The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 17. The joints shall be prepared as below: Edges Gap Square or single V ( included angle 80" and no root face ) but not more than Not less than half the plate thickness the plate thickness

The plate edges may be prepare d by shearing, machining, grinding or filing. Tack welds shaL ue on the side to be welded and in line of the weld. No other method of restraint shall be used. Distortion or misalignment caused by tacking may be corrected before the test weld is deposited. The test piece shall be supported in such a manner that contact with the bench or other material does not provide a backing for joint. 33

IS: 1393 - 1961
f MAX

*Weld

to be stopped and restarted within central SO mm of run. _\ll dimensions in millimetres. OXY-ACETYLENE BUTT WELDS IN MILD STEEL PLATE 3.15 mm THICK

FIG. 17

34

IS: 1393 - 1961 19.1.4 F&Y Rod-The filler rod used shall be 3.15 mm in diameter, but for welding in vertical position lesser diameter rod but not less than 1.60 mm in diameter may be used. The type of filler rod as stipulated in the code shall be used. 19.1.5 De$ositing the Test Weld - The test weld shall be 225 mm long as shown in Fig. 17. The weld shall be deposited in a single run using the appropriate method as follows:
POSITION METHOD

Flat Vertical

Forward Forward ( Vertical upward )

The weld shall be stopped and started within the central 50 mm of the run. A sealing run on the reverse side is not permitted, so that the degree of root penetration can be subsequently examined. 19.1.6 Assessment weld shall be visually examined 19.1.6.1 Visual examination -The for dimension of deposit, shape of profile, uniformity of surface, degree of undercut, smoothness of joints, freedom from surface defects, penetration, etc, as under 16.1. 19.1.6.2 Destrwtive tests - The test specimen shall be cut out by machining or sawing as indicated in Fig. 17 and tested as under: a) Etch test - One of the cut surfaces of the test specimen shall be prepared and etched and then visually examined as under 16.1 and 16.2 ( for etch test method see Appendix H ). b) Bend test - The top and underside of the two bend test specimens shall be dressed flush. When bent through 180" over a former thrice the thickness of the sheet that is 10 mm, each specimen shall show no crack or defect attributable to defective workmanship. i Slight cracking at the ends of the weld metal occuning during bending may be disregarded. One specimen shall be tested with the face and the other with the root in tension. c) Nick break test - The test specimen shall be notched as indicated in Fig. 17, broken open along the weld and the fractured surface visually examined as under 16.2. 19.2 Test No. 2 Oxy-Acetylene Tee Fillet Weld in Mild Steel Sheet 1.60 mm Thick 19.2.1 Parent Metat - The parent metal shall be as specified in the code. 19.2.2 Positisff - The test welds shall be deposited in the appropriate position as follows: ( slope O", rotation 45" ) Horizontal-vertical Vertical ( slope 90" ) 35

IS: 1393- 1961 19.2.3 Assembly for Weldiq - The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 18. 1Tack welds shall be on the side to be welded and in line of the weld. No other method of restraint shall be used. Distortion or misalignment caused by tacking may be corrected before the test weld is deposited.

7
7,
JJ
--_I

150 :ROOVE ALONG WELO FORMED BY SAWING, imm DEEP /

4

II

I-

1.60

*Weld

to be stopped

and restarted within central 50 mm of run. All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 18

OXY-ACETYLENE TEE FILLETWELD IN MILD STEELSHEET 1.60 mm THICK

19.2.4 Filler Rod-The and of the type stipulated

filler rod used shall be 1.60 mm in diameter in the code. shall be between as follows:

19.2.5 De$osition of the Test Weld-The test weld 4 mm and 5 mm in size, using the appropriate method POSITION METHOD Horizontal-vertical Vertical The weld shall be stopped and the test piece.

Forward Forward ( Vertical upward ) restarted within the central 50 mm of

36

IS: 1393 - 196; 19.2.6 Assessment 19.2.6.1 Visual examination - The weld shall be visually examined for dimension of deposit, shape of profile, uniformity of surface, degree of undercut, smoothness of joint, freedom from surface defects, etc, as under 16.1. 19.2.6.2 Destructive test-The test piece shall be cut out by machining or sawing as indicated in the figure and tested as under: of the cut surfaces of the test specimen shall a! Etch test -One be prepared and etched and then visually examined as under 16.1 and 16.2 for etch test method, ( see Appendix H ). b) Nick break test - The test specimen shall be notched by saw-. cuts, as indicated in Fig. 18. The test piece shall then be fractured bv bending to and fro until fracture occurs, when it shall be examined as under 16.2. 19.3 Test No. Sheet 1.60 mm 3 Oxy-Acetylene Thick The parent Corner metal Weld in Mild Steel

19.3.1 Pavent Metnlcode. 19.3.2 Position-The position as follows :

shall be as specified in the

test welds shall be deposited in the appropriate (slope O", rotation ( slope 90" ) 0" )

Flat Vertical

19.3.3 Assewbly for Welding -The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 19. Tack welds, if used, shall be on the side to be weld: ed and in line of the weld. No method of restraint shall be used. Distortion or misalignment caused by tacking may be corrected before the test weld is deposited. 19.3.4 Filler Rod-The filler rod used shall be 1.60 mm in diameter and of the type stipulated in the code. 19.3.5 Defiosition of Test Weld - The test weld shall be deposited using the appropriate method as follows:
POSITION &kTHOD

Flat Vertical The weld shall be stopped of the test piece. 19.3.6 Assessment and

Forward Forward ( Vertical restarted

upward ) 50 mm

within the central

19.3.6.1 Visual examination - The weld shall be visually examined for dimension of deposit, shape of profile, uniformity of surface, degree 37

IS: 1393- 1961

150 f *

r
within central 50 mm of run. All dimensions in millimetres. IN MILD STEEL SHEET CORNER WELD

.

DISCARD

DESTRUCTIVE TESTS SPECIMEN

DISCARD

*Weld to be stopped and restarted subjected to destructive test.

This piece to be

FIG. 19

OXY-ACETYLENE

l-60

mm THICK

of undercut, smoothness of joints, freedom from surface defects, penetral tion etc, as under 16.1. 19.3.6.2 Destructive tests -The test specimen shall be cut out by machining or sawing as indicated in Fig. 19 and tested as under: Etch test -One of the cut surfaces of the test specimen shall be prepared and etched and then visually examined as under 16.1 and 16.2.

IS : 1393 - 1961 19.4 Teat No. 4 Oxy- Acetylene Fillet Weld Branch Joints in Mild Steel Tube, Wall Thickness Up to l-60 mm and Outside Diameter Up to 60 mm parent metal shall be as specified in the 19.4.1Parent Metal -The code. 1-9.4.2 Position-The test piece may be moved into any position at the option of the trainee or the welder. 19.4.3 Assembly for Welding-The test piece shall be made of tubes shown in Fig. 20. The ends of the tubes at the joints shall be prepared to fit closely on outside diameter of the main tube. The tubes shall be tack welded together or held in a suitable jig.
I_------150. .

25 r--i-----

t

WELD SIZE TO BE MEASURED AT THE CROTCH> ------I

I
1*6oJ
I CUT>

SAW

SECTION

FOR ETCHING DETAIL OF WELD SIZE All dimensions in millimetres. FILLET WELD BRANCH JOINTS IN MILD 1.60mm AND OUTSIDE DIAMETER UPTO

Jh.

20 OXY-ACETYLENE WALLTHICKNESSUPTO

STEEL 60mm

TUBE,

19.4.4Filler Rod-The filler rod used shall be l-60 mm in diameter and of the type stipulated in the code. 19.4.5 De$osition of Test Welds-The test welds shall be between 2.5 mm and 4 mm size at the crotches of the right angle joints and shall be deposited using the forward method. 39

IS: 1393 - 1961 19.4.6 Assessment 19.4.6.1 Visual examination - The weld shall be visually examined for dimension of deposit, shape of profile, uniformity of surface, degree of undercut, smoothness of joints, freedom from surface defects, etc, as under 16.1. 19.4.6.2 Destrdive test - The test ,piece shall be cut out by machining or sawing as shown in Fig. 20 and the cut faces shall be prepared and etched and then visually examined as under 16.1 and 16.2. 19.5 Test No. 5 Oxy-Acetylene Butt Welds Sheet ( SIA, SlB or SLC ) 3.15 mm Thick 19.5.1 Pared code. Metal-The parent metal in Pure Aluminium

shall be as specified in the

19.5.2 Position ( slope O", rotation

The test welds shall be deposited in the flat position 0" ).

19.5.3 Assembly for Welding-The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 21. The plate edges may be prepared by shearing, machining or filing. The tack welds shall be on the side to be welded in the line of the weld. No other method of restraint shall be used. Distortion or misalignment caused by tacking may be corrected Fefore the The test piece shall be supported in such a mantest weld is deposited. ner that contact with the bench or other material does not provide as. backing for the joint. 19.5.4 Filler Red -The filler rod used shall be 3.15 mm in diameter and of the type as specified in the code.
NOTE Suitable flux should be used.

19.5.5 Defiosition of Test Weld -The test weld shall be 225 mm long as shown in Fig. 21. The weld shall be deposited in a single run using the forward method in the flat position. The weld shall be stopped and restarted within the central 50 mm of the run. A sealing run on the reverse side is not permitted, so that the degree of root penetration can be subsequently examined. 19.5.6 Assessment 19.5.6.1 Visual examination -The weld shall be visually examined for dimension of a deposit, shape of profile, uniformity of surface, degree of undercut, smoothness of joints, freedom from surface defects, penetration, etc, as under 16.1. 19.5.6.2 Destructive tests-The test specimen shall be cut out by machining as indicated in Fig. 21 and tested as under: a) Etch test - One of the cut surfaces of the test specimen shall be prepared and etched and then visually examined as under 16.1 and 16.2.

40

IS: 1393 - 1961 b) Ben test - The top and underside of the two bend test specimens shal P be dressed flush. When bent through 180" over a former thrice the thickness of the sheet, each specimen shall show no Slight crack or defect attributable to defective workmanship. cracking at the ends of the weld metal occurring during bending may be disregarded. One specimen shall be tested with the face and the other with the root in tensicin.
C) Nick

break test - The test specimen shall be notched as indicated in Fig. 21, broken open along the weld and the fractured surface visually examined as under 16.2.

19.6 Test No. 6 Oxy-Acetylene Thick 19.6.1 Parent code.
Metal -The

Butt parent

Welds

in Brass

Sheet

3.15 mm

metal shall be as specified in the

19.6.2 Position-The test welds shall be deposited in the flat position ( slope O", rotation 0" ). 19,6.3 Assembly. for Welding-The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 21. The plate edges may be prepared by shearing, machining or filing. The tack welds shall be on the side to be welded in the line of the weld. No other method af restraint shall be used. Distortion or misalignment caused by tacking may be corrected before the test weld is deposited. The test piece shall be supported in such a manner that contact with the bench or other material does not provide a backing for the joint. 19.6.4 Filler Rod-The filler rod used shall be 3.15 .mm in diameter and of the type as specified in the code.
NOTE

-Suitable

flux should

be used.

19.6.5 Defiositiolz of Test Weld-The test weld shall be 225 mm long as shown in Fig. 21. The weld shall be deposited in a single run using the forward method in flat position. The weld shall be stopped and started within the central 50 mm of the run. A sealing run on the reverse side is not permitted, so that the degree of root penetration can be subsequently examined. 19.6.6 Assessment
19.6.6.1 Visual examination - The weld shall be visually examined for dimension of deposit, shape of profile, uniformity of surface, degree of undercut, smoothness of joints, freedom from surface defects, penetration, etc, as under 16.1.

41

IS:1393-1961
MAX

I
I

NICK BREA f

DISCARD

E

IS -f
I
SAW CUT TO FULL DEPTH ff REHFORCEMENTJ_ II +

f" -f

t
run. *Weld to be stopped and restarted within central 50 mm of 1 A4lldimensions in millimetres. FIG . 21 OXY-ACETYLENE BUTT WELDS IN PURE ALUMINIUM BRASS SHEETS 3.15 mm THICK

AND

42

IS: 1393- 1961 19.6.6.2Destructive tests -The test specimen shall be cut out by machining as indicated in Fig. 21 and tested as under: a) Etch test - One of the cut surfaces of the test specimen shall be prepared and etched and then visually examined as under 16.1 and 16.2. b) ,!&la test.- The top and underside of the two bend test specimens shall be dressed flush. When bent through 180" over a former thrice the thickness of the sheet, each specimen shall show no crack or defect attributable to defective workmanship. Slight cracking at the ends of the weld metal occurring during bending may be disregarded. One specimen shall be tested with the face and the other with the root tension. c) .Vick break test - The test specimen shall be notched as indicated in Fig. 21, broken open along the weld and the fractured surface visually examined as under 16.2. 19.7 Test No. 7 Oxy-Acetylene Fusion Butt Weld in Cast Iron Plate 12 mm Thick 19.7.1 Parent Metal -- The parent metal shall be as specified in the code. 19.7.2 Position -The rotation 0" ) only. test piece shall be in flat position ( slope O",

19.7.3 Assembly for Welding-The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 22. The edge may be prepared by machining or grinding or cast plates with prepared edges may be used. Tack welds, if used, shall be on the side to be welded and in the line of the weld. No other form of restraint shall be used. The test piece shall be supported in such a manner that contact with the bench or other-material does not provide a backing for the joint. Pre-heating the plates prior to welding with the blow pipe shall be permitted. 19.7.4 Filler Rod -The filler rod shall be 6 mm in diameter and of the type specified in the code.
NOTE -

A suitable

Aux shall be used.

19.7.5 Deposition of Test Weld -The deposit shall be 150 mm in length as shown in Fig. 22, using forward method. 19.7.6 Assessment 19.7.6.1 Visual examination - The weld shall be visually examined for dimension of deposit, shape of profile, degree of undercut, freedom from surface defects, penetration, etc, as under 16.1. 19.7.6.2 Destructive test - The test specimen shall be cut by machining as indicated in Fig. 22 and tested as under: Nick hreak test -The test specimen shall be notched as indicated in Fig. 22, broken open along the weld and the fractured surface visually examined for hard spots and as under 16.2. 43

IS: 1393 - 1961

-501i-50D I S

c

I

R

D

DESTRU

:T

IV

E

TEST

s

P

E

c

I

M

E

N

D

I

S

c

I

R

D

;_09Jf=
GAP
FIG. 22 OXY-ACETYLENE

1 MIN 1.5 MAX
12 mm THICK

hll dimensions in millimetres. PUSION BUTT \VELD IX CAST IRON PLATE

19.8 Test No. 8 Oxy-Acetylene Braze-Butt Welds in Cast Iron Plate 12 mm Thick 19.8.1 Parent Metal - The parent metal shall be as specified in the code. 19.8.2 Position -The test weld shall be deposited in the appropriate position : Flat ( slope 0�, rotation 0" ) Vertical ( slope 90; ) upward method 44

IS: 1393 - 1961 19.8.3 Assembly .fw IVelding - The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 23. The edges may be prepared by machining or cast plates with prepared edges may be used. Surface oxide may be removed by filing, machining, chiselling, shotblasting, etc. A ground finish is not recommended. 19.8.4 Filler Rod -The filler rod shall be 6 mm in diameter and of the type specified in the code. Nr~0,l.r: - A suitable fur shall be usvtl. ' 19.8.5 Deposition of Test Weld - The deposit shall be 150 mm in length as shown in Fig. 23, using forward method. 19.8.6 Assessment
19.8.6.1 Visual examination - The weld shall be visually examined for dimension of deposit, shape of profile, degree of undercut, freedom from surface defects, penetration, etc, as under 16.1.

19.8.6.2 Destructive test - The test specimens shall be cut by mnchining as indicated in Fig. 23 and the cut face shall be prepared and polished. The joint shall show satisfactory penetration, adhesion and freedom from porosity in all sections examined. 20. RE-TEST FOR INITIAL QUALIFICATION TEST

20.1 In case a trainee fails to meet the requirements of one or more tests mentioned under 19.1 to 19.8, a re-test may be allowed immediately or after some further training on the following conditions: a) An immediate re-test shall consist of two test welds of each type in which the trainee failed. The re-test welds shall meet all the requirements specified for such welds. b) If the re-t&t is`made after the trainee has had further training or practice, the complete initial qualification test shall be repeated. 20.2 Validity of Initial Qualification Test Certificates

20.2.1 The certification implied in passing of the initial qualification test is valid only when the holder is employed as a welder within six months of the passing of the- test. The certification shall lapse automatically if, for any reason, he has not worked as a welder for a period of six months or more. Such lapsed certification shall be re-instated provided annual tests specified under 19 are passed. 21. ANNUAL TESTS 21.1 General -The annual tests to be taken by a welder, and the results of which are to be entered on his record book ( see 7 ), shall comprise of making test pieces and testing procedure as given under 19.1 to 19.8. 45

IS: 1393 - 1961 c50 --*
c-5 0 ----a

D

I

S

C

R

D

7
50

DESTRU

: T

I

TEST

150
S P E C I M E N

$
50 /50 1

D

I

S

C

R

D

~+$r2--&
GAP
All dimensions FIG.~~ in millimetres.

1 MIN l-5 MAX

OXY-ACETYLENE BRAZE-BUTT WELDS IN CAST IRONPLATE 12 mm THICK

46

IS: 1393 - 1961 22. PERIODIC CONTROL TEST

22.1 The periodic control test consists of making butt welds and testing these as per initial qualification test and should be done at regular intervals of six months. Welders engaged continually on work that is subject to examination by some non-destructive testing method, such as radiographic, need not be subjected to the periodic control test. The preparation of test piece and testing procedure for the periodic control test shall be same as those prescribed for the initial qualification test. 23. RE-TESTS CONTROL FOR ANNUAL TEST TEST AND PERIODIC

23.1 Re-Tests for Annual Test - If the welder fails in the annual test, although periodic control tests have not shown any specific reason to question his ability, he shall be re-tested immediately. The re-test shall consist of two test welds of each type on which he fails. The test welds shall meet all the requirements specified for such welds. If the trainee fails in such a re-test, he shall be employed on unimportant work for some period and then resubmitted to the initial qualification test. 23.2 Re-Tests for Periodic Control Test - If the results of the periodic control tests indicate that there is some reason to question the welder's ability, then he shall be submitted to the tests prescribed for the annual test. If he fails in this test, he shall be put on unimportant work for a period and then resubmitted to the initial qualification test. The welder shall not be permitted to re-start on important work until he has passed the annual test or the initial qualification test, as the case may be. 24. POSITION FOR-TEST WELDS

34.1 In the initial qualification test, the annual test and the periodic I control test, the position for the test welds would depend on the welding positions for which the trainee or welder is to be certified or passed. The minimum reauirements of test welds shall be as given in Table VIII under Appendix k. 24.2 The entries made in the Record Book ( see 7 ) shall have a reference to the welding positions for which the tests have been conducted and passed.

47

IS: 1393 - 1961

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.2 )
RECOMMENDED

A
BOOK

FORM FOR RECORD ( Page 1 of Book )

( h'ame of Training (City). (State) This Record Book certifies that

Establishme+lt ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~. . . . . . . . (Full name of trainee )

whose signature pleted

and

identification

are shown welding

on the

reverse,

has comStanWelders therein.

a course of osy-acetylene

and cutting

to the Indian

dard Code of Practice for Training and Testing of Oxy-Acetylene ( IS : 1393-1961 ) and has fulfilled all the requirements prescribed

The duration of the course and the details of the tests which the trainee has successfully passed are stated on the reverse.

(Signature

of `Training Oficer )

Establishment

Official Seal of Training Establishment

( Designation of Oficer )

( Date of Issue )

48

IS:1395- 1961 ( Page 2 of Book )

Title

ot Course

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Duration of Course: Total hours Hours of actual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . welding practice . . . . . Photograph Trainee of -

Hours of observation of welding, preparing plates for welding, testing specimens, etc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hours of instruction in theory . . . . . .

Visible

Identification

Marks

I

l).................... 2).................... Tests in which the Trainee DESCRIPTION OF WELDS has passed the Initial DATE TE Scctio+t I Butt Steel Fillet Steel Mild 3.15 mm Mild 1.60 mm Flat Vertical (upward ) ( Signature Qualification REMARKS of Trainee ) Test *TESTS NOT TAKEN

POSITION OF WELDING

Horizontal-vertical Vertical ( upward ) Flat Vertical

Corner Mild Steel 1.60 mm Mild Steel Tube up to 1 a60 mrr wall thickness

( upward)

Flat All-position

*A punch mark in this column is an indication that the traine5 did not take ( or hc failrtl to pass) th? test in the relevant position.
( Continued )

49

IS : 1393 - 1961 (Page 2 of Book) Contd

DESCRIPTION OF WELDS.

POSITION OF WELDING

DATE OF TEST

REMARKS *TESTS NOT TAKEN

Section II Cast-Iron Fusion Welding Cast-Iron Braze Welding Brass-Butt 3.15 mm AluminiumButt-3.15 mm . Oxygen Cutting Flame Gouging *A punch mark in this coh~mn is an indication that the trainee did not take ( or he failed to pass) the test in the relevant position. Flat

Flat Vertical ( upward method ) Flat Flat .

50

IS : 1393 - 1961 ( Pages Record DESCRIPTION OF WELDS 3 to 12 of Book ) of Annual Tests DATE OF TEST REMARKS *TESTS NOT TAKEN

POSITION OF WELDING I Flat Vertical ( upward ) Horizontal-vertical Vertical ( upward ) Flat Vertical ( Upward ) Flat All-position

Secti098 I Butt - Mild Steel 3.15 mm Fillet - Mild Steel 1.60 mm Corner - Mild Steel 1.60 mm Mild Steel Tub; up to 1.60 mm wall thickness

e, % Z Z!

s
E 9 c 2 $

section II
Cast-Iron Fusion Welding Cast-Iron Welding Grass-Butt 3.15 mm Braze Flat

Flat Vertical ( upward method Flat PIat

)

-

AluminiumButt - 3.15 mm Osygcn Cutting Plamc Gouging __ ~~~..~~~ ~~~.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51

( Date of Issue )

IS : 1393 - 1961 ( Pages 13 to 16 of Book)
Record Description of Test of Periodic Tests altd S#ecial Tests Taken

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............................

Remarks

about

passing

of Test

...................... ......................
Official Seal of Office or Factory ( Signatztve of
(@cev )

t
( Particulars of Shop or Factory conducting Test)

( Designatio~t of Ojicer ) ( Date of Issue )

................... ...................

APPENDIX (Clause 82)
RECOMMENDED B-l. DESIGN

B

OF POSITIONING

EQUIPMENT

INTRODUCTION

B-l.1 The positioning equipment is designed to hold and position plates The while the trainee is busy in performing welding exercises and tests. purpose of such equipment is to.providc'.a convenient method for holding any kind of joint ( butt joint, lap joint, tee joint or corner joint) so that it may be welded in the flat, horizontal, vertical or overhead position.
B-l.2 The plates shall be tack welded it in the positioning equipment. B-l.3 This appendis device and illustrates describes the its application. to form the specimen general features of the before f&g

positioning

B-l.4 The equipment can bc readily constructed shop and welding shop. One should be provided B-2. DESCRIPTION OF EQUIPMENT

in the average machine for each welding booth.

including all jigs and B-2.1 One type of complete positionin,, c~ cquipmcnt, listures, is illustrated ii: Fig. 24 and the details are a5 shown. 52

1s : 1393- 1961

I

P+
-t

d
3

SET

UP FOR

FOR 90"

HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL WELDING DIRECTION TURN IN THE SHOWN

WELC'lNk THRCUGH

VERTICAL

Q\

2

9

1

I

SET

UP

FOR

FLAT

AND

OVERHEAD

WELDINO

1. Working table 2. Column 3. Screw for fixing the sliding portion of column FIG. 24

4. Sliding portion of column 5. Horizontal arm 6. Screws for fixing the horizontal arm
ILLUSTRATION OF ALL POSITION

7. Plate holder 8. Screw to hold the specimen 9. Specimen
JIG

53

IS:1393 - 1961 B-2.2 Figures 25A to 25D illustrate the orientation of plates for butt welding in the flat, horizontal-vertical, vertical and overhead positions. The vientation of plates for fillet welding in the flat, horizontal, vertical, vertical and overhead positions, is illustrated in Fig. 26A to 26D.

AXIS OF WELD HORIZONTAL-,

PLATES IiORIZONTAL

\(

AXIS OF WELD HORIZONTAL

25A Position of Plates for Flat Butt Weld

2SB Position of Plates for Horizontal-Vertical . Butt Weld

Y-

AXIS OF WELD VERTICAL

AXIS OF WELD HORIZONTAL

25C Position of Plates for Vertical Butt Weld

25D Position of Plates for Overhead Butt Weld

FIG. 25

POSITIONS

OF

PLhms FOR BUTT WELDS

54

IS: 1393 - 1961

26A Position of Plates for Flat Fillet Weld

26R Position of Plates for Horizontal-Vertical Fillet Weld

26C Position of Plates for Vertidal Fillet Weld FIG. 26

26D Position of Plates for Overhead Fillet Weld FOR FILLET WELDS

POSITION OF PLATES

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.3 )

C

ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT RECOMMENDED FOR TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT WELDERS C-l. SHOP MACHINES AND ACCESSORIES the

FOR

C-l.1 The training establishment shall be provided with shop and necessary equipment: a) Heavy work bench with machinist's or blacksmith's 30 kg or more ; 55

follo\+ing

vice weighing

IS: 1393 - 1961 b) Plate shear for preparing specimens ; c) Two-ended wheels and plates with for welding 25 ~3 with cm and for cutting test

pedestal grinder wheel dresser ;

( or larger ) course capacity )

d) Heavy power hack-saw ( preferably or horizontal metal band saw; e) Portable f) Equipment or flexible shaft grinder; for machining

25 cm width

test specimens; jack of 8 metric hydraulic jack tonnes or larger tonnes

g) Bend test device capacity ; h) Break or rupture or larger capacity; j) Fire extinguishers, buckets,

with hydraulic device with

of 8 metric

chemical

( non-foam

type ) ;

k) 4 4

Fire Sand Scrap

water;
x

bags for fire protection; box, 90 x 60 30 cm;

for progress chart, instructional charts and notices; P) Chart-board q) Small platform scales for weighing out filler rods ( optional ) ;

r ) First aid kit;
for sterilizing welding goggles, if there s) Provision these being used by more than one trainee; is likelihood of t) Anvil, 45 kg or heavier; u) Display board for sample specimens of welding exercises; and tank ( a minimum of one tank between two v) Hot metal quenching trainees ). C-2. SMALL TOOLS AND the ACCESSORIES equipment should be available to

C-2.1 While welding, each trainee : a) Sledge hammer b) Ball peen c) d) e) f) C-clamps, Cold chisels, Centre punches, Scribers,

following

for rupturing

check test specimens,

hammer,

g) Metal rules, h) Try squares, 56

IS: 1393 - 1961 j) Sets of metal k) Small steel m) Medium n) Soapstone C-3. marking wedges, edges of test specimens, and marking crayon. FOR EACH shall TRAINEE be supplied with the following heads suitsteel stamps ( letters and figures 5 mm ),

coarse files for rounding

REQUIREMENTS WHILE WELDING welding,

C-3.1 While equipment:

each trainee

4

Oxyacetylene welding blow pipe with tips or welding able for welding 1.6 mm to 12 mm thick mild steel, ( where acetylene of suitable of suitable oxygen acetylene from cylinder host with

b) Oxygen regulator, 4 Xcetylene regulator 4 About 5-m length
hose clips.

is used ), and and

connections

4

About 5-m length hose clips,

hose with connections

f) Spark lighter, !a Pair of short pick up tongs or heavy W Goggles with suitable coloured filter j) Safety goggles for use while grinding k) Wire scratch brush, and
m) Leather
gloves or gauntlets C-3.2 In addition per 6 to 10 trainees, a) Osy-acetylene lator, hoses, b) Osy-acetylene lator, hoses, C-4. EQUIPMENT INSTRUCTORS

gas pipe pliers, lens and clear cover glass, specimens, ).

( if necessary

to the above, the following equipment, one set each shall be provided: cutting blow pipe with oxygen and acetylene reguetc, gouging blow pipe with oxygen and acetylene reguetc. FOR TRAINEE OBSERVERS WHILE OBSERVING shall and AND be supplied clear cover with glass,

C-4.1 \Vhilc welding, each instructor and trainee the following equipment : a) C;oggles with suitable coloured filter lens an tl b) \Vcltl gauges.
SOTE

found

ITacihtics for showing to be of assistance.

motion

pictures,

filmstrips

and slides have been

57

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS: 1393 - 1961

APPENDIX ( Clause 9.2 )
RECOMMENDED FORM OF TRAINEE

D

PROGRESS

CHART

;
! I

s

Cl -

c2

c3

~

c+

cs

(`6

c7

a, ~

b

-,_

:

------------,-~

I

-

_,_~

i

--

-,_

-

)i! -- 1 -,-/.,-

/ -`_

~ -/----

_I___

_,___

--

_

---_

-

---~-----__,_

I

--_

.-

_

.-

-I-

_I_

-

- -`-

_i

il

111

I
-

i i

i
I

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 1393 - 1961

APPENDIX ( Clause 10.1)
RECOMMENDED ( Based Details SYLLABUS on 40 working

E

FOR TRAINING hours per week ) Position

COURSE

of Course

Hours of Instructiolz 10

1st Week

Theory Welding and cutting ment safety in welding Demonstrations, Films cussions equip-

-

and Dissetset-

-

8

Fitting up the equipment, ting gas pressures, flame ting, etc Practical

-

22

Fitting up the equipment, setting gas pressures, flame setting, running beads with and without filler rods Butt welds in 1.60 mm mild steel plates 2nd \Veek Theory Welding techniques Welding metallurgy - mild steel ( sheet metal ) Welding terms and symbols Demonstrations, Films cussions Practical Butt steel Butt steel Butt steel welds in 1.60 mm sheets welds in 1.60 mm sheets welds in 3.15 mm sheets 61 mild and Dis-

Flat Flat 6

Flat

9 25

mild Vertical mild Flat

IS: 1393 - 1961
RECOMMENDED SYLLABUS FOR TRAINING COURSE Contd

Details

of Course

Position -

Hours of Ijzstruction 1

3rd Week

Theory

Characteristics of filler rods Possibilities and limitation welding
Demonstrations, cussions Practical Films and

of
Dis-

11 Vertical Flat Vertical 5 25

Butt welds in 3.15 mm mild steel sheets Corner welds in 1.60 mm mild steel sheets Corner welds in 1.60 mm mild steel sheets 4th Week Theory Inspection Costing and testing
Films

of welds
alzd Dis-

Demonstrations, cussions Practical

-

7 28

Butt welds in mild steel 1.60 mm wall thickness Welds of branch connections Plate to tube welds 5th Week
Theory

tube Flat Flat and Horizontalvertical .9

>

Weld metallurgy - cast iron, aluminium, brass and bronze
Demojzstrations, CUSstOnS Practical Films and Dis-

Flat Flat Flat Flat

5 26

Butt welds in 1.60 mm aluminium sheet Butt welds in 3.15 mm aluminium sheet Butt welds in 1.60 mm brass sheet Butt welds in 3.15 mm brass sheet 62

IS: 1393 - 1961
RECOMMENDED SYLLABUS FOR TRAININC COURSE -~ Ccl/rfd

llcluils 6th Week Theory

of C:oursP

l'osilio~a -

llows of Instructioff 8

Welding of castings Demonstrations, cussions Practical Fusion butt welds in cast iron Braze-butt welds in cast iron
7th Week

Films

L&

DisFlat Flat 3 2 30

Theory Hardfacing Demonstrations, cussions Practical Braze-butt Hardfacing welds in cast iron Films and Dis-

Vertical -

15 22

8th Week

Theory
Oxygen cussions

5

cutting Films and Dis13 22

Demonstrations, Practical

Manual oxygen cutting Flame gouging

APPENDIX ( Clause
DETAILED

F

13.1.4 and -Appendix E )
COVERING EACH OF EXERCISES SECTION AND

SUGGESTIONS GROUP

F-l.

GENERAL

F-l.1 In the suggested list of exercises (see F-2.1 and Table VII1 ), no specific recommendations are made as to the number of times each exerThe trainee should be required to perform each cise should be repeated. 63

IS: 1393 - 1961 exercise to the satisfaction of the instructor, vance to the next exercise. before being allowed to ad-

F-l.2 It is recommended that the trainee should test as many of his welds as possible as soon as these have been cooled in still air. Further, the instructor should inspect the test weld and point out to the trainee any defects that may be in evidence and the reason for such defect or The techniques of testing shall be as prescribed for failure of the joint. the check tests. F-l.3 It is recommended that the size of the specimens, the various illustrations, be maintained. F-l.4 It is recommended fore welding. as indicated in

that the pieces be set up and tack welded be-

F-l.5 To suit specific welding training requirements, special outlines may be made from among the suggested exercises given in Table VIII. F-2. F-2.1 EXERCISES Exercises suggested in Sections I and II are given in Table VIII.

64

TABLE (Clauses Ex&RCISE No. (?) Sectidn I Al A2 UNIT OPERATION (2) PARENT METAL (3)

VIII

EXERCISES

F-1.5 und F-2.1

)
FLAXE (6) INSTRUCTIONS (7)

FILLER ROD r--------v Size *Type (4) (5)

Grou$ A
of equip-

Fitting ment

-

-

-

Neutral-oxidizing and carburizing Neutral

Lighting and adjusting flame

A3

Depositing continuous bead with or weld without filler rod

Mild steel sheet 1.60 mm

9.1 or 9.2

1.60 mm

Practisc fitting up the equipment, adjusting gas pressures, testing for leaks Practise the adjustment of flame to carburizing, neutral and oxidizing, noting the difference in the flame appearance and melt condition Practise depositing continuous beads from left to right ( forward method ), ensuring that the bead welds are uniformly straight, have even build up, and are free from under-cutting and oxidation or burning

Section I Bl

Group B, Mild steel sheet 1.60 mm 9.1 or 9.2 1.60 mm Neutral Practise making butt welds by the forward technique; ensure making correct tacks, alignment. Try and obtain full fusion, feed rod uniformly in the weld pool to avoid undercutting and to ensure full build-up. Stop the weld in the centre and start again. Try to obtain a smooth joint ( ContillzrPd

Making butt welds in flat position

*Clause reference

of IS

: 1278-1958.

)

TABLE EXERCISE
NO.

VIII

EXERCISES

-- Co&d FLAME INSTRUCTIONS

z ..

UNIT OPERATION

PARENT

METAL (3)

(1)
Section

(2)
I Group B ( Co~fd)

FILLER ROD ___--L--__ Size *Type (4)

B2 B3 B4

Making butt welds in vertical position Making butt welds in flat position Making check test specimen No. 1

Mild steel sheet 1.60 G% steel sheet 3.15 mm IMild steel sheet 1.60 mm

9.1 or 9.2 9.1 Or 9.2 9.1 or 9.2

1.60 mm 3.15 mm 1.60 mm

Reeutral Neutral Neutral

Same as in BI Same as in BI Weld the joint (see Fig. 6 ) in a single run in flat position. Stop the weld and restart within central 50 mm of run. Test the specimen by rupturing and etching (see 16 for test results required ) Weld the joint ( SEB Fig. 6 ) in a single run in vertical position upward method. Stop the weld and restart within central 50 mm of run. Test the specimen by rupturing and etching ( .WP 16 for test results required ) Weld the joint ( seeFig. 6) in a single run in flat position. Stop the weld and restart within central 50 mm of run. Test the specimen by rupturing and etching (see 16 for test results required )

B5

Making check test specimen No. 2

Mild steel sheet 1.60 mm

9.1 or 9.2

1.60 mm

Neutral

B6

Making check test specimen No. 3

Mild sheet mm

steel 3.15

9.1 or 9.2

3.15 mm

Neutral

*Clause reference

of 1.S : 12781958. ( Contin?,ra
)

TABLE
YNIT
OPERATION

VIII

EXERCISES

-

Co~td
I~LAME

I'ARENT

1\IETAL

FILLER Ho0 r----h--_--_

(2)

(3)

*Type (4)

Size

.
(6)

(5)

(71

Cl c2 C3 0 < c4 C5

.\laking butt we!ds in vertical position c"rller l\Iaking welds in flat positloll l\Iaking c"r*ler vclds in vertical position ?&king tillct welds in horizontalverfical position JIaking check test specimen So. 4

hIild steel sheet 3.15 h?l~ steel sheet 1.60 Mild steel sheet 1.60 sheet 1.60 mm hlild steel sheet 3.15 mm
mm

9.1 or 9.2 9.1 or 9.2 9.1 or 9.2 9.1 or 9.2 9.1 or 9.2

3.15 mm and 1.60 mm 1.60 mm 1.60 mm 1.60 mm 250
Or

Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral

Same as in Bl Same as in Bl Same as in Bl Same as in Bl Weld the joint (see Fig. 6 ) in a single run in vertical position upward method. Stop the weld and restart within central 50 mm of run. Test the specimen by rupturing and etching ( see16 for test results required ) Weld the joint ( SEE Fig. 7 ) in a single run in flat position. stop the weld and restart within central 50 mm of run. Test the specimen by rupturing and etching ( sre 16 for test results required )

hEZ steel

mm

mm 1.60

C6

.\Ialiing check test specimen No. 5

Mild steel sheet 1.60 mm

9.1 or 9.2

1.60 mm

Neutral

t; L :

I z z

::Clausc reference

of IS: 127g-1958.

( Continued )

TABLE
ExERUNIT

VIII

EXERCISES

-

Co&d FLAME INSTRUCTIONS

CISE

OPERATION (2)

PARENT METAL

FILLER ROD y-_-h------. *Type (4)

Scctio1r I -Group D3

u

( Contd) Mild steel tube 25 mm OD - 1.60 wall mm thickness Mild steel tube 25 mm OD1.60 mm wall thickness Mild steel tube 25 mm OD1.60 wall thg? ness 9.1 or 9.2 1.60 mm Neutral Same as in Bl

fillet Making welds -between tube and plate Making check test specimen No. 8

D4

9.1 or 9.2

1 .60 mm

Neutral

D5

Making check test specimen No. 9

9.1 or 9.2

1.60 mm

Neutral

Weld the joint ( see Fig. 12 ) at an angle of 90" in one pass with 4 to 5 mm fillet weld in horizontalvertical position. Cut the tee into four pieces by sawing. Test the sections by polishing and etching (see 16 for test results required ) Weld the joint ( see Fig. 13 ) in one pass with 4 to 5 mm fillet weld in aat and horizontal-vertical positions. Cut into four pieces. Test the sections by polishing and etching (see 16 for test results required )

Section II El

Gvoup E Aluminium sheet 1.60 mm 13.3 3.15 mm Neutral Practise making butt welds in aluminium, appreciate the necessity of using flux; try and obtain full fusion and penetration without flux entrapment ( Continued )

Making butt welds in aluminium in flat position

*Clause reference of IS

: 1278-1958.

TABLE
EXERCISE UNIT OPERaTION PARENT

VIII

EXERCISES

-

Contd FLAME

METAL

FILLER ~OD ___h___ Size *Type (5) (4) 13.3 11.2 3.15 mm 3.15 mm

(6) Neutral Oxidizing Same as in El

(7)

E2 E3

Alaking butt welds in aluminium in flat position JIaking butt welds in brass in flat position Xaking butt welds in brass in flat position 3Iaking check test specimen So. 10

Aluminium sheet 3.15 B?ats sheet 1.60 mm

E4 ES

Brass sheet 3.15 mm Aluminium sheet 3.15 mm

11.2 13.3

3.15 mm 3.15 mm

Oxidizing Neutral

Practise making butt welds in brass, appreciate the necessity of using oxidizing flame and flux, try and obtain full fusion and penetration Same as in E3 Weld the joint ( see Fig. 14) in a single run in flat position. Stop the weld and restart within central 50 mm of run. Test the specimen by rupturing and etching ( see 16 for test results required ) do

E6

Xaking check test specimen Ko. 11 G~ozrp F

Brass sheet 3.15 mm

11.2

3.15 mm

Oxidizing

Sectiv~z II Fl

fusion 1Iaking butt welds in cast iron in flat position

cast

plate mm

iron 10

10.1

6 mm

Neutral

Qractise making butt welds in cast iron using flux. Try making full fusion with sufficient penetration and obtain weld deposit free from porosity

TABLE EXERCISB No. (1) UWIT OPERATION (2) F ( Contd ) Cast plate mm Cast plate mm iron 12 iron 10 PARENT METAL (3)

VIII

EXERCISES

-

Contd FLAME (7)

FILLER ROD __-h_-_ iType Size (4) (5)

(6)

Section II-Group F2

F3

Making fusion butt welds in cast iron in flat position Making braze-butt welds in cast iron in flat position Making braze-butt welds in cast iron in flat position Making check test specimen No. 12

10.1

6 mm

Neutral

Same as in Fl

10.1

6 mm

Slightly dizing

oxi-

Nl

L

F4 F5

Cast iron plate 12 mm Cast iron plate 12 mm

11.3 10.1

6 mm 6 mm

Slightly dizing Neutral

oxi-

Practise making braze-butt weld in cast iron, obtaining good bond and tinning, full penetration and build up, weld deposit free from porosity Same as in F3 Weld the joint [see Fig. 15(A) and 16 ] in flat position by fusion Cut the weld welding technique. Test the specimen by by sawing. rupturing and etching ( see 16 for test results required ) Weld the joint [see Fig. 15(A) or 15(B) and 16 ] in flat position by Cut the weld by braze welding. Test the specimen by sawing. rupturing and etching ( see 16 for test results required )

F6

Making check test specimen No. 13

Cast plate mm

iron 10

10.1

5 mm

Slightly dizing

oxi-

E

*Clause reference of IS

: 12781958.
( Continued )

E

TABLE EXERCISE NO. (1) UNIT OPERATION PARENT METAL (3)

VIII

EXERCISES

-

Contd FLAME

t; .. t;
9

(2)
II-Group

FILLER ROD l-----h--7 *Type Size (4) (5)

w
1
Y

(6)

(7)

9
c

m

Section Gl

G Cast iron plate 10 mm Cast 11.3 6 mm Slightly dizing Slightly dizing oxiSame as in F3

G3

Making braze-butt welds in cast iron in vertical position Making braze-butt welds in cast iron in vertical position Depositing hardfacing rod Making check test specimen No. 14

plate
mm

iron 12

11.3

6 mm

oxi-

Same as in F3

Mild steel 10 mm Cast plate mm iron 10

Choice left to the training establishment 10.1 5 mm Slightly dizing oxi-

According to the directions maker of the rod

of the

G4

Weld the joint [ see Fig. 15(A) or 15(B) and 16 ] in vertical position - upward method, by brazewelding technique. Cut the weld by sawing. Test the specimen by rupturing and etching ( SPP 16 for test results required ) Practice making straight cuts, piercing holes, bevel cuts, etc; try and obtain reasonably clean smooth edge without excessive top melting and cutting at uniform speed

Section

II -G~roup H
Manual cutting oxygen Mild steel 12 mm

Hl

*Clause reference

of IS

: 1278-1958.
l

( Contincrad )

TABLE EXEKCISE No. UNIT OPERATION PARENT METAL

VIII

EXERCISES

-

Contd FLAME INSTRUCTIONS

FILLER ROD #----*Tv~e Size (5)

(6)

(7)

Section H2

II -

Grou$

H ( Contd)
Mild steel plate 12 mm Mild steel plate 12 mm -

Flame

gouging

-

-

H3

Making check test specimen No. 15

-

-

-

2

H4

Making check test specimen No. 16

-

-

-

Practise making grooves on plates, removing welds from ` T ' joints without damaging the plates, cutting panhead rivets, etc Cut a 75 mm square hole in the centre of a 150 x 150 mm size plate following the profile as nearly as possible. Test the specimen for a reasonably clean cut ( see also 15.4.3 ) Remove a fillet weld from a tee joint. Examine that no damage has been done to the plates while removing the welt'

*Clause reference

of IS

: 1278:1958.

IS: 1393 - 1961

APPENDIX ( Clause 17.2.1 )
RECOMMENDED SAFETY

G

RULES

Gtl.

POSITIVE

RULES

G-l.1 Wear leather gloves ( if necessary ), adequate clothing and heavy shoes, tightly laced. G-l.2 Wear welding goggles when welding or when witnessing demonstration. G-1.3, Remove combustible materials from the vicinity of welding or gas cutting operations. G-l.4 Get prompt first aid if burnt or if your eyes have been injured by flying sparks. G-l.5 Wear safety goggles when chipping or grinding.

G-l.6 Keep welding table and floor clean and clear of short length of rods, scraps of metal and carelessly disposed tools. G-l.7 tion. Know how to use the fire extinguishers and memorize their loca-

G-l.8 See that hose connections are tight and that the tip of the torch is clean. G-l.9 Make proper provision for venting exhaust gases when operating in confined spaces. G-2. NEGATIVE RULES

G-2.1 Don't look at a welding or cutting operation with the naked eye. G-2.2 G-2.3 .G-2.4 G-2.5 Don't use cracked or defective goggles. Don't hang a torch with its hose on regulators or cylinder valves. Don't pick up hot objects. Don't use defective equipment.

G-2.6 Don't weld on closed containers or on containers that havC held combustible materials. ( Secure permission from the instructor before welding on any container.) 74

IS: 1393 - 1961 G-2.7 rials. G-2.8 G-2.9 G-2.10 Don't weld in the vicinity of inflammable or combustible mate-

Don't weld in confined spaces without adequate ventilation. Don't attempt to repair equipment.

Don't play the flame on cylinders, hoses or other equipment.

For detailed instructions for safety $nd health requirements in electric and gas welding and cutting operations, re erdnce should be made to IS: 81% 1957 Code of Practice for Safety and Health h equirements in Electric and Gas Welding and Cutting Operations. NOTE

APPENDIX

H

[ CZauses 19.1.6.2(a) and 19.2.6.2(a) ]
*SUGGESTED METHODS ETCHED H-l. MILD STEEL FOR PREPARING SPECIMENS

H-l.1 Preparation of Surface for Etching-The surface should be filed with a coarse file until all deep marks are removed. It should then be filed at right angles to the original coarse file marks with a smooth file. The smooth filed surface should be polished down with successively finer grades of emery paper, for example, ' M `, ` F `, ` 0 `, ` 00 `, the direction of polishbeing being at right angles to the marks made by the previous paper in each case. Polishing should be continued until the scratches of the previous paper have been removed before proceeding to the next finer grade. This procedure is indicated in order to show the means by which a first-class finish may be obtained. H-l.2 Etching for Macro-Examination -In general for steel, an ' 0 ' emery finish will be smooth enough for a satisfactory etch to be obtained A suitable etching solution is prepared by mixfor macro-examination. ing the following: a) Concentrated Nitric Acid - 10 to 15 ml ( conforming 1950 Specification for Nitric Acid ), and
*The methods of preparing etched specimens are suggested are in no way intended to br a rigid rcquirrmcut of this code.

to IS : 264and

for convenience

75

IS: 1393 - 1961 b) Venatured Spirit - 90 ml ( conforming tion for Denatured Spirit ). H-2. ALUMINIUM AND BRASS to IS : 324-1952 Specifica-

H-2.1 Preparation of Surface for Etching -The surface should be It should then filed with a medium file until all deep marks are removed. be filed at right angles to the original medium file marks with smooth file until the surfac.c is smooth and free from marks. The procedure is indicated so that a good finish may be obtained. H-2.2 Etching for Macro-Examination - In general for aluminium and brass, the above finish will be smooth enough for a satisfactory etch to be obtained for macro-examination. Suitable etching solutions are prepared by mixing the following: a) For Ahminium 1) Caustic soda solutiolz 3) VilzrtP nitric acid b) For Brass 1) Dilute nitric acid 1: 3 ( by volume ). 10 percent solution contain2) Ammonium fiersulfhate solution ing about 20 percent of ammonia. H-3. PROCEDURE FOR ETCHING 10 percent ( W/V ). ). 2) Dilute hydrochloric acid 1: 9 ( by volume ).

1: 4 ( by volume

H-3.1 The etching is carried out either by swabbing the surface with cotton wool or by immersing the specimen in the etching solution until a good definition of the structure is obtained. The specimen should then be washed in water, preferably hot, followed by rinsing with acetone or alcohol ( industrial spirit ) and dried in a current of air. If specimens are to be preserved, a coating of thin oil or colourless !acquer is of advaritage.

76

IS: 1393 - 1961

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.9 )
EQUIVALENT METRIC VALUES

J

fps VALUES IN THE

OF STANDARD

USED

METRIC UNITS mm 1 1.5 1.60 > 2 2.50 3.15 4 5 6 10 12 25 40 50 60' 75 150 225 300 cm 25x3 90x60~30 25 kg 30 45 metric 8 towzes

NEAREST fps EQUIVALENTS i%

. 10;1t 36x24~12 10 lb 70 100 tons 8 77

