( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO POZZOLANA
Pozzolanas Sectional Committee, chniinran
DR R. R. HA~QMI Men&n SHRIB. C. BANERJEE SHRIK. V. Cn~una~ Sxmx8. K. CHOPRA

BDC 16

l?Aywenting
The Associated Cement Cos Lt& Bombay Directorate General of Technical Development ( Ministry of Industry ) Federation of Electricity Undertakings of India, Bombay Cen;~or%e$lding Research Institute (CSIR ),

SHRI r\. K. &X.~TTERJEE ( A&?!& ) Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi DR I. C. DOSM. PAIS CUDDOIJ SHRIN. C. RAWAL( Altcmatc ) National Teat House, Calcutta La/-G. C. DAS SHRI N. C. SENOUPTA ( Al&ma& ) DEPUTY DIR~IXOR RESWRCH Railway Board

D$?&

IhRECrOR Snat M. Ri~%z;; DIRECTOR, CONTaOL SHRX G. C. GU~TA Snar V. K. GUPTA DR IQBAL ALI PROP S. R. MEHRA

SHRI MOHINIXR SUVGH ( Aftcmate )

Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Amritsar

Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik ( Al&ma&) AND Bhakra Dam, Nangal Township U.P. PWD Research Institute, Lucknow Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters Hyderabad Engineering Research Laboratory, Hyderabad cmtrrlhFd Research Institute ( CSIR ), New

DR R. K. GHOSH( Altern& ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi Smu B. MUKHERJEE Smtx B. MAHAPATRAt Altemak ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRIK. K. N~YBIAR SHRXP. J. JAGUS ( Alkmute ) The Associated Cement Cos Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. N. Pu National BuildingaOrganization ( Minirtry of Works, SRnr -aIt SrNGH Housing 8 Urban Development ) Smu G. T. BHIDE( Alternab ) Kandla Port Project ( Mitry of Transport ) SHRIR. R. SIXENQINEER Irrigation Department, Madras SUPERINTRNDIN~ ( DESIGN)

(Cuntiwdonpclgr2)

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN 9 BAHADUR NEiWDELMI.

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

IS : 4305 - 1967
MCI&US
SUPERINTENDING G~OLOGLYT ( EC &GW) SUPERINTENDING SURVEYOR OF \vORKS (I) DR H.C. WSVESVARAYA SHRI R. NAGARAJAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

Jbfiescnting
Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Central Public Works Department Cement Research Institute, Kew Delhi Director General, IS1 ( &k-c@& Member)

SCC?CtllrricS
SHRI Y. R. TANSJA Deputy Director ( C&r Engg ), ISI SHRI DEEPAK BANL,YOPADHYAY Senior Technical Assistant ( Civ Engg ), SSI

2

IS : 430s - 1967

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO POZZOLANA
0. FOREWORD

0.1 `This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu-

tion on 20 October 1967, after the draft finalized by the _Pozzolanas Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Pozzolanas fmd extensive application in this country in the preparaTheir use is. like1y to increase tion of structural mortar and concrete. further with the availability of industrial wastes and other artificial pozzolanic materials as a result of further industrialization in the country. This has necessitated formulation of a number of Indian Standard specifications and ' methods of tests for different types of pozzolanas. These standards include a number of technical terms which quite often require clarifications to give precise meaning to the stipulations in the This glossary has been prepared to clarify various terms standards. relating to various types of pozzolanic materials. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.4 This standard is one -of a series of Indian Standards Other standards published so far in the series are: IS : 1344-1959 concrete* IS : 1727-1967 Specification on pozzolanas. mortar -and (Jirsl revision )

for SUR-KHI for use in

Methods of test for pozzolanic materials

IS : 3812 ( Part I )-1966 Specification for fly ash: Part I For use as pozzolana IS : 3812 ( Part II )-1966 Specification for fly ash: Part II For use as admixture for concrete IS : 3812 ( Part III )-1966 Specification for fly ash: Part III For use as fine aggregate for mortar and concrete IS : 4098-1967
*Under revision.

Specification

for lie-pozzolana

mixture

3

IS : 4305 - 1967 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard pozzolanas. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Andesite - A volcanic rock, belonging to the interm.ediate group ( consisting of 55 to 66 percent silica ) composed essentially of a plagioclase ~2, with a pyroxene, hornblende or blotite and more of less of a glassy . by-products used as pozzoiana 2.2 Artificial Pozzolana - Industrial like fly ash, burnt oil shale, ground burnt clay, silica fumes, etc. 2.3 Burnt Clay Fine Aggregate - An obtained by burning and grinding clay 4.75 mm. artificial pozzolanic to particle size not aggregate exceeding by burndegree of covers definitions of words and terms, relating to

An artificial pozzolana obtained 2.4 Burnt Clay Pozzolanaing clay under specified conditions and grinding to a specified fineness (see IS : 1344-1959* ).

that are produced by calcination 2.5 Calcined Pozzolana -Materials of natural siliceous or alumino-siliceous earths, such calcination being for the purpose of activation of pozzolanic properties. 2.6 Chert - A compact, siliceous rock formed of chalcedonic silica, one or both, and of organic or precipitated origin. 2.7 Cinder or Coal Ash -Well-burnt iurnace residues which fused or sintered into lumps of varying sizes. The same material form is found to possess some pozzolanic activity. or opaline have been in powder type,

2.8 Clays and Shales Pozzolanas --Pozzolanas, such as kaolinite montmorillonite type, which have to be calcined to activity. 2.9 Diatomaceous Earth

a) A deposit of fine, generally white, siliceous powder, composed chiefly or wholly of the remains of diatoms. The term diatom applies to a group of microscopic unicellular marine or freshwater~algee characterized by siliciiied cell walls. b) Siliceous earth of organic origin. 2.10 Fly Ash -A finely divided residue that results from the combustion of ground or pulverized coal and is transported from boilers by flue gases and collected by cyclone separation or electrostatic precipitation (see IS : 3812-19667 )
*Specification iSpecification for SURKHI for fly ash. 4 for use in mortar and

concrete ( @n&rrevision

).

Is:+505-1967 2.11 Lime Pozzolana mixture as the binder. Concrete -Concrete -having lime pozzolana and a

2.12 Lime Pozzolana Mizture - A ready made mixture of lie pozzolana in a specified proportion ( sp IS : 4098-1967* ). 2.13 Lime Pozzolana Mortar - A mixture of lie, with or without additions of fine aggregate.

pozzolana and water

2.14 Lime ReactivityAn index of pozzolanic activity of a material based on compressive strength tests on lime pozzolana mortar cubes ( for test scc IS : 1727-1967t ) and expressed in terms of kilogram per square centimetre. a 2.15 Natural Pozzohna - Materials that in the natural state, exhibit pozzolanic properties, such as volcanic ashes and tuffs, clays and shales and diatomaceous earth. 2.16 OIivine -An important, rock forming mineral, `composed mainly of magnesium and ferrous orthosilicates, crystallizing in the orthorhombic system and occurring as a common constituent of many basic and ultrabasic igneous rocks. 2.17 Opaline Material Pozzolanas - Pozzolanas, such as diatomaceous earth opaline chert and shales, which may or may not require calcination. 2.18 Phonolite or Clink4tone - Fine-grained, compact, alkaline-lava rock rich in nepheline and sanidine, With subordinate sodic-amphibole and sodic-pyroxene and giving out a ringing sound when struck with a hammer, hence the name clink-stone. 2.19 Plagloclase -The term refers to the important rock-making minerals lime-soda felspars, which form a complete solid-solution series from pure albite ( NaAl S&O, ) to pure anorthite ( Ca Al S&O,) all of which crystallize in the triclinic system. 2.20 Portland-Pozzolana Cement -An intimately interground mixture of Portland cement clinker and pozzolana with possible addition of calcium sulphate of an intimate and uniform blend of Portland cement and fine pozzolana, the pozzolana constituent being neither less than 10 percent nor more than 25 percent by weight of the Portland-pozzolana cement ( scu IS : 1489~19621). 2.21 Pozzolana - An essentially silicious material which while in itself possessing no cementitious properties will, in finely divided form and in the presence~of water, react with calcium hydroxide at ordinary temperature to-form compounds possessing cementitious properties.

l SpcciGcation~for

lime pozzolana mixture. tMethods of test for pozzolanic materials (jirsl r&&n ). $Specificatioa for Portland-pozzolana cement (u&r retrirbn ).

5

Is : 4305- -1967 2.22 Pozzolana has been used.
Mortar -

A lime or cement mortar in which pozzolana

2.23 Pozzolanic Cement Concrete - Concrete having pozzolana partly substituted for its cement, the pozzolana content being not less than 10 percent of the combined weight of cement plus pozzolana. 2.24 Pozzolanic Material - These materials which have the pozzolanic activity of combining with lime to form cementitious compounds. 2.25 Pumice - Naturally occurring very fine material, pumacious, volcanic ash usually rhyolitic in composition used as pozzolana. 2.26 Rhyolite -A wholly crystalline, partly glassy or entirely glassy volcanic equivalent of granite, differing from the latter in the paucity of hydrous mineral muscovite and presence of high temperature alkali felspar sanidine. 2.27 Shale - A fine-grained, earthy sedimentary rock that is a somewhat indurated clay and is characterized by a thinly layered laminated structure, by which it is differentiated from clay. It is usually harder than clay and has less tendency to slake in water. 2.28 SVRKHI - The coarse powder obtained by pounding of bricks and used as an aggregate as well as a pozzolanic material. It is obtained as a by-product of the brick industry. 2.29 Trass Finely ground tufastone deriving from volcanic eruptions. 2.30 Volcanic Ash -A natural pozzolana, which is one of the solid products of a volcanic eruption cnnslsting of-tiny particles, of size ranging from a fraction of a millimetre to several millimetres, of a mineral mass, formed by the crushing of the rock cf which the central conduit walls of the volcano are made ~of.
2.31 Volcanic Sand - It is one of the solid products of a volcanic eruption consisting of particles, of the size of sand grains, of a mineral mass, formed by the crushing of the rock of which the central conduit walls of the volcanoes are made of. It is a natural pozzolana when ground to finer particles.

2.32 Volcanic Tuff - A solidified rock of volcanic ash and volcanic sand brought down the slopes of a volcano by rain, compacted under its own weight and by the action of water. It is a natural pozzolana when powdered.

6

