UDC

629'13'05

: 620'176'167

IS : 8252 Indian Standard

( Fart XVI ) - 1979

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

ENVIRONMENTAL

TESTS
PART

FOR AIRCRAFT
XVI SHOCK

EQUIPMENT

1. Scope 1.1 This standard specifies the characteristics of a shock test and states the three degrees of stress severity to be used to experimentally recreate an environment which is representative of that which the equipment may encounter during service use. 1.2 This standard systems for which 2. Description does not apply to flight (crash) recorders special, separate, requirements exist. of Test or to passenger and freight restraint

2.1 Object - The object of the test is to check the behaviour of an item of aircraft equipment which is subjected to shocks in normal operation ( for example landing, arrested landing, etc ), and in the event af an accident that it will not hazard the safety of the aircraft or its occupants. 2.2 EffectsThe test is intended faults, to highlight the following adverse effects:

a) Functioning

b) The operation of anti-vibration mounts to their stops, , c) Hazarding of safety due to breakage of equipment or its mounting d) Risk of explosion 3. Test Apparatus or fire arising from mechanical destruction.

system, and

acceleration pulses having the 3.1 Apparatus - The test apparatus shall be capable of generating The shock pulses are defined by the characteristics selected from the shapes detailed in 3.2. maximum acceleration A and duration D. 3.2 Pulse Shapes -The generated time curves listed below: a) Half-sine, in accordance pulses shall approximate to one of the nominal acceleration versus

with

Fig. 1; with Fig. 2;

b) Final peak sawtooth, c) Trapezoidal, 3.3 Puke Tolerances-The a) Acceleration b) Duration c) Velocity D, f change,

in accordance with

in accordance tolerances A, as indicated

Fig. 3.

on the pulses shall be as follows: in Fig. 1, 2 and 3; value; and to the nominal pulse.

10 percent of the nominal f

10 percent of the value corresponding

To determine the changes in the velocity, the actual pulse acceleration should be integrated from the time 0.4 D before the start of the pulse to the time 0.1 D after the duration of the pulse, D being the nominal pulse duration. The nominal in Table 1. values of the variation in velocity corresponding to each pulse shape are as stated

Adopted

13 June 1979 INDIAN
MANAK

&B May 1980, ISI

Price Rs 8%

I
STANDARDS
BHAVAN.

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 8252 (Part

XVI ) - 1979

REFERENCE LINE CORRESPONDING r TO PRE-PULSE CONDITIONS

0.3A

MINIMUM TIME DURING WHtCH THE PULSE SHOULD BE MONITORED--r
-e-eNOMINAL TOLERANCE D = DURATION A = PEAK The reference line shall not differ more than f PULSE BOUNDARIES OF NOMINAL PULSE OF NOMINAL 1 g), whichever PULSE PULSE from zero acceleration.

ACCELERATION 9'8 m/sa (&

0'05 A or f FIG. 1

is the greater,

HALF-SINE

REFERENCE LiNE CORRESPONQlNG

MINIMUM

TIME DURING WHICH THE PULSE SHOULD EE MONITDREC

-----

NOMINAL

PULSE BOUNDARIES OF NOMINAL PULSE OF NOMINAL PULSE
1 g), whichever PULSE is greater, from zero acceleration.

TOLERANCE 0 = DURATION A =PEAK
The reference line shall not differ more than f FIG. 2 0'05 A or * FINAL PEAK

ACCELERATION
9'8 m/s* (*

SAWTOOTH

2

IS : 8252( Part XVI ) - 1979

I
0.10

. 0.3A

-0

*

D

4

MINIMUM TIME DURING WHICH THE PULSE SHOULD Be MDNITORED-

---y-

NOMINAL PULSE TOLERANCE BOU.NdARIES b=DURATlON OF NOMINAL PULSE A =PEAK ACCELERATION 0~ NOMINAL PULSE

The reference

line shall not differ more than & 0'05 A or * 9'8 m/s2 ( f is greater, from zero acceleration. FIG. 3 TRAPEZOIDAL PULSE

1 g ), whichever

TABLE

1

PULSE VELOCITY ( Clause 3.3 ) Velocity Change Sawtooth m/s AD 2

CHANGE

Half-sine m/s

Trapezoidal m/s 0'9 AD

2 AD
x

3.4 Measuring SystemsThe measuring systems for apparatus and also for the response at different points specified in Table 2.

recording the shocks imparted by the test -on the equipment, shall have the accuracy

TABLE

2

ACCURACY

OF IWEASURING

SYSTEMS

I

Band Pass Frequency

I

Accuracy Actual value f 1 dB of reference value displayed 100 Hz the at

I

5 to 5000

Hz

1 to 5 -Hz inclusive

Actual value & 10 dB of reference value displayed 100 Hz

the at

3

IS : 8252 ( Part XVI ) - 1979
Wherever possible, it is recommended that:

a>the

accelerometers in these measuring systems have a flat response between 5 000 and 25 000 Hz and over this frequency range shall not exceed the reference value displayed at 100 Hz by more than 1 dB; systems should be able to pass the continuous component than -10 dB of the reference value displayed at 100 Hz. with an attenua-

b) the measuring
tion lower 3.5 Measurement

of the Reference Shock -

The reference shock shall be measured either: frame has no resonance below 2 000 Hz ); or ( when the

a) on the table of the machine

( when the fixing

b) on the fixing frame, at the same level as the equipment fixing point frame has one or more resonance frequencies below 2 000 ~Hz ). In the latter case, the acceleration axes of the reference system. of the reference shock shall

or points

be measured along the three

3.6 Measurement of Shock Obtained from the Equipment-When interference from harmonics present in the shocks recorded from the equipment, it is recommended that a low-pass filter should inserted in the measuring systems. In this case, the test results shall provide, a) a recording without filtering; and with an indication of the cut-off frequency for each measurement:

is be

b) a recording with filtering, and of its slope. 4. installation shock machine

together

of the filter

of the Equipment-The equipment to be tested shall via a fixing frame. The fixing frame shall:

be mounted

on the table of a

4 b)

allow the equipment to be orientated so that it can be subjected to shocks directed successively in six directions defined by a reference system involving three mutually perpendicular axes, which is related to the equipment; permit the attachment of the equipment by the fixing points vibration mountings) prescribed.in the installation manual; or device (for example, antihave-a are as

c>not
4

distort the shock imparted by the machine and, to this end, shall not, if possible, resonance frequency below 2 000 Hz when loaded with the equipment; and

permit the formation of electrical, pneumatic, hydraulic, etc, connections which closely as possible representative of those specified in the installation manual. - Before commencing the test, the equipment shall in accordance with the relevant equipment specification. be visually

5. initial Measurements and functionally checked 6. Classification 6.1 The relevant Table 3.

inspected

of Test equipment specification shall specify the relevant test severity selected from

TABLE

3

TEST

SEVERITIES

Test

Severity

Type of Aircraft in which Equipment to be Installed

1

Light aircraft Transport aircraft

2

High-performance

aircraft

3

equipped with armaments or exposed to effects of explosion or blast

Aircraft

4

IS : 8252 ( Part XVI ) - 1979
6.2 Types of Test The following two types of test shall be conducted. Table 4 which checks the functioning of the equip-

6.2.1 Functioning testment while being subjected

A test complying with to the shock pulses.

TABLE

4

TEST

CHARACTERISTICS

AND

PROCEDURES

( Clauses 6.2.1, 6.2.2, 7 and 6)

Tyo:pe Test

Test Severity

Acceleration A Max
m/s2 g

Pulse Duration D Nom ms

Pulse Shape

Number Sh:fks per Direction

Number of Directions ( See Note I)

Test

Procedures

-p-p_____ Cafegory 1 -p59 6 II Operate the equipment throughout test at the maximum rating stated relevant equipment specification. this in the A and 6 equipment ( see 6.3.1.1)

1) Allow at least 5 min of such operation and subject equipment to three shocks. If required by the relevant equipment specification, monitor the specific functional parameters during period of each shock. Functioning 2 147 25 11 (see Note2) 3 6 2) Functionally check equipment in accordance with the relevant equipment specification. Also visually check equipment submitted to test severity 3 in accordance with stage 2) of the structural integrity test detailed below. 3) Re-orientate 3 980 100 6 equipment.

--_-

4) Repeat (l), (2) and (3) the appropriate number of times.

Cafegory

A and B eguipmenf to be inoperative

(see

6.3.1.1 )

EquFpment this test I) Submit I Structural integrity Kee3) 2 294 30 II 147 15 II (see Note2) 3 6

throughout

equipment

to three

shocks.

2) Visually check equipment. Although the equipment may be destroyed, it shall remain integral with its mounting system and no component shall become detached. 3) Re-orientate equipment. appropriate

s

4) Repeat (I), (2) and (3) the number of times. Category C equipment

( see 6.3.1.2 ) for the functioning

Follow the procedure test above. Special

case (see 6.3.1.3) .

Note 1 -The number ment specification.

of shock

directions,

described

in 4(a), may be~reduced

if permitted

by the relevant relevant

equip-

Note 2-The specification.

appropriate shock pulse shape, selected from 3.2, shall be stated in the if the pulse shape is not specified, the half-sine shall preferably be adopted.

equipment

Note 3-During the structural integrity tests, and if permitted by the relevant equipment specification, certain mechanical or electrical components may be replaced by an equivalent mass. This mass shall be as close as possible to the mass of the component it replaces, and shall be fitted in such a way that the centre of gravity of the equipment is altered as little as possible. The substitute mass shall in no way contribute to an improvement of the mechanical characteristics of the equipment.

5

I-S : 8252 ( Part XVI ) - I979
6.2.2 Structural integrity test -

ment not to endanger

safety.

A test complying The test is applicable which

with Table 4 which checks the ability of the equipto the following three categories of equipment: shall function after, but not during, the applica-

a)
b)

Category A equipment : Equipment tion ~of the shock pulses. Category

B equipment : Items of equipment which are not required to function during, or after, application of the shock pulses, but which shall remain free from structural damage which would give rise to either:

1) breakage of the attachment 2) risks of fire, explosion

systems of part, or the whole, fluids.

of the equipment;

or

or leakage of dangerous

cl

Category

C equipment : Items of equipment which shall function the shock pulses (forexample, safety devices, etc).

during

the application

of

The relevant 6.3 Test Sequence
6.3.1

equipment

specification

shall state the appropriate

category

of the equipment.

Test severities Cetegory

7 and 2 -

The sequence of tests shall -be as fotlows:

6.3.1.1

the six directions shall be followed
6.3.1.2

A and B equipment-The functioning test shall be conducted first in each of required by the relevant equipment specification in accordance with 4(a), and then by the structural integrity test in the same six directions. C equipment

Category

procedure 6.3.1.3

for the appropriate
Special cases

-The functioning

structural integrity test only test shall be followed.

shall

be carried

out,

but the

a) If desired and if approved by the Approving Authority, the structural be carried out immediately after the functioning test in each attitude the equipment. This modified shock machine. sequence limits the number of operations involving

integrity test may before re-orienting

repositioning

on the

b) If it is not possible to conduct a functioning test, and if approved by the Approving Authority, only the structural integrity test shall be conducted. A visual and functioning check, in accordance with the relevant equipment specification shall,, however, also be made after each of the six stages of the structural integrity test. 6.3.2
Test severity 3 -

The functioning

test only should and structural in Table 4.

be carried out. integrity test shall adopt the shock pulse

7. Test Procedure -The functioning characteristics and procedures described
8. Information to be Stated

in the Relevant

Equipment

Specification

-

specified in the relevant it is applicable:

equipment

specification,

the following

information

shall

If the shock test is be stated, as far as

Relevant Clause or Sub-clause a)

Required pulse (if other than half-sine) of the equipment in number of direction (if permissible) x

3.2 and Table 4 Note 2 4(a) Table 4, Note 1 6.1 6

b) Orientation c) Reduction

d) Test severity

IS :8252 ( Part XVI)e) Equipment category (structural integrity test) 6.2.2 6.3.1.3

1979

f) Test sequence and required checks (if a special case) g) Substitution for certain components (if permissible) checks

Table 4, Note 2 5

h) Initial measurements - Detail visual and functional j)

Requirements for equipment operation and parameters to be monitored during functioning tests (if applicable) shock in each

Table 4

k) Operational checks to be made on equipment following direction during functioning tests m) Special requirements for visual checks on equipment

Table 4 Table 4

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard is one of the series of standards relating to the environmental and operating conditions for aircraft equipment. The scope and applicability of these standards is outlined in IS : 8252 ( Part I )-1976 ' Environmental tests for aircraft equipment : Part I General `. This standard is based on ISOlDlS 2670 Environmental tests for aircraft equipment-Part Shock, issued by International Organization for Standardization. 7
Prlnted at Oelhl Printers, Delhi. lndla

3.3 :

