IS 15587 (Part 2): 2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

Indian Standard SECURITIES -- SCHEME FOR MESSAGES ( DATA FIELD DICTIONARY)
PART 2 MAINTENANCE OF THE DATA FIELD DICTIONARY AND CATALOGUE OF MESSAGES

ICS 03.060

@ BIS 2005

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

BHAVAN,

November 2005

Price Group 7

Banking and Financial Services Sectional Committee,

MSD 7

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) which is identical with ISO 15022-2:1999 `Securities -- Scheme for messages ( Data Field Dictionary) -- Part 2: Maintenance of the Data Field Dictionary and Catalogue of Messages' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Banking and Financial Services Sectional Committee and approval of the Management and Systems Division Council. The text of the International Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

In the adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard, which is to be substituted in its place, is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical . .

ISO 15022-1 :1999 Securities -- Scheme for messages ( Data Field Dictionary ) -- Part 1: Data field and message design rules and guidelines

IS 15587 ( Part 1 ) .: 2005 Securities -- Scheme for messages ( Data Field Dictionary): Part 1 Data field and message design rules and guidelines

Annexes A, B, C and D form an integral part of this standard. Technical Corrigendum

Annex E is for information only.

1 of the International Standard has been given at the end-of this publication.

IS 15587 (Part 2): ISO 15022-2:1999

2005

.

Introduction
This pad of ISO 15022 replaces lSO/TR 7775, Securities -- Scheme for message types and ISO 11521, Securities -- Scheme for irrterdepository message types. In the mid-1990s it was felt strongly that the International Standards for communication between securities industry participants required an urgent review aiming at (1) reducing the time taken to deliver new message types to the market place and (2) improving "straight through processing" capabilities. ISO 15022 sets the principles necessary to provide the different communities of users with the tools to design message types to support their specific information flows. These tools consist of: a set of syntax and message design rules; -- -- a dictionary of data fields; and a catalogue for present and future messages built by the industry with the above-mentioned fields and rules.

To address the evolving needs of the industry as they arise, the Data Field Dictionary and the Catalogue of Messages have been kept outside the standard. They are made available by a Registration Authority which updates them as necessary upon the request of industry participants. To protect investments already made by the industty, the syntax proposed in this part of ISO 15022, referred to as the "Enhanced ISO 7775 syntax", is based on the syntax used for the previous ISO 7775 and ISO 11521. However, to ensure the promotion, awareness and knowledge of the Electronic Data Interchange For Administration, Commerce and Transport (EDIFACT), a standard developed by the United Nations, adopted by ISO in 1988 as ISO 9735, and recommended as the International Standard for Electronic data interchange, 1S(3 15022 also supports the EDIFACT syntax. To recognize that a number of countries are currently or may in the future migrate to EDIFACT, the Registration Authority shall register EDIFACT fields and messages for use by securities industry participants. The ISO 15022 Data Field Dictionary shows how to format each data element required in securities messages in the Enhanced 1S0 7775 syntax and in the `EDIFACT syntax. Similarly, the Catalogue of Messages shows messages structured under both the Enhanced ISO 7775 and the EDIFACT message design rules and syntax. ISO 15022 contains: -- -- -- the Enhanced ISO 7775 syntax and message design rules; the organization of the Data Field Dictionary and the Catalogue of Messages; the service levels and procedures for the Registration Authority, including its supervision by ISO.

The EDIFACT syntax referred to in this document is described in ISO 9735. It is expected that this new flexible framework will allow industry groups to build messages in an international language and to migrate to EDIFACT if desired, at the speed which matches the urgency of their needs. If none of the messages recorded in the Catalogue of Messages addresses their requirements, they will be able to agree on the use of a new one and to design it from the approved fields in the Enhanced ISO 7775 and/or EDIFACT syntax. The Registration Authority will create extra fields as necessary and record the new message types and versions in the Catalogue of Messages to avoid Ihe duplication of effort by other groups who have similar needs. The Registration Authority will ensure that the new fields and the new messages are available in both the Enhanced ISO 7775.and the EDIFACT formats, as required. Straight through processing is expected to be enhanced because each community of users will be able to explicitly define its own business requirements and convert them into market specific message type versions. The approach differs from the generic international messages defined so far by ISO, which did not explicitly identify market specifics and therefore rendered the communication interfaces dependent on additional rules to be agreed bilaterally between senders and receivers.

Ii

IS 15587 (Part 2): ISO 15022-2:1999

2W5

Although the new framework permits multiple versions of the same message type, it is expected that market forces will naturally limit their creation to what is actually required until further convergence of market practices makes it possible to develop true international message standards for straight through processing. Similarly, it is expected that market forces will naturally organize the migration to EDIFACT at.an appropriate pace. The dual structure of the Data Field Dictionary and Catalogue of Messages will facilitate the migration and the development of any required conversion mechanisms. NOTE ISO 15022 has been designed to incorporate and be upwards compatible with the previous securities message standards ISO 7775 and ISO 11521, as updated in lSO/TR 7775. As a resultkthe initial Data Field Dictionaryand Catalogue of Messages accommodate lSO/TR 7775 data fields and messages. However, some of the previousfields and messages are not fully compliant with the Enhanced ISO 7775 syntax, and none are compliant with EDIFACT. In addition, the initial Data Field Dictionary incorporates the Industry Standardization for InstitutionalTrade Communications (ISITC) DSTU 1/1995 and the Securities Standards Advisoty Board (SSAB) data dictionaries. A list of standards related to this part of ISO 15022 is given in the bibliography.

IS 15587 [Part 2): 2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

hxiian Standard SECURITIES -- SCHEME FOR MESSAGES ( DATA FIELD DICTIONARY)
PART 2 MAINTENANCE OF THE DATA FIELD DICTIONARY AND CATALOGUE OF MESSAGES

1

Scope

This part of ISO 15022 describes the responsibilities of the parties involved in the maintenance-of the Data Field Dictionary (DD) and the Catalogue of Messages (CM). There is a Registration Authority (RA) which is the operating authority responsible for maintaining the Data Field Dictionary and the Catalogue of Messages, and a Registration Management Group (RMG). The RMG is the governing body of the RA, and monitors its performance.

2 Terms and definitions
For the purposes of this part of ISO 15022, the terms and definitions given in part 1 of ISO 15022 apply.

3 Structure
3.1 There is a Service Level Agreement which determines the RAs responsibilities and terms -of reference
described in this part of ISO 15022. 3.2 There is a contract between ISO and the organization fulfilling the responsibilities of the RA.

3.3 ISO subcommittee lSO/TC 68/SC 4 has appointed a Registration Management Group (RMG) which is made up of experts familiar with the current syntax(es) used for securities messages and securities industry experls.

4 The contract
4.1 Although the contract is between ISO and the organization appointed as the RA, the ISO Central Secretariat will normally act on the recommendations of lSO/TC 68/SC 4, or it@successor. Such actions will occur as soon as practical.
4.2 The contract between ISO and the organization appointed as the RA will be for an initial period of two years. Thereafter it maybe terminated by either party on 6 months written notice. 4.3 The contract may be terminated with immediate effect if the organizzilion appointed as the RA fails to perform its duties due to gross negligence, or in the event of the failure of the organization appointed as the RA. 4.4 If the contract is to be terminated the secretariat of lSOflC 68/SC 4 shall instruct the RMG to initiate a search for a new Registration Authority. If no suitable alternative can be tound within the relevant pariod, the lSO/TC 68/SC 4 secretariat will assume the responsibilities of the RA on a temporary basis until a replacement is found.

5 Mem-bership
The Registration Authority (RA) shall be responsible for maintaining the Data Field Dictionary, the Catalogue of Messages and access to the information in a way agreed with the Registration Management Group (RMG).

1

IS 15587 (Part 2) :2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

5.1

The current Registration Authority is specified in annex A.

The organization which provides the RA function recognizes that its interests and those of its members and subscribers cannot take precedence over the general interests of securities practitioners throughout the world, especially when addressing the provision of the Data Field Dictionary (DD) and the Catalogue of Messages (CM). The effectiveness of the DD and the CM depends on the ability to support the needs of people in all industries in all countries and the recognition that all participants in the system should benefit equally. 5.2 The address of the Registration Management Group is given in annex B.

The voting delegates performing the RMG function shall be comprised of experts familiar with the current syntax(es) used for securities messages and securities industry experts from not less than seven SC 4 member countries or liaison organizations. The voting membership must include at least five SC 4 P-member country delegates and there shall be only one voting delegate per country or liaison organization. The organization which performs the RA function shall appoint a delegate to the RMG and shall have no voting right. This means that the RMG will have a minimum of seven voting delegates and one non-voting delegate. The RMG will appoint from its voting membership a convenor and a secretary. Each of the voting delegates will serve for a tenure of 3 years at which time lSO/TC 68/SC 4 may renew the membership or nominate a replacement.

6 Functions
-6.1 General
a)

and responsibilities

The RA shall submit to the RMG the Registration Authority Report two weeks prior to any scheduled meeting or as required. The reports will summarize the activity of the RA between reporting periods. The detailed information wi!l be agreed between the RA and RMG. The RMG shall submit to lSO/TC 68/SC 4 a Registration Management Report consisting of any appeals or complaints acknowledged by the RMG within the reporting period. The report will be produced. at least six weeks prior to lSO/TC 68/SC 4 meetings. The RA will maintain records of all completed Data Field Dictionary, and Catalogue of Message requests for a minimum period of 3 years. Data Field Dictionary and Catalogue .of Messages requests include all additions, changes and deletions. The RA will maintain standard operating procedures to be submitted to the RMG for annual review. Any changes to operating procedures shall be approved by the RMG. The organization appointed as the RA must maintain strict confidentiality between the RA operating functions and other parts of its organization. The RA must comply with the appeals-process administered by the RMG. The RA's performance will be monitored by the RMG in accordance with the conditions documented in both the standard and the contract between ISO and the organization appointed as the RA. The RA will make available to any interested parties the DD and CM in both electronic and paper form. The RA may appeal to the RMG for arbkration if it regards a request as being frivolous or unreasonable for any reason.

b)

c)

d)

e)

f) 9)

h) i)

6.2

Responsibility to requesters

The responsibility of the RA to a requester shall be as follows: -- -- -- Assisting the requester with the compilation of the request form; Timely response to all requests. This includes confirmation and processing of the request; Detailed explanation of all responses, if required, in English;

2

IS 15587 (Part 2) :2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

--- -- --

Provide assistance for general information Fuifil the duties of providing additions,

and service issues relating to the DD and CM;

amendments and deletions to the DD and CM;

To advise the requester of the -appeals process if the requester is dissatisfied with the RA determination.

6.3

Liaison with UN/EDIFACT

finance representative

body (EEG04)

The organization appointed as the RA shall liaise with EEG04, the UN/EDIFACT Finance Representative Body, or any future relevant body, in order to submit newly created EDIFACT messages, segments, (composite) data elements, code words; etc. to the UN/EDIFACT for inclusion in the UN/EDIFACT Directories.

7 Ownership

of the data

The data which constitutes the Data Field Dictionary and the Catalogue of Messages is the property of ISO, who elect to put it in the public domain. On termination of the agreement between ISO and the organization appointed as the RA, ISO may request that a full copy of the data together with a record of all changes is supplied in electronic or paper form. The RA is authorized to freely distribute the EDIFACT data as long as no changes are made to the data and the version of the UN/EDIFACT directories they are based on is identified.

8 Procedural

changes

The Service Level Agreement set forth to maintain 1S0 15022 shall be the responsibility of the RA and RMG. Any subsequent changes will require the approval of the RMG. The Service Level Agreement supporting ISO 15022 is . . included in annex C.

9 Appeals
When a request has been rejected by the RA, the requester may appeal to the RMG. The RMG shall review the original request and the reason for rejection. Based upon this evaluation, the RMG will render its decision. This decision will normally be within 30 calendar days of receiving the appeal. A subsequent appeal may be made to Iso/Tc 68/se 4.

10 Complaints
Complaints may be sent to the RMG regarding the servic4 provided by the RA. All complaints shall be in written form. Complaints shall be service orientated and will not be considered as part of the appeals process. The RMG will aim to respond to complaints within 90 calendar days of receipt.

11 Voting
All decisions rendered by the RMG shall be by vote consisting of a two-thirds majority of those voting. lSOflC 68/SC 4 shall have the right to overrule a decision of the RMG by .a two-thirds majority vote of its P-members, provided written notification of -an appeal against the RMG decision is received within four weeks of that decision. Voting in both cases may occur through a postal vote or through a meeting. An interested party may not vote.

3

IS 15587 (Part 2) :2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

Annex A (normative) Designation of the Registration Authority

As at 1999-01-05 the organization appointed as the Registration Authority for ISO 15022 is: Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication S.C. (S. W. I.F.T.) Avenue Adele, 1 B-131O La Hulpe Belgium

IS 15587 (Part 2) :2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

Annex B (normative) Registration Management Group

As at 1.999-01-05 the address of the Registration Management Group for ISO 15022 is: ISO 15022 Registration Management Group c/o Secretariat of lSO/TC 68/SC 4 Swiss Association for Standardization (SNV) Muhlebachstrasse 54 CH-8008 Zurich SWITZERLAND

All correspondence is to be forwarded by the TC 68/SC 4 Secretariat Management Group (RMG) within one week of receipt.

to all members

of the Registration

5

IS 15587 (Part 2) : 200!3 ISO 15022-2:1999

Annex C (normative) Service level agreement

The Service Level Agreement is between ISO and the organization appointed as the Registration Authority (RA). ISO has appointed the Registration Management Group (RMG) to act on its behalf. The Service Level Agreement highlights the changes to the Data Field Dictionary (DD) and Catalogue of Messages (CM) that may be requested of the Registration Authority, together with the expected response times and some legitimate reasons for declining the requests. The initial Data Field Dictionary and Catalogue of Messages lSO/TC 68/SC 4 in conjunction-with the Registration authority. are being produced by Working Group 7 of

C.1

Request for a new field

Requests for the creation of both Enhanced ISO 7775 data fields and EDIFACT data elements and/or segments will be centralized by the RA. The request for a new field must include all the items which would have to be included in the Data Field Dictionary, e.g. class of field, field name, definition, format, where used, etc. The request must state the business justification for the new field and demonstrate why similar already existing fields, if any, do not accommodate the need. The RA will validate the completeness of the request and return a positive or negative acknowledgement of receipt within one week of the receipt. In case the request is invalid, the acknowledgement will state the reason(s) for invalidity, e.g. which items are missing. The analysis of a complete request for one new field shall not take more than five business days. In case of multiple concurrent demands, they will each not require more than five business days and will be treated on a first in first out basis. The RA will systematically map each newly created Enhanced ISO 7775 data field into the equivalent EDIFACT data element or segment. However, they will only cFeate the Enhanced ISO 7775 field for a new EDIFACT element or segment if explicitly requested. The relevant EDIFACT body (currently EEG04) wil! be notified by the RA of any need for new EDIFACT fields. The RA may refuse to create a new field in the following, not limitative, list of cases: -- -- -- -- the field does not comply with the syntax rules; the format does not conform with another ISO standard; the proposed field is the concatenation of existing data fields; part of the proposed field is already covered by existing field(s) and only the remaining part needs to be catered fofi a field already exists which meets the request; a field already exists which can .be modified to cover the request via an additional qualifier,

-- --

6

IS 15587 (Part 2) :2005 1s0 15022-2:1999

C.2

Request for amendment

of an existing field

,

The procedure to request a change to an existing field, including new qualifiers, new code words, new code values and new data source schemes, is similar to the procedure to request a new field, except that the request must highlight the difference with the current field description. When the request changes the structure of the field and might impact current users of the field (e.g. the format is changed), it must be-processed like a request for deletion and a request for a new field. The adding of a new code word or code value to a field would not normally affect the structure of the field. The RA will process the request for an amendment to an existing field in the same way and timescale as for a new field.

C.3

Request for deletion of a field

Requests for deletion of field(s) are generally introduced at the same time as a request for deletion of the message type(s) where the field(s) appear(s). The request for deletion may also relate to an amendment (see clause 2) or to a field which relates to a message type not yet recorded in the Catalogue of Messages (see clause 5). To give users an opportunity to disagree with the deletion, the field to be deleted will be marked as such for a oneyear period. If, after this period, nobody identifies himself as a user, the field shall be deleted from the dictionary. Changes required to the UN/EDIFACT Directories will be communicated to and managed by the relevant EDIFACT body (currently EEG04). In case of deletion for-amendment, the field marked for deletion will refer to the new version of the data field.

C.4

-Request for registration

of a new message version issuer code

.

.

Institutions and market organizations may register for a specific "message version issuer code" to be used in message descriptors, when they need to identify proprietary sub-formats. Only one issuer code shall be allocated per issuer. The request must include the list of the message type versions for which this message version issuer code will be used and, for each message type version, the format of the message version issuer sub-code to be used in connection with the issuer code and a shod description of the related sub-format. Whenever possible, message version issuer codes will be based on standard codes, such as the ISO 10383 Market identifier code (MIC) or the first four characters of the ISO 9362 Bank identifier code (BIC). The spelling of the message version issuer code may be proposed by the requester but is the exclusive decision of the RA. The RA will validate the completeness of the request and return a positive or negative acknowledgement of receipt within one week of the request. In the case of an invalid request, the acknowledgement will state the reason(s) for invalidity. In the case of a valid request, the acknowledgement will contain the attributed issuer code. The inclusion of related message version issuer code and sub-codes in the Catalogue of Messages ptiormed within the month followirrg the positive acknowledgement. sh@ll be

Issuers shall communicate updates to be performed to the identification or description of their sub-formats in the Catalogue of Messages. The procedure and timing for update requests is similar to the procedure and timing to request registration of a new issuer code.

C.5

Request for creation of a new message type or version number

To ensure confidentiality, requests for the reservation of a message type number or a version number can be addressed to the RA before the request to include the message itself in the Catalogue of Messages. The request must however mention when the message description will be provided for inclusion in the Catalogue of Messages. It shall not be later than one year after the message type number or version number reservation.

7

IS 15587 (Part 2): 2005 ISO 15022-2:1999
The message type number or version number maybe proposed by the requester but is the exclusive decision of the RA. A resewed message type number or version number is subject to final confirmation after the message description is provided. The RA may decide, after analysis of the message description that, for example, the new message does not even justify a specific version number since it is too close to an existing message type or version (see clause 6). The reserved message type numbers or version numbers will be communicated to the requester within five business days of the receipt of the request.

C.6

Request for Inclusion of a new message in the Catalogue of Messages
ISO 7775 messages and/or EDIFACT messages will be

Requests for the creation of both new Enhanced centralized by the RA.

The request for inclusion of a new message must include all the items and descriptions -which would have to be included in the Catalogue of Messages. The request must state the business justification for the new message type or version and demonstrate why similar already existing messages, if any, do not accommodate the need. The business justification must identify the future community of users and give an idea of the number of users and the volume of messages. The RA will validate the completeness of the request and return a positive or negative acknowledgement of receipt within three weeks of the receipt. In case the request is invalid, the acknowledgement will state the reason(s) for invalidity, e.g. which items are missing. The analysis of a complete request for one new message shall not take more than twenty business days. When a new message requires new fields or amendment to existing fields, a specific request for a new field or amendment must be introduced for each such field according to the procedures set forth in this annex. Whenever possible, these new or amended fields will be requested, and assigned, before Ihe introduction of the new message. The delaylo analyse a new message does not start until all fields required have been created or amended by the RA. In case of multiple concurrent demands, they will each not require more than twenty local business days and will be treated on a first in first out basis. The RA will systematically map each newly created Enhanced" ISO 7775 message into the equivalent EDIFACT message. However, they will only create the equivalent Enhanced ISO 7775 message for a new EDIFACT message if explicitly requested. The relevant EDIFACT body (currently EEG04) will be notified by the RA of any need for a new EDIFACT message. The RA shall generally not refuse the inclusion of a message provided it is made of approved fields, it is constructed along the message design rules, and it is different from all existing messages. When the difference with an existing message is minor and the need to have a specific message type or version is unclear, the RA shall investigate the added value of the new message with the requester and analyse the possibility of either using an already existing message or updating an already existing message to include the requirements of the requester. If the requester maintains its request and the RA remains unconvinced, the RA shall refer the request to the RMG with a fair description of the pros and cons for the message. The RA may question the need for a new message in the following, not limitative, list of cases: -- -- there is a message with exactly the same fields; the difference with an existing message is limited to the absence in the new message of fields which are optional in the existing message; the update which would be required to include the specific requirements in an existing message is minor and has no impact on the users of the existing message (e.g. wider scope).

--

8

IS 15587 (Part 2): ISO 15022-2:1999

2005

C.7

Request for amendment

of a message

.

The procedure to request a change to an existing message type or version is similar to the procedure to request inclusion of a new message type or version, except that the request must highlight the differences with the current message description. When the request changes the structure of the message and might impact current users (e.g. a mandatory field is suppressed), it must be processed like a request for deletion and a request for inclusion of a new message.

C.8

Request for deletion of a message from the Catalogue of Messages

To give users an opportunity to disagree with the deletion, the message to be deleted will be marked as such for a one-year period. If, after one year, nobody identifies himself as a user, the message shall be deleted from the catalogue. Changes required to the UN/EDIFACT body (currently EEG04). Directories will be communicated to and managed by the relevant EDIFACT

In case of deletion for amendment, the message marked for deletion will refer to the new version of the message.

C.9

Exceptional

circumstances

In exceptional circumstances the RMG may agree to allow the RA to modify the lesponse times and priorities in the Service Level Agreement. An example of when this could occur would be if an interested party had requested say 100 new fields just before another interested party had requested one new field.

C.1 O Updating the electronic form of the Data Dictionary and Catalogue of Messages
The electronic version of the Data Dictionary and the Catalogue of Messages will be updated in the same time-scale as the requester changes. If the RA agrees to amend the DD or CM for any reason, then the electronic version will be updated within 24 hours of the requester being informed.

IS 15587 (Part 2) :2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

Annex D (normative) Accessing the Data Fietd Dictionary and Catalogue of Messages

The Registration Authority (RA) is responsible for providing access to the Data Field Dictionary (DD) and Catalo~e of Messages (CM) to interested parties. The exact method and facilities may be modified from time to time provided there is prior written agreement with the Registration Management Group (RMG). The following describes the initial proposals.

D.1

The RA will make the `DD and CM available over the Internet, or an agreed substitute network. There is no restriction on who can access the information. The RA will not charge for the service.

11.2 The user screens will include the ISO logo and the wording `International Organization for Standardization ISO 15022 Data Field Dictionary'. When provided in paper form by the RA, it shall include the same information on each page.

D.3

The RA will ensure that they are capable of satisfactorily handling the peak traffic that they expect to receive under normal conditions.

D.4 The information available on the Internet, or an agreed substitute network, will be the latest master copy -of the DD and CM. The RA will not be entitled to publish in any way information that is later than that on the Internet master version. In particular the RA will not be entitled to publish provisional or interim information if this is not on . . the Internet version. D.5 Parties will normally be able to browse and search the DD and CM as a minimum on Monday to Friday from 00:00 hours to 23:59 hours UCT (Universal Co-ordinated Time). D.6
The detailed browsing and searching facilities will be agreed between the RMG and RA.

It is expected they will include: -- -- -- -- -- an ability to download the information in the DD; an ability to download the information in the CM; an ability to search for specific data fields or classes of data fields; an ability to search fm messages that fulfil specific functions; an ability to review the changes to the DD and CM, possibly in a specific area, that have occurred since a specific date.

D.7 In addition to the DD and CM data the RA will provide general and administrative information over the Intemet. This willcover:
-- -- -- -- -- information about accessing the information, e.g. hours; how to request a new field, message type or message type version number the guaranteed response times for specific requests; the complaints procedure; forms for requesting new fields and message types or versions;

10

IS 15587 (Part 2): ISO 15022-2:1999
--

2005

information on how to obtain the latest versions of the ISO 15022 and ISO 9735 standards, and when they were published.

D.8

The RA may provide the DD and CM information in another format. For such services the RA may make a reasonable charge.

11

IS 15587 (Part 2): 2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

Annex E (informative) Procedure for registering new and modified messages and fields

The following procedure should be adopted if it is required to use a new message, functionality or format of a message or field in any way.

or change the smpe,

E.1 -- --

Messages
Before any contact is made with the Registration Authority, the designers should check whether a message is already registered in the Catalogue of Messages for the scenario in question. If one exists, the designers should evaluate whether the message meets all their requirements. If not, they can submit a New Message Version Request to the Registration Authority. This may lead to anew version of the message, "ifaccepted.

---- If one does not exist, designers may submit a Message Registration Request to the Registration Authority to
add a new message.

-- -- -- --

Requests for registration of a new message need to properly describe the scenario(s), the relationships, the information exchange and the states of the transaction(s) being covered. The Registration Authority will ensure that: All messages with the same business function have the same message type. The code (i.e. message type and version) and name of a message will be unique in the ISO 15022 Catalogue of Messages.

E.2
--

Fields
When a field is needed, designers shall first check whether a generic field is already registered in the Data Field Dictionary for the purpose in question. If one exists, designers shall evaluate whether the field meets all their requirements. If not, they can submit a Field Change Request to the Registration Authority. This will frequently be tor the registration of a new

--

qualifier.
--

If one does not exist, designers may submita Field Registration Request to the Registration Authority to add a
new field.

-- --

Requests for registration of a new field need to properly describe the purpose. The Registration Authority will ensure that the field identification and the field name are unique in the `ISO 15022 Data Field Dictions-&.

E.3 --

New code word
If it is a request for a new code word for an existing field, sub-field or qualifier, which does not affect the usage of existing code words, or the format of the field, a New Code Word Request should be sent to the Registration Authority for approval.

12

IS 15587 (Part 2): ISO 15022-2:1999

2005

Bibliography

Users are encouraged to make use of other 1S0 standards wherever practical. For example, some of the fields in the Data Field Dictionary -will comply with the following standards. [1] [2] [3] [4] ISO 3166, Codes for the representation ISO 4217, Codes for the representation of names of countries. of currencies and funds. numbering system (ISIN). interchange -- Representation of dates

ISO 6166, Securities -- /international securities identification ISO 8601, Data e/ements and interchange and times,

formats -- Information

[5] [6]

ISO 9362, Banking -- Banking telecommunication ISO 9735, Electronic level syntax rules.

messages -- Bank identifier codes. and transport [EDIFAC~ -- Application

data interchange for administration, commerce

[7] [8]

ISO 10383, Codes for exchanges and regu/ated markets -- Market identifier codes (MIC). ISO 10962, Securities -- Classification of Financial Instruments (CFI code).

13

IS 15587 (Part 2) :2005 ISO 15022-2:1999

TECHNICAL

CORRIGENDUM

1

Technical Corrigendum 1 to parts 1 and 2 of International Standard ISO 15022 was prepared by Technical Committee lSOfiC 68, Banking, securities and other financial services, Subcommittee SC 4, Securities and related financia/ instruments.

This International Standard contains data elements related to dates where Ihe year is formatted in /ess than four digits. The format of these data elements will be considered, and, if appropriate, amended on the occasion of the next revision. Meanwhile, it is recommended that users consider, within the context of their implementation of this International Standard, any requirements for amendment in relation to the -year 2000 and their business environment.

14

!3ureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian Starrdarcfs Act, 1986to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyrigl-tt BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these form without thepriorpermission in writing of BIS. This does of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed Review of Indian Standards publications maybe reproduced in any not preclude the free use, inthecourse as symbols and sizes, type or gr-ade to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed Amendments Amend No. from Doc : No. Issued Since MSD 7 ( 271 ). Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Website: www. bis.org. in Regional Central Offices.: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI I1OOO2 : 1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, : C. 1. T. Campus, Shah Zafar Marg Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 ~2254 1216,22541442 122542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Eastern Northern Southern Western

Vll M, V. 1. P. RQad, Kankurgachi CHANDIGARH 160022 600113

Sector.34-A,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri : Manakalaya, MUMBAI 400093

(East)

Branches:

BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, Indi;

