NAT HIAF IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


ara aA — aora aah 
Aygar — Nea at uga Va 


( Teel JAGO ) 


Foodstuffs — Molecular Biomarker 
Analysis — Immunochemical 
Methods for the Detection and 

Quantification of Proteins 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.050 


© BIS 2021 


anda HM et 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2021 Price Group 10 


Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture Sectional Committee, FAD 23 


NATIONAL FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard (First Revision) which is identical with ISO 21572 : 2019 ‘Foodstuffs — 
Molecular biomarker analysis — Immunochemical methods for the detection and quantification 


of proteins’ issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 2009 by identical adoption of ISO 21572 : 2004 
‘Foodstuffs — Methods for the detection of genetically modified organisms and derived products — 
Protein based methods’ under single numbering. The first revision of this standard has been undertaken 
to align it with the latest version of ISO 21572 : 2019. 


The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard 
without deviations. Certain terminologies and conventions are, however, not identical to those used in 
Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 


a) Wherever the words ‘International Standard’ appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as ‘Indian Standard’. 


b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 


The technical committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard referred 
in this adopted standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this 
standard. 


International Standard Title 
ISO 16577 Molecular biomarker analysis — Terms and definitions 
In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 


observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for 
rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Introduction 


Analytical techniques based on highly specific immunochemical-binding interactions have become 
key tools for analysing many different chemical and macromolecular analytes, including proteins. 
Methods utilizing these techniques are widely accepted in the scientific and regulatory communities. 
Immunochemical assay methods are most commonly used to detect (presence or absence) and/ 
or quantify specific protein analytes such as allergenic proteins, disease marker proteins or newly 
expressed proteins in biotech crops. 


Prior to analysis, samples generally need to be ground or processed in a manner that facilitates 
extraction of the analyte from the sample matrix. An important step in analytical method development 
is therefore the selection of a suitable extraction buffer that does not interfere with the analytical 
method performance and that ensures an appropriate level of analyte stability during the analytical 
process. 


The immunochemical assay process generally incorporates at least two steps: 


— binding or capturing the analyte ofinterest present in samples with an antibody targeted specifically 
to the analyte; 


— detection of the antibody-analyte complex using a technique that signals the specific interaction. 


Once an analytical method has been developed and optimized, it should be validated to demonstrate 
that its performance is reliable and suitable for the intended use and to characterize the method 
limitations. This involves performing several experiments with real samples to evaluate parameters 
such as accuracy, precision, sensitivity, selectivity and the detection or quantification limits. Validation 
also allows for the establishment of method performance criteria, against which routine analytical 
performance can be compared to ensure that acceptable analytical results are consistently reported. 


This document provides a set of general procedures and analytical considerations for using 
immunochemical techniques to analyse target proteins. It discusses aspects of sample processing, 
extraction, assay set-up, interpretation and reporting of results, and relevant assay performance 
parameters. Two annexes are included containing example procedures that can be followed when 
analysing a protein of interest (POI) in a variety of background matrices using methods based on 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) and lateral flow devices (LFDs). 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


FOODSTUFFS — MOLECULAR BIOMARKER 

ANALYSIS — IMMUNOCHEMICAL METHODS 

FOR THE DETECTION AND QUANTIFICATION 
OF PROTEINS 


( First Revision ) 


1 Scope 


This document specifies performance criteria for immunochemical methods for the detection and/or 
quantification of a specific protein or protein(s) of interest [POI(s)] in a specified matrix. 


The methods discussed are applicable to the analysis of proteins from a variety of sample types. Some 
uses for these methods include, but are not limited to, analysing proteins involved in crop and food 
production, food processing, food marketing, food safety, biotechnology or disease indexing. 


2 Normative references 


The following documents are referred to in the text in such a way that some or all of their content 
constitutes requirements of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For 
undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. 


ISO 16577, Molecular biomarker analysis — Terms and definitions 


3 Terms and definitions 

For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in ISO 16577 and the following apply. 
ISO and IEC maintain terminological databases for use in standardization at the following addresses: 
— ISO Online browsing platform: available at https://www.iso.org/obp 


— IEC Electropedia: available at http://www.electropedia.org/ 


3.1 
conjugate 
material produced by attaching two or more substances together by covalent bond via chemical groups 


Note 1 to entry: Conjugates of antibodies with fluorochromes (e.g. chemical entity, such as a molecule or group, 
that emits light in response to excitation by absorbed incident light), radiolabelled substances, gold or enzymes 
are often used in immunoassays. 


4 Principle 


The target protein is extracted according to the procedure described for that specific matrix, and 
a specific antibody is used to detect or measure the concentration of the POI in the sample. For the 
detection of specific proteins in ingredients, the basic principle of a protein-based method is to: 


— take a representative sample of the matrix; 
— extract the proteins; 


— detect and/or quantify the specific protein derived from the matrix under study. 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


5 Reagents 


During the analysis, use only reagents of recognized analytical grade and only de-ionized or distilled 
water or water that has been purified, or equivalent unless indicated otherwise by the manufacturer of 
the reagents or the kit. 


Other reagents, such as antibodies, conjugates, substrates, stop solutions and buffer components are 
method specific. Refer to the method for specifics regarding reagents such as protein standards or 
reference materials, antibodies or pre-coated solid surfaces, controls, and samples. 


Reagents are specified in A.4.2, A.4.3, B.4.2 and B.4.3. 


6 Laboratory equipment 


Laboratory equipment is specified in A.5 and B.5. 


7 Sampling 


Sampling is not part of the method specified in this document, though Annex A and Annex B do provide 
sampling instructions as per the relevant methods. It is recommended that the parties concerned come 
to an agreement on this subject. 


8 Procedure 


8.1 General 


Storage conditions and the shelf-life of LFDs, antibodies, conjugate, substrate, etc. shall be clearly 
specified by the provider. 


Use appropriate laboratory equipment with low protein binding capacity (e.g. polypropylene tubes) to 
prevent protein adsorption during the whole procedure. 


For the use of this document, general requirements of quality assurance for laboratories shall be 
observed (e.g. concerning calibration of apparatus, double determination, blanks, use of reference 
materials, preparation of calibration curves) Carefully clean all equipment coming into direct contact 
with the sample to prevent contamination. See ISO/IEC 17025 for more information. 


8.2 Preparation of sample solution 


Once a representative sample is obtained, prepare the sample solution. Sample preparation procedures 
are described in Annexes A and B. 


Grind samples as specified in the method before test portions are taken, if necessary. Powders/flour can 
have swelling properties and could require more extraction solution if a manufacturer’s method does 
not specify this information. If the sample is not immediately used, follow the laboratory’s procedure 
for storage (e.g. -20 °C or below). 


Weigh an appropriate amount of a representative test sample (as specified in A.6.6.1 and B.6.2.1) for 
analysis to create a test portion for extraction. Add extraction solution and homogenize or mix. 


Laboratory samples containing high amounts of fat can be non-homogeneous and a larger test portion 
should be extracted to ensure that it is representative. If applicable, instructions can be found in the 
sample preparation sections of Annexes A and B. 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


8.3 Extraction 


Use an extraction procedure suitable for the matrix. Details of appropriate conditions for the extraction/ 
dilution of the test portions, controls and reference materials are provided in Annex A for ELISA and 
Annex B for LFDs. Care should be taken to use extraction procedures validated for the matrix. Extracted 
samples should be immediately used or treated as specified in the procedure for storage. 


8.4 Preparation of calibration curves, positive controls, and reference materials 


For the preparation of calibration curves, positive controls and reference materials for Annex A, it 
is recommended to use matrix-matched reference materials or reference materials that have been 
validated for the matrix. Calibration curves are not required for qualitative application such as LFDs. 
However, positive and negative controls can be prepared at the discretion of the analyst. 


8.5 Assay procedure 


For a quantitative test, select the required number of wells, (e.g. in ELISA) for the test portion(s) to be 
analysed, including blanks, positive controls and negative controls, and add each of them, at minimum 
in duplicate and properly diluted so as to be within the range of the assay. 


For a qualitative test or semi-quantitative test, select the required number of tests (e.g. ELISA or LFDs) 
needed for the test portions to be analysed, including blanks, positive controls and negative controls. The 
stability of the final signal can vary. Read the results in a timely manner as specified in Annexes A and B. 


According to the method chosen, follow the instructions of each method for sample analyses, including 
blanks, reference materials and/or measurement standards (if necessary). Allow the reaction to 
occur at a specified temperature range and time. If necessary, terminate the reaction according to the 
method described in A.6.6.2.7 and B.6.4.2. For example, if the ELISA method requires acquiring data 
on a spectrophotometer, perform this step. In the case of qualitative tests, follow the kit instructions. 
Generally, these are interpreted visually. 


9 Interpretation and expression of results 


9.1 General 


The parameters to interpret vary depending on whether the assay is qualitative, semi-quantitative or 
quantitative. 


For quantitative methods, the coefficient of variation (Cy) of optical density values resulting from 
replicate measurements of a sample test solution, in general, should not exceed 15 %. The coefficient of 
variation of calculated concentrations resulting from replicate measurements of a sample test solution, 
in general, should not exceed 20 %. 


If the coefficient of variation limit is exceeded, the analyses should be repeated on freshly prepared 
sample test solution. To establish a coefficient of variation, in this case, at least three determinations 
shall be carried out (e.g. values from three micro-titre wells). 


Negative results shall be reported as “negative at the limit of detection” and the limit of detection (LOD) 
shall be reported. 


Positive results below the limit of quantification shall be reported as “positive above the limit of 
detection, but below the limit of quantification”. The limits of quantification and detection shall be 
reported. 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


9.2 Quantitative and semi-quantitative analysis 

For quantitative and semi-quantitative analysis, the following parameters shall be evaluated: 

— raw data of the sample test solution; 

— blanks; 

— reference materials or measurement standards; 

— negative controls; 

— %C,between replicates; 

— %Cy,of standards; 

— %C,of control samples. 

In accordance with ISO/IEC 17025, measurement uncertainty should be reported, where applicable. 


Quantitative results shall not be reported by extrapolating above the highest or below the lowest 
calibration point. 


9.3 Qualitative analysis 


For qualitative tests, including all applications thereof, the corresponding parameters are described in 
Annexes A and B. The LOD shall always be reported. Negative results shall be reported as “negative at 
the limit of detection”. 


Positive results shall also report the LOD. 


10 Specific parameters that can influence results 


10.1 General 


The performance criteria listed in the method of Annex A are a set of performance specifications 
established for each method during the development, validation and routine use of the method. These 
parameters shall be estimated and evaluated for each method to ensure they are reliable and of 
consistently high quality. Each time a method is implemented, the data generated shall be evaluated 
and compared with the established method performance criteria. 


When a value (e.g. coefficient of variation of replicate determinations) does not agree with the assay 
specifications, it signals that the result is atypical and warrants closer evaluation of the data. The list 
of specifications shall be taken as whole. In certain instances, individual parameters may not meet the 
specifications but the data are still perfectly acceptable. If any of the criteria are not met, this should, 
however, be acknowledged in writing and the data evaluated to determine if the analysis of results 
should be adjusted, or if a particular sample or a set of samples should be repeated. These decisions 
should be based on the judgement of the technical expert interpreting the entire set of criteria. 


In contrast to the method described in Annex A, the performance criteria of LFD assays as described 
in Annex B are evaluated during the development of the method by the manufacturer of the kit. The 
method should be evaluated for repeatability in the laboratory prior to use on test samples. Non- 
performing kits shall not be used. 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


10.2 Special considerations 


10.2.1 Selectivity 


Adequate selectivity of the assay for a particular analyte shall be demonstrated for each POI or analyte 
(protein) to be measured in each matrix to be tested. Where appropriate, cross-reactivity should be 
evaluated for analogues (proteins with a similar sequence or structure). To test for the absence of 
the POI in non-POI sample, assay the non-POI containing sample and POI-containing sample at the 
appropriate dilutions and compare. 


This is generally done during the development and validation of the method and is not necessary during 
routine analysis of samples for which the method has previously been validated. Selectivity of the test 
kits, either ELISA or LFD-based methods, should be addressed by the manufacturer of the kit (e.g. listed 
in the manufacturer’s product inserts). 


10.2.2 Extraction efficiency 


Special care shall be taken to assess the influence of process parameters applied for the production of a 
given laboratory sample. 


In order to provide for the greatest sensitivity of the immunoassay, extraction efficiency should be 
as high as possible, especially for quantitative methods. The assay performance is matrix dependent. 
Extraction efficiency should be determined and documented for each matrix. 


The extraction procedure shall be demonstrated to be reproducible and the method of calibration (if 
applicable) should account for incomplete extraction. 


10.2.3 Matrix effects 


The scope of application clearly and exactly defines the matrices for which the given immunoassay 
is applicable. The use of matrix matched reference materials allows for direct comparison between 
reference materials and samples. However, if samples are to be analysed against reference materials 
that are not the same matrix, then the matrix effects will have to be evaluated. 


For example, prepare a negative extract for each sample (matrix) to be analysed by the method and 
an extract of a positive control of known concentration. Prepare a series of dilutions of the positive 
control in the negative extract and compare the resulting dose response curve with the calibration 
curve from the method. If the two curves are different, then there is a matrix effect. Use a matrix that 
most closely represents the true samples that will be tested. A dilution curve with a positive control of 
known concentration should also be included as a reference. The shape of the calibration curve should 
not change due to a matrix effect. 


10.2.4 Assay applicability 


Food processing will generally lead to degradation or denaturation of the POI, which could result in a 
substantial change in immunoreactivity. Immunoassays should be evaluated for applicability to the POI 
in processed products. 


10.2.5 Hook effect 


In an antibody-based LFD and plate format assay, a hook (saturation) effect could lead to a false- 
negative result. A thorough demonstration that the working concentration range comfortably covers 
the practical need of POI test samples is necessary. 


10.2.6 Parallelism/linearity 
For quantitative analyses, the expected dynamic range of the immunoassay should be explicitly stated 


in the scope of applications for all matrices covered by it. The relationship of the instrument response to 
known POI concentration may not be linear and shall be established for each quantitative immunoassay 


5 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


method by the manufacturer. This relationship is typically hyperbolic if the POI concentration is plotted 
on a linear scale or sigmoidal with a logarithmic concentration scale. Either a 4-parameter logistic or 
5-parameter logistic regression model provides the best fit for an ELISA calibration curve, with the 
linear portion in the centre of the sigmoidal curve representing the optimal region for quantitative 
analysis. Other regression models (e.g. linear, quadratic, logit-log, spline-fit, third order polynomial) 
may also be suitable to fit limited portions of the calibration curve. 


A minimum of four calibration points, reflecting the usable portion of the curve, shall be evaluated 
for quantification purposes, although a 4-parameter logistic fit requires at least five points and a 
5-parameter logistic fit requires at least six points. 


10.2.7 Limits of detection 


Results should not be interpreted below the LOD. In this case, reporting of results shall be stated 
according to applicable method as described in 9.1 to 9.3. 


10.2.8 Limits of quantification 
The limits of quantification for each set of calibrants (or dilutions) shall be stated explicitly. 


The estimated concentration of unknown sample test solutions shall be interpolated and not 
extrapolated. 


Results shall not be extrapolated below the limit of quantification or above the highest or below the 
lowest calibration points. 


11 Confirming method 


To establish the credibility of assays, another method such as western blot, high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC), mass spectrometry (MS) or a functional assay can be used to measure 
split analytical samples of known concentration. The results of both methods are then qualitatively/ 
quantitatively compared. This is especially important for immunoassays, since antibodies could cross 
react with other analytes present in a matrix. 


12 Test report 

The test report shall contain at least the following information: 
a) allinformation needed to identify the laboratory; 

b) allinformation needed to identify the laboratory sample; 


c) reference to this document, i.e. ISO 21572, and to the method used, and an indication of whether it 
was a qualitative, quantitative or semi-quantitative method; 


d) LOD; 

e) lower and/or upper limits of quantification; 

f) date and type of sampling procedure used (if known); 
g) date of sample receipt; 

h) analysis start date or other appropriate documentation; 
i) amount of the test portion; 

j) amount of the test sample; 


k) results and the units used to report them; 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


any special points observed during testing; 


if known, limitations should be also listed such as possible cross-reactants or selectivity of 
each method; 


any operation not specified in this method or considered to be optional, but that can have an effect 
on the results. 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Annex A 
(informative) 


Detection of a protein by ELISA 


A.1 General 


ELISAs have been successfully and routinely used for qualitative or quantitative detection of protein 
analytes. 


Most of the commercial ELISA methods are applicable to samples where little or no treatment and 
processing have been performed, and thus the POIs have not been denatured. Heating, steaming and 
drying are just a few examples of conditions to which food ingredients are subjected during processing, 
which will denature proteins, and thus impact or greatly diminish the ability of the immunological 
reagents used in the ELISAs to bind to the specific proteins in their non-native states. Selectivity of the 
method should be reported since, in certain cases, ELISAs will also react with similar proteins. 


ELISA methods are routinely utilized in a qualitative manner for presence or absence testing and 
for quantification purposes. Applicability to different matrices (e.g. grain, leaf) and crops are 
clearly identified by the kit manufacturer in the kit documentation and shall be supported by the 
manufacturer’s method validation. The limit of detection (LOD) is defined under these parameters. The 
LOD for an ELISA kit is usually established by the kit manufacturer to be consistent with the expression 
in the lowest expressing variety. Cross-reactivity with other proteins is examined. ELISA kits are 
commercially available worldwide. 


The alternate use of kits, on other crops and matrices (e.g. foods), shall be supported by independent 
validation and LOD determination by the laboratory performing the off-label testing. 


A.2 Scope of the method 


This annex outlines a generic example of a procedure for using ELISA to determine if the POI is present, 
and to quantitate the amount of the POI present in the sample. The method is applicable to samples 
where little or no treatment or processing has been carried out, and, thus, the POI is not denatured. For 
example, high temperatures at which food ingredients are processed can impact the ability to detect 
the POI. Each manufacturer shall supply the ELISA procedure with the kit and specify what matrix 
can be tested using the ELISA along with acceptance and rejection criteria that have been established 
through development and validation of the method. 


A.3 Principle 


A direct sandwich ELISA is used for detection of a POI as follows and as shown in Figures A.1 to A.4. 


— Step 1: The surface of a micro titre plate is coated with a specific capture antibody. 


— Step 2: When the sample of interest is added, the capture antibody binds the antigen. Unbound 
components of the sample are removed by washing. 


— Step 3: After washing, a polyclonal antibody, covalently linked (for example) to horseradish 
peroxidase (HRP) is added, which is specific for a second antigenic site on the bound POI. 


— Step 4: After washing, a tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) chromogenic substrate for horseradish 
peroxidase is added. The horseradish peroxidase generates a colour signal that is proportional to 
the concentration of the antigen in a linear range. To stop the colour development, a stop solution is 
added. The degree of colour produced is measured at a wavelength of 450 nm. 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Figure A.1 — Step 1 


Figure A.2 — Step 2 


Figure A.3 — Step 3 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Figure A.4 — Step 4 


A.4 Reagents 


A.4.1 General 


During the analysis, unless otherwise stated, use only reagents of recognized analytical grade and 
deionized or distilled water. 


Any deviation from the defined performance criteria can indicate a lack of reagent stability. For 
example, turbid buffer or turbid conjugate solutions should not be used. 


All kit components should be stored at approximately 2 °C to 8 °C. The shelf-life of the kit components is 
indicated by an expiration date. 


The antibody conjugate stock solution (A.6.3.1) and the antibody conjugate working solution (A.6.3.2) 
can be stored at 2 °C to 8 °C according to the kit instructions for dilution and storage. The diluted 
wash buffer should also be stored according to the manufacturer’s instructions or according to the 
laboratory’s established standard procedures. 


A.4.2 Reagents and materials usually provided with the test kit 
A.4.2.1 Extraction buffer. 


A.A.2.2 Assay buffer. 


10 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


A.4.2.3 Coated strip wells or plates. 


Not all kits contain coated strip wells or plates. Coating the strip wells or plates with antibody can 
be done by the user as an additional step. Users shall follow the manufacturer’s instructions for the 
preparation of coating buffer and strip well or plate coating steps. 


A.4.2.4 A conjugated detection antibody. 
A.4.2.5 Conjugate diluent buffer. 

A.4.2.6 Chromogenic substrate. 

A.4.2.7 Stop solution. 

A.4.2.8 Wash buffer concentrate. 


A.4.2.9 Matrix matched negative and positive reference materials. 


A.4.3 Chemicals not supplied with the test kit 


A.4.3.1 Alcohol, such as methanol, volume concentration of 70 %, or ethanol, volume concentration 
of 95 %. 


A.4.3.2 Detergent for ultrasonic bath (optional). 

A.5 Laboratory equipment 

Usual laboratory equipment and, in particular, the following. 

A.5.1 Refrigerator, set to an operating range of approximately 2 °C to 8 °C. 
A.5.2 Polypropylene conical centrifuge tubes, sealable, e.g. 15 ml. 

A.5.3 Plastic wrap or aluminium foil (optional). 

A.5.4 Plastic tape to prevent strip movement during plate washing (optional). 
A.5.5 Wash bottle, e.g. of volume of 500 ml. 

A.5.6 Precision pipettes, capable of delivering e.g. 20 ul to 500 ul. 

A.5.7 Small sample mixer. 

A.5.8 Balance, capable of weighing to the nearest 0,01 g. 

A.5.9 Centrifuge, capable for producing a relative centrifugal force (RCF) of at least 5 000g. 


A.5.10 Microtitre plate reader, capable of reading absorbance at 450 nm or the wavelength specified 
in the kit. 


A.5.11 Incubator oven or water bath, capable of maintaining 37 °C (if required). 


11 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


A.5.12 Sieve of aperture size of 450 um, or equivalent (optional). 

A.5.13 Sieve of aperture size of 150 um (100 mesh), or equivalent (optional). 
A.5.14 Multi-channel pipette, e.g. of 50 ul to 300 ul, (optional). 

A.5.15 Reagent reservoirs for multi-channel dispensing (optional). 

A.5.16 Automated plate washer (optional). 

A.5.17 Test tube rack for 15 ml centrifuge tubes (optional). 


A.5.18 Ultrasonic bath (optional). 


A.6 Procedure 


WARNING — Precautions should be taken when using acidic stop solutions or chromogenic 
substrate solutions containing tetramethylbenzidine (TMB). Standard laboratory ventilation is 
sufficient. 


A.6.1 Limitations of the procedure 


For thermally processed food samples and composite food samples, the method may not be fit for 
purpose, unless specifically designed for the matrix. 


The ELISA test kit is designed to give optimum performance at ambient temperatures of between 15 °C 
and 30 °C. The absorbance of the highest reference material should be greater than 0,8 optical density 
(OD) and should not fall outside the linear range of the reader. At temperatures greater than 30 °C, 
OD values will rise more rapidly and a reduced substrate incubation time could be necessary. At low 
temperatures (less than 15 °C), the substrate incubation time should be increased. 


A.6.2 Sampling 


A.6.2.1 Sample preparation 
Take a homogeneous test sample from the laboratory sample in duplicate. 


For whole grains, the amount of test portion taken will influence the LOD and limit of quantification 
of the method. For raw grain, it is typical that 2 000 g is blended and ground until fine enough to be 
sieved. For quantitative analysis, it is typical that a particle size of less than 150 um should be obtained 
and less than 450 um for qualitative analysis. To avoid contamination, care should be taken during the 
sieving step. Furthermore, care should be taken to avoid excessive heating. The action of the blender 
will both mix and grind the sample. From the ground material, approximately 100 g should be taken and 
passed through a sieve of 450 um pore size (A.5.12). At least 90 % of this sample should pass through 
the 450 um sieve. For a qualitative assay, this material can be used directly. For a quantitative assay, 
the sieved material should be further sieved using a sieve of 150 um pore size (A.5.13). The material 
passing through the 450 um sieve has been shown to be homogeneous. Therefore, it is necessary to 
sieve only enough material to provide an analytical sample through the 150 um sieve. 


This procedure is typical for a large grain such as maize or soybean. Certain samples can consist of 
material that should be handled frozen or are already a homogenate. 


12 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


A.6.2.2 Measures to avoid contamination during sample preparation 


A.6.2.2.1 General 


The ELISA test system is a sensitive technique capable of detecting very small quantities of POIs. For 
this reason, it is imperative that all equipment used to process samples be thoroughly cleaned between 
sample batches. The procedures given in A.6.2.2.2 and A.6.2.2.3 involve a first step of the physical 
removal of as much particulate material as possible. The second step, a wash with alcohol, is to denature 
and render non-reactive any protein that remains on the equipment. 


This procedure is typical for blenders that cannot be washed in a commercial washing operation. 


A.6.2.2.2 Grinder or blender cleaning 
Brush clean with a soft bristle brush. 


Rinse with alcohol (this may be stored and dispensed from a spray or squirt bottle). Two rinses or 
sprays are recommended. Then rinse thoroughly with water. 


Air dry or, if rapid reuse is required, use a flow of air such as from a commercial hair dryer. 


Periodically wash the brush and soak it in an alcohol solution (A.4.3.1). Dry the brush before subsequent 
use. Wipe with a soft cloth or laboratory towel. 


A.6.2.2.3 Sieve cleaning 


Sieves tend to become caked with powder. Sharply tap sieves on hard surfaces to dislodge caked 
material. 


Brush the sieves with clean soft bristle brushes. Soak the sieves in alcohol for at least 5 min and rinse 
thoroughly with water. Air dry or, if rapid reuse is required, use a flow of air such as from a commercial 
hair dryer. 


An alternative method is to use an ultrasonic bath followed by air drying, or to wash the sieve with hot 
water and detergent in a dishwasher. 


Periodically wash the brush and soak it in an alcohol solution (A.4.3.1). Dry the brush before subsequent 
use. Wipe with a soft cloth or laboratory towel. 


A.6.2.2.4 Cleanliness of work area 


Avoid dust contamination in the work area. Do not allow dust from one processing to contaminate 
equipment to be used in a subsequent processing. For optimum performance, run assay in a room 
separated from the facility where sample grinding and preparation is conducted to avoid potential dust 
contamination. 


A.6.3 Preparation of antibody conjugate 


A.6.3.1 Antibody conjugate stock solution 


Prepare the antibody conjugate (A.4.2.4) as per the kit instructions. 


Store the antibody conjugate stock solution at 2 °C to 8 °C for no longer than the expiration date of the 
kit, as per the manufacturer’s instructions. 


A.6.3.2 Antibody conjugate working solution 


Add the conjugate stock solution (A.6.3.1) to the conjugate diluent buffer (A.4.2.5) according to the 
method used. 


13 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Store the antibody conjugate working solution at 2 °C to 8 °C for no longer than the expiration date of 
the kit. 


A.6.4 Preparation of wash buffer 


Prepare the wash buffer as per the manufacturers’ instructions or to a laboratory standard operating 
procedure (SOP). 


A.6.5 Assay procedure 
Allow all reagents to reach room temperature. 


Remove the coated strips (A.4.2.3) and strip holder or the ELISA plate from the foil bag. Always seal 
the foil bag each time after removing the appropriate number of strips. Typically, 10 to 12 wells are 
required for reference materials and assay blanks. Each plate shall have its own standards and controls. 
A typical procedure is summarized in A.7. 


A.6.6 Test performance 


A.6.6.1 Extraction of test portion and reference standard 


The test portions and negative and positive reference materials are extracted under the same conditions 
in duplicate. 


A typical process is illustrated as follows. 


Weigh out 0,5 g + 0,01 g of each reference material and the test portion into individual 15 ml 
polypropylene centrifuge tubes. When weighing, weigh out each reference material in increasing order 
of concentration. Subsequently, weigh out the test portions. To avoid contamination, clean the spatula 
by wiping it with an alcohol-soaked tissue (A.4.3.1) followed by drying, or use a disposable spatula 
between each reference material and test portion. 


Add extraction buffer (A.4.2.1) into each centrifuge tube. 


Mix the test portion or reference material with extraction buffer by shaking vigorously and agitating 
(vortex) until they become a homogeneous mixture. 


Defatted flour and protein isolate need a prolonged time of mixing, sometimes more than 15 min. Full 
fat flour easily becomes a homogenous mixture (in less than 5 min). 


Centrifuge the mixtures at approximately 5 000g for 15 min, preferably at 4 °C. 


Carefully remove approximately 1 ml supernatant of each sample solution and standard reference 
extract and place each into an individual clean polypropylene centrifuge tube. 


Stability of the sample solution should be established. It is recommended that sample solutions are 
stored at 2 °C to 8 °C, but no longer than one working day. 


Prior to starting the assay, dilute the sample solutions and the reference standard solutions with the 
assay buffer (A.4.2.2). 


A summary of the extraction steps can be found in Table A.2. 
A.6.6.2 ELISA Immunoassay procedure 


A.6.6.2.1 General 


The ELISA assay kit can be run in different formats using any number of the 8-well strips, or a whole 96- 
well ELISA plate. It is recommended to follow a randomized loading scheme when validating the assay, 


14 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


i.e. test samples and controls not always added to the same wells of each assay run to avoid position 
effects in the plate, if any. 


Each extract should be assayed in at least duplicate and the mean absorbance value calculated. Each 
run includes an assay blank, the sample blank and the positive reference standard solutions. An assay 
blank or sample blank should be described in the instructions. If the manufacturer does not recommend 
a reagent, use the diluent buffer as the assay blank. For the sample blank, use the diluted control 
containing no POI. 


When an assay has been started, all steps should be completed without interruption. Asummary of the 
ELISA procedure can be found in Table A.3. 


To establish a coefficient of variation in this case, at least three determinations shall be carried out (e.g. 
values from three wells). These three determinations can include analysis of multiple extracts of the 
same sample. 


A.6.6.2.2 Incubation 


Using a pipette, add diluted sample and reference material solutions and the assay blank to 
the appropriate wells. Use separate disposable tips for each pipetting step to avoid carry-over 
contamination. Cover the plate with plastic wrap or aluminium foil (A.5.3) to prevent contamination 
and evaporation. 


Before starting incubation, the microtitre plate may be mixed by moving the plate from side to side. 
Alternatively, ELISAs may be continually shaken during the incubation, if validated as such. 


Incubate the microtitre plate at 37 °C for 1 h or as the manufacturer recommends. 


A.6.6.2.3 Washing 
Wash with wash buffer as per the instructions or validated SOP. 


Manual washing: Empty the wells by inverting over a sink or suitable waste container. Using a wash 
bottle containing a working wash solution, fill each well to the top, allow to stand for 60 s, then empty 
the plate as described above. Repeat the washing step three times. Remove residual liquid and bubbles 
by tapping upside down on several layers of paper towels. 


If using a multi-strip plate, it is recommended to prevent the strips from falling out of the frame by 
securing with adhesive tape. 


Automatic washing: At the end of the incubation period, aspirate the contents of all wells using a plate 
washer, then fill the wells with a working wash buffer. Repeat the aspiration/fill step three times. Finally, 
use the washer to aspirate all wells then tap the inverted plate into a stack of paper towels to remove 
residual droplets of wash buffer and bubbles. Plate washers may automate one or more of these steps. 


Do not let wells dry out, as this it can affect assay performance. 


NOTE Inadequate washing will cause erroneous results. Whether using a manual or automated washer, it is 
important to ascertain that each assay well is washed with the same volume as all other wells. 


A.6.6.2.4 Addition of antibody conjugate 


Add the antibody conjugate working solution (A.6.3.2) to each well using a pipette. Cover the plate to 
prevent contamination and evaporation. 


The plate is mixed (if appropriate) and incubated (with or without shaking as per the manufacturer’s 
instructions or validated SOP). 


A.6.6.2.5 Washing 


At the end of the incubation period, repeat the washing step as described above (A.6.6.2.3). 


15 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


A.6.6.2.6 Substrate addition 


Add the chromogenic substrate (A.4.2.6) to each well using a pipette. Gently mix the plate and incubate 
(typically) for 10 min at room temperature. 


The addition of chromogenic substrate should be completed without interruption. Maintain the same 
sequence and time interval during the pipetting. 


A.6.6.2.7 Stop solution addition 


At the end of the incubation period, add the stop solution (A.4.2.7) to each well, pipette the stop solution 
in the same sequence as the colour reagent was added. Gently agitate the plate to ensure mixing of the 
well contents and the stop solution. 


The addition of stop solution should be completed without interruption. Protect the microtitre plate 
from prolonged exposure to light, otherwise the colour intensity can change over time. 


A.6.7 Absorbance reading 


Measure the absorbance or chromogen intensity of each well using a microtitre plate reader fitted with 
a filter or monochromator appropriate to the wavelength needed for the ELISA chromogenic system 
(see Table A.1). All readings should be completed within 30 min of adding the stop solution. 


Absorbance for the HRP enzyme and TMB substrate example provided in this annex should be measured 
with a plate reader fitted with a 450 nm filter. 


Record the results obtained and calculate the mean absorbance values or use a software application. 


Table A.1 — Typical enzyme chromogenic systems 


Substrates Wavelength (nm) /Colour 

Horseradish 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB) 405/yellow 

a 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) 450 (652)/yellow (blue) 
2,2'-Azinobis[3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid] (ABTS) |410 (650)/green (blue) 

o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD) 490 (450)/green (orange) 


Alkaline Combination of nitro blue tetrazolium chloride (NBT) and Blue 


phosphatase 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate (BCIP) 
(AP) p-Nitrophenyl Phosphate (PNPP) 405/yellow 


Glucose oxidase __| Nitro blue tetrazolium chloride (NBT) Black/brown 
(GO) 


B-galactosidase 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indoyl-B-D-galactopyranoside (BCIG or |Blue 
X-Gal) 


A.7 Flowcharts 


Table A.2 — Extraction flowchart 


Procedure Description 
Weigh out 0,5 g Weigh out analytical samples, blank, reference standards. 
Addition of 4,5 ml Addition of extraction buffer (A.4.2.1). 
Mixing Mix the test portion with extraction buffer until it becomes homogeneous, 
full fat flour less than 5 min, defatted flour, protein isolate more than 15 min. 
Centrifugation at 5 000g Centrifuge the sample at 5 000g for 15 min, preferably at 4 °C. Remove 
supernatant and place it into a clean tube. 


16 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Table A.2 (continued) 


Procedure Description 


Dilution: Dilute the resulting test solution, assay blank and reference standards. 


1 > 300 or 1 > 10 according to 
the material investigated 


Protein quantification Immediately after dilution, proceed to ELISA as described in A.6.6.2 or store 
the test samples and dilutions thereof, assay blank and reference standards 
according to the recommended storage condition. 


Table A.3 — ELISA procedure flowchart 


Procedure Volume Description 


Addition Pipette diluted sample test solutions, blank and reference standards into 
appropriate assay well and mix. 


Incubation Incubate 1 h at 37 °C.4 

Washing Wash three times with wash buffer (A.6.4). 

Addition Dispense antibody conjugate (A.4.2.4) into each assay well and mix. 
Incubation Incubate 1 h at 37 °C.4 

Wash three times with wash buffer (A.6.4). 


Dispense chromogenic substrate (A.4.2.6) into each well and mix. 


Incubation Incubate for 10 min at ambient temperature. 


Addition Dispense stop solution (A.4.2.7) into each assay well and mix. 


Absorbance Measure the absorbance or chromogen intensity of each well using a 
measurement microtitre plate reader fitted with a filter or monochromator appropriate 
to the wavelength needed for the ELISA chromogenic system. 


a Incubation times and temperatures will be based on the manufacturer’s recommendations and conditions established 
during validation. 


A.8 Evaluation 
Data should be recorded. 


Standard values should be used to develop a standard curve. The value from the assay blank should be 
subtracted for all values. The average corrected values from each duplicate reference point should be 
used to create a standard curve. The average data from each duplicate sample test solution should then 
be used to interpolate a concentration from this curve. 


The curve should provide a linear function upon transformation. ELISA assays often show a nonlinear 
line without transformation, and thus curve fitting programs give the best result. 


A.9 Accept/reject criteria 


Each assay procedure shall have a set of criteria for accepting and rejecting results. The specific criteria 
developed and validated for each procedure may vary. Table A.4 provides a set of example criteria. To be 
considered valid, each assay run shall meet the procedure-specific criteria. The run consists of an assay 
blank, positive reference materials, negative reference materials (sample blank) and unknown samples. 
All sample test solutions, reference material solutions and assay blanks will be run in duplicate. If an 
assay run does not meet the assay acceptance criteria, the entire run shall be repeated. Individual 
sample test solutions that do not pass the acceptance criteria in any run shall be re-run a second time. 


17 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Table A.4 — Example criteria for accepting or rejecting results? 


Assay buffer blank 


Absorbance at appropriate wavelength of < 0,30 


0 % POI standard (sample blank) Absorbance at appropriate wavelength of < 0,30 


2,5 % reference standard Absorbance at appropriate wavelength of = 0,8 


All positive reference standards, OD Cy (OD) of replicates < 15 % 


a As applied to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) detection in the sandwich ELISA example, the wavelength is 450 nm. 


18 


Unknown samples, solution Cy (OD) of replicates < 20 % 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Annex B 
(informative) 


Detection of a protein or proteins by lateral flow devices 


B.1 General 


LFDs (also known as lateral flow strips or dipsticks) have been successfully and routinely used for the 
qualitative or semi-quantitative detection of antigens including, for example, novel proteins expressed 
in crops derived from modern biotechnology (GMO, bioengineered). 


Most of the commercial LFD methods are applicable to samples where little or no treatment and 
processing have been performed, and, thus, the POIs have not been denatured. Heating, steaming and 
drying are just a few examples of processes to which food ingredients are subjected during processing, 
which will denature proteins, and thus impact or greatly diminish the ability of the immunological 
reagents used in the LFDs to bind to the specific proteins in their non-native states. Typically, specific 
separate applications should be developed, if required, for detecting POIs in processed fractions such 
as meals. Selectivity of the method should be reported since, in certain cases, LFDs will also react with 
similar proteins. 


In cases of a semi-quantitative application for the detection of a specific antigen, the method can 
only be applied to food samples consisting entirely of products in which protein can be detected. The 
LFD methods are routinely utilized in a qualitative manner for presence or absence testing, although 
approaches have been developed to obtain quantitative outputs. The confidence in the results is 
high, and these methods usually test against a threshold. These methods can be easily transformed 
for semi-quantitative applications by combining them with sampling plans and statisticsl2! for field 
applicationsls]. 


The LOD for a LFD kit is usually established by the kit manufacturer to be consistent with the expression 
in the lowest expressing variety. Cross-reactivity with other proteins is examined. The LFD kits are 
commercially available world-wide. Applications for other (i.e. non-grain) protein containing matrices, 
such as leaf, are clearly identified by the kit manufacturer in the documentation that is part of the kit 
and should be supported by manufacturer’s method validation data. 


The alternate use of kits, on other crops and matrices (e.g. foods), shall be supported by independent 
validation and LOD determination by the laboratory performing the off-label testing. 


B.2 Scope of the method 


This annex specifies LFD for the determination of POIs that are present in herbicide-tolerant or pest- 
resistant crops or ingredients processed from biotechnology derived crops. This annex provides general 
guidelines for LFD methods for the detection of POIs in a specified matrix and, in general, addresses the 
existing procedures for LFD-based methods. 


B.3 Principle 


B.3.1 General 


As shown in Figure B.1, a typical LFD consists of a nitrocellulose membrane (1) on a backing material 
(2) with two lines: the test line (3) immobilizes the antigen-specific capturing antibody (4), and the 
control line (5) immobilizes another type of antibody that recognizes the labelled antigen-specific 
conjugate antibodies (6). 


19 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


15 


<——10 


7" 
a RO ee E FE ET, 2 


6 
Key 
1 nitrocellulose membrane 
2 backing material 
3 test line 
4 antigen-specific capturing antibody 
5 control line 
6 antibody specific for gold-labelled antibody conjugate 
7  gold-labelled antigen-specific antibody conjugate 
8 gold-labelled antibody conjugate pad 
9 sample and buffer pad 
10 wicking pad 
11 extract of positive sample 


12 target antigen/protein of interest (POI) 

13 antigen complex to gold-labelled antibody conjugate 

14 sandwich formation with capturing antibody 

15 unbound conjugated antibody captured by the anti-conjugate antibody 


NOTE Adapted from Reference [4]. 
Figure B.1 — Diagram and description of a lateral flow device 


The antigen-specific detection antibody is conjugated to gold (7) and dried into a fibre pad (antibody 
conjugate pad or gold pad (8)). Optimized buffers necessary for the test performance are incorporated 
into the sample pad (9). On the opposite end, the strip also contains a wicking pad (10) made of fibre, 
which provides the necessary wicking for the fluids to move through the nitrocellulose membrane. 
When a strip is immersed into an extract of a positive sample (11), the target antigen (12) in the sample 
first binds to the gold-labelled specific antibody (13) and flows through the membrane. When it passes 
over the test line, it forms a sandwich with the capturing antibody (14) present in the test line. This 
results in the formation of a visible pink to reddish line, and the result is interpreted as positive. The 
excess gold-labelled antibody (15) further moves and when it passes over the control line it is recognized 
by the immobilized antibodies in this line and allows for the development of the second line. The second 
line, often termed as the “control line”, serves as an internal control. The test and control lines can 
be of varying intensities. The device is negative if only a control line is observed. This negative result 


20 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


should not be construed as proving that there is no analyte present. Refer to 9.1 for further details on 
reporting results. 


B.3.2 Visualized test results by LFD 


Examples of a positive, negative and invalid results obtained by LFDs are demonstrated in Figure B.2. 
Development of the control line within the required reaction time indicates that the LFD has functioned 
properly. Any LFD that does not develop a control line (in Figure B.2, it is closest to the top of the strip) 
should be discarded and the test portion shall be analysed again using a new test strip. If the sample 
extract contained the POI, a second line (in Figure B.2, the test line is closest to the arrows) will develop 
on the LFD within the required reaction time. The test results should be interpreted according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions for the POI. If no test line is observed after the required reaction time, the 
results should be interpreted according to the manufacturer’s instructions for the POI. If the results are 
interpreted as negative, i.e. the test portion does not contain the POI, then the POI could be present at 
levels below the LOD or the POI was modified, rendering it undetectable (e.g. a test portion was highly 
processed, such as defatted flour). 


POSITIVE 
NEGATIVE 
INVALID 


Figure B.2 — Example lateral flow device results 


B.4 Test kit reagents and equipment 


B.4.1 General 


Any deviation from the defined performance criteria can indicate a lack of reagent stability. Extraction 
may be performed using a supplied or prepared buffer or, in cases where the buffer is incorporated in 
the strip, the sample may be extracted in water. Water containing high levels of copper, iron and other 
divalent cations should not be used to extract samples or for preparation of buffers. 


The LFDs should be stored according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Usually, they can be stored 
at room temperature, or in some cases refrigerated for longer shelf life, and will perform according 
to the principles in this annex for a period equal to one year from the date of shipment of the product 
or the expiration date marked on the product packaging. Prolonged exposure to deviant conditions, 
especially to high temperatures or moisture conditions, will adversely affect the test results. In cases 


21 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


where canisters of strips are stored refrigerated, allow these to come to room temperature before 
opening to prevent condensation. Desiccant is usually present in the canister. It is therefore important 
to keep the strips in the manufacturer’s original containers with desiccant. 


B.4.2 Reagents and equipment that may be provided with a test kit 
B.4.2.1 Test strips in a closed canister (LFDs). 

B.4.2.2 Sample tubes, 1,5 ml or smaller volume tubes, as appropriate. 
B.4.2.3 Transfer pipettes. 

B.4.2.4 Extraction buffer. 

B.4.3 Reagents and equipment not supplied with the test kit 
B.4.3.1 De-ionised or distilled water or water that has been purified, or equivalent. 
B.4.3.2 Laboratory grade blender. 

B.4.3.3 Blender jars or other bottles that can adapt to the blender. 
B.4.3.4 Sample tube rack. 

B.4.3.5 Graduated cylinder, 250 ml. 

B.5 Laboratory equipment 

Usual laboratory equipment and, in particular, the following. 

B.5.1 Refrigerator. 

B.5.2 Laboratory balance. 

B.5.3 Small sample mixer (optional). 

B.5.4 Pipettes. 

B.5.5 LFD strip reader (optional). 

B.5.6 Test tube rack for sample tubes. 


B.6 Procedure 


WARNING — Samples shall be handled while wearing gloves. Standard laboratory ventilation is 
sufficient. Surfaces shall be clean of crop debris or particles from previously ground materials. 
For further precautions, see B.6.4. Read and follow the manufacturer’s product insert or guide 
for each kit. 


22 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


B.6.1 Limitations of the procedure 


LFDs are limited to qualitative or semi-quantitative applications. Moreover, LFDs are limited to samples 
that express target proteins at levels sufficient to be extractable in order to establish the LOD and that 
can unequivocally be interpreted as positive with a high level of confidence. For thermally processed, 
extruded and composite samples, this correlation may not be applicable since the protein becomes 
degraded and denatured and thus un-recognizable by the capture and/or detection antibodies under 
these conditions. 


The use of a blender other than the one specified by the manufacturer of the kit shall be validated prior 
to substitution and new parameters may have to be established. 


Other considerations of non-performance for LFDs include the following. 


— Precipitation of gold conjugate during the development of the test, can be the cause of false- 
positive and false-negative results. Colloidal gold conjugates of the type used in most LFDs for the 
detection of POIs can be precipitated by extreme salt content or pH. Partially aggregated gold can be 
trapped non-specifically at the test line, producing a false-positive result. If the gold is more heavily 
aggregated, some of it can be prevented from entering the membrane, which results in reducing the 
signal and, thus, producing a false-negative result. Highly precipitated gold could never enter into 
the membrane, resulting in an invalid test. 


— WhenLFDsare exposed to inappropriate storage conditions, especially high humidity, false-positive 
and false-negative results can occur due to aggregation of the colloidal gold and/or loss of antibody 
activity. LFDs are typically manufactured under low humidity and packaged with a desiccant to keep 
them dry. As long as the test device is kept dry, LFDs can be stable for many months. An expiration 
date should be supplied for each lot by the manufacturer. 


— Impaired liquid flow can produce both false-positive and false-negative results and can occur when 
the extraction ratio of buffer (or water) to sample is too low, a sample is too finely ground, or oil or 
another component of the sample impedes the flow. Particulate material can clog the membrane, 
preventing gold from entering the strip. Partially clogged membranes can cause non-specific binding 
at the test line or prevent a sufficient amount of sample from washing past the test line, producing 
what appears to be a faint false-positive or difficult-to-interpret result. 


— Most LFDs have a limit on the sample volume and the depth at which these are inserted into the 
sample. If immersed too deeply into liquid, the conjugate pad becomes in contact with the sample 
extract directly, the gold conjugate is released into the liquid, and the test line will be absent or very 
faint. When some LFDs are used with highly concentrated plant tissue, chlorophyll can bind non- 
specifically to the test line, resulting in the appearance of a light green line (instead of a positive 
pink line). An inexperienced analyst could interpret such a test as positive. 


LFDs are designed to give optimum performance at ambient temperatures, i.e. between 15 °C to 30 °C. 
The sensitivity of the LFD is indicated by the manufacturer on its “users’ guide” or “product insert”. 
Attempts to measure protein expression below this sensitivity level (i.e. the manufacturer’s LOD claim) 
shall be avoided. 


B.6.2 Sampling 


B.6.2.1 Sample preparations 


Care should be taken to avoid excessive heating of the sample during grinding. The action of the blender 
will both mix and grind the sample. Follow the test kit manufacturer’s users’ guide recommendations 
for the jar size, ground sample to buffer volume ratio and grinding time for sample extraction. A particle 
size of 450 um or less is appropriate for LFDs. For sample preparation, the following procedure could be 
followed. 


a) Weigh sample into the appropriate size container. 


b) Puta protective cover over the container attached to the blender. 


23 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


c) Grind the sample on high speed for the specified time or until all grains are broken and the sample 
appears to be homogenous. 


d) Add the volume of water (B.4.3.1) per the manufacturer’s recommendation for each kit. 


e) Cap and shake the container vigorously until the entire sample is wet (follow the manufacturer’s 
recommendation; generally 20 s to 30 s, depending upon the number and type of grains/seeds). 


f) The sample will begin to settle immediately. Remove the liquid from the sample container after 
10 sto 20s. 


g) Draw enough liquid to fill the transfer pipette and up to the line at the top of the flared portion of 
the pipette bulb. Dispense the extract into the reaction vial, usually to the top of the tapered vial, or 
about 0,5 ml. In some cases, the manufacturer can have more specific volumes that shall be used. 


h) Useanew transfer pipette and reaction vial for each sample. 


Sample preparation is highly dependent on the parameters specified by each manufacturer of the strips, 
especially the ratio of sample weight to the volume of extraction buffer. 


B.6.2.2 Measures to avoid contamination during sample preparation 


B.6.2.2.1 General 


LFDs can be very sensitive and are usually developed to detect very small quantities of proteins. For 
this reason, it is imperative that all equipment used to process samples be thoroughly cleaned between 
sample batches. The procedures given in B.6.2.2.2 and B.6.2.2.3 involve a first step of the physical 
removal of as much particulate material as possible. The second step is to denature and render non- 
reactive any protein that remains on the equipment. 


B.6.2.2.2 Grinder or blender cleaning 


In an ideal situation, blender parts and jars are thoroughly cleaned of dust residue prior to preparation 
of asecond sample. Brush clean with a soft bristle brush. Rinse with alcohol when applicable. Two rinses 
or sprays are recommended. Follow this by a wash with warm water. Allow the equipment to air dry. 
Periodically, after washing the brush, soak in an alcohol solution. Always clean and dry the brush before 
subsequent use. Before use, wipe all the equipment with clean single-use soft cloth or laboratory towels. 


In certain situations, where large numbers of negative samples are being tested, it is more normal to 
wash jars with water between uses, and clean more thoroughly after a positive sample. 


B.6.2.2.3 Cleanliness of work area 


Avoid dust contamination in the work area. Do not allow dust from one processing to contaminate 
equipment to be used in a subsequent processing. For optimum performance, use LFDs in a room 
separated from the facility where grinding and preparation is conducted to avoid potential dust 
contamination. To contain the dust, grinding can be performed in an area with negative air pressure. 


B.6.3 Assay procedure 
Allow LFDs and samples to reach room temperature if stored refrigerated. 


Place 0,5 ml or the volume as specified by the manufacturer of the prepared sample extract into an 
appropriate sample tube as recommended by the manufacturer. Some kits require a specific volume, so 
it is important to use equipment from the same kit as the strips, if provided. 


Place the LFD sample pad down into the sample tube and allow it to incubate for 5 min or as prescribed 
by the manufacturer. If the strip was placed properly, the liquid will flow toward the top of the strip via 
capillary action. 


24 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


Use both positive and negative control samples when appropriate. 

The interpretation of results is as follows: 

a) the appearance of no line on the strip indicates an invalid result; 

b) the appearance of only the control line on the strip indicates a negative result; 

c) the appearance of two lines on the strip indicates a positive result for at least one POI; 


d) the appearance of more than two lines on the strip indicates a positive result for more than one POI. 


B.6.4 Test performance 


B.6.4.1 Extraction of test portion and reference standard 


If the negative and positive matrix-matched reference materials are utilized, then these shall be 
extracted under the same conditions as the test portions. 


B.6.4.2 Reading the LFD strip 


Be sure that the arrows on the filter cover point into the tube so that the wicking or reservoir pad is at 
the top. 


Check the result window frequently after adding the strip to the sample tube. 


At least one line, the control line, should always develop approximately one centimetre down from the 
wicking pad. A pink to red colour line in this position indicates that the device is functioning properly. 


A pink to red line appearing below the control line is the test line and indicates a positive result. If the LFD 
displays two pink or red lines, the test is complete, and the sample is positive for that particular trait. 


If at about 5 min (or as specified by the manufacturer), the test strip shows a clearly visible control line, 
and no positive test line has appeared, then the test sample is negative and shall be reported according 
to Clause 12. 


The strips should be interpreted only after the sample incubation has been completed. The sample and 
wicking pads can be cut off if the strip has to be archived. It is possible to archive an image of the strips 
in a digital form since stability of reacted strips is not determined by the manufacturer for archival 
purposes. 


B.7 Statistical applications for threshold analysis 


Testing against a threshold is a common application in grain handling and seed quality controll4]. When 
testing samples comprise discrete particles, such as seed and grain, it is possible to use qualitative 
methods with statistical sampling plans to determine if POI content is above or below specified 
thresholds with a high statistical confidence. 


NOTE To develop a statistical testing plan, the US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Marketing 
Service, Federal Grain Inspection Service (USDA/AMS/FGIS) websitel®! or the Seedcalc spreadsheet application 
provided on the International Seed Testing Association (ISTA) websitel®l can be used. 


B.8 Status 


During the development of the method, performance is validated under the storage conditions specified 
by the manufacturer. 


25 


IS/ISO 21572 : 2019 


26 


Bibliography 


ISO/IEC 17025, General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories 


REMUND K.M., D1Ixon D.A., WRIGHT D.L., HODEN L.R. Statistical considerations in seed purity 
testing for transgenic traits. Seed Science Research. 2001, 11(2), pp. 101-119 


Lipp M., ANKLAM E., STAVE J. Validation of an Immunoassay for Detection and Quantification 
of a Genetically Modified Soybean in Food and Food Fractions Using Reference Materials: 
Interlaboratory Study. Journal of AOAC International. 2000, 83(4), pp. 919-927 


GROTHAUS G.D., BANDLA M., CURRIER T., GIROUX R., JENKINS G.R., KIPP M., SHAN G., STAVE 
J.W., PANTELLA V. Immunoassays as an Analytical Tool in Agricultural Biotechnology. JAOAC 
International. 2006, 89(4), pp. 913-928 


US Department of Agriculture. Agricultural Marketing Service, Federal Grain Inspection Service 


(USDA/AMS/FGIS). Available at: https://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/fgis.aspx 


International Seed Testing Association. Available at: https://www.seedtest.org 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of ‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 23 (15783). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg f 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches :AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


