IS : 1885 ( Part XVII I- 1979

Indian Standard
PART XVII SWITCHGEAR ( AND

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
CONTROLGEAR

First Revision )
NOVEMBER 1993

Second Reprint

UDC

621'316'3/`7 : 001'4

Q) Copyright
BUREAU
MANAK

1980 STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC3

OF
BHAVAN.

INDIAN

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Cr 8

April 2980

1s : 1885 ( Part xvu)

- 1979

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL
PART XVII SWITCHGEAR ( Electrotechnical
Chairman SHRI J. s. ,ZavERr Members

VOCABULARY
AND CONTROLGEAR

First Revision )
Standards Sectional Committee,
Representing Bharat Bijlee Ltd, Bombay; and Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ETDC 15, ISI

ETDC

1

SHRI H. V. BADRINATH
SHRI V. K. BATRA SHRI V. S. BHATIA BRIG N. DAYAL

Wireless Planning & Co-ordination lying, Ministry of Communications, New Delhi National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), ir;cw Dc4hi Low Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectiollx! Committee, ETDC 57, ISI Ministry of Defence ( DC1 )

COL K. V.

KUDVA ( Al~crnote)

Central Electricity Authority ( Department of Power ), Ministry of Energy DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( TED ) ( Af~crnatc ) Power Cables Sectional Committee, ETDC 59, IS1 SWRI M. L. DONGRE Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( MinisGENERAL MANAGER try of Communications ), New Delhi DIRECTOR I TRANSMISSION , ) ( . Alternate 1 ComCon&ctors and Overhead Lines Sectional SHRI R. D. JAiN mittee, ETDC 60, IS1 Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI K. C. KAUL SHRI S. K. BHATIA( Alternate ) SHRI P. SINGH ( Alternate ) Electronics & Radar Development Establishment COL C. D. MALANEY ( Ministry of Defence ), Bangalore D~RBCTOR ( TED )

SHRI V. L. SASTRY( Alternate) SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE
PROF R. C. NARAYANAN SHRI D. SIIRI H. SHRI R.

Srmr

National Test House, Calcutta General Nomenclature & Symbols Subcommittee, ETDC 1 : 3, ISI Transformers Sectional Committee, ETDC lG, IS1 V. NARKE High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional M. PA1 Committee, ETDC 58, IS1 Central Electrochemical Research Institute ( CSIR ), RADRAKRISHAN Karaikudi H. N. VENKOBARAO ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyright
BUREAU OF INDIAN

1980 STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the In&an Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright undor the said Act.

IS : 1885( Part XVII ) - 1979
( Conlinuedfrom pagt 1 )
Members SHRI K. N. Rm~swm Representing Electrical Wiring Accessories Sectional Committee ETDC 44, IS1 Relays Sectional Committee, ETDC 35, IS1 DR T. S. M. %o Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta DR S. M. SEN Secondary Cells & Batteries Sectional Committee, DR H. V. K. UDUPA ETDC 11, IS1 Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SHRI M. P. WAGH Ssrru S. D. MEDHEKAR ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ofi& Member ) Saax S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) ( Secretary )

Low Voltage

Switchgear

and Controlgear

Sectional

Committee,

ETDC

57

Chaiiman SHRI V. S. BH+.TIA Members SHRI S. G. NENE ( Alternate to Shri V. S. Bhatia ) English Electric Co of India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI C. R. BALASUBRAMANIAN SHRI M. SESHADRI ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CH~SP ENGINEER ( ELEC ) II SURVBYOROF WORKS ( ELRC ) 111 (Alternate ) Associated Cement Companics Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. C. DOSHI SHRI. R. H. KULKARNI ( Alternuts ) Direc$r&s General of Supplies and Disposals, New SHRI K. L. GARG e . S:SRI R. V. NARAYANAN ( Altcrnafe ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SIIRI D. P. GUPTA New Delhi Bhartia Cutler Hammer Ltd, Faridabad SHRI M. A. JOSHI SHRI V. J. KANITKAR ( Alternate ) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SI~RI B. H. KHANDERIA SHRI U. G. KAMATH ( Alfcrnate ) Northern India Switchgear Manufacturers' AssociaSIIRI V. P. MAHENDRU tion, Jullundur SHRI J. K. GUPTA ( Aknafr ) The Ahmedabad Millowners' Association, AhmadaSIIRI J. K. MEHTA bad SHRIR. M. THAKKER (Alternate) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKHERIEE SHRI B. MUKHOPADHYAYA (Alternate) Central Power Research Institute. , Banealorc SHRI V. R _NARASIMHAN I SHRI V. JAYACHANDRAN( Alternate ) Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara SI~RIJ. S. NEGI SHRI V. B. DESAI ( Alternate ) The Ahmedabad Electricity Co Ltd. Bombav SlTRI H. M. PA1 SHRI B. S. REVBBN ( Alternate ) Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, Bombay DR G. M. PHADKE SHRI.~. N. GURJAR (Alternate ) ( Continued on page 37 ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay

2

fs : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
PART XVII

SWITCHGEAR

AND

CONTROLGEAR

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 June 1979, after the draft finalized by the Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee in consultation with the Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Diviaion Council. 0.2 The definitions contained in this standard have been drawn up with the object of striking a correct balance between absolute precision and simplicity. The principal object of this standard ( Part XVII) is to provide definitions which are suficiently clear so that each tern is understood with the same meaning by all electrical engineers and it does not, therefore, constitute a treatise on electrical engineering. It may sometimes be felt that the definitions are not sufficiently precise, do not include all cases, do not take account of certain exceptions or are not identical with those which may be found in other publications designed with other objects and for other readers. Such differences are iuevitablc and should be accepted in the interest of uniformity and clarity. 0.3 This r(:vision is being brought out with a view to aligning the Considerable definitions with those accepted as standard internationally. assistance has been derived, hence, from IEC Pub 50 ( 441 ) ( 1974 ) ` International Electrotechnical Vocabulary, Chaper 441 : Switchgear and Controlgear ' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.4 Definitions of terms earlier in vogue have also been retained, in the form of an appendix, as it is felt that they would serve a useful purpose in conjunction with the other terms defined. This is in view of the fact that they find extensive application in the various Indian Standards in the field It is intended, at a later stage, to consider exclusion of electrotechnology. of the terms contamed in Appendix A or to modify its contents as may be found appropriate. However, if any contradiction is observed between the definitions in the main text and Appendix A, those contained in the former shall prevail. 3

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part XVII

IS : 1885 ( Part XVfI ) - 1979 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part XVII switchgcar and controlgear. 2. GENERAL TERMS ) covers definitions of terms applicable to

general term covering switching devices and their 2.1 Sw-itchgear -A combination with associated control, measuring, protective and regulating equipment, also assemblies of such devices and equipment with associated interconnections, accessories, enclosures and supporting structures, intended in principle for use in connection with generation, transmission, distribution and conversion of electric energy. 2.2 Contrdgear - A general term covering switching devices and their combination with associated control, measuring, protective and rcguIating equipment, also assemblies of such devices and equipment with associated interconnections, accessories, enclosures and supporting structures, intended in principle for the control of electric energy consuming equipment. 2.3 Operation ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) -The transfer of the moving contact(s) from one position to an adjacent position. NOTPI - For a circuit-breaker, this may tion.
be a

closing operation or an opening opera-

NOT; 2 - If distinction ls necessary, an operation in the electrical sense, for example, make or break, is referred to as a switching operation, and an o eration in the mechanical sc,:se, for example, close or open, is referred to as a mechanica P operation.

2.4 Operating Cycle (of a Mechanical Switching Device )-A succession of operation from one position to another and back to the first position through all other positions, if any.
succession of operations not forming an operating cycle is referred to as NOTE -A an operating series.

2.5 Operating Sequence ( of a Mechanical Switching Device) succession of specified operations with specified time intervals.

A

2.6 Main Circuit ( of a Switching Device ) - All the conductive parts of a switching device included in the circuit which it is designed to close or open. 2.7 Control Circuit (cf a Switching Device ) -All the parts ( other than the main circuit ) of a switching device included in a circuit used for the closing operation or opening or both, of the device. 4
conductive

which are operation,

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 2.8 Auxiliary Circuit (~of a Mechanical Switching Device ) - All the conductive parts of a mechanical switching device which are intended to be included in a circuit other than the main circuit and the control circuits of the device.
NOTE - Some auxiliary circuits serve supplementary requirements such as signall@, interlocking, etc, and, as such, they may be part of the control circuit of another stitchmg device.

2.9 Pole of a Switching Device -The portion of a switching device associated exclusively with one electrically separated conducting path of its main circuit and Excluding those portions which provide a means for mounting and operating all poles together.
NOTE- A switching device is called single-pole if it has only one pole. If it has more than one pole, it may be called multipole (two-pole, three-pole, etc ) provided the poles are or can be coupled in such a manner as to operate together.

2.10 Closed Position ( of a Mechanical Switching Device) - The position in which the predetermined continuity of the main circuit of the device is secured. 2.11 Open Position ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) -The position in which the predetermined clearance between open contacts in the main circuit of the device is secured. 2.12 Position of Rest ( of a Contactor) -The position which the moving elements of the contactor take up when its electromagnet or its compressed-air device in not energized. 2.13 Short Circuit -The connection of two or more points of a circuit through a negligible impedance.
NOTE 1 -A short circuit may be intentional or accidental.

NOTE 2 - The term `short circuit' is frequently applied to the whole group of phenomena which accompany a short circuit between points of different potential, for example, the short circuit current is the current'which is the result of such a short circuit.

2.14 Short-Circuit `Current - An overcurrent resulting from a short circuit due to a fault'or an incorrect connection in an electric circuit. 2.15 Overcurrent Any current exceeding the rated current. in an electrically undamaged

2.16 Overload - Operating conditions circuit, which cause an overcurrent. 3. TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

AND PHYSICAL PROTECTION

3.1 Oil-Immersed Apparatus - Apparatus in which the main parts, or some of these parts;are immersed in oil.

5

l3 : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 3.2 Indoor Switchgear and Controigear - Switchgear and controlgear designed solely for installation within a building or other housing, where the switchgear and controlgear is protected against wind, rain, snow, abnormal dirt deposits, abnormal condensation, ICC and hoarfrost. 3.3 Outdoor Switchgear and Controlgear - Switchgear and controlgear s;:it:\ble for inst~allation in the open air, that is capable of withstanding wield, rain snow, dirt deposits, condensation, ice and hoarfrost. Y.4 Metal-Enclosed rtultrolgear assemblies earthed, and complete Switchgear and Controlgear with an external metal enclosure except for external connections. Switchgear and intended to be

3.5 Met&lad Switchgear and Controlgear - Metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear in which certain components ( for example, each circuit-breaker ) are arranged in separate compartments with metal partitions intended to be eat&cd. determined under 3.6 Ambient Air Temperature - The temperature, prescribed conditions, of the air surrounding the complete switching device (for example, for enclosed switching devices, it is the air outside the enclosure ) . 4. CONSTRUCTIONAL ELEMENTS part of a device, provided for electrical of a

4.1 Terminal-.-A conductive connection to estcrnal circuits.

4.2 Earth TerminalA terminal intended to ensure, by means specified connection, the earthing of a part of an apparatus.

4.3 Contact ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) - Two or more conductors designed to establish circuit continuity when they touch, and which, due to their relative movement during operation, open or close a circuit. 4.4 Contact Piece One of the conductor forming a contact.

NOTE -- If no confusion can arise, the term "contact" may be used instead of "contact piece".

4.5 Main Contact ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) - A contact included in the main circuit of a mechanical switching device, intended to carry, ii] the closed position, the current oi the main circuit. 4.6 Arcing Contact ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) on which the arc is intended to be established, A contact

NOTE-A n arcing contact may serve as a main contact; it may be a separate contact so designed that it opens after and closes before another contact which it is intended to protect from injury.

6

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 4.7 Control Contact ( of a Mechanical Switching Device)included in a control circuit of a mechanical switching mechanically operated by this device. A contact device and

4.8 Auxiliary Contact ( of a Mechanical Switching Device) - A contact included in an auxiliary circuit and mechanically operated by the switching device. which 4.9 A-Contact ( Make Contact ) - A control or auxiliary contact is closed when the main contacts of the mechanical switching device are closed and open when they arc open. 4.10 B-Contact ( Break Contact) 1 A control or which, is open when the main contacts of the mechanical are closed and closed when they are open. auxiliary switching contact device

of the 4.11 Ba Contact - A contact in which the relative movement contact pieces is substantially in a direction perpendicular to the contact surface. movement 4.12 Sliding Contact - A contact in which relative contact pieces is substantially in a direction parallel to the contact 4.13 Rolling the other. Contact A contact in which one contact of the surface.

piece rolls on

4.14 Release ( of a Mechanical Switchiug Device ) - A device, mechanically connected to a mechanical switching device, which releases the holding means and permits the opening or the closing of the switching device. 4.15 Arc-Control Device - A device, surrounding the arcing contacts of a mechanical switchkg device, designed to confine the arc and to assist in its extinction. 4.16 Arc-Chute its extinction. A chamber into which the arc is transferred to assist in field a

4.17 Blow-Oui: CoilA coil designed to produce a arranged to deflect an arc, for example, into an arc-chute. 4.18 Bushing - An insulating partition or cover. structure carrying

magnetic

a conductor

through

4.19 Conductive Part - A part which is capable of conducting current although it may not necessarily be used for carrying service current. 4.20 Exposed Conductive Part -A be touched and which is not normally under fault conditions.
etc.

conductive part which can readily alive, but which may become alive

NOTE - Typical exposed conductive parts are walls of enclosures, operating handles, 7

IS: 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 5. OPERATION OF SWITCHING DEVICES

5.1 Mauual Control -

Control of an operation by human intervention.

of an operation without human 5.2 Automatic Control -Control intervention, in response to the occurrence of predetermined conditions. Control of an operation at a point on or adjacent to 5.3 Local Controlthe controlled switching device. 5.4 Remote Control - Control of an operation the controlled switching device. at a point distant from

5.5 Closing Operation ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) - An operation by which the device is brought from the open position to the closed position. 5.6 Opening Operation ( of a -Mechanical Switching Device ) - An operation by which the device is brought from the closed position to the open position. 5.7 Auto-reclosing ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) - The operating sequence of a mechanical switching device, whereby, following its opening, it closes automatically after a predetermined time. 5.8 Dependent Manual Operation (of a Mechanical Syitching Device ) -An operation solely by means of directly applied manual energy, such that the speed and force of the operation are dependent upon the action of the operator. 5.9 Dependent Power Operation ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) - An operation by means of energy other than manual, where the completion of the operation is dependent upon the continuity of the power supply ( to solenoids, electric or pneumatic motors, etc ). 5.10 Stored Energy Operation (of a Mechanical Switching Device ) -An operation by means of energy stored in the mechanism itself prior to the completion of the operation and sufficient to complete it under predetermined conditions.
NOTE This kind of operation may be subdivided according to: a) the manner of storing the energy ( spring, weight, etc ); b) the origin of the energy ( manual, electric, etc ); and c) the manner of releasing the energy ( manual, electric, etc ).

5.11 Independent Manual Operation ( of a Mechanical Switching Device ) -A stored energy operation where the energy originates from manual power, stored and released in one continuous operation, such that the speed and force of the operation are independent of the action of the operator, 8

tS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 5.12 l?ixed `rrip Mechanicak Switching Device A nlecllikc:rl

switching position.

device

which

cannot

be releaed

except when it is in the closed

5.13 Trip-Free Mechanical Switching Device - A mechanical switching device, the moving contacts of which return to and remain in the open position when the opening operation is initiated aftrF the even if its closing command is initiation of the closing operation, maintained.
NOTE - To ensure proper breaking of the current which may have ken it may be mxcssary that the contacts momentarily reach the closed position.

ert.~blirhcd,
any

5.14 Instantaneous

Release -

A release

which

operates

without

intentional

titne-d&y.

5.15 Overcurrent Release --A release which permits a rneihnnical switching device to open wi:h or without time-delay when the c::lrrcnr in the release exceeds ii predetermined \,alue.
NOTE -

This value

can in some cases dcpcnd

upw~ the rate-of-rise

of CM tent.

Time-Delay Overcurrent Release - An ovl.:rcurrcnt relelsr: which operates with a dzfinite time-delay, which may bc adjurtable, but is i:ldep::nc!e:lt of the value of the ove:current. 5.17 Inverse Time-Delay Overcurrent Release --- An

5.16 Definite

release which operates after _a time-delay value of the ovcrcurrent.

invcrseiy

depend<,nt
approach,

nv;rcurrent u!:on the
s R :It$nitc

r\`orE - Such a release may be designed so that the time-delay minimum value for high values of overcurreflt.

5.18 Direct

Overcurrent

Release -

energized device.

by the current

in the main

An overcurrent rcIc:ue dig ectly circuit of a mechanical switc%ing
release
energized

5.19 Indirect Overcurrent Release - An ov,:rcurrent by the current in the main circuit of a mechanical through a current transformer or a shunt. 5.20 Shunt Release A release energized

switching

device

by a source of,r~,li?rgrz.
of the voltn:f~ of 111r* main circuit.

`NOTE - The source of voltage may be independent

5.21 Undervoltage Release - A shunt rciease wlkh permits a mechanical switching device to open or close, with or wit!lol;t time-delay, when the voltage across the terminal? of the release falls b&w a predetermined value. 5.22 Reverse Current Release ( DC only ) - A relrnsc: which permits a mechanical switching device to open, with or without time-delay, wh ii the current flows in revl;rse direction and exceeds a predet;:rmined vri~. 9

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 5.23 Inching (Jogging ) for short periods to obtain Energizing a motor or solenoid repeatedly small movements of the driven mechanism. The current

5.24 Operating Current ( of au Overcurrent Release ) value at and above which the release can operate.

5.25 Current Setting (of an Overcurrent Release ) - The value of the operating current for which the release is adjusted and in accordance with which its operating conditions are defined. 5.26 Current Setting Release ( of an Overcurrent Release ) - The range between the minimum and maximum values over which the current setting of the rcleasc can be adjusted. 5.27 Antipumping Device - A device which prevents reclosing afrur a close-open operation as long as the device initiating closing is maintained in the position for closing. 5.28 Interlocking Device - A device which makes the operation of a switching device dependent upon the position or operation of one or more other pieces of equipment. 6. CHARACTERISTIC QUANTITIES

6.1 Prospective Current ( of a Circuit and lwith Respect to a Switching Bevice ) - The current that would flow in the circuit if each pole of the switching device were replaced by a conductor of negligible impedance.
method to be used to evaluate and to express thr prospective currcat NOTE -The to be specified in the individua1 specifications. is

6.2 Prospective Peak Current -The peak value current during the transient period following initiation.

of

a

prospective

definition assumes that the current is made by an ideal switching device, NOTE -The that is with instantaneous transition from infinite to zero impedance. For circuits tvhere the current can follow several different paths, for example,`polyphase circuits, it further assumes that the current is made simultaneously in all poles, even if only the current in one pole is considered.

6.3 Prospective Symmetrical Current ( of an AC Circuit ) - The prospective current when it is initiated at such an instant that no transient phenomenon follows the initiation.
polyphase circuits, the condition of nontransient period can NOTE 1 -For satisfied for the current in one pole at a time. only be

NOTE 2 - The prospective symmetrical current is expressed by its rms value.

6.4 Maximum Prospective Peak Current ( of an AC Circuit ) --The prospective peak current when initiation of the current takes place at the instant which leads to the highest possible value.
NOTE - For a multipoIe device in a polyphase circuit, the maximum prospective peak current refers to a single-pole only.

10

15 : 1889 ( Part XVII 1 - 1979
6.5 ProspectiVe Device ) - The Making Current ( for a Pole of a Switching

prospective

current

when

initiated

under

specified

conditions.
specified conditions may relate to the method of initiation, for example, device, or to the instant of initiation, for example, lending to the maximum prospective peak current in an ac circuit, or to the highest rate of rise. The specification of these conditions is found in the individual standards.
NoTE-T~~

by an ideal switching

6.6 Prospective Breaking Current ( for a Pole of a Switching Device ) - The prospective current evaluated at a time corresponding to the instant of the initiation of the breaking process.
NOTE - Specifications concerning the instant of the initiation of the brcnking process For mechanical switchi,lg dwices, it 15 arc to he found in the individual standards. usually defined as the moment of initiation of the arc during the opening operation.

6.7 Breaking Current - The current the instant of initiation of the arc during

in a pole

of a switching

device

at

a breaking

operation.

6.8 Breaking
prospective at a stated

Capacity ( of a Switching Device) - A vJue of breaking current that a switching device is capable of breaking voltage under prescribed conditions of use and behaviour. to be prescribed arc dcnlt \vith

NOTE - The voltage to be stated and the conditions in the individual specifications.

Device ) - X v,~l~` 6.9 Making Capacity ( of a Switching prospective mnking current that a switching device is capable of makin: a s&ated voltage under prescribed conditions of use and be!laviour.

of
at

NOTE - The voltage to be stated and the conditions to bc prcscribccl are dealt 4th in the individual specifications.

6.10 Short-Circuit Making Capacity -A making the prescribed conditions include a short circuit at switching device. 6.11

capncitv for the terminals

wl1ic.h of the

Short-Circuit Breaking Capacity -A breaking cap:\city for whic!i the prcicribed conditions include a short circluit at the terminals of the switching device. Cut-Off Current (of a Switching Device ) -Tl:c
xn.xilnuln

6.12

instantaneous value switching device.

of current

attained

during

the brc.iking

opcr.ltiun

of .L
opcmw

NOTE - This concept is of particular importance when the s\vitching tkvicc in such a manner that the prospective peak current of the circuit is not rcachctl.

6.13

under stated conditions of opcrati,bn: tile v:llue of operatin? time exprcsscd as virtual time as a function of tile l"ojl)cctivc. symmctrlcal current, expressed as the rms value. 11

AC ) - A curve giving,

Time-Current

Characteristic

( of

a

Switching

Device

on

IS s 1885 ( Part XVBI ) - 1979 6.14 Cut-Off Current Characteristic 1 of a $dtching Device orl AC ) - A curve giving, under stated conditions of operation, the cut-off current as a function of the prospective symmetrical current, expressed as the rms vrrluc. 6.15 Overcurrent Discrimination - Co-ordination of the operating characteristics of two or more ovcrcurrent protective devices such that. on the incidence of overcurrents within stated limits, the device intended to operate within these limits does so, while the others do not operate. 6.16 Take-Over Current - The current co-ordinate of the intersection between the time-current characteristics of two overcurrent protective devices. current that a switching 6.17 Short-Time Withstand Current -The device~can carry in the closed position during a specified short time under prescribed conditions of use and behaviour. value of peak current that a 6.18 Peak Withstand Current -The switching device can withstand in the closed position under prescribed conditions of use and behaviour. 6.19 Applied Voltage - The voltage which exists across the terminals a pole of a switching device just before the making of the current. of

voltage which appears across the terminals 6.20 Recovery Voltage -The of a pole of a switching device after the breaking of the current.
NOTE- This voltage may be considered in two successive intervals of time, one during which a transient voltage exists, followed by a second one during which powerfrequency voltage alone exists.

6.21 Transient Recovery Voltage (TRV) - The recovery during the time in which it has a significant transient character.

voltage

NOTE 1 - The transient voltage may be oscillatory or nonoscillatory or a combination of these depending on the characteristics of the circuit and the switching device. It includes the voltage shift of the neutral of a polyphase circuit. NOTE 2 - The transient recovery voltage in three-phase circuits is, unless otherwise stated, that across the first pole to clear, because this voltage is generally higher than that which appears across each of the other two poles.

6.22 Power-Frequency Recovery Voltage - The recovery voltage after the transient voltage phenomena have subsided.
NOTE - This definition applies also to the case of dc, the frequency being then considered as zero.

6.23 Prospective Transient Recovery Voltage ( of a Circuit ) - The transient recovery voltage following the breirking of the prospective symmetrical current by an ideal switching device.
NOTE - The definition assumes that the switching device, for which the prospective transient recovery voltage is sought, is replaced by an ideal switching device, that is having

12

1s I 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979
instantaneous transition from xero to infinite impedance at the very instant ofzero current For circuits where the current can follow several ( that is at the `natural' current zero ). different paths, for example polyphasc circuits, the definition further assumes that the breaking of the current by the ideal switching device takes place only in the pole considered.

instantaneous value of voltage 6.24 Peak Arc Voltage - The maximum which under prescribed conditions appears across the terminals of a pole of a switching device during the arcing time. between two conductive 6.25 Clearance - The distance string stretched the shortest way between these conductive `6.26 Ciearance Between Poles parts of adjacent poles. The clearance between parts parts. along a

any conductive

6.27 Clearance to Earth ( of a Pole ) - The clearance ~between any conductive parts and any parts which are earthed or intended to be earthed. 6.28 Clearance Between Open Contacts ( Gap ) - The total clearlmce between the contacts, or any conductive parts connected thcre:o, of a pole of a mechanical switching device in the open position. 6.29 Creepage Distance - The shortest distance insulating material between two conductive parts.
NOTE surface. A joint between two pieces of insulating

along

the surface
par!

of an
of' the

mntcrinl

is considcrcd

6.30 Isolating Distance ( of a Pole of a Mechanical clearance between open contacts meeting Device ) -The requirements specified for disconnectors.

Switching the safety

6.31 Opening Time ( of a Mechanical Switching Device) -The interval of time between the specified instant of initiation of the opening operation and the instant when the arcing contacts have separated in all poles.
No-r-n - The instant of initiation of the opening operation, that is the application of the opening command ( for example, energizing the release, etc ) i's given in the rclevant specifications.

6.32 Arcing Time~of a Pole - The interval of time between the instant of the initiation of the arc in a pole and the instant of final arc extinction in that pole. 6.33 Arcing Time of Multipole Switching Device -The interval time between the instant of the first initiation of an arc and the instant final arc extinction in all poles. 6.34 Break-Time -The interval of time between the beginning opening time of a mechanical switching device ( or the pre-arcing a fuse ) and the end of the arcing time. 13 of of

ofthe time of

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII)

- 1979

6.35 Make-Time -, The interval of time between the initiation of the closing operation and the instant when the current begins to flow in the main circuit. The interval of time between the initiation of the 6.36 Closing Timeclosing operation and the instant when the contacts touch in all poles. 6.37 Make-Break Time - The interval of time between the instant when the current begins to flow in a pole and the instant offinal arc extinction in all poles, with the opening release energized at the instant when current begins to flow in the main circuit. 6.38 Dead Time ( During Autoreclosing ) - The interval of time between final arc extinction in all poles on the opening operation and the first re-establishment of current in any pole on the subsequent closing operation. 6.39 Reignition ( of an AC ~Mechanical Switching Device ) - A resumption of current between the contacts of a mechanical switching device during a breaking operation with an interval of zero current of less than a quarter cycle of power frequency. 6.40 Restrike ( of an -AC Mechanical Switching Device ) - A resumption of current between the contacts of a mechanical switching device during a breaking operation with an interval of zero current oj a quarter cycle of power frequency or longer. 7. SWITCHING DEVICES

7.1 Switching Device -A device designed to make or break the current in one or more electric circuits. 7.2 Mechanical Switching Device - A switching device designed to close and open one or more electric circuits by means of separable contacts. 7.3 Semiconductor Switching Device -A switching device designed to make the current in an electric circuit by-means of the controlled conductivity of a semiconductor. 7.4 Switch ( Mechanical ) - A mechanical switching device capable of making, carrying and breaking currents under normal circuit conditions which may include specified operating overload conditions and also carrying for a specified time currents under specified abnormal circuit conditions such as those of short circuit. 7.5 Switch-Fuse -A switch in which one or more poles have a fuse in series in a composite unit. 7.6 Fuse-Switch-A switch in which a fuse-link or a fuse carrier with ~fuse-link forms the moving contact of the switch. 14

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 switching device for earthing parts 7.7 Earthing Switch - A mechanical of a circuit, capable of withstanding for a specified time currents under abnormal conditions such as those of short circuit, but not required to carry current under normal conditionsof the circuit. switching device, 7.8 Circuit Breaker ( Mechadcal ) - A mechanical capable of making, carrying and breaking currents under normal circuit conditions and also making, carrying for a specified time and breaking currents under specified abnormal circuit conditions such as those of short circuit. 7.9 Current-Limiting Circuit-Breaker -A circuit-breaker with break-time short enough to prevent the short-circuit current reaching otherwise attainable peak value. a its

switching device having 7.10 Contactor ( Mechanical ) - A mechanical only one position of rest, operated otherwise than by hand, capable of making, carrying and breaking currents under normal circuit conditions including operating overload conditions. mechanical switching 7.11 Control Switch -A purpose of controlling the operation of switchgear signalling, electrical mterlocking, etc. device which or controlgear, serves the including

NOTE -A control switch consists of one or more contact elements with a common actuating system.

7.12 Pilot Switch - A nonmanual specified conditions of an actuating

control switch actuated quantity.

in response

to

NOTE - The actuating quantity may be pressure, temperature, elapsed time, etc.

velocity,

liquid level,

7.13 Push-Button - A control switch having an actuator intended to be operated by force exerted by a part of the human body, usually the finger or palm of the hand, and having stored energy ( spring) return. 7.14 Disconnector ( Isolator ) - A mechanical switching device provides, in the open position, an isolating distance in accordance specified requirements. which with

NOTE- A disconnector is capable of opening and closing a circuit when either negligible current is broken or made, or when no significant change in the voltage across the terminals of each of the poles of the disconnector occurs. It is also capable of carrying currents under normal circuit conditions and carrying for a specified time currents under abnormal conditions such as those of short circuit. 7.15 Switah-Disconnector ( Switch-Isolator ) - A switch which, in the open position, satisfies the isolating requirements specified for a disconnector.

7.16 Fuse-Disconnector ( Fuse-Isolator ) -A disconnector in which a fuse-link or a fuse carrier with fuse-link forms the moving contact of the disconnector. 15

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII 8. FUSES

) - 1979

A switching device that, by the melting of one or more of its spcclally dcsigncd and proportioned components, opens the circuit in which it is inscr ted and breaks the current when this exceeds a given value for a sufficient time.
8.1 Fuse NOTE .-- The fuse comprises all the parts that form the complete switching ck~iw.

8.2 Fuse-Element

-The

part of a fuse designed to melt wl:en the fuse
) -The

operates. 8.3 Fuse-Link ( Fuse-Unit after the fuse has operated. 8.4 Fuse fuse-link.
Carrier -

part of a fuse intended to be replaced

The movable parts of a fuse designed to carry the
does not include the fuse-link.

NOTE -The

fuse-carrier

8.5 Fuse-Base--The connection to a circuit.

fixed part

of a fuse provided with terminals

for

the fuse-elcmcnt is 8.6 Enclosed Fuse-Link - A fuse-link in which totally enclosed ;md which has been designed to eliminate any harmful extcrn,il effects during operation within its rating.
l~U?E --~xtcrnal

clcs are cunsidcrcd

arcing, ths rclcase harmful effects.

of gas or the ejection

of flame

or metalk

parti-

8.7 Indicating 8.8

Device (Indicator) - A part indicate at tile fuse whether the fuse has operated.

cf

a fuse provided is accomplished

to by

Expulsion Fuse -- A fuse in which expulsion <rfgnses produced by the arc.

operation

8.9 Striker "-A mechanical device forming part of a fuse which, when the fuse operates, releases the energy required to cause operation ofother apparatus or to provide interlocking. 8.10 Fuse-Holder
-

The combination

of a fuse-base with its fuse-carrier.

8.11 Pa-e-arcing Time ( Melting Time) - The interval of time between the beginning of a current large enough to cause a break in the fuse element(s) and thc~instant when an arc is initiated. 8.12 Arcing TimeThe interval of time between the instant of the initiation of the arc and the instant of final arc extinction. 8.13 Operating Time ( Break Time ) and the arcing time. 16 The sum of the pre-arcing time

. 8.14 Joulehtegral ( 1st ) over a given time interval:
The integral 11 Izt =

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 of the square of the currc*x

I to

i2 dt

NOTE 1 - When considered from the point of view of the circuit protected by a furc, the value of the Joule-integral over the operating time of the fuse is rcfcrrcd to'a specific energy, that is the energy released as heat in 1 Q of circuit resistance. NOTE 2 -The values of the Joule-integral Joule-integral and operating Joule-integral operating time, respectively. usually stated for fuse-links arc prc-arciW extended over the pre-arcing time and the

of

8.15 Virtual Time -The value of Joule-integral the value of the prospective current.

divided by the sqti=c
the values or

NoTE-T~~ values of virtual times usually stated for a fuse-link arc pre-arcing time and of operating time.

8.16 Conventional Non-fusing Current - A value of current specified as that which the fuse-link is capable of carrying for a specified tinlc ( conventional time ) without melting. 8.17
that

Conventional Fusing Current - A value of current specified a> which causes operation of the fuse-link within a specified time ( conventional time ).

APPENDIX ( Cluuse 0.4 )
ADDITIONAL A-l. GENERAL TERMS TERMS

A

AND DEFINITIONS

A-l.1 Co-ordination of Insulation - The process of correlatirlg tllc insulating strength of electrical equipment with anticipated ovcrvoitagc:s and with the characteristics of protective devices ( see IS : 2165-1977" ). It consists of the steps taken to prevent damage to electrical equipme-it due to overvoltages and to localize flashover ( when they cannot economically be prevented ) to points where they will. not cause damage. A-l .2 Earthing Position - A position in which the closing of a mechanical switching device causes a main circuit to be short-circuited and earthed.
*Guide

for insulation co-ordination

(second revision).

17

A-l.3 Electrically Exptstd Iastallatiw - An installation in which the apparatus is not subjected to overvoltages of atmospheric origin. A-l.4 Electrically Nontxpostd Installation - An installation in which the apparatus is subjected to overvoltagea of atmospheric origin. A-l.5 Interlocking Device - A device which makes the operation of a switching device dependent upon the position of one or more other pieces of equipment. A-1.6 Isolated Position ( Disconnected Petition ) - The position of a withdrawable part in which the isolating distance is established whilst the withdrawable part remains mechanically attached to the enclosure. A-l.7 Maintenance Position (Test Position) - An isolated position in which the control circuits are connected, allowing tests of the mechanical operation of the withdrawable part. A-l.8 Mechanical Switching Device - A switching device designed to close and open one or more electric circuits by means of separable contacts. A-1.9 Operating Duty-( of a Circuit-Brtaktr ) - A defined sequence of making and breaking operations without any deliberate alterations of the main circuit in which circuit-breaker is placed. A-1.10 Removed Position - The position of a removable outside of and mechanically separated from the enclosure. A-2. TYPE OF CONSTRWTION AND PHYSICAL part when

PROTECTION

A-2.1 Compartment - A part of a metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear, itself totally enclosed except for opening necessary for interconnection, control or ventilation.
NOTE - A compartment may be qualified by the main component for example, circuit-breaker compartment, busbar compartment.
contained therein,

A-2.2 Cover - A part of the switchgear and controlgear.

external

enclosure

of

metal-enclosed

A-2.3 Cubicle Switchgear &d Controlgear - Metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear other than metal-clad switchgear and controlgear.
NOTE--This term applia to switchgear md cantigesr enclosure and having either: having,stn external metal

a) no partition,
b) nori-metallic partitions, or c) metallic partitions having a degree ofprotection rekvant standard. lower than thcwc.jt&dcd in tie.

18

IS I 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 A-2.4 Door A hinged cover.

A-2.5 Enclosure - Surrounding part of metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear used to prevent personnel from accidentally approaching live or moving parts contained therein and to protect internal equipment against external effects. A-2.6 Factory Assembled Switchgear and Controlgear - Switchgear and controlgear built in the factory as transportable assemblies constructed and tested under the responsibility of the manufacturer. A-2.7 Flameproof Enclosure - An enclosure for mechanical switching device that will withstand, when the covers or other access doors are properly secured, an internal explosion of the flammable gas or vapour which may enter or which may originate inside the enclosure without suffering damage and without communicating the internal inflammation (or explosion ) to the external flammable gas or vapour, for which it is designed; through any joints or other structural openings in the enclosure.
NOTE - The term `flameproof' as used here is synonymous with the term `explosionproof' as used in the USA or `pressure-proof type of protection' used in Germany for the class of apparatus covered.

A-2.8 Gate-End Box - A flameproof enclosure containing electrical apparatus such as controlgear, switchgear, and/or protective gear, designed primarily for use in proximity to the coal face. A-2.9 Open Type Apparatastouched. Apparatus in which live parts can be separating

A-2.10 Partition - A part of the enclosure of a compartment it from another compartment.

NOTE - A partition becomes a cover when it is accessible from the outside in one of the positions defined in 2.10 of Is: 3427-19692.

A-2.11 Proof -- Apparatus is defined as proof when so designed that its successful operation is not interfered with when the apparatus is subjected to the specified-external agent under given conditions. A-2.12 Remo$able Part - A part which may be removed entirely from the metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear even though the main circuit is live. A-2.13 Resistant - Apparatus is defined as resistant when so designed that it will not deteriorate when subjected to the specified external agent under given conditions. A-2.14 Screened Apparatsss ( Partially Enclosed Apparatus ) Apparatus in which live_parts are protected from accidental contact by any pcrson. butnotexccc&g
*Specification for metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear 11 OoOV. for voltegea above 1000

V

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 A-2.15 Segregation - A general term describing an arrangement of conductors with earthed metal interposed between them in such a manner that dielectric breakdown can only occur to earth. A-2.16 Shutter - A part which can be moved between a position in which it permits contacts of removable parts to engage fixed contacts, and a position in which it becomes a part of a cover or a partition shielding the fixed contacts. A-2.17 Single-Tank Switch ( Single-Tank Circuit-Breaker ) - 11 multipole switch or circuit-breaker with a single-oil filled tank containing the breaking-element of all the poles. A-2.18 Tight - Apparatus is defined as tight when so constructed that the enclosing case will prevent entry of the specified external agent under given conditions. A-2.l3 Totally Enclosed Apparatus - Apparatus completely enclosed in such a way as to make it-impossible for foreign bodies to make accidental or intentional contact with a live part so long as the enclosure is in position. A-2.20 Transportable Assembly - An assembly or sub-assembly of metal-enclosed switchgear and controlgear, suitable for shipping without being dismantled. A-2.21 Withdrawable Part - A removable part capable of being displaced to a position in which it provides an isolating distance or segregation whilst remaining mechanically attached to the enclosure. A-3. CONSTRUCTIONAL ELEMENT6

A-3.1 Accidentally Dangerous Part - A conducting part which can be touched readily by an operator and which is normally not alive, but which may become alive as a result of an insulation failure if it is not earthed. A-3.2 Break (Applicable to a Circuit-Breaker ) - A sum of gaps introduced in one pole between main contacts or arcing contacts ( if any ) when the circuit-breaker is fully open. A-3.3 Closing Release -A release which mechanically releases the energy stored in a spring, a counterweight or the like, used for closing the circuit-breaker. A-3.4 Conducting Part -A-part which is capable of conducting current although it may not necessarily be used for carrying service current. A-33 Making Current Release ( of a Circuit-Breaker ) - A release which permits a circuit-breaker to open, without any intentional time-delay only during a closing operation if the making current exceeds a prcdetermined value, and which is rendered inoperative when the circuit-breaker is in the closed position. 20

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1978 A-3.6 Overcurrent Device - A device designed to cause interruption of the circuit with both operational excess current and short-circuit current. A-3.7 Overload Device - A device, the operation of which causes the mechanical stvitching device to interrupt current at a predetermined excess value but not necessarily under short-circuit conditions. Such a device normally includes some form of time delay. release which permits a mechanical A-3.7 .I Oucrload Retease -A switching device to open automatically when current in at least one of the poles of its main circuit exceeds a predetermined value. relay which permits a mechanical switching A-3.7.2 Overload Relav -A device to open automat&ally through an auxiliarv contact or a device when current in at least one of the poles of its circuit exceeds a predetermined value. A-3.8 Relay -. An auxiliary device which may or may not be part of the mechanical switching device ~intended to causethe automatic opening or closing of the main circuit current when predetermined conditions are realized. A-3.9 Undervoltage Protection ( of a Starter) - A protection in which the starrcr opens the circuit if the voltage fails or falls to an abnormally low value but cannot be closed on restoration of adequate voltage until subsequent manual operation or its equivalent. A-4. OPERATION A-4.1 Mechanical Switching Device with Lock-Out Preventing Closing -. A mechanical switching device in which none of the moving contacts can make current if the closing command is initiated while the conditions necessary for the opening operation remain established. A-5. CHARACTERISTIC QUANTITIES

A-5.1 Amplitude Fact& - Ratio between the highest peak value of the transient recovery voltage and the amplitude of the recovery voltage at supply frequency. A-5.2 Arc Voltage ( of a Fuse-Link) fuse-link during the arcing time. The voltage that exists across a

A-5.3 Symmetrical Breaking Capacity - The rms value of the ac component of the current that the switching device shall be able to break at a stated voltage simultaneously in all the poles of a switching device. A-5.4 Asymmetrical Breaking Capacity -The rms value of the combined ac and dc components of the currents that the switching device shall be able to break at a stated voltage by any one pole of a switching device. 21

IS t 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 A-5.5 Mainly Active LoadBreaking Capacity - The breaking capacity when breaking a load at an inductive power factor of 0.7. A-5.6 Closed Loop Breaking Capacity (of a Switch or Switch breaking capacity at an inductive power factor of 0.3 Xsolator ) -The in a closed loop circuit, that is, a circuit in which both sides of the switch remain live after breaking and in which the voltage appearing across the terminals is substantially less than the system voltage. A-5.7 Critical Current - The value of the breaking current, less than the rated breaking capacity, at which the arc duration is at maximum and shows a marked increase compared with that corresponding to the rated breaking capacity. A-5.8 Discrimination -Discrimination between two or more fuse-links or any other protective device in series is said to occur when on the incidence of a short circuit or an overcurrent only the desired fuse-link or other protective device operates. period of time for which the A-5.9 Duration of Short Circuit -The switch or switch-isolator can carry a short circuit current of specifi& value. A-5.10 Duty ( of a Fuse-Link ) - The satisfactory opening, at declared voltages not higher than its rated voltage, of the circuit or circuits protccted by a fuse-link under conditions that produce for the requisite length of time any prospective current greater than its minimum fusing current up to its rupturing capacity rating. A-5.11 Fusing Factor - The ratio, greater than unity, of the minimum fusing current to the rated current, namely: Fusing factor = Minimum fusing current Rated current

voltage values ( both power A-5.12 Insalation Level ( Rated ) -The frequency and impulse ) which characterise insulation of the equipment with regard to its capability to withstand the dfelectric stresses. A-5.12.1 Imfxdse Withstand Voltage - The value of the amplitude of the standard impulse voltage wave which the insulation of the.mechanical switching device shall withstand under specified test conditions. A-5.13 Prearcing Zar ( of a Ease-Link ) - The measure of the heating effect of the current during the pre-arcing time derived from the time integral of the square of the current actually passed by the fuse-link during the pre-arcing time as recorded by the oscillogram during the test laid down in the relevant specification and where I is rms current. A-5.14 Arcing IQ ( of a Fase-Link) -The measure of the heating effect of the current during the arcing time derived from the time integral 22

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 of the square of the current actually passed bv the fuse-link during the arcing time as.recorded by the oscillogram during the tejt laid down in the relevant snecification and where Z is the rms curreut. A-5.15 Total I't and arcing Pt. ( of a Fuse-Link part ) The sum of th,.: prz-arcing extends 19

A-5.16 Loop -That zero to next.

of an alternating

wave which

from ol:e

NOTE1 - Successive loops may have different durations or anq~litudcs in the rrgion The larger loops are called major loops and ~hc sn~sllrr ows of initiation of current. are called minor loops.
NOTE 2 -

time, arcing-time

For the purpose of indicating the number of current-zeros during may be referred to as including a statccl numbrr of loops.

arcing-

A-5.17 Mechanical Loading of Terminal ( of an Isolator ) - Tl:e mechanical load at each terminal equivalent to the combined mechanical forces to which the isolator may be subjected. current at which ;1 A-5.18 Minimum Fusing Current - The minimum fuse-element shall melt, that is, the asymptotic value of currcllt shown b) the curve of total operating time. this is -dccmcd to be the \-aluc of the crlrrent A-5.18.1 In practice, corresponding ( on the curve ) to an arbitrary time sufliciently 11~s for the asymptotic value to be nearly reached. A-5.19 Minimum Nonfusing Current - Tbc current shown by the curve of pre-arcing time. A-5.19.1 In practice, this is deemed corresponding on the curve to an arbitrary asymptotic value to be nearly reached.
to asymptt)tic value of

bc tllc value of current time suflicicntly long for the

A-5.20 Natural Frequency - The frequency at which the circuit shall oscillate if it is free to do so. Circuit may have more than one natural frequency. These are the frequencies wliich occur in the trausicnt component of the recovery voltage. A-5.21 Opening Time ( Until Separation of the Arcing Contacts )The opening time until separation of the arcing contacts of a ulechanical switching device is defined according to the type of its opening release as stated below, and with any time delay dcvicc forming an integral part of the mechanical switching device adjusted to its minimum setting or, if possible, cut out entirely: a) For a mechanical switching device tripped by any form of auxiliary power, the opening time is measured from the instant of application of the auxiliary power to the opening release Of the mechanical switching device, when in the closed position, to the instant when the closed position, to the instant when the arcir?g contacts have separated in all poles. 23

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 b) For a mechanical switching device tripped by a current in the main circuit without the aid of any form of auxiliary power, the opening time is measured from the instant at which, the mechanical switching device being in the closed position, the current in the main circuit reaches the operating value of the overcurrent release to the instant when the arcing contacts have separated in all poles.
NOTE -For switching devices which embody switching resistors, it may he. necessary to make a distinction between the opening time up to the instant of the separation of the arcing contacts and the opening time up to the instant of the separation of the contacts in series with the switching resistors.

A-5.22 Operating arcing time.

Time -

The sum

of the

pre-arcing

time

and

rhe

A-5.23 Operation ( of a Fuse-Link ) - The process between the beginnOperation is ing of the pre-arcing time and the end of the arcing time. sometimes called `blowing'. A-5.24 Overvoltage to Earth - A voltage to~earth, expressed voltage, which is greater than the normal peak voltage corresponding to the highest system voltage. as a peak to earth

A-5.24.1 Assigned Maximum Overt&ages - The maximum permissible overvoltages lvhich may occur under prescribed test conditions when breaking current lower than or equal to the rated breaking capacity. They shall include the overvoltage values for the load side and for the supply side of the switch or switch-isolator measured at its terminals. A-5.25 Peak Current (of a Starter ) - The highest peak value of the rms current which is attained during the short-circuit conditions between the steps. A-5.26 Peak Making Current - The highest peak value of current in a pole of a switching device when the current is established by the closing of the device. A-5.26.1 Peak Making Current of Circuit, Prosjectioe ( with Resect to o Switching Device Situated Therein) - The highest peak value of prospective current of a circuit.
NOTE 1 -The prospective peak making current is used instead of the peak making current, in expressing the making capacity of switching device which inherently and materially influence the current in the circuit. NUIZ 2 - The prospective peak making current of a polyphase circuit conditions when the circuit is made simultaneously in all phases. refers to the

A-5.27 Peak Short-Circuit Current -The peak value ( including the dc component ) of the first major half-cycle of the short-circuit current. 24

tS : i885 ( Part X-VII ) - 1979 A-5.28 Peak Withstand Current switching device withstand in the conditions of use and behaviour. The value of peak current that a closed position under prescribed

A-5.29 power Frequency Withstand Voltage - The rms value of the sinusoidal alternating voltage at power frequency which the insulation of a mechanical switching device shall withstand .under specified tat conditions. A-5.30 Pre-arcing Time ( Melting Time ) of a Fuse -The time between the commencement of a current large enough to cause the fuse element(s) to melt and the instant where the arc is initiated. A-5.31 Rbted Air Supply Pressure -The rated supply pressure of pneumatic or electro-pneumatic switching device is the air pressure upon which the operating characteristics of the pneumatic control system are based. A-5.32 Rated Breaking Capacity capacity assigned to a fuse. ( of a Fuse) The value of breaking which the at its rated

A-5.33 Rated Current - The rms value of the current mechanical switching device shall be able to carry continuously frequency, under prescribed test conditions.

A-5.34 Rated Frequency -The service frequency for which the mechanical switching device is designed and to which characteristic values correspond. A-5.35 Rated Insulation Voltage ( of a Starter ) - The value of voltage which designates the starter and to which dielectric tests clearance and creepage distances in air are referred. For polyphase circuits it is the voltage between phases. A-5.36 Rated Mechanical Load ( of an Isolator ) - The highest static force that an isolator is capable of withstandin g, this force being applied at each terminal in any direction, in a plane at right angles to the taxis of the insulator. A-5.37 Rated Operational Current ( of a Contactor ) - Tt is the -value of current which determines the conditions of use of the contactor. It is stated by the manufacturer and takes into account the rated operational voltage, frequency, rated duty, the utilization category and the type of protective encldsures specified by the user. The rated making and breaking capacities of a contactor are generally exprcsscd in reLition to the rated operational current. In the case of contractors of motors, the indication ofoperational current may be replaced by a statement of the power rating of the motor corresponding to the rated operational voltage considered. The manufacturer shall bc prepared to ind'cate the assured relation between the current and the power. 25

fS : 1883 (Part XVII

j-

19%

Operational Currents (of a Starter ) - It is stated by the manufacturer and takes into account the rated current of the overload relay. installed in the starter, the rated operational voltage, the rated frequency, the rated duty, the utilization category and the type of protective enclosure.

A-S.B Rated

A-5.38.1 The indication of a rated operational current may be replaced by the indication of the maximum rated power output at the rated operational voltage considered, of the motor for which the starSer is intended. The manufacturer shall be prepared to state the relationship assumed between the current and the power. A-5.39 Rated Operational Voltage (._ofa Starter or Contactor) - The value of voltage which combined with a rated operational current determines the application of the starter OT contactor and to which arc referred to the making and breaking capacities, the types of duty and the utilization category. For polyphase circuits, it is stated as a voltage between phase. A-5.40 Rated Peak Short-Circuit Current -That value of the peak short-circuit current which a mechanical switching device can carry in the closed position without damage. A-5.41 Rated Short Time Current (of an Isolator or Earthing Switch ) - That short time current which an isolator or an earthing switch can carry for a period of 1. second. A-5.42 Rated Supply Voltage and Frequency of Control Circuit The values of supply voltage and frequency upon which the operation, temperature-rise and insulation characteristics of the operating coils are based. A-5.43 Rated Thermal Current - It is the value of current which determines the temperature-rise conditions of the main circuit in the absence of any starting or stopping operation of the starter or closing or opening operation of a contactor. The starter or contactor is capable of carrying this current for 8 hours. The contacts being closed throughout this period without the temperature-rise of its several parts exceeding the limits specified in the relevant specification. The rated thermal current may differ according to the type of enclosure. A-5.44 Rated Voltage the mechanical switching conditions. The rms value of the voltage used to designate device and to which are related the operating

A-5.45 Rating - General terms employed to designate the characteristic values that together define the working conditions upon which the tests are based and for which the equipment is designed.
capacity,

NOTE-Examples of rated values usually stated are:
insulation level, etc.

voltage,

current,

breaking

26

tS I 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1939 A-5.46 Ruptnring Capacity ( of a Fuse-Lbk ) - A value of the prosptictive current (stated by the manufacturer ) a fuse-link is capable of breaking at a stated voltage under prescribed conditions of use and bchaviour. A-5.47 Short-Circuit Breaking Power Factor Under consideration.

that a A-5.48 Short-Time Current - The rms value of the current switching device can carry in the closed position during a specified short time under prescribed conditions of use and behaviour. rated current A-5.49 Size ( of a Fuse) - The maximum amperes) that fuse of a given dimension may be allocated. 1 expressed in

A-5.50 Take-Over Current -The current co-ordinate of the intersection between the time-current characteristics Of two over-current protective devices. A-6. SWITCHES AND DISCONNECTOR

with and A-6.1 Auxiliary Switch - A switch working in conjunction actuated by the mechanical switching device and serving to control lamps and alarm-bells or auxiliary devices, such as trip coils, indicating for providing electrical interlocking. A-6.2 Air-Break Isolator - A manually-operated isolating in air the circuit under no-load conditions
carrying

device only.

capable

of

device capable of making, A-6.3'Air-Break Switch - A non-automatic and breaking its normal rated current and limited overcurrent in air in addition to being capable of making circuits under abnormal conditions, for instance, short circuit when associated with a fuse. switch consisting of fixed contact A-6.4 Cam-Operated Switch -A elements and movable contact elements operated in sequence by a camshaft. A-6.5 Composite Unit of Switches and Fuse - A combination of a switch in series with a fuse ( or fuses ) within an enclosure ( or enclosures ) so as to form a composite whole. A-6.6 Drum Controller -A selector members are arranged on a cylindrical switch in which the moving surface. contact

A-6.7 Indicating Device ( of a Switch or Switch Isolator ) - A device which indicates, at the location of the switch or switch-isolator, whether the separable contacts of the switch or switch-isolator are in the open or closed position. a circuit and ~-6.8 Isolating Switch - A switch which isolates capable of breaking not less than its rated current at rated voltage. 27 &

IS: 1885 ( Part XVII

) - 19%

A-6.9 Limit Switchactunted when a moving

A position switch in which the contacts part reaches the end of its normal travel.

are the

A-6.10 Master Controller ( Auxiliary Controller ) - A controller contacts of which arc included in the auxiliary circuit of an apparatus.
A-6.11 Over Travel Switch-

are actuated

when a moving

A position switch in which the contacts part passes beyond its normal travel. in

A-6.112 Position-Switch - A device in which the contacts are actuated accordance with a prcdetermincd position of a moving part. A-6.13 Push Button Switch acts as operating elcmcnt. A switching device wherein

a push button

A-6.14 Q_uick Make-and-Break SwitchA switch in which quick make-and-break of the circuit is ensured through the medium of a spring or by other means independent of the speed of operation of the operator. A-6.15 Reversing Switch -- A selector switch tions of a part of a circuit.
A-6.16 Rotary Switch -

for reversing

the connecin which the

movable

cont.xt

members

A switch or selector switch move in an accurate path. A device

A-6.1 I Selector Switch circuits.

used to select any one of two or more

A-6.18 Splitter Unit - A composite unit comprising a switch of not more in any than 2 poles ::nd a bank of not more than 8 fused ways connected one pole to a common busbar. NOTE- In sornc forms of splitter unit a fuze of the same rated current
switch A-6.19 is in series with the bank of fused ways. as

that of the the

Star-Delta

Switch -

three circuits

of a tllrec-phnse

,4 selector switch intended to connect device either in star or delta,

A.6.20 Travel Reversing Switch - A device in which the contacts are actuated to revcrsc: the directiort of movement of a reciprocating part at a prcdctcrminsd position. A-7. CIRCUIT-BREAKERS in which circuit

A-7.1 Air Blast Circuit-Breaker - A circuit-breaker breaking occurs in a blast of air under pressure. A-7.2 Air Break Circuit-Breaker-A circuit-breaker breaking occurs in air at axlospheric prtxsure. A-7.3 Automatic Circzlit-Breaker breaking occurs automatically under

in which circuit the

- .4 circuit-breaker in which predetermined conditions,

28

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 A-7.4 Automatic Reclosing Circuit-Breaker ( Automatic Circuit Recloeer ) - A circuit-breaker designed to reclose automatically a circuit according to a predetermined duty cycle after an automatic opening. A-7.5 Circuit-Breaker ( Mechanical ) - A mechanical switching device, capable of making, carrying and breaking currents under normal circuit conditions and also making, carrying for a specified time and breaking currents under specified abnormal circuit conditions, such as those of short circuit. some types are suitable for frequent operation.
NOTE-A circuit-breaker is usually intended to operate in frequently

although

A-7.6 Dead Tank Oil Circuit-Breaker ( Bulk Oil Circuit-Breaker ) An oil circuit-breaker in which the oil content is used for arc-extinction and also for insulating live parts from the tank which is dead and generally earthed ( grounded ) . A-7.7 fiard Gas Circuit-Breaker - A circuit-breaker in which the arc acts upon gas-producing solid material and so produces a quantity of gas sufficient to create an arc quenching blast. A-7.8 High Speed Circuit-Breaker ( DC ) - A circuit-breaker with very short breaking time which is intended to prevent the short-circuit current from attaining its prospective value. A-7.9 Live Tank Oil Circuit-Breaker ( Small Oil Volume CircuitBreaker ) - An oil circuit-breaker in which the oil is primarily used for ac extinction and not necessarily for insulating live parts from earth ( ground). The tanks of such circuit-breakers arc insulated from earth ( ground ). These circuit-breakers are always phase separated. A-7.10 Magnetic Blow Out Circuit-Breaker - A circuit-breaker in which the interaction between a magnetic field and the arc current is used to extinguish the arc. A-7.11 Oil Circuit-Breaker occurs in oil. A circuit-breaker in which circuit breaking -A circuit-breaker that

A-7.12 Remote Controlled Circuit-Breaker may be opened and closed from a distance. A-8. APPARATUS FOR STARTING

AND CONTROL

A-8.1 Composite Resistor - A resistor in which the element having resistance is composed of mixtures of conducting and insulating materials in the form of compressed powders. A-8.2 Constant Voltage Regulator ( Voltage Stabilizer) -A device intended to maintain a constant voltage across a circuit connected to a variable voltage bus. 29

IS: I885 ( Part XVII ) - I979
A-8.3 Contactor - A mechanical switching position of rest ( corresponding to the position open or closed) operated otherwise than by carrying and breaking currents under normal operating overload conditions, the speed independent of the operator.

device having only one of the main contacts either hand, capable of making, circuit conditions including of make and break being

A-3.3.1 Air-Break Contactor made and broken in the air.

A contactor

in which the main circuit is

A-8.3.2 Electra-pneumatic Contactor - A contactor the moving elements of which leave the position of rest when compressed air is fed by means of electrically controlled valves, to a device which acts on the mechanism of the contactor. contactor the moving elements of A-8.3.3 Electromagnetic Contactor -A which leave the position of rest when an electromagnet is energized and acts directly on the mechanism of the contactor. A-8.3.4 Latched Contactor -A contactor; the moving ekments of which leave the position of rest when the operating means are energized, but which are prevented by means of a latching arrangement from returning The to the position of rest when the operating means are de-energized. latching and the release of the latching may be mechanical, magnetic, electrical or pneumatic.
NOTE - Because of the latching, the latched contactor actually acquires a second However, position of rest and, according to the definition in A-8.3, it is not a contactor. since the latched contactor in both its utilization and its design is more closely related to contactors in gcncral than to any other classification of switching devices, it is considered proper that it should comply with the specifications of contactors wherever they are applicable.

A-8.3.5 Oil-Immersed Contactor made aud broken ino il.

A contactor in which main

circuit is

A-8,3.6 Pneumatic Contactor - A contactor the moving elements of which leave the position of rest when compressed air is fed without the use of electrical means, to a device which acts on the mechanism of the contactor. A-8.4 Controller - A device, or group of devices, which serves to govern, in some predetermined manner, the electric power delivered to the apparatus to which it is connected. A-8.5 Field Rheostat current of a machine.
-

A rheostat

designed to reguiate

the excitation

A-8.6 Film Resistor - A resistor in which the element having resistance comprises a thin film of conducting material on an insulating Gpport. A-8.7 Inductor with Adjustable Air Gap - An inductor which can be regulated by varying the reluctance of its magnetic circuit by means of an adjurtable air gap. 30

IS t 1885 ( Part XVII A-8.8 Liquid Resistor -

) - 1979

A resistor

comprising

electrcdcs

immcrscd intclltled conductor

in a to i;

liquid. A-8.9 Load Rheostat (Loading Resistor) - A rheostat constitute a load, for example, for load tests of generators.
A-8.10 Metallic Resistor-A

resistor

in

which

tllc

metallic. A-8.11 Potentiometer Type Resistor tappings allowing fractions of the voltage between the tappings. - A resistor tvith intcrmcdi.tta actosa the resistor to I)e obtained type resistor a sGtch or

A-8.12 Potentiometer Type Rheostat - il potfntiometer from which varying voltage values can bc tapped off ( by sliding contact ) without disconnecting the connections. A-8.13 Regulating certain limits either is conncctcd.
Inductor -

the current

A device designed to regulate within or the voltage drop in tile circuit \VliCrC it

A-8.14 Regulator - A devicecapable or var-ying in a prescribed manner, current, voltage, speed or power. A-8.15 Resistance Step adjacent steps of the starters. A-8.16 Resistor-An resistance.
The

ofmaintaining one operirtional
of the

practically quantity,

const;lr!t, namei!., two it5

value

rl:sist;lncc xnninly

I,et\\:c:clr wetI for

arrangement

of conducttirs which connected adjusting
-A

A-8.17 Rheostat --A variable disconnecting any connection. A-8.18 Rotor Rheostat a motor.
A-8.19 Slip Regulator-A -

resistor

can be regulated to the rotor rheostat for an

\vithout of

A rheostat speed
Rheostat

winclin:;s induction

motor. A-8.20 Speed Regulating the speed of a motor. rheostat for the regulation of

A-8.21 Starter --- A device ( or assembly a motor or contrcllhg a11 apparatus.
A-8.21.1 Air- beak Starter -

of devices ) designed in which

for starting is rn;~cle

A starter

the main circllit

and broken

in air.

A-8.21.2 Autometic Starter - A d evice so designed that, after an initiating impulse given by another device or an operator, the complete cycle of operations necessary for starting is carried out automAtically. 31

IS : 1885 ( Part XVII ) - 1979 A-8.21.3 Cam Starter -A operated by a cam shaft. starter in which the moving contacts are

switching starter which connect3 a A-8.21.4 Direct- On- Line Starter -A line voltage across the motor terminals in one step. starter in which the moving conta.ct parts are A-8.21.5 Drum Starter -A arranged upon a cylindrical surface. A-8.21.6 Face Plate Starter -A arranged upon a plane surface. starter in which switch contact parts arc of all the switching and

A-8.21.7 Motor StarterA combination regulating means to start and stop a motor.
NOTE -For

normal applications, the starter is provided with protective device, .sueh

as for overload and undervoltage.

A-8.21.7.1 Motor switch - Switch capable of performing the functions of a motor starter but without any protective devices. A-8.2118 Oil-Immersed and broken in oil.
Starter -A

starter in which main circuit is made

A-8.21.9 Pole Changing Starter - A starter for an induction motor having several starter windings which may be combined differently depending on the desired number of poles; the starter is designed to feed the different windings according to a sequence suitable for starting the motor. A-8.21.10 n-Skep Starter - A starter in which there are ( n ting positions between the `off' and the `full-on' positions. 1 ) accelera-

Example: A 5-step resistance starter has four resistance sections and a star-delta starter is a 2-step starter. A-8.21.11 Reduced Voltage StarterA starter 30 arranged that with the switching device in intermediate or starting position, reduced voltage is applied to the motor terminals. A-8.21.12 Resistance Starter -A starter comprising a resistor and means for readily reducing the amount of resistance in the circuit. A-8.21.13 Reversing Starter - A switching starter meant for changing over the connections to the stator windings of the motor with the object of changing its direction of rotation. A-831.14 Semi-aufomatic Starter -A starter, the automatic operation of which can be limited to a greater or smaller part of the starting operations, at the will of the operator. A-8.21.15 Series- Parallel Starter - A switching starter for induction motors arranged in such a way that in the starting posit@ all the windings of each phase are in series and in the running position the windings of each phase are in parallel circuit. 32

IS : 1885 ( Part XV11 ) - 1979 A-8.21.16 Single-Phase Spli/ Phase Starter - A starter for a single-phase induction motor which has in the starting position on the stator side a phase splitter consisting of a resistor or reactor or both ~for starting purposes. A-8.21.17 Single-Step Starter --A starter in which there is no accelerating position between the `off' and the `full-on' positions. starter which comprises a A-8.21.18 StatorlRotor Starter - A resistance switching device for connecting the primary winding of an ac motor to the supply and means for varying the amount of resistance in the secondary The switching device for the primary winding may be supplied circuit. separately. A-8.21.19 Star-Delta Starter-A switching starter for a three-phase induction motor arranged in such a way that in the starting position the stator windings arc connected in star and in the running position they are connected in delta. A-8.21.20 Stator Resistance ( or Inductance ) Starter - A starter for an ac motor which inserts momentarily one or more resistances ( or inductances) in series with the stator winding and cuts them out in succession. A-8.21.21 Switching Starter without any current limiting resistors. A starter which is arranged to start a motor devices, such as auto-transformers and

A-8.21.22 Transformer Starter ( or Auto-transformer Starter ) - .4 reducedvoltage starter for an ac motor which uses for starting one or several reduced voltages derived from a transformer ( or an auto-transformer ). A-8.21.23 Two-Step Starter - A starter in which there is one accelerating position between the `off' and the `full-on' positions. A-8.21.24
Device ) -A Sturter with Automatic Cutout ( Starter with Automatic Trip

starter mined conditions.

which

automatically

stops the motor

under

prcdeter-

A-8.21.23 Rotor Resistance Starter-A starter for an ac motor which inserts momentarily one or more resistances in series with the rotor winding and cuts them out in succession. A-8.22 Starter Rheostat -A rheostat designed to limit the current taken by a starting motor or device and the resistors of which are cut out when the motor of device is in normal operation. A-8.23 Starting Capacitor -A capacitor auxiliary winding of a single-phase motor displacement necessary to start the rotor. connected in series with the in order to obtain the phase)so as

A-8.24 Tap Changer ( for Off-Voltage and On-Load Operation A device designed to change the connections to transformer tappings to modify the voltage ratio of the transformer. 33

E3: 1885 ( Part XV11 ) - 1979 A-8.25 Tapped Variable Inductor by means of taps in the winding. An inductor which can be varied

A-0.26 Variable Voltage Regul'ator -- A device connected between a constant voltage circuit and a receptor circuit designed for gradually varying the voltage across the receptor. A-9. SWITCHBOARD A-9.1 Box switchgcar. CUBICLE, BOXES in the form of a box containing several an assembly of or

An enclosure

A-9.2 Bzs Bars - Co:ductors to which severA distribution circuits, are connected. A-9.3 Cell -Compartment by pnrStio:ls from adjoining of a sub-station compartments.

sznrrces of supply,

or of a switchboard

separated

A-9.4 Corridor Sw-itchboard ( Duplex Switchboard ) - A switchboard on which apparatus is mounted on two opposite sides separated -by an acczssiblc corridor. A-9.5 Cubicle - A container assembly of switchgcar. in the form of a cabinet enclosing an or

A-9.6 Cubicle Switchboard - A switchboard the different elements groups of elements of which are enclosed in separate compartments.

A-9.7 Cutout - An appli:mcc for automatically interrupting the transmission of cncrgy throuqil any conductor when the current rises above a pred*:tcrmined value, and sh;dl also include fusible cutout. A-9.8 Desk A !;witchboard in the form of a desk. or cubicle distribution of draw-out

A-9.9 Distribution Pillar - A toidly enclosed structure containing bus bars c nl:ectcd to incoming and outgoing feeders controlled t!u-ough links or fuses. A-9.10 Draw-Out Switchboard - A switchboard eIeme.r;s for easy change and inspection. A-9.11 Dual Switchboard - A switchboard apparatus is mounted on two opposite faces. composed

closed at the sides on which

A-9.12 Enclosed Distribution Fuseboard - An enclosure containing bus bars with fuses for the purpose of protecting, controlling or connecting more than one outgoing circuit fed from one or more incoming circuits. A-9.13 Mimic Diagram Board - A switchboard on which is reproduced the diagram of the main circuits and which sometimes includes the controlling device of the main switchgear. 31

fS : 1885 ( Part XVII A-9.14

) - 1979

Neutral of a Distribution Fuseboard - A bus bar intended to bc clinn :cted to the neutral conductor of a distribution system, provided with terminals and links ( if required ) for outgoing circuits.

A-9.15 Neutral of a Distribution Pillar - A bus bar provided with terlllillnls ( and if required, links ) for connection to the neutral conductor system. of outgoing and incomin, 0 circuits ofa distribution
A-9.16 Number of Ways of a Distribution Pillar-The

maximum control

number
A-9.17

IL circuits
Pillar -

for which A pillar

the distribution supports or

pillar

is designed. electrical

which

contains

device.
A-9.18 Pole of a Distribution Fuseboard - When a bus bar of a distribution fuseboard has associated with its fuses for outgoing <*irc:uits; bus bar, with its associated fuses, is cnllcd a pole of the distribution circuits. A-9.19 Pole of a Distribution Pillar -. \Vhen a bus b.lr of a distribution pillar is associated with its fuses and/or links for outgoing or incoming circuits, a bus bar along with its associated fuses and/or hnks is called ;L 11"lc of the distribution circuit.

A-9.20 control fr;!mc.
A-g.?1

Switchboard

(If electrical

including the switchgear for the - .4n assembly circuits, the electrical connections and the supportLlg
g~*o!~p

Wiriqg -- Th1: whole , ::~:ic.rl .~pparatus. in a.1 ells A-10. A-10.1 FUSES Arc Extinguishing

of c,>nductors

of small

cross

section

Medium

elc:llc;lt A-10.2 usu.!lly

provided
Cartridge

to facilitate
Fuse-Link

breaking

- Material surrounding of the r.urrcnt.

t!le fus(: encl~lsure,

cylindrical,

1:rovided

- A fuse-link having an insulating at its two ends with met.:1 cont;,cts.

A-10.3 Current Limiting Fuse-Link - A fuse-link that, during and b) its operation in a spucificd current range limits the current to a sub~tnnti.~ll) Lnver value: than the peak value cjf the prospective current. A-10.4 Drop-Out position t:, provide
A-10.5 Fuse -

A fuse in which tllc ft!s::-carrier drops into ;t an isolating distance sifter the fuse has opcrotcd.

Expandable Cap - Rcplaccmcnt part or assclubl;; for clljsing one It includes a pressure-responsive s*,ction that opens end of the fuse-carrier. to reli::ve the prcssCre within -the fuse-carrier wllcri ;L prl:clcterrnin!:d V,ilUC is exceetlcd during circuit interruption.

35

1s:iluls (PartXv'ri )-Mm
A-10.6 Fssse-Base Contact ( Fssse-l%smt Contact ) -- A conducting part of a fuse-base connected to a terminal d=igned to engage with a fusecarrier contact or with a fuse-link contact. A-10.7 Fuse-Carrier Contact -- A conducting part of a f-e-carrier connected to a free-link conbact and designed to engage with a fuse-base contact. A-iO.8 Fuse-Link Contact -- A conducting part of a fuse-link designed to en gay with a fuse-base contact or with a fuse-carrier contact. Fuse with Enclosed Fuse Element A fuse in which the fuse element is totally enclosed in such a way that at the time of operation it cannot produce any external effect harmful to persons or objects in the immediate vicinity. A-10.10 HRG ( High

A-iO.~

Capacity ) Cartridge
A-lf).11

Rupturing Capacity, that is, Brep Fssse-Link -- A cartridge fuse-link having

a

rupturing capacity not less than that specified in the relevant specification.
Indicating Fuse -- A fuse incorporating a device to indicate that the fuse has opened the circuit.

A-10.I2 Noskterchassgeable Fuse -- A fuse so designed and proportioned as to accept only a fuse-link of a predetermined type and of a rated current equal to or less than a predetermined value. A-lOil 3 Open Wire Fuse -- A fuse that does not include arrangements limiting the development of an arc, the release of gas, and the ejection of frame or metal particles caused by its operation. A-10.14 Renewable Fuse-Link -- A fuse-link that, after operation may be restored for service by a refill unit. A-ltL15 RefiU Unit -- A set of parts required to be replaced after each operation to restore a fuse-link to its original condition. A-10.16 Rewirable Fssse -- A fuse in which the fwe-element a wire which may b: replaced when neeessary. A-10.17

consists of

Semi-enclosed Fuse -- A fuse in which the development of an arc, the release of gas and the ejection of flame or metal particles caused by its operation are controlled so as to limit danger to persons. A-1%18 Striker Fuse -- A fuse which contains a striker.

36

ISt1885(PartXVII)-1979
( Contiuucdffom page 2 ) Mnnbtrr SWRIA. S. Pm-ro
SAWElNEY (tih?tdU) SHIU S. P. RANADE SHRX S. R. POTNIS ( Al&mete) SHRl P. K. SaxeN~

Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, Crompton Greavcs Ltd. Bombay

New Delhi

&IRI P.S.

Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi The Bombay Electric Supply and Transport taking, Bombay Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex4jkio Member )
SCCWklry New

SHRI G. L. Dua ( Alfcrnnfe ) SIIRIA. P, SHENOY
SHRI D. M. WATCHA ( Aflernak ) SHRI I. P.SINGX SHRIR. SRINIVASAN (Al&mate) 5,X hf. P. WAoH SHRII. C.jOSEPH ( AffUR&) ?.HRlS. P.SACHDEv,

UndcrDelhi

Director ( Elec Tech ) SHRI K. GANESH Assistant Director ( Elec Tech ), ISI

37

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

El.zcTROTECHNICAL IS: 1885 Electrotechnical

VOCABULARY

vocabulary: Fundamental definitions Secondary cells and batteries Electrical relays Electrical power system protection Electrical measurements Nuclear power plants Primary cells and batteries Lighting, Section 1 General aspects illumination, lighting

1885 ( Part I )-1961 1885 ( Part IX )-1966 1885 ( Part X )-1968 1885 ( Part XI )-1966

1885 ( Part VIII )-1965

1885 ( Part XIV )-1967 1885 ( Part XV )-1967 1885 ( Part XVI/Set

1 )-1968

Section 2 General 1885 ( Part XVI/Set 2 )-1968 Lighting, fittings and lighting for traffic and signalling 1885 ( Part XVI/Set 1885 ( Part XVII 1885 ( Part XXVII 1885 ( Part XXVIII 1885 (Part XXIX 1885 ( Part XXX 1885 ( Part XXX11 1885 ( Part XXXIV 1885 ( Part XXXV 1885 ( Part XXXVII 1885 (Part XXXVIII 3 )-1967 )-1969 )-1972 )-1971 )-1971 )-1971 )-1972 )-1973 )-I974 )-1973 )-1979

Lighting, Section 3 Lamps and auxiliary apparatus Static power convertors Instrument transformers

Switchgear and controlgear (Jkf r&ion )

Mining terms Overhead, transmission and distribution of electrical energy Cables, conductors and accessories for electricity supply Cinematography Rotating machinery Tariffs for electricity Transformers

1865 ( Part XL11 )-I977 1885 (Part XL111 )-I977 1885 ( Part XLIX 1885 (Part LI/Sec )-1978

Power capacitor Electrical equipment used in medical practice Industrial process measurement and control Industrial electroheating, Section 1 General terms Industrial electroheating&etion 2 Resistanceheating *

l )-1978

1885 ( Part LI/Sec 2 )-1978

BUREA-U

OF

INDIAN

STANDARD-S

Headquarters; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Talephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanatha ( Common to all offices) Regional Olflces; Telephones Central : Manak Bhevan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, [ 331 01 31 NEW DELHI-1-l 0002 331 1375 *Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, 2 1843 1 31641 CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern : C. I. 1. Campus, MADRAS tWestern 600113 `4: tt :5: I 41 2916 6 32 92 96

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093 Branch Oflees: `Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AH MEDABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. 1. Nager. BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 761002 53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 6th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 6-8-66C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Stetlon Road), HYDERABAD _500001 RI4 Yudhlster Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 117/418 302005

26348 [ 2 63 49 38 49 55 [ 38 48 56 66716 6 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 6 3471 [ 6 98 32 21 68 76 121 82 92 6 23 05 621 04 [ 621 17 2 51 71 52436
27 61100 89 65 28 22 36 71
IMhl. India

B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208006

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695035 lnspecfion Oflce (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivajl Nagjar, PUNE 411005
*Sales Off~ce In Calcutta Is at 5 Chowringhes Approach, P.O. Prlncrp Street, Calcutta 700072 tSales Offko in Bombay la at Novelty Chamber& Grant Road, Bombay 400007 SSaler Ofice In SanDalore la at Unlty Building, Nararlmharaja Squ8ro Clangalore 560002 Printed -at Slmso Prlntlnp Prorr.

