IRAT HTA IS 16636 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


1000 A ah Wa Uled at Aiea 
tem fq erate uray treet 
Aa (APFC) Act 


Automatic Power Factor Correction 
(APFC) Panels for Voltage Rating up 
to and Including 1 000 V 


ICS 29.240.99 
© BIS 2017 
ads Aah Set 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF WH, 9 E aR HP, ae feeeit-110002 
diea MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2017 Price Group 11 


Power Capacitors Sectional Committee, ETD 29 


Foreword 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Power 
Capacitors Sectional Committee has been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


Low Voltage (LV) Automatic Power Factor Correcting (APFC) panels are installed in distribution lines for 
improvement of power factor correction. The important advantages of APFC panels over fixed capacitor 
banks are (1) Ability to maintain Power Factor (PF) at the target value, closer to unity and hence avoid 
penalties imposed by electricity supply companies due to low PF, (2) Avoid over compensation during low 
load conditions and (3) Improved efficiency of the system. 


This standard has been prepared with a view to formulate the safety, performance requirements and methods 
of tests for LV APFC panels connected in parallel to an electrical equipment or a power system for the purpose 
of power factor improvement. This standard also provides guidance for design, Installation, operation and 
safety of such LV APFC panels. 


In preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived from IEC 61921 : 2003, “Power Capacitors — 
low voltage power factor correction banks” and IEC 61439-1 : 2011, “Low voltage switchgear and control-gear 
assemblies, Part 1: General rules”. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this Standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding of numerical values (revised)”. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this Standard. 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMATIC POWER FACTOR CORRECTION (APFC) 
PANELS FOR VOLTAGE RATING UP TO AND 
INCLUDING 1 000 V 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard is applicable to low voltage 
a.c. Automatic Power Factor Correction (APFC) 
panels intended to be used for automatic power factor 
correction purposes, equipped with capacitor banks 
and switching device (s) (either electro-mechanical 
or electronic) and other components with the aim to 
correct the power factor to the target value. 


The constituent components of the panel like 
capacitors, switching devices, instrument 
transformers, fuses, damping and de-tuning reactors, 
current limiting devices, control and auxiliary circuits, 
supporting insulators, accessories, busbars, cables, 
etc., shall be in accordance with relevant Indian 
Standards. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication of this 
standard, the edition indicated are valid. All 
standards are subject to revision. 


Indian Standard Title 


IS 694: 2010/IEC 60227 PVC Insulated cables for 
working voltages up to and 
including 1100 V 


IS 1885 (all parts) Electro-technical vocabulary 
IS 2071 (Part1): 1993/ High voltage test techniques: 
TEC 60060-1 Part 1 General definitions and 
test requirements 
IS 2705 (all parts) : 1992 Current transformers 
TIS 3156 (all parts): 1992 Voltage transformers 
IS 5553 (all parts) Reactors 


IS 7098 (Part 1):1998 Cross-linked polyethylene 
insulated PVC sheathed cables: 
Part 1 For working voltage up 


to and including 1100 V 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear assemblies: Part 1 
Type-tested and partially type- 
tested assemblies 


IS 8623 (Part 1) : 1993/ 
TEC 60439-1 


IS 8623 (Part 3) : 1993/ 
TEC 60439-3 


Low-voltage switchgear and 
controlgear assemblies: Part 3 
Particular requirements for low- 
voltage switchgear and 


Indian Standard 


IS 11298 ( Part 3/Sec 1): 
1991 


IS 12360: 1988 


IS 12672 : 1989/ 
TEC 60593 


IS 13067 : 1991 


IS 13340 (Part 1) :2012/ 
TEC 6083 1-1 


IS 13340 (Part 2): 
2012/ 
TEC 6083 1-2 


IS 13585 (Part 1) :2012/ 
TEC 6093 1-1 


IS 13703 (all parts) 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Title 


controlgear assemblies 
intended to be installed in 
places where unskilled persons 
have access for their use — 
Distribution boards 


Plastic films for electrical 
purposes: Part 3 Specifications 
for individual materials, 
Section | Polypropylene film 
for capacitors 


Voltage Bands for Electrical 
Installations Including 
Preferred Voltages and 
Frequency 


Internal fuses and internal 
overpressure disconnectors for 


shunt capacitors 
Impregnants for 


capacitors 


power 


Shunt power capacitors of the 
self-healing type for a.c. 
systems having a rated voltage 
up to and including 1000 V: Part 
1 General — Performance, 
testing and rating — Safety 
requirements — Guide for 
installation and operation 


Requirements for ageing test, 
self-healing test and 
destruction test on shunt 
capacitors of the self-healing 
type for ac power systems 
having a rated voltage up to and 
including 1000 V 


Shunt power capacitors of the 
non-self-healing type for a.c. 
systems having a rated voltage 
up to and including 1 000 V : 
Part 1 General — Performance, 
testing and rating — Safety 
requirements — Guide for 
installation and operation 


Specification for Low-Voltage 
Fuses for Voltages not 
exceeding 1000 V AC or 1500 V 
DC 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Indian Standard 
IS/TEC 60529 : 2001 


Title 


Classification of degrees of 
protection provided by enclosures 
of electrical equipment 


IS/IEC 60947 
(all parts) 


Specification for Low-voltage 
Switchgear and Controlgear 


3 TERMINOLOGIES 


For the purpose of this document, in addition to the 
definitions given in IS 8623-1/ IEC 61439-1, IS 13340 IEC 
60831 and IS 13585 / IEC 60931 following shall apply. 


3.1 Low Voltage Automatic Power Factor Control/ 
Correction (APFC) Panel 


Combination of one or more capacitor units together with 
associated devices for switching, controlling, measuring, 
signalling, protection, regulation, etc., assembled 
together for providing automatic correction to the power 
factor (PF) to the target value with the help of automatic 
reactive power controller/regulator. 


NOTE — The target value for PF correction is to be decided 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer, depending on 
the application. 


For the purpose of this standard, “APFC Panel” will be 
termed as “Panel”. 


3.2 Automatic Power Factor Controller 


Device designed to sense power factor of the load 
connected to the power line and to control the switching 
on and off of the steps of the capacitor bank, in order to 
correct the power factor to the target value. 


NOTE— The components of automatic PF controller / 
regulator of APFC panel may be electro-mechanical or 
electronic. 


3.3 Automatic Reactive Power Controller/Regulator 


(RPC) 


Device designed to calculate the reactive power absorbed 
by the load connected to the power line and to control 
the switching on and off of the steps of the automatic 
bank, in order to compensate for the reactive power 


NOTES 


1 The reactive power is normally calculated at the 
fundamental frequency. 


2 The controller may be “built-in” or “free-standing” and 
has usually to be adjusted for each bank before operation. 


3.4 Response Time (T.,) of Automatic Power Factor 
Control Panel 


Response time of APFC panel for PF correction is the 
interval of time between the instant of sensing the 
prevailing power factor and the instant of correcting to 
the target power factor. 


3.5 Low Voltage A.C. Capacitor Bank 


Combination of one or more capacitor units 
together with associated devices for switching, 
controlling, measuring, signalling, protection, 
regulation, etc., completely assembled under the 
responsibility of the manufacturer with all the 
internal electrical and mechanical inter 
connections and structural parts. 


3.6 Step of Capacitor Bank 


Combination of one or more capacitor units 
switched together. 


3.7 Main Circuit 


All the conductive parts of a panel (or an 
assembly) included in a circuit which are 
intended to compensate the reactive power from 
which one or several branch circuits can be 
connected. 


3.8 Branch Circuit 


A circuit which connects one step of capacitor 
bank to the main circuit. 


NOTE — A panel may have one or more branch 
circuits. 


3.9 Control and Auxiliary Circuit 


All conductive parts of a panel (or an assembly) 
included in a circuit (other than the main circuit) 
intended to control, measure, signal, regulate, 
process data, etc. 


NOTE— The auxiliary circuits of a panel include 
the control and the auxiliary circuits of the 
switching devices. 


3.10 Functional Unit 


A part of a panel comprising of all the electrical 
and mechanical elements those contribute to the 
fulfilment of the same function. 


NOTE — Conductors which are connected to a 
functional unit but which are external to its 
compartment or enclosed protected space (e.g. 
auxiliary cables connected to a common 
compartment) are not considered to form part of 
the functional unit. 


3.11 Functional Group 


A group of several functional units which are 
electrically interconnected for the fulfilment of 
their operational functions. 


3.12 Switching Device 


Device designed to make or break the current in 
one or more electric circuits. 


NOTE — A switching device may perform one or both 
of these operations. 


3.13 Mechanical Switching Device 


Switching device designed to close and open one or 
more electric circuits by means of separable contacts. 


3.14 Electronic Switching Device 


Switching device designed to close and open one or 
more electric circuits by means of controlled 
conductivity of a semiconducting device. 


3.15 Interlocking Device 


Device which makes the operation of a switching 
device dependent upon the position of operation of 
one or more other pieces of equipment. 


3.16 With-Drawable Part 


Removable part which can be moved from the 
connected position to the isolated position and to a 
test position, if any, whilst remaining mechanically 
attached to the panel. 


3.17 Incoming Unit 


A functional unit through which electrical energy is 
normally fed into the panel. 


3.18 Outgoing Unit 


A functional unit through which electrical energy is 
normally supplied to one or more outgoing circuits. 


3.19 Cable Entry 


A part with openings which permit the passage of 
cables into the panel. 


NOTE— A cable entry can at the same time be designed 
as a cable sealing end. 


3.20 Enclosure 


Housing of the panel, capable of providing the type 
and degree of protection suitable for the intended 
application. 


3.21 Cover 
A part of the external enclosure of a panel. 
3.22 Panel for Indoor Installation 


A panel which is designed for use in locations where 
the normal service conditions for indoor use as 
specified in 7.1 of this standard are fulfilled. 


3.23 Panel for Outdoor Installation 


A panel which is designed for use under the normal 
service conditions for outdoor use as specified in 
7.1 of this standard 


IS 16636 : 2017 


3.24 Pollution 


Any condition of foreign matter, solid, liquid or 
gaseous (ionized gases) that may affect dielectric 
strength or surface resistivity 


3.25 Pollution Degree (of Environmental 
Conditions) 


Conventional number based on the amount of 
conductive or hygroscopic dust, ionized gas or salt, 
and on the relative humidity and its frequency of 
occurrence resulting in hygroscopic absorption or 
condensation of moisture leading to reduction in 
dielectric strength and/or surface resistivity 


NOTES 


1 The pollution degree to which the insulating materials 
of devices and components are exposed may be different 
from that of the macro-environment where the devices 
or components are located because of protection offered 
by means such as an enclosure or internal heating to 
prevent absorption or condensation of moisture. 


2 For the purpose of this standard, the pollution degree 
is of the micro-environment. 


3.26 Manufacturer 


For the purposes of this standard, manufacturer is a 
person or a company or an organisation with ultimate 
responsibility to: 


a) provide the panel so as to comply with the 
appropriate standard or standards 
b) provide the panel information according to 4 


3.27 Protective Measures with Regard to Electric 
Shock 


3.27.1 Live Part 


A conductor or conductive part intended to be 
energized in normal use, including a neutral 
conductor. 


NOTE — This term does not necessarily imply a risk 
of electric shock. 


3.27.2 Live Terminal 


Point of interconnection of the panel with other 
electric circuit elements, electric circuits or networks. 


NOTE — For an electric circuit element, the terminals 
are the points at which or between which the related 
integral quantities are defined. At each terminal, there 
is only one electric current from outside into the 
element. 


3.27.3 Conductive Part 
Part which is capable of conducting current. 
3.27.4 Exposed Conductive Part 


A conductive part of electrical equipment, which can 
be touched and which is not normally live, but which 
may become live under fault conditions 


IS 16636 : 2017 


NOTE— Typical exposed conductive parts are walls of 
enclosures, operating handles, etc. 


3.27.5 Protective Conductor 


Conductor provided for purposes of safety, for 
example protection against electric shock 


NOTE — As an example, the protective conductor can 
electrically connect the following parts: 


1. exposed conductive parts; 
extraneous conductive parts; 
main earthing terminal; 


2 
3 
4. earth electrode; 
5 


earthed point of the source or artificial neutral. 


3.27.6 Surge Arrester; Surge Protective Device 
(SPD) 


Device designed to protect the electrical apparatus 
from high transient over voltages and to limit the 
duration and amplitude of the follow-on current 


3.27.7 Electric Shock 


Pathophysiological effect resulting from an electric 
current passing through a human or animal body 


3.28 Electrical Characteristics of APFC Panels 
3.28.1 Rated Voltage of the Panel (Uy) 


The highest nominal value of the a.c. (r.m.s.) voltage 
declared by the manufacturer, to which the main 
circuit(s) of the panel is (are) designed to be 
connected. 


NOTES 
1 In poly-phase circuits, it is the voltage between phases. 
2 Transients are disregarded.. 


3 The value of the supply voltage may exceed the rated 
voltage due to permissible system tolerances. 


3.28.2 Rated Insulation Voltage (U, ) 


r.m.s withstand voltage value, assigned by the 
manufacturer to the equipment or to a part of it, 
characterizing the specified (long-term) withstand 
capability of the insulation. 


NOTES 
1 In polyphase circuits, it is the voltage between phases. 


2 The rated insulation voltage is not necessarily equal 
to the rated operational voltage of equipment which is 
primarily related to functional performance. 


3 It is the value to which dielectric test voltages and 
creepage distances are referred. 


3.28.3 Rated Operational Voltage (U.) 


The value of voltage, declared by the manufacturer, 
which combined with the rated current, determines 
its application. 


NOTE— In polyphase circuits, it is the voltage 
between phases. 


3.28.4 Power-Frequency Withstand Voltage 


r.m.s. value of a power-frequency sinusoidal voltage 
which does not cause breakdown under specified 
conditions of test 


3.28.5 Rated Impulse Withstand Voltage (Uiny ) 


The peak value of an impulse voltage of prescribed 
form and polarity which the circuit of a panel is 
capable of withstanding without failure under the 
specified conditions of test and to which the values 
of the clearances are referred. 


The rated impulse withstand voltage of a circuit of a 
panel shall be equal to or higher than the values 
stated for the transient over voltages occurring in 
the system in which the panel is inserted. 


NOTE — The preferred values of rated impulse 
withstand voltage are those given in Table 4. 


3.28.6 Overvoltage 


Any voltage having a peak value exceeding the 
corresponding peak value of the maximum steady- 
state voltage at normal operating conditions 


3.28.7 Transient Overvoltage 


Short duration overvoltage of a few milliseconds or 
less, oscillatory or non- oscillatory, usually highly 
damped 


3.28.8 Rated Current (I,) 


The rated current is stated by the manufacturer, 
taking into consideration the ratings of the 
components of the electrical equipment within the 
panel, their disposition and application. Rated current 
is derived from rated power and rated voltage of the 
panel. 


3.28.9 Transient Inrush Current (I) 


Transient inrush or overcurrent occurs when a 
capacitor is switched on. Amplitude and frequency 
of transient inrush current are determined by the 
factors such as the short circuit impedance of the 
supply, the amount of energized capacitance 
switched in parallel, the instant of the switching, 
series reactors, type of switch, etc. 


3.28.10 Rated Peak Withstand Current (I) 


Value of peak short-circuit current, declared by the 
manufacturer, that can be withstood under specified 
conditions 


3.28.11 Rated Short-Time Withstand Current (L) 


r.m.s value of short-time current, declared by the 


manufacturer, that can be carried without damage 
under specified conditions, defined in terms of a 
current and time. 


3.28.12 Rated Conditional Short-Circuit Current 
(L) 


Value of prospective short-circuit current, declared 
by the manufacturer, that can be withstood for the 
total operating time (clearing time) of the short-circuit 
protective device (SCPD) under specified conditions. 


NOTE— The short-circuit protective device may 
form an integral part of the panel or may be a separate 
unit. 


3.28.13 Rated Reactive Power of the Panel (Q ) 


Total reactive power of the panel at the rated 
frequency and rated voltage, is calculated by the 
total impedance of the panel including reactors, if 
any. 


NOTE— The reactive power is normally calculated at 
the fundamental frequency. 


3.28.14 Rated Frequency (f,) 


The rated frequency of a panel is the value of 
frequency which designates it and to which the 
operating conditions are referred. 


NOTE— The frequency should be within the limits 
specified in the relevant IS standards for the 
incorporated components. Unless otherwise stated by 
the manufacturer of the panel, the limits are assumed 
to be 98 % and 102 % of the rated frequency. 


3.28.15 Clearance 


The distance between two conductive parts along a 
string stretched the shortest way between these 
conductive parts 


3.28.16 Creepage Distance 


The shortest distance along the surface of the 
insulating material between two conductive parts 


NOTE— A joint between two pieces of insulating 
material is considered part of the surface. 


4 MARKING 


The following minimum information shall be given 
by the manufacturer on a rating plate to be fixed on 
the panel or alternatively in an instruction sheet, on 
request of the purchaser. 


a) Manufacturer’s name or trademark. 


NOTE—The manufacturer is deemed to be the 
organization taking the responsibility for the 
completed panel. 


b) Identification number 


c) Type of switching, electro-mechanical or 
electronic or combination of both 


IS 16636 : 2017 


d) Reference to IS 
e) Month and year of manufacture 
f) Rated reactive power, Q, in kilovars (kvar) 


g) Number of stages of panel and kvar of each 
stage 


h) Rated voltage, U, in Volts (V) 
i) Rated frequency, f, in Hertz (Hz) 


j) Minimum and maximum 
temperatures in °C 


ambient 


k) Short-circuit withstand strength, in amperes 
(kA) 

D Installation — Indoor or outdoor 

m) Degree of protection 

n) Weight 


o) Dimensions 
5 TESTS 
5.1 Test Requirements 
5.1.1 General 


Tests specified are intended to verify compliance 
with the requirements laid down in this standard for 
a given type of APFC panel, as an assembly. The 
constituent components like capacitors, switching 
devices, reactors, instrument transformers, fuses, 
current limiting devices, control and auxiliary circuits, 
supporting insulators, accessories, etc. used in the 
panel shall comply with the requirements of relevant 
Indian Standards. 


5.1.2 Test Conditions 


Unless specified for a particular test or measurement, 
the ambient air temperature during the test shall be 
in the range of +10 °C to +40 °C. 


The ac test voltage and measurements shall have a 
practically sinusoidal waveform and a frequency from 
49 Hz to 51 Hz. Tolerances for test voltages shall be 
in accordance with IS 2071-1/ IEC 60060-1 (latest 
version). 


5.1.3 Voltage Source Requirement 


Power supply used for testing the panels shall be 
capable of continuous deliverance of power required 
for achieving the test voltage and test current across 
the terminals of the APFC panel under test. Suitable 
reactive compensation may be provided for achieving 
the same. Necessary safety measures shall be 
incorporated. 


5.2 Classification of Tests 
The tests are classified as 


a) Type tests (5.2.1) 


IS 16636 : 2017 


b) Routine tests (5.2.2) 
c) Acceptance tests (5.2.3) 


5.2.1 Type Tests 


Type tests are carried out in order to ascertain that, 
as regards design, material, construction and ratings, 
the panel complies with the specified characteristics 
and operational requirements detailed in this 
standard. If modifications are made to the 
components of the panel, type tests shall be repeated, 
but only in so far as such modifications are likely to 
adversely affect the result of these tests. 


5.2.1.1 Criteria of approval 


One or more identical panels shall be submitted for 
testing, along with relevant data. The testing 
authority shall issue a type test report / certificate, if 
the panels are found to comply with the requirements 
of type tests given in 5.2.1. 


5.2.1.2 The following shall constitute type tests: 


a) Verification of Output (5.3) 
b) Dielectric tests (5.4) 
i) Insulation resistance test (5.5) 
il) Power frequency withstand voltage test 
(5.6) 
ii) Voltage withstand test between phases 
(5.7) 
iv) Lightning Impulse voltage withstand 
test (5.8) 
c) Temperature rise test (5.9) 


d) Verification of the effectiveness of 
protective circuit (5.10) 


e) Short circuit withstand test (5.11) 
f) Verification of clearances (5.12) 
g) Verification of mechanical operation (5.13) 


h) Verification of the degree of protection of 
enclosure (5.14) 


i) Verification of the effectiveness of 
automatic PF correction (5.15) 


j) Measurement of transient over currents due 
to capacitor switching (5.16) 


These tests may be carried out in any order. It is not 
essential to carry out the type test on a single panel. 
Same can be carried out on different panels of the 
identical design, type, rating and construction. 


Unless otherwise specified, every panel to which it 
is intended to apply the type test shall have 
withstood satisfactorily the application of all routine 
tests given in 5.2.2. 


The successful completion of each type test is also 
valid for panels of the same voltage rating, having 


lower output ratings (kvar) with the same design, 
construction, type of switching device, type of 
current limiting device, IP class and other 
components, provided that they do not differ in any 
way that may influence the properties checked by 
the test. 


5.2.2 Routine Tests 


Routine tests are intended to detect faults, defects, 
deficiencies in materials and workmanship. They 
shall be carried out on every new APFC panel, before 
delivery. If purchaser so requests, he shall be 
supplied with a routine test report, detailing the 
results of tests. 


5.2.2.1 The following shall constitute routine tests 


a) Dielectric test (5.4) 
i) Insulation resistance test (5.5) 


ii) Power frequency withstand voltage test 
(5.6) 


b) Verification of the effective connection 
between the exposed conductive parts of 
the panel and the protective circuit (5.10.1) 


c) Inspection of panel including inspection of 
wiring (5.17) 


d) Test for checking functional operation (5.18) 
Routine tests may be carried out in any order. 
5.2.3 Acceptance Tests 


The routine and / or type tests, or some of them, may 
be repeated by the manufacturer in connection with 
any contract by agreement with the purchaser. The 
kind of tests, the number of samples that may be 
subjected to tests, and the acceptance criteria shall 
be as agreed between manufacturer and purchaser, 
and shall be stated in the contract. 


5.3 Verification of Output (Type Test) 


This test verifies the output rating (reactive power, 
kvar) of the panel and of the individual stages of the 
panel, against the declared values. 


The panel shall be energised to the rated voltage at 
frequency between 49 Hz to 51 Hz using a suitable 
voltage source. Total output (kvar) of the panel and 
output of individual stages of the panel shall be 
measured with the help of a suitable power meter 
having accuracy of 1% or better. 


Total output of the panel and output of individual 
stages of the panel are to be reported. 


Alternatively, output current can be measured at 
rated voltage and frequency between 49 Hz to 51 Hz 
and calculated output (kvar) may be reported. 


5.3.1 Output Tolerances 


The output shall not differ from the rated output at 
rated frequency by more than 


a) -5% to +15 % for stages and panels of rating 
up to 100 kvar 

b) -5% to+ 10 % for panel of rating above 100 
kvar. 


5.4 Dielectric Tests (Type and Routine test) 
5.4.1 General 


Each circuit/component of the panel shall be capable 
of withstanding 

a) Temporary over-voltages 

b) Transient over voltages 
The ability to withstand temporary over-voltages and 
the integrity of solid insulation, is verified by the 
power frequency withstand voltage tests and the 


ability to withstand transient over-voltage is verified 
by the impulse voltage withstand test. 


The rated insulation voltage of any circuit of the 
panel shall be equal to or higher than the rated 
voltage of the panel. 


5.4.1.1 For routine test, the following dielectric 
tests shall be made 
a) Insulation resistance test (5.5) 
b) Power frequency withstand voltage test 
(5.6) 


5.4.1.2 For type test, the following dielectric tests 
shall be made 
a) Insulation resistance test (5.5) 


b) Power frequency withstand voltage test 
(5.6) 


c) Voltage withstand test between phases (5.7) 
d) Lightning impulse voltage withstand test (5.8) 


IS 16636 : 2017 


5.4.2 Application of Voltage 


The panel shall be mounted as in normal use, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In 
case of panels having non-metallic enclosure, the 
outer surface of the enclosure shall be covered by a 
metal foil and connected to the frame or the mounting 
plate. 


The test voltage for Insulation resistance test (5.5), 
Power frequency withstand voltage test (5.6) and 
Lightning impulse voltage withstand test (5.8) shall 
be applied 


a) Between all terminals (shorted together) and 
the conductive structural parts of the panel 
(grounded) (refer to case | of Table 1). 


b) Between each terminal and all the other 
terminals connected to the conductive 
structural parts of the panel (grounded) 
(refer to case 2 of Table 1). Not applicable 
for electronically switched panels. 


Test voltage shall be applied successively to all parts 
of the circuit as given in Table 1. 


Test can be performed by energising all the stages at 
a time or by energising individual stages. 


All electrical equipment of the panel shall be 
connected, except those items which, according to 
the relevant specifications, are designed for a lower 
test voltage; current-consuming apparatus (e.g. 
windings, measuring instruments, voltage surge 
suppression devices) in which the application of the 
test voltage would cause the flow of a current, shall 
be disconnected. 


Anti-interference capacitors installed between live 
and exposed conductive parts shall not be 
disconnected and shall be capable of withstanding 
the test voltage. 


For test voltage tolerances and the selection of test 
equipment, see IS 2071-1/ IEC 60060-1. 


Table 1 Application of Test Voltage for Dielectric Tests 


Case 1: Between terminals (shorted) and grounded enclosure 


Test Arrangement 


Voltage Applied to Ground(G) / Earth(E) 


Connected to 


The Switching device (K) to be in open position. 


A, shorted to A2, Bı shorted B2 , Cı shorted to C2 shorted 
together 


(1) (2) (3) 
In case, control and auxiliary circuits (X, Y, Z,) are 
connected to the main circuit, they are to be dis- A, B, C and N X, Y, Z, n, F shorted 
connected from the main circuit (including neutral, n), shorted 
while applying voltage. 
Protection devices like Switch Fuse unit/MCB/MCCB in XYZ ü A. B.C. N and F 
the branch circuits shall be in close position. shorted shorted 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Case 2: between each terminal and other terminals (shorted and) connected to grounded enclosure - Not 
applicable for electronically switched panels. 


Notes 


Test Arrangement Voltage Applied to Ground(G) / Earth(E) 
Connected to 
a) (2) (3) 

In case, control and auxiliary circuits (X, Y, Z,) are A BCN X.Y, Z,.0;.F 

connected to the main circuit, they are to be dis- shorted 

connected from the main circuit (including neutral, 

n), while applying voltage. 

Protection devices like Switch Fuse unit/MCB/MCCB B A, C, N, X, Y, Z, n, F 

in the branch circuits shall be in close position. shorted 

The Switching device (K) to be in open position. Ç B, A, N, X, Y, Z, n, F 
shorted 


1 CT terminals / connections are to be grounded throughout the test for both electromechanically and electronically 


switched panels. 


2 Abbreviations used in the Table 1 are given below with reference to Fig. 1. 


A, B, C: terminals of main circuit 
N: Main Neutral 


K: Switching device (electro-mechanical or electronic) 


Al, B1, Cl: terminals of main circuit up to incoming terminal of switching device 
A2, B2, C2: terminals of main circuit from outgoing terminal of switching device 


X, Y, Z: terminals of control circuit 

n: neutral of control and auxiliary circuit 
F: Metallic Enclosure / Frame 

G: Ground 

E: Earth 


ABCHN 
INCOMING 
SUPPLY 


t a 


JF MOCA/MCB 


9% & 


A MOCE/MCB 
God 


¢ 


a1) Bi; CH 1 
p 


ae 
AZ| 62) C2 


qp 


A,B,C terminals of main circuit 

N Main Neutral 

CF Control fuse 

NL Neutral link 

FL Fuse link 

MCCB Moulded case circuit breaker 

MCB Miniature circuit breaker 

L Reactor 

Rl Control Relay 

q4, 112712 Terminals of the switching device connected to the control circuit 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC OF POWER CIRCUIT AND CONTROL CIRCUIT OF APFC PANEL 


8 


5.5 Insulation Resistance Test (Routine Test) 
5.5.1 Test Voltage 


Measurement of insulation resistance (IR) shall be 
carried out using an insulation resistance measuring 
instrument by applying a voltage of at least 500 V dc 
for | minute. Application of voltage shall be as given 
in 5.4.2. 


5.5.2 Passing Criteria 


The test is deemed satisfactory if the measured value 
of insulation resistance is at least 50 MQ. 


5.6 Power Frequency Withstand Voltage Test 
(Routine and Type Test) 


The power source shall have sufficient power to 
maintain the test voltage irrespective of any leakage 
currents. The ac test voltage shall have a practically 
sinusoidal waveform and a frequency between 49 Hz 
and 51 Hz. 


5.6.1 Test Voltage 
5.6.1.1 Testing of the main circuit 


Clearance from live terminals to parts intended to be 
earthed shall be capable of withstanding the power 
frequency test voltage, either a.c. or d.c. given 
in Table 2. Application of voltage shall be as given 
in 5.4.2. 


Duration of the test shall be 10 s for routine test and 
60 s (with tolerance of +2/-0 s) for type test. 


Table 2 Power Frequency Withstand Voltage for 
Main Circuits 


SI. Rated Insulation Dielectric Test Dielectric Test 


No. Voltage U, Voltage Voltage 
(line to line) a.c. r.m.s. d.c. r.m.s. 

Vv Vv Vv 

a) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Ui < 60 1000 1415 
ii) 60 <U; <300 1500 2120 
iii) 300 <U; < 690 1890 2670 
iv) 690 <U; < 800 2000 2830 
v) 800 <U; < 1000 2200 3110 


5.6.1.2 Testing of auxiliary and control circuits 


Auxiliary and control circuits, whether a.c. or d.c., 
that are not connected to the main circuit shall be 
subjected to the test voltage according to Table 3. 
Voltage shall be applied between shorted terminals 
and the conductive structural parts of the panel 
(grounded). 


Duration of the test shall be 10 s for routine test and 
60 s (with tolerance of +2/-0 s) for type test. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Table 3 Power Frequency Withstand Voltage for 
Auxiliary and Control Circuits 


Sl. Rated Insulation Dielectric Test Voltage 
No. Voltage U, a.c. r.m.s. 
(line to line) 
v v 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Ui < 12 250 

ii) 12<U: < 60 500 
iii) U> 60 1500 


5.6.2 Passing Criteria 


During the test, neither puncture nor flashover shall 
occur. 


5.7 Voltage Withstand Test between Phases (Type 
Test) 


5.7.1 Test Voltage 


The panel shall be energised to a voltage of 1.5 Un 
a.c. for 10 s. During this test all the switching devices 
shall be in switched-on condition. Alternatively, test 
can be performed by energising individual stages. 


For three phase panels, all the phases shall be 
energised with a three phase source. 


During the test, the control and auxiliary circuits 
connected to the main circuit may be disconnected from 
the main circuit and powered from a separate source. 


5.7.2 Passing Criteria 


During the test, neither puncture nor flashover shall 
occur. Self-healing breakdowns, in case of self- 
healing type capacitors, are allowed. 


5.8 Lightning Impulse Voltage Withstand Test (Type 
Test) 


5.8.1 Test Voltage 


Output of impulse voltage generator shall be adjusted 
to the required impulse voltage with the panel 
connected. The 1.2/50 us impulse voltage shall be 
applied. The tolerances for impulse voltage 
waveform shall be as follows: 


a) Test voltage (Peak): +3 % 
b) Front time: + 30% 
c) Time to half value: +20 % 


Five impulses of positive polarity followed by five 
impulses of negative polarity shall be applied at 
intervals of 1 s minimum. 


After the change of polarity, it is permissible to apply 
some impulses of lower amplitude before the 
application of the test impulses. 


Application of voltage shall be as given in 5.4.2. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Manufacturer shall declare the rated impulse 
withstand voltage for the panel. 


5.8.1.1 Testing of the main circuit 


Clearance from live terminals to parts intended to be 
earthed shall be capable of withstanding the test 
voltage given in Table 4 appropriate to the rated 
impulse withstand voltage. 


The rated impulse withstand voltage for a given 
rated operational voltage shall not be less than that 
corresponding in Annex A to the nominal voltage of 
the supply system of the circuit at the point where 
the panel is to be used and the appropriate 
overvoltage category. 


5.8.1.2 Testing of auxiliary circuits 


Auxiliary circuits that are connected to the main circuit 
and operate at the rated operational voltage without 
any means for reduction of overvoltage shall be capable 
of withstanding the test voltage given in Table 4 
appropriate to the rated impulse withstand voltage. 


Auxiliary circuits that are not connected to the main 
circuit may have an overvoltage withstand capability 
different from that of the main circuit. The clearance 
of such circuits shall be capable of withstanding the 
appropriate impulse voltage in accordance with 
Annex A. 


5.8.2 Passing Criteria 


The test is considered to have been passed if there 
is no puncture or flashover, which can be ensured 
by the record of the impulse voltage waveform during 
the test. 


5.9 Temperature Rise Test (Type Test) 


The temperature-rise test is carried out to verify that 
the temperature-rise limits are not exceeding the 
specified values for different parts and components 
of the panel. 


5.9.1 Test Method 


The panel shall be mounted as in normal use, with all 
covers including bottom cover plates, etc., in place. 


The temperature rise test shall be carried out on the 
panel with all capacitor units, reactors, if any, and 
other components connected. Test current shall be 
passed through the panel by energizing the panel 
with the help of a suitable voltage source. Suitable 
voltage may be applied to produce the specified test 
current. Control and auxiliary circuits shall be 
supplied with rated operational voltage. 


At the discretion of the manufacturer, temperature 
rise test can be performed at higher ambient air 
temperatures by placing the panel in a heated 
enclosure. For such cases, the limits for temperature 
rise shall be as agreed upon between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. 


5.9.2 Test Current 


The test current in terms of the rated current of the 
panel shall be one of the following: 


a) In the absence of any reactor or other 
current control devices, the test current shall 
not be less than 1.3 times the rated current 
of the panel. 

b) When protection or control systems are 


provided which limit the maximum current, 
then test current shall correspond to this 
maximum current. Otherwise panels shall be 
tested at 1.2 times the rated current. 


The test current shall be maintained with a tolerance 
of 0 % to +2 %. 


Guidelines for selection of the cross section of the 
external copper conductors used for connecting 
the panel to the test source are given in Annex B at 
Tables B.1 and Table B.2. For external aluminium 
conductors, size selection may be as given in Table 
B.3 and Table B.4. 


5.9.3 Measurement of Temperature 


During the test, temperature shall be measured with 
the help of suitable temperature sensors like 
thermocouples, at all points where temperature-rise 
limit must be observed. The thermocouples shall be 
protected from air currents and heat radiation. 


Table 4 Dielectric Withstand Voltages for Lighting Impulse Test 


S.No Rated Impulse Impulse Test Voltages and Corresponding Altitudes, 
Withstand Voltage U iaso KV 
U mKV 
(1) (2) 1 (3) N 
Sea level 200 m 500 m 1000 m 2000 m 

i) 2.5 2.95 2.8 2.8 2.7 25 

ii) 4 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.4 4 
ili) T3 7.2 7 6.7 6 
iv) 8 9.8 9.6 9:3 9 8 

v) 12 14.8 14.5 14 13.3 12 


10 


Temperature rise shall necessarily be measured on 
middle phase (Y-phase) of the following components. 


a) Incoming MCCB/ACB/ Isolator 

b) Main busbar 

c) Fuse switch unit /Fuse link/MCB/MCCB on 
branch circuits 

d) Switching device (K) 

e) Reactor coil surface 

f) Reactor terminal 


Temperature shall be measured at all points where a 
temperature rise limit must be observed. Particular 
attention shall be given to joints in conductors and 
terminals within the main circuit. 


Temperature rise shall also be measured at the 
following components / locations 


a) Capacitor case 

b) Surface of the PF controller 

c) Outer surface of enclosure 

d) Panel enclosure air temperature 


Ambient temperature shall be recorded during the 
test by means of at least three thermometers or 
thermocouples or other temperature-detecting 
devices equally distributed around the panel at about 
the average height of its current-carrying parts and 
at a distance of about 1 m from the panel and 
protected from direct heat radiation. Mean value of 
their readings shall be used for evaluation of the 
test. In order to avoid indication errors because of 
rapid temperature changes, the thermometers or 
thermocouples may be put into glass beakers 
containing about 0.5 liters of insulating oil. 


During the last 2 hours of the test period, the change 
of ambient air temperature shall not exceed | K in 
1 h. If this is not possible because of unfavorable 
temperature conditions of the test room, the 
temperature of an identical panel under the same 
conditions, but without current, can be taken as a 
substitute for the ambient air temperature. This 


IS 16636 : 2017 


additional panel shall not be subjected to an undue 
amount of heat. 


The test shall be made for a time sufficient for the 
temperature rise to reach a steady state value, but 
not exceeding 8 h. In practice, this condition is 
reached when the variation at all measured points 
(including the ambient air temperature) does not 
exceed | K/h. In any case the minimum duration of 
test shall be for 6 hours. 


5.9.4 Passing Criteria 


The temperature-rise of any part is the difference 
between the temperature of this part and the mean 
ambient air temperature outside the panel. 


The temperature-rise limits given in Table 5 shall not 
be exceeding the specified value for various parts 
and components of the panel. The specified limits 
are applicable for the mean ambient air temperature 
up to +35 °C. 


For tests conducted at other ambient air 
temperatures, the limits for temperature rise shall be 
as agreed upon between manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 


During the test, neither puncture nor flashover shall 
occur in the panel. 


The size and disposition of external conductors used 
for the test shall be stated in the test report. 


5.10 Verification of the Effectiveness of Protective 
Circuit 


5.10.1 Verification of the Effective Connection 
between the Exposed Conductive Parts of the Panel 
and the Protective Circuit (Routine and Type Test) 


It shall be verified that the different exposed 
conductive parts of the panel are effectively 
connected to the protective circuit and their 
resistance between the incoming protective 
conductor and the relevant exposed conductive part 
does not exceed 0.1 Q. 


Table 5 Temperature-rise limits 


Temperature Rise K 


(3) 


SI. No. Parts of Panel 
d) (2) 
i) Built-in components 
a) Capacitor case 
(Refer to Table 1 of IS 13340/IEC 60831 
and IS 13585/IEC 60931 for classification 
of temperature categories as A, B, C and D) 
b) Reactor coil surface 
c) Case temperature of PF Controller 


11 


Temperature Category A: 15 
Temperature Category B: 15 
Temperature Category C: 15 
Temperature Category D: 15 


Class A: 50 

Class E: 65 

Class B: 70 

Class F: 90 

Class H: 115 

The temperature shall necessarily be measured at the top 
region in between cores and coil of the middle phase. 


10 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Sl. No. 


Table 5 (Continue) 


Parts of Panel 


(2) 


Temperature Rise K 
(3) 


d) 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


vii) 


Terminals of external insulated conductors 
(see Note 2) 


Terminals of MCB/ MCCB/Isolator/ 
Contactor (see Note 2) 


a) 


b) 


c) Reactor terminals (see Note 2) 


Bus bar and conductors 


Manual operating means: 
a) of metal 
b) of insulating material 


Accessible external enclosures and covers: 
a) metal surfaces 
b) insulating surfaces 


Discrete arrangements for plug and socket-type 
connections 


Air temperature inside the panel 


12 


70 


Bare copper : 60 
Tinned copper: 65 
Other metals: 65 


The temperature rise limits for winding terminals of dry 
type reactors shall not exceed the limits given below: 

a) Bare terminals of copper, copper alloy, Aluminium 
or Aluminium alloy: 55 
Silver-plated or nickel-plated terminals made of 
copper, copper alloy, Aluminium or Aluminium 
alloy: 80 
Tin-plated terminals made of copper, copper alloy, 
Aluminium or Aluminium alloy: 70 


b) 


c) 


Limited by 
a) 
b) 
c) 


mechanical strength of conducting material, 
possible effects on adjacent equipment, 
permissible temperature limit of the insulating 
materials in contact with the conductor, 

d) effect of the temperature of the conductor on the 
apparatus connected to it 

e) for plug-in contacts, nature and surface treatment 
of the contact material 

temperature rise limits have to be specified by the 
original manufacturer taking into account any 
additional measuring points and limits imposed by 
the components manufacturer. 


The limit 
a) 


is also decided based on the following factors: 


Ambient air temperature for LV capacitors are 
40°C, 45°C, 50°C and 55°C for various categories 
namely A, B, C, and D (refer to IS 13340/ 
IEC 60831 and IS 13585/IEC 60931) 

The maximum admissible rise in capacitor case 
temperature is 15 K above the rated ambient air 
temperature. 


b) 


c) Heat dissipated from the bus bar shall not influence 
the performance of capacitors and other 


components of the panel 


Assuming all other criteria listed are met, a maximum 
temperature rise of 105 K for bare copper bus bars and 
conductors shall not be exceeded. 


(1) 15 
(2) 25 
Manual operating means within panels which are only 
accessible after the panel has been opened, for example 
draw-out handles which are operated infrequently, are allowed 
to assume a 25 K increase on these temperature-rise limits. 


(1) 30 

(2) 40 

Unless otherwise specified, in the case of covers and enclosures, 
which are accessible but need not be touched during normal 
operation, a 10 K increase on these temperature-rise limits is 
permissible. External surfaces and parts over 2m from the base 
of the panel are considered inaccessible. 


This allows a degree of flexibility in respect of equipment 
(e.g. electronic devices) which is subject to temperature-rise 
limits different from those normally associated with 
switchgear and control-gear. 


Determined by the limit for those components of the related 
equipment of which they form a part. 


The temperature-rise limit to be specified by the 
manufacturer of the panel, taking into consideration the 
safety limits. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Table 5 (Conclude) 


NOTES 


1 The specified limits are applicable for the mean ambient air temperature up to +35°C 


2 For deciding the temperature rise limits for terminals where two limits may be applicable, the lower limit among the two 
shall be considered. For example, the external insulated conductor connected to MCCB, the temperature rise limit for MCCB 


terminal shall be considered as the limit. 


Verification shall be made employing a resistance 
measuring instrument or arrangement which is 
capable of driving a current of at least 10 A a.c. or 
d.c. into an impedance of 0.1Q between the points 
of the resistance measurement. 


NOTE — It may be necessary to limit the duration of 
the test to 5 s where low-current equipment otherwise 
may be adversely affected by the test. 


5.10.2 Verification of the Short-Circuit Strength of 
the Protective Circuit by Test (Type Test) 


This test does not apply for panels according to 
5.11.2. 


The capacitor banks and reactors, if any, shall be 
bypassed or disconnected from the panel for 
conducting this test. Electronically switched devices 
of the panel shall also be excluded from test. 


A single-phase test supply shall be connected to 
the incoming terminal of one phase and to the terminal 
for the incoming protective conductor. When the 
panel is provided with a separate protective 
conductor, the nearest phase conductor shall be used. 
For each representative outgoing unit, a separate 
test shall be made with a bolted short-circuit 
connection between the corresponding outgoing 
phase terminal of the unit and the terminal for the 
relevant outgoing protective conductor. 


Each outgoing unit on test shall be fitted with its 
intended protective device. Where alternative 
protective devices can be incorporated in the 
outgoing unit, the protective device which lets 
through the maximum values of peak current and I °t 
shall be used. 


For this test, the frame of the panel shall be insulated 
from earth. The test voltage shall be equal to 1.05 
times the single-phase value of the rated operational 
voltage (Ue). Unless otherwise agreed between the 
original manufacturer and the user, the value of the 
test current in the protective conductor shall be at 
least 60 % of the phase current during the three- 
phase test of the panel. 


All other conditions of this test shall be analogous 
to 8.2.3.2 of IS 8623 -1/IEC 60439-1. 


5.10.3 Passing Criteria 


The continuity and the short-circuit withstand 
strength of the protective circuit, whether it consists 


13 


of a separate conductor or the frame, shall not be 
significantly impaired. Besides visual inspection, this 
may be verified by measurements with a current in 
the order of the rated current of the relevant outgoing 
unit. Deformation of the enclosure or of the internal 
partitions, barriers and obstacles due to short-circuit 
is permissible to the extent that the degree of 
protection is not apparently impaired and the 
clearances or creepage distances are not reduced to 
values, which are less than those specified in 5.12. 


NOTES 


1 Where the frame is used as a protective conductor, 
sparks and localized heating at joints are permitted, 
provided they do not impair the electrical continuity 
and provided that adjacent flammable parts are not 
ignited. 


2 A comparison of the resistances measured before and 
after the test, between the terminal for the incoming 
protective conductor and the terminal for the relevant 
outgoing protective conductor, gives an indication of 


conformity with this condition. 
5.11 Short- Circuit Withstand Test (Type Test) 
5.11.1 General 


Short-circuit withstand strength declared by the 
original manufacturer shall be verified. 


5.11.2 Circuits of Panels Which Are Exempted From 
the Verification of the Short-Circuit Withstand 
Strength 


A verification of short-circuit withstand strength is 
not required for the following: 


a) Panels having a rated short-time withstand 
current or rated conditional short-circuit 
current not exceeding 10 kAr.m.s. 

b) Panels protected by current-limiting devices 

having a cut-off current not exceeding 17 

kA at the maximum allowable prospective 

short-circuit current at the terminals of the 
incoming circuit of the panel. 

Auxiliary circuits of panels intended to be 

connected to transformers whose rated 

power does not exceed 10 kVA for a rated 
secondary voltage of not less than 110 V, or 

1.6 kVA for a rated secondary voltage less 

than 110 V, and whose short-circuit 

impedance is not less than 4 %. 


All other circuits shall be verified. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


5.11.3 Test Procedure and Criteria of Acceptance 


The short circuit withstand test shall cover the 
incomer MCCB / ACB / Isolator and complete busbar 
system. 


The capacitor banks and reactors, if any, shall be 
bypassed or disconnected from the panel for 
conducting this test. Electronically switched devices 
of the panel shall also be excluded from test. 


Test procedure and accepting criteria shall be done 
as per IS 8623-1/IEC 60439 — 1. 


5.12 Verification of Clearances (Type Test) 


Clearances between phases and phase to body/ 
ground/neutral are intended to provide insulation 
co-ordination within the panel. For dimensioning 
clearances between separate circuits, the highest 
voltage ratings shall be used (rated impulse 
withstand voltage for clearances). 


The clearances shall be sufficient to enable the 
declared rated impulse withstand voltage (Uimp) of a 
circuit to be achieved. The clearances shall be as 
specified in Table 6. 


5.13 Verification of Mechanical Operation (Type 
Test) 


5.13.1 General 


Test is not applicable for devices like MCB, MCCB, 
ACB, with-drawable circuit breaker, etc., which have 
already been type tested according to their relevant 
product standard unless their mechanical operation 
has been modified by their mounting. 


Table 6 Minimum Clearances in Air 


Sl Rated Impulse Withstand Minimum 

No. Voltage, Uimp Clearances 
kV mm 
a) (2) (3) 
i) 2.5 15 
ii) 4 3.0 
iii) 6 5.5 
iv) 8 8.0 
v) 12 14.0 

NOTE — The values of minimum clearances in air are 


based on 1.2/50 us impulse voltages, for barometric 
pressure of 80 kPa equivalent to normal atmospheric 
pressure at 2000 m above sea level. 


All enclosures or partitions including locking means 
and hinges for doors shall have mechanical strength 
sufficient to withstand the stresses to which they 
may be subjected in normal service, and during short- 
circuit conditions. 


The mechanical operation of removable parts, 
including any interlocking devices, shall be verified 
after installation in the panel. 


5.13.2 Test Method 


Mechanical operation cycle consists of - open 
interlocking devices - open enclosure or partition - 
close enclosure or partition - close interlocking 
devices. This constitutes one cycle. 


The number of operating cycles shall be 


a) 200 for enclosures or partitions including 
interlocking devices in the main circuit 
b) 25 for enclosures or partitions including 


interlocking devices in the branch circuit. 
5.13.3 Passing Criteria 


The test is considered to have been passed if the 
operating conditions of the panel, interlocking 
devices, specified degree of protection etc., have not 
been impaired and if the effort required for operation 
is practically the same as before the test. 


5.14 Verification of the Degree of Protection of 
Enclosure (Type Test) 


The degree of protection provided in the panel shall 
be verified in accordance with IS / IEC 60529. 


IP tests shall be carried out: 


a) with all covers and doors in place and closed 
as in normal service; 
b) in a de-energised state unless stated 
otherwise by the original manufacturer. 
Panels having a degree of protection of IP 5X 


shall be tested according to category 2 in 13.4 of 
IS/ IEC 60529: 2001. 


Panels having a degree of protection of IP 6X 
shall be tested according to category | in 13.4 of 
IS/TEC 60529 : 2001. 


The test device for IP X3 and IP X4 as well as the 
type of support for the enclosure during the IP X4 
test shall be stated in the test report. 


The IP X1 test may be carried out by moving the drip 
box instead of rotating the panel. 


Ingress of water in the IP X1 to IP X6 tests on a 
panel is permissible only if its route of entry is 
obvious and the water is only in contact with the 
enclosure at a location where it will not impair safety. 


The IP 5X test is deemed to be a failure if harmful 
amount of dust is visible on electrical equipment 
housed within the enclosure. 


5.15 Verification of the Effectiveness of Automatic 
PF Correction (Type Test) 


5.15.1 General 


APFC panels shall be capable of sensing the 


prevailing PF of the load and automatically correct it 
to the target value. This test is intended to verify the 
function of APFC panels for automatic PF correction. 
Effectiveness of automatic PF correction can be 
verified either in terms of PF value achieved or kvar 
compensation or reduction in mains current, by way 
of switching suitable stage (s) of APFC panel. The 
procedure of kvar compensation for PF correction 
shall be as follows. 


The test is carried out by connecting a variable 
inductive load, which could be either a shunt reactor 
bank or an electronic load or a combination of both. 
Rating of the inductive load shall be capable of 
delivering necessary reactive power for switching 
all stages of the APFC panel from the minimum stage 
to the maximum stage, individually and / or 
sequentially. 


APFC panels of rating, for example up to 100 kvar, 
may be tested by switching all its stages in one step. 
For testing panels of rating beyond 100 kvar, 
laboratory test setup may have practical limitations 
in switching all the stages of APFC panels in one 
step. Therefore, automatic PF correction capability 
of the panel can be verified either for the panel as a 
whole or for individual stages or for combination of 
multiple stages depending on the test set up rating. 


NOTES 


1) Feedback CT of appropriate rating and accuracy 
shall be used for sensing the prevailing PF by the APFC 
panel. Accuracy of the CT shall be 0.5 class or better 
(refer to IS 2705). 


2) A suitable resistive load (say, 1 Kw) may be connected 
for the purpose of proper sensing of power factor. 


3) Minimum stage that can be switched on depends 
upon the minimum current sensed by the feedback CT 
which will be, generally, equivalent to 5 % of the rated 
current of CT. 


5.15.2 Test Procedure 


Test shall be carried out at rated voltage of the panel. 
Sequence of test shall be as follows: 


a) The panel shall be mounted as in normal use 
and PF controller shall be set to function in 
automatic PF correction mode as per 
manufacturer’s instruction. 


(i) Lagging PF correction 


IS 16636 : 2017 


b) APFC panel and variable inductive load shall 
be connected in parallel to a common bus 
which will be connected to the power supply. 
A feedback CT shall be installed on the 
power supply line for sensing the load PF 
by the PF controller. 


c) The target PF, as declared by the 
manufacturer, shall be set in the PF 
controller of the APFC panel. If no target PF 
is declared by the manufacturer, then, target 
PF could be set as 0.98 lag. 


d) Verification of correction to lagging PF: 
Suitable inductive load is turned ON into 
the circuit so as to switch ON single or 
multiple stages of the panel. Switching may 
happen in accordance with the switching 
programme defined in the PF controller. If 
programme is not defined in the controller, 
switching may be in the ascending order of 
stage size of the panel. Inductive load (kvar) 
turned ON shall be either equal to or greater 
than the stage size (s) of the panel to be 
switched, however, shall not exceed the size 
of the next higher stage. Test shall be 
conducted so that all stages of the panel 
are switched in sequence, individually or in 
combination. Examples of switching are 
given in Annex C. 


e) Verification of correction to leading PF: This 
test can be carried out in continuation to 
verification of correction to lagging PF. 
Inductive load in the circuit is turned OFF 
so as to switch OFF single or multiple stages 
of the panel. Test shall be conducted till all 
the stages of the panel are switched OFF. 


f) Inductive load turned ON and panel stages 
automatically switched ON are noted down 
for lagging PF correction. Similarly, 
inductive load turned OFF and panel stages 
automatically switched OFF are noted down 
for leading PF correction. 


The observations may be reported as follows 


Panel Inductive APFC panel Total size of Passing 
Stage(s) to Load turned stage(s) capacitor criterion 
be switched ON automatically | stages 
ON (Q,)” switched ON | switched ON 
(Qs) Qo) (Q, -Q) 
(Q, -Q.) 
shall be 
equal to 
(Q, -Q,) 
%Q, shall be either equal to or greater than the stage size (s) to be switched, however, shall not exceed| 
the size of the next higher stage. 


15 


IS 16636 : 2017 


(ii) Leading PF correction 


Panel Inductive APFC panel | Total size of Passing 

Stage(s) to Load turned stage(s) capacitor stages criterion 

be switched OFF automatically | switched OFF 

OFF (Q,)” switched OFF | (Q, —Q.) 

Q) Q 
(Q, -Q) 
shall be 
equal to 
(Q, -Q,) 

%Q,, shall be either equal to or greater than the stage size (s) to be switched OFF 


5.15.3 Passing Criteria 


a) APFC panel stage (s) shall switch ON or OFF 
so as to compensate the inductive load 
turned ON or OFF. 

b) Switching sequence of panel stages shall 


follow the programme defined in the PF 
controller. If programme is not defined in the 
controller, switching shall happen in the 
ascending order of stage size of the panel in 
accordance with inductive load connected 
or removed from the circuit. 


Alternatively, suitable procedure in terms of PF 
correction achieved against the target PF, may also 
be followed. 


5.16 Measurement of Transient over Currents Due 
To Capacitor Switching (Type Test) 


5.16.1 General 


Transient over currents are expected when a 
section of a capacitor bank is switched alone or in 
parallel with other steps that are already energized 
(see Annex D). 


The effect of transients is more severe in 
mechanically switched panels as compared to 
electronically switched panels. In case of 
mechanically switched panels, current limiting 
devices like pre-insertion resistor, series reactors, 
etc., are generally used to limit the amplitude of peak 
current and duration of transient. 


This test is for measuring the peak magnitude of 
transient over current due to capacitor switching and 
for verifying the efficacy of current limiting devices 
used in APFC panels. 


Amplitude and frequency of transient overcurrent 
are influenced by factors such as the short circuit 
impedance of the power supply, the amount of 
energized capacitance switched in parallel and the 


16 


instant of the switching. Switching transients during 
single switching (see Annex D) are influenced by 
short circuit impedance of the supply. Switching 
transients during parallel switching are independent 
of short circuit impedance of the power supply and 
are dependent on circuit components of APFC panel. 
In order to exclude the influence of short circuit 
impedance of the power supply, which may vary from 
laboratory to laboratory, measurement of transient 
over currents is considered only for parallel 
switching. 


The maximum inrush current occurs during switching 
of the highest size stage in parallel with remaining 
stages in energized condition. 


5.16.2 Test Method 


Test shall be carried out at rated voltage of the panel. 
Sequence of test shall be as follows: 


a) 


The panel shall be mounted as in normal 
use. 


b) The panel and suitable variable inductive 
load shall be connected in parallel to a 
common bus which will be connected to the 


power supply. 


Inrush current is measured for each stage 
of the panel. If the APFC panel has two or 
more identical stages, then test is carried 
out on one of the identical stages. 


The inductive load is adjusted so that the 
test stage is switched in parallel with 
remaining stages in energized condition. 
Peak of transient over current is measured 
along with the point of switching, 
simultaneously on all three phases. 
Switching operations are continued till peak 
switching has occurred or for a minimum of 
5 switching operations. Maximum of the 
measured peak current is reported for each 


d) 


test stage. Time interval between two 
switching operations shall be as declared 
by the manufacturer or 5 minutes, minimum. 


Suitable oscilloscope (of bandwidth 100 kHz, 
minimum), voltage probes and current probes with 
appropriate response characteristics like frequency 
band and current amplitude based on the rating of 
the panel shall be employed for measuring the 
transient over currents. 


The observations to be reported as follows 


Trial Panel Panel stages Peak of 
Number | stage to already energised transient over 
be switched (kvar). current 
(kvar) (maximum) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 


5.16.3 Passing Criteria 


Peak value ofthe transient over current due to parallel 
switching of capacitor banks shall not exceed the 
value declared by the manufacturer. However, it shall 
not exceed 100 A (r.m.s. value). 


In case of electronically switched panels, the 
transient over current shall not exceed 10 Jy (r.m.s. 
value) or as declared by the manufacturer. 


5.17 Inspection of the Panel Including Inspection 
of Wiring (Routine Test) 


The following physical inspection shall be carried 
out: 


a) Conformity of the panel to the circuit and 
wiring diagrams, technical data, etc., 
provided by the manufacturer 


b) Verification of the information and markings 
specified in Markings 4 and conformity of 
the panel to these information 

c) Visual inspection of the prescribed degree 
of protection 

d) Connections, especially screwed and bolted 


connections 


In some cases, it may be necessary to repeat this 
test at site, prior to installation of the panel. In this 
case, a special agreement shall be made between 
manufacturer and user. 


5.18 Test for Checking Functional Operation 
(Routine Test) 


The panel shall be energised to rated voltage through 


17 


IS 16636 : 2017 


a suitable voltage source. Each stage of the panel is 
switched on and current drawn is measured. 
Individual stage current and total panel current shall 
be within + 5% of the rated current. 


Output (kvar) of individual stages of the panel is 
calculated as per 5.3. Output tolerance shall be in 
accordance with 5.3.1. 


Function of meters, switches and indicators shall be 
checked for their functionality. 


The panel shall be provided with meters for display 
of voltage (V), current (A), frequency (Hz) and power 
factor. Accuracy of metering provided in the panel 
shall be within 1%. 


6 GUIDE FOR DESIGN, INSTALLATION, 
OPERATION AND SAFETY 


6.1 General 


For proper design and installation, it is essential to 
perform a detailed system study mainly to assess (a) 
the present load, loading pattern, existing PF and 
required reactive compensation, (b) power quality 
and harmonics, (c) expected growth in load for next 5 
years and (d) any special system requirement. 
Outcome of such system study shall be made 
considered for designing APFC panels for the 
required application. 


Unlike most electrical apparatus, shunt capacitors, 
whenever energized, operate continuously at full 
load or at loads that deviate from this value only as 
a result of voltage and frequency variations 


Overstressing and overheating shorten the life of a 
capacitor, and therefore the operating conditions 
(that is temperature, voltage and current) should be 
strictly controlled. 


It should be noted that the introduction of a 
capacitance in a system might produce 
unsatisfactory operating conditions (for example 
amplification of harmonics, self-excitation of 
machines, overvoltage due to switching, 
unsatisfactory working of audio-frequency remote- 
control apparatus, etc.). 


Because of the different types of capacitors and the 
many factors involved, it is not possible to cover, by 
simple rules, installation and operation in all possible 
cases. The following information is given with regard 
to the more important points to be considered. In 
addition, the instructions of the manufacturer and 
the power supply authorities shall be followed. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


6.2 Choice of Components 


The choice of components of an APFC panel shall 
be carried out with careful reference to compliance 
between their ambient air temperature and that of 
the panel itself. 


6.3 Design 
6.3.1 General 


APFC panel shall have provision to read system 
voltage and current. For power factor correction, 
APFC panels get the feedback from the current 
transformer (CT) installed in the system. Therefore, 
CT of suitable ratio and accuracy is to be provided 
in the panel for measuring the current drawn by the 
panel. Provision shall be made in the panel for 
monitoring panel current. 


6.3.2 Power Factor Correction System Enclosed 
Within a Main Switchboard 


The equipment needed for the automatic correction 
of power factor in an installation, including controller, 
fuses, switching devices, capacitors and reactors 
(chokes), can be installed as an integral part of the 
main switchboard. 


This equipment can be also installed in a separate 
shell of the main board or simply as an added part in 
the common main switchboard shell. 


6.3.3 Free Standing Power Factor Correction 
System 


The equipment is free standing and usually installed 
adjacent or close to the main switchboard or relevant 
sub-board. It generally has a main bus bar 
arrangement of the required fault level to match the 
adjacent main switchboard or sub-board. or the 
required fault current of that section of the 
installation. 


This bus bar section is bus barred or cabled back to 
the main supply of the installation. 


Feeding off this bus bar section is a group of fuses, 
circuit-breaker or fused switch which are wired to a 
switching device and then to the capacitor banks. 


6.3.4 Automatic Power Factor Correction System 
with Remote Mounted Capacitors 


All components except for the capacitors are 
mounted in the control cubicle. The capacitors and 
the required reactors, if any, are mounted on a remote 
mounting rack. This arrangement is generally used 
if there is a problem with space requirements or to 
allow further dissipation of heat. It is important to 
note that power factor component equipment such 
as fuses, capacitors; reactors, etc. generate a 
significant amount of heat. 


18 


6.3.5 Communication Ports / Data Interfaces 


If the purchaser desires, an Ethernet gateway or main 
meter with Ethernet capabilities shall be provided. 
This feature can be used for monitoring and recording 
of data (like voltage (V), current (A), kvar, frequency 
(Hz) and power factor) and / or for transferring data 
to electrical SCADA. 


6.3.6 Tamper proof Design 


If purchaser desires, suitable tamperproof design 
shall be provided. 


6.3.7 Compartmentalization 


The general arrangement of a power factor correction 
panel can be made in sections, which can be arranged 
in separate compartments or in a single configuration. 


a) 


Bus bar, main connection and/or main 


isolation; 
b) Capacitor bank fuses or circuit-breakers 
and/or contactors; 
c) Reactors for harmonic control purposes; 
d) Capacitors; 
e) Control fuses, terminals and controller 


6.3.8 Choice of Rated Voltage 


The rated voltage of the capacitor shall be at least 
equal to the service voltage of the network to which 
the capacitor is to be connected, account being taken 
of the influence of the presence of the capacitor 
itself. 


In certain networks, a considerable difference may 
exist between the service voltage and rated voltage 
of the network, details of which should be furnished 
by the purchaser, so that due allowance can be made 
by the manufacturer. This is important for capacitor 
banks, since their performance and life may be 
adversely affected by an undue increase of the 
voltage across the capacitor dielectric. 


If no information, to the contrary, is available, the 
service voltage shall be assumed as equal to the rated 
(or declared) voltage of the network. 


Where circuit elements are inserted in series with 
the capacitor to reduce the effects of harmonics, etc., 
the resultant increase in voltage at the capacitor 
terminals over and above the service voltage of the 
network necessitates a corresponding increase in the 
rated voltage of the capacitor. 


When determining the voltage to be expected on the 
capacitor terminals, the following considerations 
shall be taken into account: 


a) 


Shunt-connected capacitors may cause a 
voltage rise from the source to the point 


where they are located (see Annex D); this 
voltage rise may be greater due to the 
presence of harmonics. Capacitors are 
therefore liable to operate at a higher voltage 
than that measured before connecting the 
capacitors. 
b) The voltage on the capacitor terminals may 
be particularly high at times of light load 
conditions (see Annex D); in such cases, 
some or all of the capacitors should be 
switched out of circuit in order to prevent 
overstressing of the capacitors and undue 
voltage increase in the network. 


Only in case of emergency should capacitors be 
operated at maximum permissible voltage and 
maximum ambient temperature simultaneously, it shall 
be only for short periods of time. 


NOTES 


1) an excessive safety margin in the choice of the rated 
voltage U, should be avoided, because this would result 
in a decrease of output. 


2) Refer to IS 13340/IEC 60831 and IS 13585/IEC 60931 
concerning maximum permissible voltage. 


6.3.9 Special Service Conditions 


Apart from the conditions prevailing at both limits 
of the temperature category, the most important 
conditions about which the manufacturer shall be 
informed are the following: 


a) Rapid mould growth 


Mould growth does not develop on metals, ceramic 
materials and certain kinds of paints or lacquers. For 
other materials, mould growth may develop in humid 
places, especially where dust, dirt, etc. can settle. 


The use of fungicidal products may improve the 
behaviour of these materials, but such products do 
not retain their poisoning property for more than a 
certain period. 


b) Corrosive atmosphere 


Corrosive atmosphere is found in industrial and 
coastal areas. It should be noted that in climates of 
higher temperature the effects of such atmosphere 
might be more severe than in temperate climates. 
Highly corrosive atmosphere may be present even 
in indoor installations. 


c) Pollution 


When panels are mounted in a location with a high 
degree of pollution, special precautions shall be taken. 


d) Altitude exceeding 2000 m 


Capacitors used at altitudes exceeding 2000 m are 
subject to special conditions. Choice of type of 


19 


IS 16636 : 2017 


capacitor should be made by agreement between 
purchaser and manufacturer. 


6.3.10 Switching and Overload Protection 


Capacitor overload capacities are given in IS 13340 / 
IEC 60831 and IS 13585/IEC 60931. These limits are 
however larger than the ones applicable for the 
banks. The switching and protective devices and the 
connections shall be designed to carry continuously 
a current of at least 1.3 times the current that would 
be obtained with a sinusoidal voltage of an r.m.s. 
value equal to the rated voltage at the rated 
frequency. 


The switching and protective devices and the 
connections shall also be capable of withstanding 
the electro dynamic and thermal stresses caused by 
the transient over currents of high amplitude and 
frequency that may occur when switching on. 


Such transients are to be expected when a bank or a 
step is switched in parallel with others that are 
already energized. It is common practice to increase 
the inductance of the connections in order to reduce 
switching current, although this increases the total 
losses. Care should be taken not to exceed the 
maximum permissible switching current of capacitors 
and switching devices. 


When considering electro dynamic and thermal 
stresses, which results in the risk of leading to 
excessive dimensions, special precautions, such as 
those mentioned in IS 13340/IEC 60831 and IS 13585/ 
IEC 60931 for the purpose of protection against over 
currents, should be taken. 


NOTE 


1) in certain cases, for example when the banks are 
automatically controlled, repeated switching 
operations may occur at relatively short intervals 
of time. Switchgear and fuses should be selected 


to withstand these conditions. 


2) Switching devices connected to a bus bar which is 
also connected to a bank, may be subjected to 
special stress in the event of switching on a short- 
circuit. 

3) Devices for switching parallel steps and their 


associated protective equipment should be able to 
withstand the inrush current (amplitude and 
frequency) resulting when one bank connected to 
a bus bar to which other bank(s) are already 
connected. 


It is recommended that capacitors be protected 
against over current by means of suitable over 
current relays, which are adjustable to operate the 
switching devices when the current exceeds the 
permissible limit specified in IS 13340/IEC 60831 and 
IS 13585/IEC 60931. Fuses do not generally provide 
suitable over current protection. 


NOTE 4 — Depending on the design of capacitors; 
their capacitance will vary more or less with the 
temperature. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


If iron-core reactors are used, attention should be 
paid to possible saturation and overheating of the 
core by harmonics. 


Any bad contacts in capacitor circuits may give rise 
to arcing; causing high-frequency oscillations that 
may overheat and overstress the capacitors. Regular 
inspection of all capacitor equipment contacts is 
therefore recommended. 


6.3.11 Ingress Protection Designation (IP) 


Most APFC panels are installed in main switch rooms 
or adjacent to main boards: in these conditions IP 20 
may be sufficient. Other IP levels should be agreed 
between manufacturer and purchaser. 


Degrees of protection (IP) rating for panels to be 
installed outdoor may be increased up to IP 54. 
Careful consideration is to be paid to the design of 
the ventilation of the cubicle. 


6.3.12 Accessibility of Components 


The cubicle and equipment shall be arranged so that 
in the event of a component failure, components can 
be easily replaced. 


The arrangement of cabling to the capacitor(s) 
should allow easy regular maintenance checks. 


6.4 Response Time of the Panel for PF Correction 


Response time of the panel is the interval of time 
between the instant of sensing the prevailing PF and 
the instant of correcting it to the target PF. Response 
time of APFC panel can be measured as the interval 
of time between the instant of sensing the lagging or 
leading current and the instant of final PF correction 
by way of switching necessary stages of the panel. 


Procedure for measurement of response time of the 
panel for PF correction is given in Annex E for 
information. 


6.5 Installation and Operation 
6.5.1 General 


During installation, care shall be taken with regard 
to polarity of CTs and phase sequence of main circuit. 


6.5.2 Electrical Environment 
6.5.2.1 Harmonics 


The connection of PFC (power factor correction) 
equipment onto a system containing harmonics may 
reduce the life of the PFC equipment. The damaging 
effects of harmonics can be mitigated by the use of a 
suitable detuning reactor in series with each capacitor 
step. 


6.5.2.2 Voltage spikes 


Voltage spikes should be avoided. If switching 
components are selected which are specifically 
recommended for capacitor applications, the problem 
should not arise. Nevertheless, equipment does 
deteriorate with time and worn contacts should be 
replaced during regular maintenance checks. 


6.5.2.3 Load assessment 


The decision of where to apply the power factor 
correction is determined by a number of factors, 
including cost and available space: 


a) Determine where the loads with the low 
power factor are situated: the PFC can be 
located at these points; 


b) Generally, it is more practical to locate PFC 
at the main switchboard, where space is 
available. In this case, the PFC will correct 
the power factor of the whole load and 
maintenance of the PFC is in one location 


6.5.3 Secondary Effects of the PFC System 
6.5.3.1 Harmonic distortion 


PFC equipment when connected onto a system where 
harmonics are being generated will generally increase 
the amplitude of the harmonics, unless a well suited 
detuning reactor is placed in series with each 
capacitor step. 


The increase in harmonics will not only affect the 
life of the capacitors but could cause problems with 
other electric and electronic equipment in the system. 


6.5.3.2 Rise of ambient temperature 


PFC equipment produces heat from the losses 
developed in capacitors, reactors, resistors, coils, 
etc. This heat adds to the ambient temperature in 
the surrounding area. It is important to ensure that 
adequate ventilation is provided in the operating 
room in order to maintain good air circulation around 
the PFC unit. 


6.5.4 Over Voltages 


IS 13340/IEC 60831 and IS 13585/IEC 60931 specify 
overvoltage factors. With the manufacturer’s 
agreement, the overvoltage factor may be increased 
if the estimated number of over voltages is lower, or 
if the temperature conditions are less severe. These 
power-frequency overvoltage limits are valid, 
provided that transient over voltages are not 
superimposed on them. The peak voltage shall not 
exceed “2 times the given r.m.s. value. 


Capacitor banks that are liable to be subjected to 
high over voltages due to lightning should be 
adequately protected. 


6.5.5 Overload Currents 


Before ordering PFC equipment, consideration should 
be given to checking the conditions in the system at 
the place of installation (for instance, presence of 
harmonic distortion, or use of ripple control 
frequencies). 


Capacitors should never be operated with currents 
exceeding the maximum value specified in IS 13340/ 
TEC 60831 or IS 13585/IEC 60931. 


Overload currents may be caused either by excessive 
voltage at the fundamental frequency, or by 
harmonics, or both. The chief sources of harmonics 
are rectifiers, power electronics devices and 
saturated transformer cores. 


If the voltage rise at times of light load is increased 
by capacitors, the saturation of transformer cores 
may be considerable. In this case, harmonics of 
abnormal magnitude are produced, one of which may 
be amplified by resonance between the transformer 
and capacitor. This is a further reason for 
recommending the disconnection of capacitor banks 
at times of light load. 


If the capacitor current exceeds the maximum value 
specified in IS 13340/IEC 60831 or IS 13585/IEC 60931, 
while the voltage is within the permissible limit of 
1.10 Un specified in IS 13340 / IEC 60831 or IS 13585/ 
IEC 60931, the predominant harmonic should be 
determined in order to find the best remedy. 


The following remedies should be considered: 


a) Move some or all of the capacitor units to 
other parts of the system fed by another 
transformer; 

b) Connect a reactor in series with the capacitor 

unit, to lower the resonant frequency of the 

circuit to a value below that of the disturbing 
harmonic. 


The voltage waveform and the network 
characteristics should be determined before and after 
installing the capacitor bank. When sources of 
harmonics such as large power electronic devices 
are present, special care should be taken. 


Transient over currents of high amplitude and 
frequency may occur when capacitors are switched 
on. Such transient effects are to be expected 
when a section of a capacitor bank is switched in 
parallel with other steps that are already energized 
(see Annex D). 


It may be necessary to reduce these transient over 
currents to acceptable values in relation to the 
capacitor unit and to the equipment by switching on 
the capacitors through a resistor (resistance 
switching), or by the insertion of reactors into the 
supply circuit of each section of the bank. 


21 


IS 16636 : 2017 


The peak value of the over currents due to switching 
operations shall be limited to a maximum of 100 Jy 
(r.m.s. value) or to the maximum capability of the 
contactors, whichever is the smaller. 


6.6 Safety 
6.6.1 Discharging Devices 


Each capacitor bank or step should be provided with 
means for discharging the bank after disconnection 
from the network. 


The specified discharging times may be met by 
applying either internal (incorporated) discharge 
resistors on each capacitor or external discharge 
devices rated for the entire capacitor equipment. 


Since the residual voltage at energization must not 
exceed 10 percent of the rated voltage, discharge 
resistors with lower resistance or additional switched 
discharge device may be needed, for the 
automatically controlled capacitors. 


Before touching any live parts, allow at least 5 min 
for the bank to self-discharge and then short-circuit 
each capacitor terminal together and ground. 


6.6.1.1 Internal resistors 


Internal resistors are generally built into the 
individual capacitors. They are designed to ensure 
the discharge of each capacitor and therefore the 
whole bank. In a bank with several sections of 
capacitors in series, the residual voltage on the bank 
terminal is equal to the sum of the residual voltage in 
each section. 


6.6.1.2 External discharge devices 


External discharge devices may be used. Each device 
should be adapted to the conditions existing at the 
site of erection of the equipment and have suitable 
strike distance, creep age path and insulation level. 
If the capacitors have no internal discharge resistors, 
there should be no isolating device between the 
capacitor bank and the discharge device. 


Discharge reactors may be used connected directly 
in parallel with the capacitor steps. Usually, two 
reactors are connected line-to-line across two phases 
because of economical reasons. Under operating 
conditions, only the magnetizing current flows in the 
reactor. When the capacitor equipment is switched 
off, all the energy stored circulates through the coil 
in a few seconds. Most of the energy is dissipated in 
the reactor. The number of discharges per unit of 
time should be restricted so that no overheating of 
the discharge reactor occurs. 


Windings of transformers or motors may be 
considered as suitable impedances as well as the 
primary of voltage transformers. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


6.6.2 Discharging after Disconnection 


A disconnected capacitor installation should 
completely self-discharge no matter where the 
discharge device is located, be it directly at each 
capacitor or at the connecting terminals of the 
equipment. 


However, a capacitor installation comprising series 
connections and star connections, which have 
undergone puncturing or internal or external arcing, 
may not be discharged completely through discharge 
devices connected to the terminals of the capacitor 
installation. Although there is no voltage measurable 
at the equipment terminals, dangerous amounts of 
stored energy may exist in the bank. These so-called 
“trapped charges” may persist over a period of 
several months and can only be discharged by 
individual discharging of each section of the bank. 
These inter-connections, therefore, shall be short- 
circuited to earth before handling. 


It is important to note that a discharging device is 
not suitable for short-circuiting the capacitor 
terminals together and to ground before and during 
handling. 


NOTES 


1) Capacitors connected directly to other electrical 
equipment providing a discharge path shall be 
considered properly discharged, provided that the circuit 
characteristics are such as to ensure the discharge of 
the capacitor within the times specified in IS 13340/ 
IEC 60831 and IS 13585/IEC 60931. 


2) Discharge circuits must have adequate current 
carrying capacity to discharge the capacitor from the 
peak of the 1.3 Un over-voltage. 


6.6.3 Earth Connection 


If the metal container of the panel and capacitor units 
is at earth potential in normal service, it shall be 
possible to connect it to earth in a reliable way, and 
clearly marked with the symbol. 


To enable the potential of the metal container of the 
panel and capacitor units to be fixed, and to enable 
carry the fault current in the event of a breakdown to 
the container, the container shall be provided with a 
connection capable of carrying the fault current. 


6.6.4 Other Safety Requirements 


Panel shall comply with the relevant general safety 
regulations for power installations, that is, Indian 
Electricity Rules. 


6.6.5 Fire Hazard In Case Of Failure 


Capacitors contain flammable materials, i.e. dielectric 
film and/or paper, oil, etc. The bank should be 
arranged with consideration of a possible fire hazard 
in case of a failure ofa component. The two areas to 
be considered are as follows: 


a) Adjacent areas to the capacitors. Normally 
capacitors are manufactured in metal cans 
or are installed in a segregated metal section 
or separated from other components by 
metal barriers. Power and control cables in 
these areas should be kept to a minimum 
and carefully cabled, so as to avoid direct 
contact to capacitor cases. 

b) Adjacent areas around the reactors. Where 
reactors (chokes and filters) are installed, 
power and control cables should be kept to 
a minimum around these components or at 
least supported away from the laminated 
steel cores of these components. 


6.6.6 Human and Property Damage 


The manufacture of the panel should have 
components arranged in a manner so that when 
carrying out maintenance, personnel are not subject 
to accidental arcing faults. Capacitors with a rating 
of, say, 50 kvar, will develop quite a heavily 
interrupting arc if fuses are extracted without first 
isolating the bank via the controlling device. The 
same will apply if the fuse is inserted while the 
continuity of the circuit is present. 


6.6.7 Bus bar 


The bus bar section of power factor panels shall 
withstand, as a minimum, the fault currents of the 
system at the point where it is intended to be 
connected. Usually, these panels are connected onto 
a section of the main installation where the fault 
currents are quite high. 


If the manufacturer specifies a current-limiting device 
at the connection point of the equipment, the 
withstand test shall be carried out with this type of 
device connected in the circuit. 


6.6.8 Connection of Systems 


The bus bar system in these panels shall be arranged 
so that cables or bus bars to be connected and 
extended to the installation have sufficient area for 
take-off. If cables are used for this extension, they 
are usually of a large cross-sectional area and shall 
be of a suitable size to take the required rated current 
and fault current of the system. 


7 SERVICE CONDITIONS 
7.1 Normal Service Conditions 


Panels conforming to this standard are intended for 
use under the normal service conditions detailed 
below. 


NOTE — If components, for example relays, electronic 
equipment, are used which are not designed for these 
conditions, appropriate steps should be taken to ensure 
proper operation. 


7.1.1 Ambient Air Temperature 


7.1.1.1 Ambient air temperature for indoor 
installations 


The ambient air temperature shall not exceed +40°C 
and its average over a period of 24 h shall not exceed 
FC, 


The lower limit of the ambient air temperature shall 
be=5°C. 


7.1.1.2 Ambient air temperature for outdoor 
installations 


The ambient air temperature shall not exceed +50°C 
and its average over a period of 24 h shall not exceed 
+40 °C. 


The lower limit of the ambient air temperature shall 
be —25°C. 


7.1.2 Atmospheric Conditions 


7.1.2.1 Atmospheric conditions for indoor 
installations 


The air shall be clean and its relative humidity shall 
not exceed 50 % at a maximum temperature of +40°C. 
Higher relative humidity may be permitted at lower 
temperatures, for example 90 % at +20°C. Moderate 
condensation should be borne in mind which may 
occasionally occur due to variations in temperature. 


7.1.2.2 Atmospheric conditions for outdoor 
installations 


The relative humidity may temporarily be as high as 
100 % at a maximum temperature of +25°C. 


7.1.3 Pollution Degree 


The pollution degree refers to the environmental 
conditions for which the panel is intended. 


For switching devices and components inside an 
enclosure, the pollution degree of the environmental 
conditions in the enclosure is applicable. 


For the purpose of evaluating clearances and 
creepage distances, the following four degrees of 
pollution in the micro-environment are established. 


Pollution degree 1: No pollution or only dry, non- 
conductive pollution occurs. The pollution has no 
influence. 


Pollution degree 2: Only non-conductive pollution 
occurs except that occasionally a temporary 
conductivity caused by condensation is to be 
expected. 


Pollution degree 3: Conductive pollution occurs or 
dry, non-conductive pollution occurs which is 
expected to become conductive due to condensation. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Pollution degree 4: Continuous conductivity occurs 
due to conductive dust, rain or other wet conditions. 


Pollution degree 4 is not applicable for a micro- 
environment inside the panel to this standard. 


Unless otherwise stated, panels for industrial 
applications are generally for use in a pollution 
degree-3 environment. However, other pollution 
degrees may be considered to apply, depending upon 
particular applications or the micro-environment. 


NOTE — The pollution degree of the micro- 
environment for the equipment may be influenced by 
installation in an enclosure. 


7.1.4 Altitude 


The altitude of the site of installation does not exceed 
2 000 m. 


NOTE — For equipment to be used at higher altitudes, 
it is necessary to take into account the reduction of the 
dielectric strength, the switching capability of the 
devices and of the cooling effect of the air. 


7.2 Special Service Conditions 


Where any special service conditions exist, the 
applicable particular requirements shall be complied 
with or special agreements shall be made between 
the panel manufacturer and the user. The user shall 
inform the panel manufacturer if such exceptional 
service conditions exist. 


Special service conditions include, for example: 


a) Values of temperature, relative humidity and/ 
or altitude differing from those specified in 7.1 


b) Applications where variations in 
temperature and/or air pressure take place 
at such a speed that exceptional 
condensation is liable to occur inside the 
panel; 

c) Heavy pollution of the air by dust, smoke, 
corrosive or radioactive particles, vapours 
or salt; 

d) Exposure to strong electric or magnetic 
fields; 

e) Exposure to extreme climatic conditions; 

f) Attack by fungus or small creatures; 

g) Installation in locations where fire or 
explosion hazards exist; 

h) Exposure to heavy vibration and shocks; 

i) Installation in such a manner that the 
current-carrying capacity or breaking 
capacity is affected, for example equipment 
built into machines or recessed into walls; 

j) Consideration to appropriate remedies 
against conducted and radiated 
disturbances other than EMC. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


k) Consideration to appropriate remedies 
against EMC disturbances in environments 
other than those described in 8. 


For installation in a place where the ambient 
temperature can be outside the normal service 
condition range stated in 7.1, the preferred ranges 
of minimum and maximum temperatures to be specified 
should be 


a) 
b) 


-50 °C and + 40°C for very cold climates 
-5°C and + 55°C for very hot climates 


7.3 Conditions during Transport, Storage and 
Installation 


A special agreement shall be made between the panel 
manufacturer and the user if the conditions during 
transport, storage and installation, for example 
temperature and humidity conditions, differ from 
those defined in 7.1. 


8 ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY 


The relevant clauses of the standards concerning 
capacitors (see 2) apply with the following additions. 


8.1 Emission 


Under normal service conditions, power capacitors 
do not produce any electromagnetic disturbance. 
Electromagnetic disturbances can only be generated 
by panels during switching operations (connection 
or disconnection of steps) and are limited to 
switching over voltages, the duration of which is 
measured in milliseconds. If the controller is 
regulated so as to limit the number of switching 
operations to not more than 5/min, the requirements 
of electromagnetic emission are deemed to be 
satisfied and no verification is necessary. 


8.2 Immunity 


Panels not incorporating electronic equipment are 
not sensitive to normal electromagnetic 
disturbances, and therefore no immunity tests are 
required. 


8.3 Panels Incorporating Electronic Equipment 


Electronic equipment (i.e. the controller) incorporated 
in panels shall comply with the immunity and 
emission requirements of the relevant Indian 
standard(s). 


24 


9 INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN WITH ENQUIRY 
OR ORDER 


The following minimum information is recommended 
to be given at the stage of enquiry or order of APFC 
panels: 


a) Output, kvar 

b) Rated voltage, volts 

c) Rated frequency, Hz 

d) Number of phases 

e) Configuration for 3-phase panels: star or 
delta 

f) Number of stages of panel and kvar of each 
stage 

g) Type of switching, electro-mechanical or 
electronic 

h) Rated impulse withstand voltage (Un) 

i) Short-circuit withstand strength, in amperes 
(kA) 

j) State whether any abnormal voltage rises 
are expected. If so, state highest voltage 
expected in the system of installation 

k) Type of capacitor: SH / NSH, MPP/ APP, dry 
type, oil filled 

D Series rector — Yes or No. If yes, % (0.1%, 
0.2%, 0.5%, 1%, 5.67%, 7%, 14%) and 
conductor material - copper / aluminium 

m) Upper limit of temperature category 

n) Indoor or outdoor installation 

0) Proposed location of APFC panels: 

i) Local substation (If so, state kVA rating 
of the transformer etc.,) 

ii) Distribution circuit level 

ii) Load (appliances, equipment level) 

iv) Special application 

v) Any other 

p) Altitude above sea level of installation 
location 

q) Degree of protection - IP Clause 

r) Tamperproof design — Yes or No 

s) Any special requirement that may affect the 
design or operation of the panel 

t) Reference to IS 


Annex A 
(Clauses 5.8.1.1 & 5.8.1.2) 


CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE NOMINAL VOLTAGEAT THE SUPPLY SYSTEM AND THE 
EQUIPMENT RATEDIMPULSE WITHSTAND VOLTAGE 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Sl. | Maximum Nominal Voltage of the supply system Preferred values of rated impulse 
No. |value of rated (< rated insulation voltage of the equipment) withstand voltage (1,2/50us) at 1000 m 
operational Vv kV 
voltage to 
earth, 
a.c .r.m.s. or 
d.c. 
v 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i IV Ul I ji 
| A e Origin of | Distribution Load Specially 
á = 7N. p installation | circuit level | (appliance, | protected 
i; (service equipment) | level 
L / \ entrance level 
= —" level) 
A 
a.c TMS: a.c .r.m.s | a.c .r.m.s. a.c .1.m.s 
or d.c or d.e 
i 50 - - 12,5,24,25,| - 1,5 0,8 0,5 0,33 
30,42,48 
ii 100 66/115 66 60 - 2,5 1,5 0,8 0,5 
iii 150 120/208 115,120 110,120 220-110, 4 3 155 0,8 
127/220 127 240-120 
iv 300 220/380, 220,230 |220 440-220 6 4 2,5 15 
230/400 240,260 
240/415, 277 
260/440 
277/480 
v 600 347/600, 347,380, |480 960-480 8 6 4 2,5 
380/660 400 
400/690, 415,440, 
415/720 480 
480/830 500,577, 
vi 1000 - 600 1000 - 12 8 6 4 
660 
690,720 
830,1000 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Annex B 
(Clause 5.9.2) 


GUIDELINES FOR SELECTION OF CROSS SECTION OF EXTERNAL TEST CONDUCTORS FOR TEMPERATURE 
RISE TEST BASED ON THE TEST CURRENT 


Table B.1 — Copper Conductors for Rated Current up to 400 A Inclusive 


SI Range of Rated Current * Conductor Cross-sectional Area: 
No. A 
(1) (2) (3) 
mm? AWG/MCM 

i) 0 8 1.0 18 

ii) 8 12 135 16 
iii) 12 15 2.5 14 
iv) 15 20 2:5 12 

v) 20 25 4.0 10 
vi) 25 32 6.0 10 
vii) 32 50 10 8 
viii) 50 65 16 6 

ix) 65 85 25 4 

x) 85 100 35 3 

xi) 100 115 35 2 
xii) 115 130 50 1 
xiii) 130 150 50 0 
xiv) 150 175 70 00 
xv) 175 200 95 000 
xvi) 200 225 95 0000 
xvii) 225 250 120 250 

xviii) 250 275 150 300 

xix) 275 300 185 350 
xx) 300 350 185 400 
xxi) 350 400 240 500 


a 


The value of the rated current shall be greater than the first value in the first column and less than or equal to the second 
value in that column. 

For convenience of testing and with the manufacturer’s consent, smaller test conductors than those given for a stated 
rated current may be used. 


c 


Either of the two conductors specified may be used. 
NOTE— 


The minimum length of each temporary connection from terminal to test supply shall be 
a) 1 m for cross section up to and including 35 mm? 


b) 2 m for cross section larger than 35 mm? 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Table B.2 — Copper Conductors for Rated Current from 400 A to 4000 A 


Sl Range of rated Test Conductors 
No. current * 
Cables Copper bars ° 
Quantity Cross-sectional Area Quantity Dimensions 
mm? mm (W x D) 
i) 400 to 500 2 150 2 30x 5 
ii) 500 to 630 2 185 2 40x 5 
iii) 630 to 800 2 240 2 50x 5 
iv) 800 to 1 000 2 60x 5 
v) 1 000 to 1 250 2 80x 5 
vi) 1 250 to 1 600 2 100x 5 
vii) 1 600 to 2 000 3 100x 5 
viii) 2 000 to 2 500 4 100x 5 
ix) 2 500 to 3 150 3 100x 10 
x) 3 150 to 4 000 4 100x 10 


The value of the rated current shall be greater than the first value and less than or equal to the second value. 


Bars are assumed to be arranged with their long faces (W) vertical. Arrangements with long faces horizontal may be used 
if specified by the manufacturer. Bars may be painted. 


NOTE— 
The minimum length of each temporary connection from terminal to test supply shall be 
a) 2 m for test current up to 800 A 


b) 3 m for test current above 800 A and up to 4000 A. This can be reduced to 2m provided that the 
temperature rise at the supply end of the connection is not more than 5 K below the temperature rise in the 
middle of the connection length. 


Table B.3 — Cross section of Aluminium Table B.4 — Cross Section of Aluminium Conductors 

Conductors for Values of Test Current up to 400 A for Values of Test Current Higher than 400 A 

a ctsive __________ SI Range of Test Aluminium Bars 
SI. Range of Test (2) AC Conductor Size No. Current 
No. Current (A) mm? (1) (2) (3) 

i) 0-8 1.5 (A) Quantity Dimensions 
ii) 8-12 1.5 mm (W x D) 
iii) 12-15 2.5 i) 400-500 2 32 x 8 
iv) 15-20 4.0 ii) 500-630 2 40 x 8 
v) 20-25 6 ili) 630-800 2 50 x 8 
vi) 25-32 10 iv) 800-1000 2 50 x 10 

vii) 32-50 16 v) 1000-1250 2 63 x 12 
viii) 50-65 25 vi) 1250-1600 4 50 x 8 

ix) 65-85 35 vii) 1600-2000 3 100 x 10 

x) ae viii) 2000-2500 4 100 x 10 
x) ix) 2500-3150 4 150 x 10 
xii) 115-130 70 

xiii) 130-150 70 NOTES : k : 

: 1. The connections shall be made with matt black finished 
xiv) 150-175 95 Pe 

aluminium bars 

=) dias 134 2. The minimum length of each temporary connection 
xvi) 200-225 150 from terminal to terminal shall be 2 m. 

xvii) 225-250 185 
xviii) 250-275 240 

xix) 275-300 240 

XX) 300-350 240 
xxi) 350-400 300 
NOTES 


1. Connections shall be single core, PVC insulated, aluminium 
cables or wires as indicated. 
2. For single phase or multiphase tests the minimum length of 
each temporary connections from terminal to terminal or to 
the test supply or to a star point shall be: 
a) 1 m for cross section up to and including 50 mm? 
b) 2 m for cross section larger than 50 mm? 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Annex C 
EXAMPLES OF SWITCHING SEQUENCE FOR APFC PANEL 
(Clause 5.15.2) 
Example 1: Single stage switching 


APFC panel: 75 kvar of 7 stages with stage size: 6.25, 6.25, 12.5, 12.5, 12.5, 12.5, 12.5 
Switching sequence: (6.25-6.25-12.5-12.5-12.5-12.5-12.5) 


SI Panel Stage(s) Inductive | APFC Panel Total Size of = (Q,-Q)  (Q,-Q) 
No. to be Load Stage(s) Capacitor 
Switched (Q)? Automatically Stages 
ON Switched ON Switched ON 
(Qs) (Q) (kvar) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 6.25 10 6.25 6.25 3375 3.75 
ii) 6.25 5 +375 6.25 12:5 2.5 2.5 

iii) 12.5 10 12.5 25 0 0 
iv) 12.5 15 12.5 37.5 2.5 2.5 
v) 12.5 10 +2.5 12.5 50 0 0 
vi) 12.5 15 12.5 62.5 2.5 2.5 

vii) 12.5 10 +2.5 12.5 75 0 0 


%Q, shall be either equal to or greater than the stage size (s) of the panel to be switched, however, shall not exceed the size 
of the next higher stage. 


Example 2: Single and multiple stage switching 
APFC panel: 100 kvar of 5 stages with stage size: 5, 5,15, 25, 50 
Switching sequence: (25-50-5-5-15) 


SI Panel Stage(s) Inductive APFC Panel Total Size of (Q, -Q,.) (Q, -Q 
No. to be Load Stage(s) Capacitor 
Switched (Q,)” Automatically Stages 
ON Switched ON Switched ON 
(Qs) Qo) (kvar) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 25 25 25 25 0 0 
ii) 50 50 50 75 0 0 
iii) 5-5-15 25 5 + 5+ 15 100 0 0 


%Q,, shall be either equal to or greater than the stage size (s) of the panel to be switched, however, shall not exceed the 
size of the next higher stage. 


Example 3: One step switching of all stages 
APFC panel: 100 kvar of 5 stages with stage size: 5, 5,15, 25, 50 
Switching sequence: (15-25-50-5-5) 


SI Panel Stage(s) Inductive APFC Panel Total Size of (Q, -Q,.) (Q, -Q 
No. to be Load Stage(s) Capacitor 
Switched (Q,)” Automatically Stages 
ON Switched ON Switched ON 
(Qs) Qo) (kvar) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 7) 
i) 15-25-50-5-5 120 15+ 25+50+5+5 100 20 20 


%Q,, shall be either equal to or greater than the stage size (s) of the panel to be switched, however, shall not exceed the 
size of the next higher stage. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Example 4: Single and multiple stage switching 
APFC panel: 450 kvar of 8 stages with stage size: 25, 25, 25, 75, 75, 75, 75, 75. 
Switching sequence: (25-25-25-75-75-75-75-75) 


Sl Panel Stage(s) Inductive APFC Panel Total Size of (Q, -Q,) (Q, -Q,) 
No. to be Load Stage(s) Capacitor 
Switched (Q,)” Automatically Stages 
ON Switched ON Switched ON 
(Qs) (Q) (kvar) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 25 25 25 25 0 0 
ii) 25 50 25 + 25 75 0 0 
iii) 25 100 75 150 25 25 
iv) 75 50 75 225 0 0 
v) 75 100 15 300 25 25 
vi) 75 50 75 375 0 0 
vii) 75 100 75 450 25 25 


ƏQ, shall be either equal to or greater than the stage size (s) of the panel to be switched, however, shall not exceed the 


size of the next higher stage. 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses 5.16.1, 6.3.8 & 6.5.5) 


FORMULAE FORAPFC PANELINSTALLATIONS 
(Informative) 


D-1 RESONANCE FREQUENCY 


A capacitor will be in resonance with a harmonic in 
accordance with the following equation in which n is 
an integer: 


where, 


S is the short-circuit power (MVA) where the 
capacitor is to be installed; 


Q isexpressed in megavars (Mvar); 
n is the harmonic number: that is, the ratio 


between the resonant harmonic (Hz) and the 
network frequency (Hz). 


D-2 VOLTAGE RISE 


Connection of a shunt capacitor will cause the steady- 
state voltage to rise, given by the following expression: 
AU @Q 


U S 
where, 

AU is the voltage rise in volts (V); 

U is the voltage before connection of the 
capacitor (V); 

S isthe short-circuit power (MVA) where the 
capacitor is to be installed; 

Q is expressed in megavars (Mvar). 


D-3 INRUSH TRANSIENT CURRENT 


D-3.1 Switching In of a Single Capacitor 


; 25 
Is = In |— 
\o 
Where 


I, is the peak of inrush capacitor current in amperes 


(A); 

I, is the rated capacitor current (r.m.s.) in amperes (A); 
S is the short-circuit power (MVA) where the 
capacitor is to be installed; 

Q is expressed in megavars (Mvar). 


D-3.2 switching of Capacitors in Parallel with 
Energized Capacitor(s) 


T; = 
X.X, 
X 
ee ee E 
X, 


where 
Í is the peak of inrush capacitor current in 
amperes (A); 
U isthe phase-to-earth voltage in volts (V); 


Xo is the series-connected capacitive reactance 


per phase in ohms (Q); 


IS 16636 : 2017 


X is the inductive reactance per phase between 
the banks in ohms (Q); 


J, isthe frequency of the inrush current in hertz 
(Hz); 
J, isthe rated frequency in hertz (Hz). 


D-3.3 Discharge Resistance In Single-Phase Units Or 
In One-Phase Or Polyphase Units 


pe Ff 
UR 
where 


t is the time for discharge from U, V2 to U, in 
seconds (s); 
R isthe discharge resistance in megohms (MQ); 


C is the rated capacitance per phase in 
microfarads (UF); 


U,, is the rated voltage of unit in volts (V); 


U, is the permissible residual voltage in volts (V) 


(see IS 13340 / IEC 60831-1 and IS 13585/ 
IEC 60931-1 for limits of ¢ and U,); 


K is the coefficient depending on the method of 
connection of the resistors to the capacitor 
units (see IS 13340 / IEC 60831-1 and IS 13585/ 
TEC 6093 1-1). 


Annex E 
(Clause 6.4) 
(Informative) 


MEASUREMENT OF RESPONSE TIME OF THE PANEL FOR PF CORRECTION 


Response time can measured along with the test at 5.15 
for “Verification of effectiveness of automatic PF 
correction”. 


For measuring the response time, mains current (I,,), 
inductive current (I,) and capacitor current (1) are to 
be measured, simultaneously, on a common time scale, 


as indicated in Fig. E1. 


Step 1) to Step 5) shall be same as of 5.15.2. 


The observations to be reported as follows: 


Step 6): Mains current (I,,), inductive current (I, ) and 
capacitor current (I.,) are measured, simultaneously, on 
a common time scale. 

Step 7): Inductive load switched, panel stages 
automatically switched and the interval of time between 
the instant of sensing the inductive load current and 
the instant of achieving the lowest mains current are 
noted down for individual and / or multiple stages of 


switching, as schematically shown in Fig. E2. 


Inductive load 
switched ON 


QD 


Capacitor bank(s) 
automatically switched time 


Measured response 


Suitable oscilloscope (of bandwidth 100 kHz, minimum) and current probes with appropriate response characteristics 
like frequency band & current amplitude depending on the rating of the panel may be employed for measuring 


response time. 


IS 16636 : 2017 


Testing 
transformer 


Mains 
current 


Capacitor 


current 
Inductor 


current 


e F 


Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage n 
Inductive Load 


APFC Panel 


Fic. E1 ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURING MAINS CURRENT, INDUCTIVE CURRENT AND CAPACITIVE CURRENT FOR 


Inductor 
current 


—o 


current 


Capacitor 
current 


RESPONSE TIME MEASUREMENT 


(a) Response time measured for a 7 stage APFC panel — Sequential switching of individual stages 
(refer to Example | at Annex C) 


31 


IS 16636 : 2017 


(b)Response time measured for a 5 stage APFC panel - One step switching of all stages (refer to 
Example 3 at Annex C) 


Fig. E2 Response Time of APFC Panel 


32 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 29 (10378). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg ee 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
2609285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
22542519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


