Wada ATAF IS 7718 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Ror afew sit ade Prenat & 
fao, sit wa-Tara at 
fam 


( ZAT FRAT ) 


Recommendations for 
Inspection, Testing and 
Maintenance of Fixed Wheel and 
Slide Gate 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2018 


UMA AH ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM WH, 9 Begs VHC AM, Ae feeci#-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2018 Price Group 7 


Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee, WRD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional 
Committee. 


Gates provided for controlling water discharges for flood control, water supply, irrigation etc., are required to be 
manufactured, erected and maintained properly to get the best results and maximum utility of water and to get the 
designed life of the gate itself. 


This Indian Standard was first published in three parts. Part I published in 1975, deals with inspection, testing and 
assembly at manufacturing stage. Part II published in 1978, deals with inspection and testing at the time of erection 
and Part III published in 1975, deals with inspection, testing and maintenance after erection. Previous revision was 
published in 1991, merging all the three parts covering inspection and testing to be carried out during manufacture, 
erection and periodical maintenance of these gates. 


Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard decided to revise it based on the experience gained 
since then as well as considering technological development in the field. New clause for quality assurance plan for 
manufacture, erection, and periodical maintenance of hydraulic gates (9.1) alongwith a typical quality assurance 
plan (Annex A) have also been incorporated in this revision. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7718 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INSPECTION, TESTING AND 
MAINTENANCE OF FIXED WHEEL AND SLIDE GATE 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the recommendations for 
inspection, testing and maintenance of fixed wheel and 
slide gates. It does not cover hoists, controls, stem rods, 
wire ropes, etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on these 
standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
822 : 1970 Code of procedure for inspection 
of welds 
1030 : 1998 Carbon steel castings for general 
engineering purposes — 


Specification (fifth revision) 
Technical supply conditions for 
threaded steel fasteners — Part 3 : 
Mechanical properties of fasteners 
made of carbon steel and alloy 
steel — Bolts, screws and 
studs (fourth revision) 

Schedules for wrought steels — 
Part 5 : Stainless and heat-resisting 
steels (second revision) 

Rolling and cutting tolerances for 
hot rolled steel products (fourth 
revision) 

Carbon steel billets, blooms, slabs 
and bars for forgings (fifth 
revision) 

Carbon steel forgings for general 
engineering purposes — 
Specification (third revision) 

Hot rolled low, medium and high 
tensile structural steel (sixth 
revision) 

Carbon steel castings for surface 
hardening — Specification (fourth 
revision) 


1367 (Part 3) : 
2002 


1570 (Part 5) : 
1985 


1852 : 1985 
1875 : 1992 
2004 : 1991 
2062 : 2006 


2707 : 1996 


2825 : 1969 Code for unfired pressure vessels 

3658 : 1999 Code of practice for liquid 
penetrant flaw detection (second 
revision) 

3664 : 1981 Code of practice for ultrasonic 


pulse echo testings by contact and 
immersion methods (first revision) 


7318 ( Part 1): Approval tests for welders when 


1974 welding procedure approval is not 
required: Part 1 Fusion welding of 
steel 

11855 : 2004 Guidelines for design and use of 


different types of rubber seals for 
hydraulic gates (first revision) 


3 INSPECTIONS 


3.1 Inspection during manufacturing stage is to be 
carried out in respect of the following. 


3.1.1 Materials 


All materials and components supplied by the 
manufacturer shall conform to the requirements of the 
latest relevant Indian Standard. In the absence of the 
Indian Standard for any material other specifications, 
mutually agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier, may be used. For important components, 
manufacturer’s test certificates shall be furnished. 


3.1.2 Castings 


a) All castings shall conform to the relevant 
Indian Standard. 

b) Ifthe defects are within acceptable limits as 
per the relevant Indian Standard, repairing of 
castings can be allowed without impairing the 
strength of machinability. 

c) Visual examination shall be done to ascertain 
the general soundness of the castings and, if 
required, these may be subjected to non- 
destructive tests. 


3.1.3 Forgings 


a) All forgings shall conform to the relevant 
Indian Standards. 

b) All forgings shall be suitably heat-treated, 
whenever deemed essential. 


IS 7718 : 2018 


3.1.4 Welding 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 
e) 


g) 


All weldings shall conform to the relevant 

Indian Standard. 

Qualified welders, complying with IS 7318 

(Part 1), shall be employed for the welding 

work. 

Visual examinations shall be carried out of all 

welded joints to ensure that welding is free 

from the following: 

1) Cracks on the surfaces of the joints or 
parent metals located in the heated zone 
of the joint; 

2) Undercuts in the parent metals; 

3) Sponginess and porosity in the welded 
metals; 

4) Non-uniform width of the fillet joints: 

5) Misalignment and distortion of the welded 
member; and 

6) Irregular reinforcing beads of welds. 


Defective welds shall be removed and re-done. 
The welds which seen questionable, shall be 
checked by the manufacturer, using 
nondestructive testing methods to ensure the 
soundness of the weld. 


Ten percent of butt welds on major stress 
carrying members like gate girders, 
unsupported butt joints on skin plate shall be 
examined by radiographic tests like (X-ray, 
Gamma ray, etc). Fifty percent of the remaining 
butt joints shall be examined by any 
nondestructive tests, namely ultrasonic tests, 
magnetic particle tests, etc. 

If necessary, any component may be stress 
relieved according to the procedure laid down 
in IS 2825. 


3.1.5 Manufacturing Tolerances 


The gates and the embedded parts shall be manufactured 
to such an accuracy and tolerances as are required for 
efficient operation of the gates. Unless otherwise 
specified, the tolerances given in (a), (b) and (c) may 
be used as a general guide. 


a) 


Embedded Parts 


1) Deviation of any point on the face of the 
seal seats or wheel track/slide track from 
a 2 metre machined straight edge held 
against it shall not exceed 0.5 mm. 
However, overall deviation for the entire 
length shall not be more than 1 mm. 

2) Deviation from straightness of the guide 
track shall not be more than 2 mm in 2 
metre length and 3 mm for the entire length. 


3) Variation in the distance between the face 
of the seal seat and the face of its 
respective wheel track/slide track shall not 
exceed | mm. 

4) The offset or gap at any adjoining field 
joints between seal seats, wheel tracks/ 
slide tracks and guide tracks shall not be 
more than 0.5 mm. The gap at the joint 
shall be seal welded and ground smooth. 

5) Therounding off/chamfering of seal seats 
as required shall be checked. 


b) Fixed Wheel Gates 


1) These gates shall be so assembled that 
when a machined straight edge is held 
against all the wheels on either side, in 
neutral position, it shall not be possible 
to insert a feeler gauge thicker than 1.5 
mm between any of the wheels and the 
straight edge. 

2) The distance between the side guide shoe 
or guide roller on one side of the gate and 
the corresponding guide shoe or guide 
roller on the other side shall not differ 
from the dimension shown in the drawing 
by more than 1.5 mm. 


c) Slide Gates 


1) The gate and the components shall be so 
manufactured that on assembly, the side 
and top seal bases coincide on the same 
plane within the tolerance as given below: 


When a machined straight edge is held 
against the seal bases, it shall not be 
possible to insert a 0.2 mm feeler gauge 
between the seal base and straight edge 
anywhere. 

2) After fixing metallic seals their faces shall 

be tested to ensure that these are in a 
common plane within the tolerance given 
below: 
When a machined straight edge is held 
against the metallic seal faces, it shall not 
be possible to insert a 0.2 mm feeler gauge 
between the seal face and straight edge 
at any point. 


3) The distance between the side guide shoes 
or guide rollers on either side of the gate 
shall not exceed the dimension shown in 
the drawing by more than 1.5 mm. 


4 SHOP ASSEMBLY AND TESTING 


4.1 Gate shall be assembled, complete with wheels and 
guides, either in horizontal or vertical position for 
proper alignment and inspection. 


4.2 Side guide shoes or guide rollers may be shimmed, 
if necessary, to maintain the required tolerances. 


4.3 All the wheels of the gate shall be rotated a number 
of times to ensure their free movement. 


4.4 If ballast is provided, it should be ensured that it is 
placed in correct position and secured to avoid 
dislodging during operation of the gate. 


4.5 The marking and match marking on the components 
shall be made before the final despatch of the 
components. 


5 PAINTING 


5.1 Painting shall be done according to the requirement 
of the purchaser and the application procedure shall be 
as recommended by the paint manufacturer. 


5.2 Prior to painting, proper surface preparation should 
be ensured. 


5.3 The painting work done shall be checked for the 
required specifications regarding quality of paints, dry 
film thickness etc. 


6 INSPECTION DURING ERECTION WORK IS 
TO BE CARRIED OUT AT THE FOLLOWING 
STAGES 


6.1 General Inspection 


6.1.1 It should be ascertained that the gate parts 
received at site have been manufactured according to 
the design and have necessary match markings made at 
shop. It shall be ensured that all exposed surfaces of 
the embedded parts have been protected by painting, 
greasing, etc. The surface of the embedded parts in 
contact with concrete should be free from grease, paint, 
etc. for better bonding with the concrete. A coating of 
cement wash may be given, if necessary. 


6.1.2 Any difference in the blockouts or critical 
dimensions shall be corrected before erection. The 
critical dimensions as mentioned in Fig.1 should be 
checked with reference to the drawings during erection 
and corrected, if required. 


6.1.3 The reference axis lines, centres of openings and 
levels having relations to completed civil structure shall 
be established on the site so as to ensure erection at 
proper locations. 


6.2 Inspection of Blockouts 


Concreting behind the gate groove may be done in one 
or two stages. If done in two stages, it should be ensured 
that adequate blockouts are kept for accommodating 
the gate parts as manufactured both with respect to 
dimensions and anchorage provision according to the 
design. Ensure that the requisite dowel bars of adequate 


IS 7718 : 2018 


length are left out in the blockouts. The entire blockout 
should be left roughened properly for further concreting 
to give necessary bond to the second stage concreting. 


6.3 Inspection of Embedded Parts 


6.3.1 It should be ensured that the sill beam is correctly 
positioned, both in level and location. All the nuts and 
bolts of anchorages of the sill beam should be tightened 
so as to prevent dislocation during and after concreting. 


6.3.2 The embedded parts, namely, track beam, guides, 
seal seats, gate groove lining etc, shall be checked when 
all these parts are in their final position, at least up to 
double the gate height, in one operation. The check 
should be carried out both with respect to location and 
levels with respect to the sill beam already established 
in position. Each part should be checked first 
individually and thereafter relatively with the other parts. 
It should be ensured that manufacturing tolerances, as 
prescribed, are considered while erecting these parts 
and even after accounting for these tolerances, the 
erection work is carried out according to the design 
provisions. 


6.3.3 The track beam and seal seats shall be in true 
alignment. The alignment can be checked by means of 
a fine plumb bob and feeler gauge, preferably at 300 
mm intervals from bottom to top side of the gate 
opening. Alternatively, diagonal checking or any other 
satisfactory method can be adopted for checking the 
alignments. 


6.3.4 After checking the track beams and seal seats on 
both sides it shall be ensured that they are in terms of 
their respective planes. It should be checked that top 
seal seat, wherever provided, shall also be in the required 
plane. 


6.3.5 Guides and counter guides, if provided, should 
be checked for exact location and true alignment, first 
individually and then also relatively. 


6.3.6 Groove liners and corner protection angles, when 
provided, should be checked for true location and true 
alignment. 


6.3.7 The following salient dimensions shall be checked 
at intervals of 300 mm from the bottom to double the 
gate height (see Fig. 1): 
a) Centre to centre distance of track beams, 
b) Centre to centre distance of side seal seats, 
c) Face to face distance of guides, 
d) Face of track beam to face of side seal seat, 
e) Face of track beam to centre line of guide, 
and 
f) Vertical distance between sill and the centre 
line of top seal seat. 


IS 7718 : 2018 


SIDE SEAL SEAT 


1A Gate Groove with Upstream Seal 


a/2 € a/2 


1B Gate Groove with Downstream Seal 


Fic. 1 CRITICAL DIMENSIONS IN A GATE GROOVE 


4 


NOTES 


1 Use of a suitable template for checking (d) and (e) above is 
recommended to maintain corresponding portions of vertical 
embedded parts from sill level up to the top of embedded parts. 


2 For the portions falling above the level corresponding to double 
the gate height, the checking interval may be increased to | m. 


3 In case a top seal is provided, the dimensions between the face 
of the track beam and the face of the top seal seat should also be 
checked. 


6.3.8 Eccentricity or some such arrangement, if 
provided to a gate for its fine adjustment in the groove, 
shall not be accounted for while erecting embedded 
parts. 


6.3.9 Anchorages should be fastened or welded rigidly, 
after final adjustment of the embedded parts, so as to 
prevent dislocation of the parts while pouring second 
stage concrete. 


6.3.10 The gate groove concreting shall be done only 
after satisfying all the above requirements, together with 
generating and securing proper records thereof. 
Randomized recheck of alignment of the embedded 
parts shall be done after concreting. 


6.3.11 It shall be ensured that there is no step at the 
joint while extending the embedded parts. 


6.3.12 Second stage concrete surfaces must be smooth 
and properly matched with the surface of the embedded 
parts and of the first stage concrete design profile, so 
as to avoid any future cavitation. For high head gates, 
special care shall be taken for matching the concrete 
surfaces with the embedded parts wherever the free 
stream flow velocity is likely to exceed 30 m/s. 


6.4 Inspection of Gate 


6.4.1 The gate which is received on site, after having it 
duly inspected in the workshop, should be re-inspected 
at the site for overall dimensions before lowering it in 
the gate groove to ensure proper fitting. It should be 
ensured before lowering that the gate has been painted 
according to the specification. 


6.4.2 The following salient dimensions shall be checked 
at an interval of at least 300 mm, least wherever 
applicable. 


a) Centre to centre distance between wheel 
treads/slide block, 

b) Centre to centre distance between side seals/ 
bases, 

c) Face to face distance between guide shoes/ 
rollers, 

d) Face of seal base to wheel tread/slide block, 

e) Centre line of guide shoes/roller to wheel tread 
in zero position, and 

f) Vertical distance between bottom of skin plate 
and centre line of top seal/bases. 


IS 7718 : 2018 


6.4.3 The seals of seal bases should be checked to 
ensure that they are coplanar. All the wheels should be 
adjusted to ensure that all wheel treads are in their 
proper alignment. The wheel pins should be locked after 
making this adjustment. 


6.4.4 The seal bolts shall be tightened adequately and 
uniformly. 


6.4.5 The gate wheel should be checked for free rotation 
to ensure that they are not jammed during transport/ 
handling. To check the effectiveness of the seal, actual 
seal interference should be compared with that provided 
in the design, which affects the efficiency of sealing 
arrangement and easy operation of gate. For the river 
carrying abnormal logs or solid floats, adequate 
protection should be devised to safeguard the life of 
the seals. This can be done either by operational 
parameters of gates or by providing screening device 
before the gate. 


6.4.6 In case of counterweighted gates or gates with 
ballast it should be ensured that the weights have been 
added and secured properly at correct place. This is 
very important consideration to achieve the correct 
seating pressure. 


7 INSPECTION OF COMPLETE GATE 
INSTALLATION 


7.1 It should be ensured that the installation of the 
various parts of the gate and hoisting arrangement 
conforms to specified location and alignment, 
particularly with respect to correct positioning and 
attachment of rope/stem of the gate as well as hoist. 


7.2 It should be ensured that the gate groove, sill and 
the embedded parts are thoroughly cleaned and no 
foreign material is present in the groove. Before 
lowering the gate it is advisable to check the gate 
passage, either with the help of template representing 
the cross section of the gate in plan or by any other 
means, to ensure that the gate groove is free from any 
obstruction. 


7.3 During inspection it may be ensured that there is an 
adequate space to carry out maintenance, replacement 
or repairs on gates or parts like wheels, rubber seals, 
etc. 


8 TESTING 


8.1 The gate should be tested preferably in a dry 
condition with the hoist duly connected for its smooth 
working. The gate should be moved up down in the 
groove with no obstruction and no undue efforts 
required for its operation. If the gate cannot slide down 
of its own weight or if it is found to be going tight 
anywhere, reasons should be investigated and remedied 
instead of forcing the gate down. 


IS 7718 : 2018 


8.2 The testing of the gate seals in dry conditions should 
be done by suitable means, such as by viewing the 
contact surfaces against a light source. Ensure that the 
seal rides smoothly over the seal seat at the time of its 
approach to the latter during the gate operation. Seal 
seat shall be cleaned before the trial operation. 


8.3 In case of rubber seals, water should be initially 
poured over the seals so that there is no dry friction of 
the seals. In case of metal to metal contact, oil or grease 
is to be used. No grease or lubricant is to be used at 
rubber seals. 


8.4 There should be no noise due to friction or 
otherwise, nor any signs of excessive friction. The 
performance shall be free of jerks or any dug-in at any 
position. There shall be no dangling of the gate or twist 
in the rubber seals. The top seals should not leave their 
plane and the rubber seals should not be overpressed. 


8.5 The test against leakage shall be carried out as 
follows: 


The gate is to first rest on the sill beam, that is, the 
closed position. The leakage test can be taken in this 
position by using suitable pump, with necessary 
arrangements of jetting water at 1.5 times the designed 
pressure on seal position from bottom to top. 
Particularly all corner joints and other joints, if any, are 
to be tested to ensure perfect working of the gate. 
Allowable leakage is from 5-10 litres/minute/metre 
length of seal for medium and high head gate. 


8.6 All the tests indicated under 8.1 to 8.5 should be, 
wherever possible, also performed with water standing 
at the site to the design head. 


8.7 When the gate is operated under standing water, it 
is to be uniformly ensured that there are no vibrations 
of the gate or of the civil structure at any of the gate 
openings. 


8.8 Bypass arrangement made for the water should be 
checked to ensure the proper working of the 
arrangement. Bypass arrangement shall be provided 
with an additional emergency valve as a safety measure. 


8.9 Air vents, when provided, are to be tested for their 
choke free performance. 


9 PERIODIC INSPECTION AFTER ERECTION 


9.1 Quality assurance plan for manufacture, erection, 
and periodical maintenance of Hydraulic Gates shall 
be prepared for execution of project covering quality 
of raw materials, quality of manufacturing processes, 
erection and periodical maintenance. A typical quality 
assurance plan is given in Annex A. 


9.2 In order to detect normal wear and tear defects, if 
any, periodical inspection of the installed gates shall 


be carried out. Direct visual inspection of these gates 
shall be done as and when necessary but at least twice 
a year corresponding to the period when upstream water 
level is at its highest and lowest level. In case of 
inaccessible parts, inspection may be necessary through 
diverse/remote operated underground videography. 


9.3 Inspection shall be done for both through the 
following: 


a) Embedded parts, and 
b) Gate leaf and components. 


9.3.1 Inspection of Embedded Parts 


All parts, either rigidly fixed in the concrete or partly 
exposed, shall be subjected to the periodical inspection. 
This covers sill beam, seal seats, track path, guide path, 
liners, etc. 


All the debris and blockage at and over these parts shall 
be cleared. Any peculiar formation or deposition, over 
the embedded parts should carefully monitored. 
Photographic records may be maintained, if useful. 


9.3.1.1 Due to constant use and various known and 
unknown hydraulic phenomena seal seat, sill beams, 
track paths etc. get pitted. Eating of the metal of seal 
seat, if any, should be compared with the previous 
record, variation damages excessive sealing, uneven 
surfaces, stepping, and should be carefully checked 
preferably by using magnifying glass. 


9.3.1.2 Due to wear and tear, surfaces may become 
uneven and may have indentations, for example, roller 
marks over the track paths. The embedded parts should 
be in their alignment. Readings of alignments should 
be taken at intervals of at least 60 cm. Some fixed point 
may be used for taking readings at every inspection to 
determine comparative wear and tear. 


9.3.1.3 The following salient dimensions should be 
periodically checked at longitudinal intervals, not less 
than 300 mm for conformity as designed: 


a) Centre to centre distance between the track 
plates, 


b) Centre to centre distance between the side 
seals, 


c) Face to face distance between the guides, 
d) Face of seal seat to face of track path, 
e) Centre of guide path to face of track path, and 


f) Vertical distance between sill and centre line 
of top seal seat, if applicable. 


9.3.1.4 The maintenance of conformity in the 
dimensions mentioned in 9.3.1.3 shall be equally 
obtained for the gate leaves as well. 


9.3.1.5 All nuts, bolts and screws shall be periodically 
checked for wear, tear and tightness. Countersunk 


screws and bolts shall be checked for holding on to 
their proper positions. All welds shall be checked for 
cracks and other defects, if any. 


9.3.1.6 The entire gate shot shall be checked thoroughly 
so as not to have any obstructions for travel of the gate. 


9.3.1.7 In case of sliding gates all sealing metallic 
surfaces shall be inspected with utmost care. 


9.3.2 Inspection of Gate Leaf and Components 


9.3.2.1 A debris and sealing should be removed from 
the gate leaf. Peculiar formations, if any, on the leaf 
should be carefully stripped off the scales. Photographic 
records should be kept, if necessary. The skin plate and 
other components should be tapped lightly by hammer 
to examine soundness. 


9.3.2.2 The dry side of the skin plate should be checked 
for the welds, joints of horizontal and vertical members 
and any drain holes for the horizontal members. 


9.3.2.3 Hoisting connection on the gate leaf should be 
checked for shearing or punching effect and wear and 
tear. 


9.3.2.4 Alignment of seals should be precision checked 
by means ofa thread and feeler gauge. All corner joints 
should be checked for any cracks. In case of musical 
note rubber seals, twists, overlapping bulb flatness, 
deformation, etc, should be checked. There should not 
be any undesirable material into the rubber seal and in 
between the rubber seal and the skin plate. Retractable 
seals should be checked for their effectiveness. Use of 
oil or grease over rubber seals should be avoided. 
Cladded rubber seals should be inspected for proper 
adhesion between cladding and the rubber. All the nuts 
and bolts, fixing rubber seals to the gate, should be 
checked. In case of metallic seals, thickness and camber, 
if any, should be checked. Lubricating system if 
provided, should be checked for free flow of lubricant. 


9.3.2.5 Alignment of rollers should be checked and 
deviation of alignment should be noted. Each roller 
should be checked for maladjustment of the pin or any 
other defect. It should be rotated a number of times to 
ensure its free rotation. The bearing should be checked 
for proper functioning. 


9.3.2.6 The following salient dimensions should be 
periodically checked at longitudinal intervals, not less 
than 300 mm for conformity as designed: 


a) Centre to centre distance between the rollers 
of the fixed wheel gate, 

b) Centre to centre distance between the side 
seals, 

c) Face to face distance between the face of guide 
shoes or guide rollers, 


IS 7718 : 2018 


d) Face of the rollers to face of the seal base, 


e) Distance between the wheel face and the 
centre of the guide shoe or guide roller in case 
of fixed wheel gate and distance between the 
face of slide plate and centre of the guide shoe 
or guide rollers for slide gates, 

f) Vertical distance between the bottom most 
point of the bottom seal and the centre line of 
top seal, if applicable. 


9.3.2.7 The maintenance of conformity in the 
dimensions mentioned 9.3.2.6 shall be equally obtained 
for the embedded parts. 


9.3.2.8 All the nuts, bolts and screws shall be 
periodically checked for wear, tear and tightness. 
Countersunk screws and bolts shall be checked for 
holding on to their proper positions. All welds shall be 
checked for cracks and other defects, if any. 


10 TESTING 


10.1 The gate should be tested for its smooth travel 
throughout in the groove, both up and down, without 
appreciable sway, anywhere. All rollers shall always be 
in contact with the track surface during the entire travel. 


10.2 The gate shall not be subjected to undue pressure; 
nor should any extra effort be needed to operate the 
gate, under no load condition. The operation should be 
trouble free and without rattle. If it is noticed that extra 
efforts are needed it should be measured by torque meter 
with suitable arrangements. 


10.3 On load (that is when there is water) there should 
be no undue vibrations in the gate and the structure. In 
case vibrations are noticed during the operation of the 
gate, the reason thereof should be investigated. Until 
remedial measures are taken, gate shall not be kept in 
the position at which vibrations are noticed. 


10.4 The gate should be watched against any leakage 
in its closed position at least once under maximum head 
condition available in a year. 


11 MAINTENANCE OF GATE 


11.1 Any weld that might have become defective should 
be chipped out and re-made. Damaged nuts, bolts, 
rivets, screws etc should be replaced without delay. 


11.2 The gate slot and platform should be cleaned 
periodically. Scales formed over the embedded parts 
should be removed. All bottom corners should be 
cleaned and accumulations removed. Anchorages and 
concrete around anchorages should be checked for any 
developing cracks or slackness, etc, and repair should 
be attended to immediately. 


11.3 The gate leaf should be thoroughly cleaned and 


IS 7718 : 2018 


repainted, as and when necessary, according to the 
procedure recommended by the paint manufacturer. 


11.4 Rubber seals should be ground, if required to keep 
it in one alignment. All nuts and bolts fixing the seal to 
the gate should be tightened uniformly. Seals, when 
damaged or found leaking excessively, should be 
adjusted, repaired or replaced as considered necessary. 


11.5 Gate roller bearings and guide roller bushes should 
be properly lubricated. 


11.5.1 Whenever necessary these should be opened for 
rectifications of defects; and after cleaning and 
lubrication, should be refitted. These may be replaced 
if repairs are not possible. 


11.6 Hoisting connection on the gate leaf should be 
lubricated where necessary and defects if any should 
be rectified. 


11.7 All nuts, bolts, check nuts and cotter pins of the 
lifting devices should be checked periodically. 


11.8 Where filling valves are provided as part of the 
gate structure, all the nuts, bolts, checknuts etc should 
be checked periodically. It shall also be ensured that 
the filling valves completely shut-off the passage of 


water when the load is removed. To ensure the same 
springs and other components shall be periodically 
checked and replaced if necessary. 


11.9 All components should be greased and lubricated 
as per the relevant Indian Standards. Recommended 
and approved oils and grease only should be used. 


11.10 Appropriate remedial measures should be taken 
so that the salient dimensions mentioned in 9.3.1.3 
and 9.3.2.6 and alignment of components mentioned 
in 9.3.1 are set right. Appropriate repairs should also 
be carried out wherever excessive pitting and other 
surface damages are noted. 


11.11 The roller assembly should be adjusted by the 
eccentricity arrangement to ensure that all the rollers 
rest uniformly on the track plates, particularly in the 
closed position of the gate. 


11.12 Maintenance charts showing the components of 
gates and hoists and their periodically undertaken 
checking maintenance programme set up with respect 
to the gates for timely implementation. A register 
showing the time and the date of operation, the amount 
of opening, discharge, etc should be maintained. 


Annex A 
(Clause 9.1) 


Typical Quality Assurance Plan for Manufacture, Erection and Periodical Maintenance of 


Hydraulic Gates 
Project : Type of Gate : 
Manufacturer : 
Purchaser : 
Agreement No.: Dated : 
Sl Component Characteristics Type of Quantity Acceptance 
No. Check of Check Norm 
1 RAW MATERIALS 
1.1 | Hot rolled Physical properties Verification of material testing | One item per batch As per relevant Indian 
plates, Section and Rolled Rounds certificate Standard specified in 
drawling 
Chemical Properties Verification of material testing |One item per batch As per relevant Indian 
1.2 certificate Standard specified in 
drawling 
1.3 Dimensional Check Measurements Complete dimensions on IS 1852 
randomly selected sample/s 
1.4 Ultrasonic check for Ultrasonic Testing 100 percent Level III 
laminations IS 3664 
NOTE — Heat numbers of plates may be recorded for co-relating the test certificate 
2 CAST STEEL — ITEMS 
2.1 Gate Rollers Physical properties Mechanical Test with test bar One item per heat As per relevant Indian 
Guide Roller Assy. Standard specified in 
Gear wheels drawing 
Chemical properties Chemical analysis One item per heat As per relevant Indian 
Standard specified in 
drawing 
Heat treatment Heat Chart One item per heat As per relevant Indian 
Standard specified in 
drawing 


(Contd.) 


8107 : SILL SI 


OI 


2.4 Dimensions Measurements 100 percent on As per relevant Indian 
randomly selection Standard specified in 
sample/s. drawing 

2.5 U T testing UT Ex. 100 percent on IS 3664 
randomly selection 
sample/s. 

2.6 Hardness Hardness As specified in Tolerance as specified in 
Approved drawings _| drawings 

3 FORGINGS 
3.1 Physical properties Verification of material testing Entire Lot As per relevant Indian 
certificate Standard specified in 
drawing 
3.2 Rollers and Pins Chemical properties Verification of material testing Entire Lot As per relevant Indian 
certificate Standard specified in 
drawing 

3.3 Bend test Verification of material testing Entire Lot As per relevant Indian 

certificate Standard specified in 
drawing 

3.4 Heat treatment Heat Chart Entire Lot As per relevant Indian 

Standard specified in 
drawing 

3.5 Dimensions Measurements 100 percent No significant defect 
randomly selected 
sample/s 

4 STAINLESS STEEL 

4.1 Plates Physical properties Verification of test certificate 100 percent As per relevant Indian 

42 for Seal Seats Standard specified in 

43 wheel tracks and pins drawing 

Chemical properties Verification of testing certificate 100 percent As per relevant Indian 
Standard specified in drawing 
Hardness Measurement 100 percent As per relevant Indian 
Standard specified in drawing 
4.5 Dimensions Measurement 100 percent on As per relevant Indian 


randomly selected 
sample/s 


Standard specified in 
drawing 


(Contd.) 


8107 : SILL SI 


IT 


Surface defects 100 percent Approved Drawing 
4.6 U.T. tests for internal UT test 100 percent Level HI IS 3664 
defects 
5 RUBBER 
5.1 Rubber Seals Physical properties 
i) Hardness after Verification of test certificate 100 percent IS 11885 
vulcanizing 
ii)Elongation Verification of test certificate 100 percent IS 11885 
ili) Tensile strength Verification of test certificate 100 percent IS 11885 
iv) Water absorption test Verification of test certificate 100 percent IS 11885 
v) Dimensions Measurement 100 percent on Approved .Drawing 
randomly selected 
sample/s 
6 BOUGHT OUTS 
6.1 Bolts and Nuts Hardware items Verification of test certificate 100 percent Approved Drawing 
6.2 _ |bearings etc. Specification and make Verification of test certificate 100 percent Approved Drawing 
6.3 Dimensional check Measurements 100 percent on Approved Drawing 
randomly selected 
sample/s 
6.4 Physical properties Verification of test certificate 100 percent As per approved drawings 
and relevant Indian Standard 
6.5 Chemical properties Verification of test certificate 100 percent As per approved drawings 
and relevant Indian Standard 
7 [WELDING o T 
7.1 Fillet welds Weld procedure for fillet Verification of document Random IS 3658, IS 3664 
and butt welds and butt weld 
7.2 Qualification of welders Verification of document Random IS 7318 (Part 1) and 
IS 822 
7.3 Quality of fillet welds Random No significant defects 


(Contd.) 


81072 : SILL SI 


TI 


7.4 Quality of butt welds Die Penetration 100 percent 
Ultrasonic Test/Radiographic Test |10 percent Level III 
IS 3664 
No significant defects 
8 FABRICATION OF Dimensional inspection Measurements Each item Approved Drawing 
GATE PARTS 
8.1 Skin plate Assembly. 
8.2 Horizontal girders Dimensional inspection Measurements Each item Tolerance as per relevant 
Indian Standard 
Dimensional inspection Measurements Each item Tolerance as per relevant 
Indian Standard 
8.3 Wheels, pins Surface Finish (Mechined) | Visual/Comparison with 100 percent Approved Drawing 
Comparator 
9 EMBEDDED PARTS LH Measurements Each Item Approved Drawing. 
9.1 
RH Measurements Each item Tolerance as per relevant 
Indian Standard 
LH — Top Measurements Each item Tolerance as per relevant 
9.2 Indian Standard 
LH - Bottom 
9.3 RH — Top Measurements Each item Tolerance as per relevant 
Indian Standard 
RH - Bottom 
9.4 Surface Finish (Machined) |Visual/Comparison with 100 percent Approved Drawing 
Comparator 
10 PAINTING Surface preparation Visual Random As per approved Drawing or 
10.1 | Gates Technical specification 
10.2 Primer coat Visual Random As per approved Drawing or 
Technical specification 
10.3 Intermediate coat Visual Random As per approved Drawing or 


Technical specification 


(Contd.) 


8107 : SILL SI 


el 


10.4 Finish coat Visual Random As per approved Drawing or 
Technical specification 
10.5 Thickness of paint Measurements Random As per approved Drawing or 
Technical specification 
11 ERECTION Check for critical Measurements Each As per approved Drawing or 
11.1 Technical specification 
dimensions Verification Each As per approved Drawing or 
11.2 Balancing of gate Technical specification 
11.3 Dry test Visual with light source Each As per approved Drawing or 
Technical specification 
11.4 leakage test Visual Each As per Clause 8 


8107 : SILL SI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 12 (590). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


