( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 3731 - 1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TEAK SQUARES

( First Revision )
Timber
Chairman Members ADDITIONAL CHIEF CONSERVATOR Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow OF FORESTS ADDITIONAL INSPECTOXGENERAL Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi OF FORESTS Ministry of Dcfence ( DGI ) Sn~r R. C. BEDI SHRI J. P. BHARDWAJ ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. BANI~JEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI D. K. MANUNQO ( Alternate) CHIEF CONSERVATOROF FORESTS Himachal Pradesh Forest Department, Simla CONYERVATOROF FORESTS ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI V. N. DESBPANDE New Delhi SHRI D. S. SAXENA ( Alternate ) DIRECTOI~ Forest Department, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore DIRECTOR Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, Bangalore Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DIRECTOR ( TRACKS ) JOINT DIRECTOR ( CE ) ( TM ) ( Alfcrnate ) DR RAMES~ DAYAL Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Wood Anatomy Branch ), Dehra Dun National Buildings Organization. New Delhi EDITOR INDUSTRIAL ADVIS~I~ Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi S~IKI P. V. MEHTA ( Alternate ) SHRI U. B. KANC~AN R & D Organization ( Ministry of Defcm e ), New Delhi SI~I B. B. MEHTA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. L. LAULY Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel Industry, New Delhi EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ( Allzrnate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ copyig/It 1985

Sectional

Committee,

BDC 9

*

Representing New Delhi

INSPECTORGENERAL OF FORESTS Ministry of Agriculture,

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Zndiun Co#ysight Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to he nn infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 3731 - 1985 ( Continuedfrom page 1)
Members DR A. N. NAYAIZ SHRI R. C. PRASAD In Representing ( C-59, Indcrpuri, .hrew personal capacity Delhi ) Bihar State Forest Development Corporation Limited, Patna

SHRI B. M. PRASAD (Alternate) Indian Academy of Wood Science, Dehra Dun PRESIIU~NT Dn SATISX KU~AR ( Alternate ) Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay DR A. PURUSHOTHAIK Naval Headquarters, New Delhi CAPT Moam RAMAN CIIK MANMOHAN SIN~I~ ( Alternate ) Forest Research Institute and Colleges ( Timber SIXI~IS. S. RAJPUT Mechanics Branch ), Dehra Dun In personal capacity ( 28-C, N Block, Malviy(l Nagar Dn V. RANQANATH.~N Extension, Sakct, .Ncw Delhi ) ( I7-1-391154, Subramanya In personal capacity SHRI A. C. SEKJIAR Colony, Saidabad, Hydcrabad ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi S~IRI F. C. SHARUA Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHKI S~IARAN SINQII -_ DR M. C. TEWARI DR A. C~ANDRA ( Alternate ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Forest Research Institute & Colleges Products Department ), Dehra Dun Director General, IS1 ( Ex-opo Mcmbtr )

New Delhi

( Forest

SHRI P. SATYANARAYANA Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Timbqr

Conversion

and

Grading
Convener

Subcommittee,

BDC 9 : 10

SHRI A. C. SEKHAR 17-l-391/54, Subramanya Colony, Saidabad, Hyderabad

ADDITIONAL CIIIEF CONSER- Forest Department, Nainital VATOR op: FORESTS CONSERVATOROF FORESTS ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence SHIZI R. C. BEDI SARI J. P. BHARDWAJ ( Alternate ) CHIEF CONSERVATOROF FORESTS Agriculture Forests Government of ADDITIONAL CHIEF CONSERVATOR OB FORESTS (Alternate )

Government ( DGI )

of Uttar

Pradesh,

and Co-operation Gujarat, Vadodara

Department,

( Continuedon page 10 1

2

IS:3731-1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TEAK SQUARES

( First Revision )
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 The need for a standard on grading rules for teak squares for purposes of internal trade and replacing several individual specifications now existing between various buyers and sellers particularly in the government departments themselves, has been felt for quite sometime. 0.2.1 No arbitrary rules for the inspection of `teak squares' can be maintained with complete satisfaction as the variation from any given rule will be far too numerous and as such the judgement of the grader should command the maximum degree of acceptance by everybody. Teak squares being mostly intended for reconversion into smaller sizes must be judged by the general quality of the wood and the probable loss due to visible defects under normal methods of conversion. 0.2.2 In view 1966 to lay down on the experience revision has been teak squares have of these conditions, this standard was first published in a uniform set of grading rules for teak squares. Based gained as a result of usage of this standard, this taken up, wherein the extent of permissible defects in been revised.

0.3 While formulating these rules the experience based on `Rules for the grading of teak squares' of Forest Research Institute coupled with the recent trends in the international fields have been duly considered. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retainetl in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).
3

IS:3731

- 1985

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers squares based on defects. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose ofthis standard, and the following shall apply. the definitions given in IS : 707-1976* the requirements of various grades of teak

2.1 Equivalent Defect - Any defect not listed in this standard but which can be rated the same as any other defect mentioned in the standard and which causes equal degrade in further utilization of teak squares. 2.2 Teak Squares - A piece of teak timber formed by slabbing a teak log on four sides with a rectangular cross-section of not less than 20 cm side and length not less than 2 m. The sides of the cross-section are generally equal to each other within 10 percent. 2.3 Consignment - One lot of 100 teak squares or inspection at any particular time for a particular grade. caused by the 2.4 Holes - Cavities means and expressed by their diameter. 2.4.1 2.4.2 2.4.3 Large Holes Small Holes Pin Holes Hole above insects, birds less, and offered for

mechanical

12 mm in diameter.

Hole 12 mm or less but more than 2 mm in diameter. Hole 2 mm or less in diameter.

2.5 Defect teak square

or irregularity which lowers the value of - An abnormality by decreasing its out-turn in future conversion.

2.6 Units of Defect - Unit of a defect is a quantitative representation of the approximate degrade of the utilizable material for each defect. A sum of units of various defects gives an estimate of the total degrade due to all defects present simultaneously in the material under consideration. 3. GRADES 3.1 For all squares up to 5 m in length any consignment as below depending on cumulative value of the defects. shall be graded

3.1.1 Grade 1 - No single square shall contain more than 2.0 units of defects and the average for the whole consignment shall be not more than 0.75 units of defects. *Glossary of terms applicable to timber technology and utilization ( second revision ). 4

IS : 37313.12 Grade 2 - No single square shall contain defects and the average for the whole consignment 1.5 units of defects.
3.1.3 Grade 3 - No single and the average for the whole of defects.

1985

more than 4.0 units of shall not be more than

square shall contain 6.0 units of defects consignment shall not be more than 3 units

3.2 For squares more than 5 m in length the above limits shall be derived by the following equation: Permissible number of defects in L squares more than 5 m in length = 5 where L = length of squares in m. twice the number of Permissible defect value x according to grade

3.2.1 The value derived from 3.2 shall not exceed units of defects as permitted for each grade. 4. GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS
shall be either sawn or hewn to a reasonable evenness.

4.1 Teak

squares

4.2 All pieces shall have fairly straight and parallel sides with the planes of end-sections fairly perpendicular to the planes of the side surfaces. 4.3 All squares shall be of good sound wood and free from defects than those permitted under 6. other

4.4 The grading of individual squares shall be based on cumulative effect of defects as obtained by the addition of units of defect and shall conform to 3. 4.5 Plugging any form. or covering of the visible defects shall not be permitted in

4.6 All pieces shall be air-seasoned to a moisture content not exceeding 20 percent up to a depth of 15 mm from any portion of the surface Determination of moisture content excluding 30 cm from each end. shall be done by the methods prescribed in IS : 11215-1985*. In case of dispute, distillation method shall be regarded as standard. 5. DIMENSIONS

AND THEIR

MEASUREMENTS
shall be made at mid length of the

5.1 All

cross-sectional measurements teak square carrect to 0.5 cm.

5.2 Length shall be measured from end to end correct to the nearest lower O-05 m at the corners of the ends, the shortest length parallel to longitudinal edges shall be taken as the length of the teak square. *Methods for determination of moisture content of timber and timber products.

5

IS : 3731- 1985 5.3 The
third volume of any decimal place. piece shall be computed in m3 to the nearest

6. PERMISSIBLE

DEFECTS AND

THEIR EVALUATION

6.0 The

evaluation of defects mentioned below and their method of measurement shall generally conform to IS : 3364 ( Part 2 )-1976* and in addition shall be governed by the following clauses. 6.1 Curvature - Curvature more than 20 mm in 2 m length shall not be accepted. Curvatures up to 20 mm in 2 m shall be admitted in all grades subject to the provision that curved squares shall not exceed 5 percent in any consignment. 6.2 Taper - Taper up to 10 mm in every metre ( both faces ) shall be admitted in all grades. Steeper taper shall not be accepted.

6.3 Wane - Wane up to a total of 10 percent of width on any face shall not be considered a defect; wane in excess of 10 percent shall not Wane shall be measured at its deepest part on each face. be accepted. 6.4

Knots
Knot shall not be more than one-fourth of the face on which it

6.4.1 occurs.

6.4.2 Knots shall not be so distributed as to result in an estimated loss of more than 25 percent in further conversion under normal conditions of saw milling. 6.4.3 1976*. below: The units of defect shall be evaluated as per IS : 3364 ( Part 2 )For ready reference the units for some dimensions are given 0.01 units 0.04 units

One knot up to 50 mm One knot over 50 mm and up to 100 mm 6.4.4 6.5 Decayed knots count twice

as sound knot of the same dimensions.

Holes Large holes shall not be permitted and the supplier. unless agreed to

6.5.1 Large Holes between the purchaser

6.5.2 Small Holes - Not more square metre of all the four be not so distributed as to result further coversion under normal

than 5 holes shall be permitted for every surfaces put together. They shall also in a loss of more than 25 percent in conditions of saw milling.
of defects in timber: Part 2 Ccnverled

*Methods measurementand evaluation timber (first revision ).

of

6

IS:

3731- 1985

6.5.3 The units of defect shall be evaluated by the diameter of the For ready reference the units for holes as per IS : 3364 ( Part 2 )-1976*. some sizes and number are given below:

One hole up to 5 mm One hole above 5 mm and up to 10 mm 6.5.4 Pin holes be permitted. 6.6 Shakes

0'01 units 0.03 units shall

other than those due to live powder post beetles

6.6.1 All type of shakes up to 80 mm in length shall be permitted. 6.6.2 The units of defect shall be evaluated as per IS : 3364 ( Part 2 )1976*. For ready reference the units for some shakes are given below:

Length of the Shake mm 20 40 80

Width of the Shake mm 10 15 25

Units of DGfects 0.10 0'20 0.66

6.6.3 For more than one shake the units of defect shall be added together and in case of star shake the values of the largest shake is multiplied by half the number of shakes in the star.

6.7 Checks

and Splits

6.7.X Checks less than 50 mm in length and 2 mm in width shall be permitted provided they are not so numerous as to effect the out turn of the material on conversion.

6.7.2 Checks up to 200 mm in length and more than 2 mm in width shall be evaluated as shake as per IS : 3364 ( Part 2 )-1976*. 6.7.3 Checks more than 200 mm shall not be permitted. and evaluated as per

6.7.4 Splits up to 250 mm shall be permitted IS : 3364 ( Part 2 )-1976*. 6.8 Other
Defects

6.8.1 Any defect not listed above but which will not debar any piece from its expected utility can be considered as equivalent defect to any of the above for purposes of evaluation depending on its size, appearance, location and distribution.
*Methods of measurement timber (/irst revision ). and evaluation defects in timber: Part 2 Converted

7

IS:3731

-1985

6.8.2 Defect values for those which cannot be considered as equivalent defects and for such number and sizes of the defects not listed above shall be obtained from IS : 3364 ( Part 2 )-1976*. .
7. MARKING

7.1 All
indicate

squares shall the following:

be

marked

or

punched

suitably

at the ends to

a) Suppliers' b) Grade c) Grade d) Grade 7.1.1 Mark. Each

identification

mark by abbreviated and

initials,

1 by a square, 2 by a triangle, teak square 3 by one star or cross `*' or `x'. may also be marked with the ISI Certification

NOTE The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and ReguThe IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard lations made thereunder. conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

8. GUIDING 8.1 Guiding

PRINCIPLES

FOR INSPECTION
given in IS : 6534-197lt shall be inspected shall be kept in the

principles for inspection followed and a record of each square pro forma given in Table 1.

*Methods of measurement and evaluation of defects in timber: timber (first revision ). TGuiding principles for grading and inspection of timber.

Part

2 Converted

8

IS : 3731 - 1985 ( Continued from pap 2 )
Members CHIEF CONSERVATOR OB FORESTS Rejresenting Forest Department, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Simla CONSERVATOR0~ FORESTS ( Alternate ) CHIEF CONSERVATOROF FORESTS Forest Department, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta COXWERVATOR OF FORESTS ( Alternafe ) DIRECTOR ( TRACKS ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOLT DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) DR R. GHANAHARAN Kerala Forest Research Institutc,.Pcechi INDUSTRIAL A D v I s E R Directorate General of Techmcal Development, ( CHEMIOALS ) New Delhi SHRI P. V. MEFITA ( AIternate ) MANACXN~ DIRECTOR U.P. Forest Corporation, Lucknow REQIONAL MANAQER ( Alternate ) MANAGING DIRECTOR Hirn;;zi Pradesh State Forest Corporation Ltd, OFFICER-IN-CHAROE Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Logging Branch), Dehra Dun Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI P. C. SHARMA SERI R. T. SO~AIYA Bombay Timber Merchants Association Limited, Bombay SHRI JIMMY WADI_& ( Alfcrnatr )

10

