IS 14519:1998 ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) v-@v?7w

m$Rr~~~rn~~m~~

Indian Standard

GUIDELINESFORFIXINGRATESFOR IRRIGATIONWATER

ICS 13.060.25

@ BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI I 10002

March

1998

PriceGroup

2

Water Resources,

Planning,

Management

and Evaluation

Sectional Committee,

RVD 6

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Water Resources, Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. `Water rates, as well as the principles adopted to fix them' vary from State to State. The systems of levying water rates have been influenced by local conditions and irrigation practices. India adopted a National Water Policy in 1987, which lays down the following rates: guidelines for fixing the water

`Water rates should be such as to convey the scarcity value of the resource to the users and to foster the motivation for economy in water use. They should be adequate to cover the maintenance and operation charges and a part of the fixed costs. Efforts should be made to reach this ideal over a period while ensuring the assured and timely supplies of irrigation water. Water rates for surface water and ground water should be rntionalized with clue regard to the interests of small and marginal farmers'. The guidelines for fixing irrigation water rates, laid down in this Indian Standard are based on the recommendatians of the following commissions and the National Water Policy, 1987: a) Maharashtra b) Irrigation State Irrigation Commission 1972, on Agriculture 1994, and Report 1992. 1976, 1962, Commission

c) National Commission e) Vaidyanathan

d) 10th Finance Commission Committee

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, obser.ved or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (~Gse~)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be ihe same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14519 : 1998

Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR FIXING RATES FOR IRRIGATION WATER
1 SCOPE This standard lays down the guidelines for irrigation water. 2 PRINCIPLES 2.0 The following principles should be kept in view while fixing the rates for irrigation water. 2.1 Water rates should be adequate to cover the annual maintenance and operation charges and a part of the fixed costs. Efforts should be made to reach this ideal over a period. 2.2 Water rates should be generally levied on `crop basis' except in the cases of irrigation from tubewells and to Water Users' Associations. 2.3 The crop water rate should be related to the gross income from the crop. It should range between 5 percent and I2 percent of the gross income. (The lower limit being applicable to food and fodder crops and the upper limit to cash crops.) 2.4 For fixing rates, irrigation should be divided into categories A, B and C depending on the quality of service, that is, on the basis of quantity and timeliness of supply. Lower rates may be fixed where on account of good rainfall, the demand for irrigation water is less or where the supply is inadequate and uncertain. 2.5 The rates should be uniform for same class of supply over a State or a region and the disparity in rates for same class of supply between the regions, if any, should be minimum. 2.6 Where lift irrigation is done at farmers' cost, water is generally used economically and wastage is reduced. The resulting saving in waterjustifics a lower water rate. 2.7 Water years. rates should be revised after every five for fixing rates 3 PROCEDURE RATES FOR ESTIMATING WATER

3.1 As stated in 2.1 water rates should be adequate to cover the annual maintenance and operation charges and a part of the fixed costs. These costs comprise the following items: I ) Variable Costs: Establishment charges; i) Regular, and ii) Work-charged. Maintenance of work charges; and Energy charges (in the case of Government Tubewells and Lift Irrigation Schemes). 2) Fixed Costs. a) Interest on capital cost, and b) Depreciation. 3.2 As stated in 2.5 water rates should not vary from project to project in a State and normally should be same throughout for same quality or service. Hence the average cost per unit of water, that is. the total amount of the variable and tixed costs, per unit of water in respect of each class of irrigation projects in a state 01 region for three years immediately preceding the last year or the current block period of 5 years, should be worked out. Quantum of water to be considered would be the annual utilization on each project. Interest on capital cost is to be taken at IO percent pet annum. The life of major and medium irrigation projects is generally assumed as I00 years and of minor irrigation projects as SO years. Hence the depreciation for majol and medium irrigation projects would be 1.OOpercent and for minor irrigation project 2 percent of capital cost. For lift irrigation schemes, the life of civil works is considered as 25 years and that of pumping machinery and ancillaries as 12 years. The depreciation should therefore be taken as 4 percent of the capital cost of civil works and X.33 percent of the capital cost of pumping machinery. 3.3 The cost per unit of water for the first year and the fifth year of the next block period of 5 years should then be worked out by applying escalation at the rate of 5 percent per annum to the variable costs. The average of these two values would give the cost peg unit of water for the next block period of S years.

,

2.8 While promotional water rates may be necessary on projects where cultivators are not familiar with irrigated agriculture ancl the demand for water is not keen, prolonged concessions are undesirable as they entail loss of revenue and accustom the irrigators to low rates and it becomes difficult to raise as time passes. In arcas where cultivators are keen on irrigation, promotional rates may not be necessary.

IS 14519: 1998 3.4 The rate of evaporation increases in summer season thereby causing more loss of water during the summer season. It is, therefore, necessary to account for this increase in loss by proportionately increasing the cost of water to be used during the summer season. The cost per unit of water should be increased considering the higher ratio of evaporation during summer season. 3.5 Where the water rates are to be levied on `Crop basis', the requirement of water for each crop has to be worked out. The water requirement of a crop is determined by evapotranspiration, which is primarily governed by meteorological factors. There are number of climatological methods to estimate the cropwater requirements, out of which the Modified Penman Method is widely used. The waterrequirement at canal fiead should then be arrived at by dividing the water requirement at tield, estimated by the climatological methods, by the overall irrigation efficiency obtaining on the projects in the state or region. 3.6 From the water requirement thus worked out and taking into consideration the season and the cost per unit of water, as assessed above, the water rate per hectare of a crop should be arrived at. 3.7 As stated in 2.3, the water rate should also be related to the gross income of the crop and should be within the range of 5 percent and I2 percent of the gross income. Gross income from various crops of a state or region for the three years of the current block period of 5 years, considered for working out the cost per unit of water in 3.2, should be obtained from the Agriculture Department of the State and the average gross income should be found out. Then the gross income for the first year and fifth year ofthe next block period should be estimated with 3 percent annual escalation and the average of these two values would give the gross income from the crop for the next block period. 3.8 The water I-ates for different crops as worked out in 3.1 and 3.7, should be compared. The component of fixed costs in the water rates, as worked out in 3.1, is variable as the National Water Policy lays down that the water rate should cover only a part of the fixed costs. Hence the water rate for each crop should bc so fixed, by varying the tixed costs, that it (water rate) would be within the range of 5 percent and 12 percent of the gross income from that CI-op. The water
rate thus arrived at ~.hould again be examined the paying capacity of irrigators and considering

a) b) c) d)

e>

g)
h)

By flow from canals of irrigation projects. By lift from reservoirs of irrigation projects, By lift from canals of irrigation projects. By lift from rivers supported by reservoirs upstream of irrigation projects, By lift from rivers without any support by reservoirs upstream, By lift from wells within a short distance of any of (a) to (e) above, By lift from return tlow of irrigation, and By lift downstream of the pickup weir and where there is no backwater of any storage further downstream.

4.2 Irrigation projects are designated as major, medium and minor on the basis of culturable command areas (CCA) as below: a) b) c) Major Project: CCA > IO 000 Ha. Medium Project: 1OOOOHa> CCA > 2 000 Ha. Minor Project: CCA < 2 COOHa.

4.3 It is necessary to classify the sources as A, B and C to describe the quantum, reliability and timeliness of supply. The dependability of water availability is an important parameter for classification of quality of service. Generally Major projects and perennial rivers have a 75 percent dependability. Some of the Medium and Minor Irrigation projects can also be of more than 75 percent dependability, depending upon the nature and climate in the catchment area. Even though the yield from a catchment is variable, dependability can be increased by having a larger capacity in the reservoir and thereby providing a carry over from a good year to a bad year. On the other hand, where no carry over storage is provided and a large quantity of water is allocated for drinking water or industries, on a more than 75 percent dependability, the availability for irrigation may become less than 75 percent dependable. Quality of service also includes quantum and timeliness. A rcscrvoir source, l`or example, is more reliable than a canal source wherein the timeliness of water supply depends on the canal management authority. Similarly if there is lift irrigation ;I stretch of river between a reservoir and ;I weir from where its canals take off it will enjoy ;I better quality 01` service. 4.4 The sources of water supply can. thcrct'orc. be classified as class A, 13OI-C in the folIowiny ~nanncr: Class A a) Reservoirs of' more th:rn 75 pcrccnt J~pcndability ~ Reservoir lit{. :~n(l trivcr strctchc!, between reservoir and pickLlp weir. River lifts supporred hy such ICUXvc~irs. Wells within recharge distance from such systc~i~s;.

should aim at cnsurinp supplies. 4 CLASSIFICATION

full utilization OF SOIJRCE

of' available OF SUPPLY i`rom the

4.1 Irrigntinn water is pcnel-ally following sources:

available

IS 14519:1998 b)
c) Perennial Return rivers c)f adequate flow.

flow

on such systems.

6.1.2 Government Owned and Operated L@ Irrigation Schemes On such irrigation schemes, the water rates will have to include: a) b) rates for water, depending on the location of the point of lifting as explained in 6.1.1; and Cost of lifting and further distribution.

Class B a) b)
Reservoirs of more than 75 percent dependability--Canals and canal lifts. Reservoirs of dependability 50percent or more but less than 75 percent--Reservoir lifts, river stretches between reservoir and pickup weir. River lifts supported by such reservoirs. Wells within recharge distance of these systems. Perennial rivers of50 percent dependable flow. Return flow on (b) above,

c) d)

Class C
Other than A and B above.

This should be estimated as outlined in 3. For this purpose the lift Irrigation Schemes may be suitably grouped on the basis of total lift involved. Thus the rates as calculated in 6.1 will be enhanced to account for ~he charges on account of lifting--both operating charges and fixed costs. 6.2 Where Government takes up Lift Irrigation Schemes to irrigate areas which cannot otherwise be covered by flow irrigation and where otherwise the water cannot be harnessed for irrigation, the rates should be the same as for flow imigation as in 5. Large lift irrigation projects covering more than 10000 Ha of command will be included in this category. 7 TUBEWELLS
7.1 The tube well water should be charged on the basis of the quantity of water supplied at the tubewells. There would be some disparity in the amount which

If there are any large competing demands for nonirrigation purposes, this factor should be weighed in classification. 4.5 The basic water rates for irrigation projects should be worked out as explained in 3 and should apply to appropriate category. The basic water rates for Class B and Class C category of projects may be reduced to about 75 percent and 50 percent. The basic water rates for A category, will remain the same. 5 RATES
FOR FLOW IRRIGATION

5.1 For flow irrigation from canals, where the irrigator

is not expected to make any investment for taking the water to his field, these basic rates may be applied. 5.2 For flow irrigation from canals, where the irrigator is expected to contribute for the construction of field channels, these basic rates may be reduced by 10 percent. 6 LIFT IRRIGATION
6.1

irrigators pay for areas located at different distances from the tubewell because of the transit losses but with lined water courses and a proper roster of supply, the disparity can be considerably reduced. 7.2 The rate per unit of water should be worked out as explained in 3. Tubewells can be classified in Class A category. 8 WATER
RATES FOR VOLUMETRIC SUPPLY OF WATER TO WATER USER'S ASSOCIATIONS (WUA) 8.1 It is now an accepted fact that for achieving economic use of water, the suppiy of water should be on volumetric basis. However, since it is not practicable to measure water supplied to individual farmers because the average farm holding is very small, the formation of Water Users' Associations (WUA) in the form of co-operative societies of farmers, in the command of minors is being encouraged. The Water Users' Associations should be supplied water at the head of minor or a small distributary on volumetric basis.

SCHEMES Schemes, and (b)

There are two types of' Lift Irrigation namely, (a) Co-operative or private, Government owned. 6.1.1 Co-operative
or

Pri\wte Lifi Irrigation Schemes

On such Lift Irrigation Schemes, the distribution SyStHTI of project is not used. On the other hand the farmers have to invest for pumping the further distribution of water. Also the energy charges are to be borne by the irrigators. Tbe water rates for such lift irrigation schemes should, therefore, be arrived at by miuring the basic rates by 25 percent. For Lift Irrigation Schemes on Canal, the reduction ~ ,:a> be only 10 percent instead of 25 percent. IV h.'re, the Lift Irrigation Schemes ii ft water from iri'~)cwand the Government has not incurred any :.\ rw~l~iiture on (.iiversion (H-storage of water, royalty 1,, .,.;s, as decicled by the state may be levied.

8.2 As the basis for arriving at water rates is not only the unit operating cost of water but also the value of the crop, the rate for volumetric supply will turn out to be different for different crops. As the sLlpply is made to a WUA, distinction on the basis of crops grown will

J

IS 14519:1998

have to be removed. Actual cropping pattern obtaining in command areas of different regions should be taken as the basis. Based thereon different water rates for different seasons may be arrived at per unit of water. 8.3 To cover the costs of management and as an incentive to the Water Users' Associations the water rates for bulk supplies on volumetric basis may be fixed at 80 percent of the corresponding rate arrived at, on crop-basis.

9 PROMOTIONAL

WATER

RATES

On the commencement of' new irrigation projects, the supplies in the initial years are not quite satisfactory. Most of the farmers are also new to irrigated agriculture. The farmers are also required to mobilise resources, necessary for irrigated farming. Hence in the initial years it is desirable to charge confessional rates, and then raise them gradually to full rates.

4

