**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9335-2 (1998) : Cellulosic Papers for Electrical 
Purposes, Part 2: Methods of test [ETD 2: Solid Electrical 
Insulating Materials and Insulation Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 9335 ( Part 2 ) : 1908 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 

g y/Vcfl<y HM<t> ( Reaffirme<1 2001 1 

Indian Standard 
CELLULOSIC PAPERS FOR ELECTRICAL PURPOSES 

PART 2 METHODS OF TEST 

( First Revision ) 

ICS 29.033. 10 



O BIS 1998 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Jwu 199S Frtee Grwp 12 



Solid Electrical Insulating Materials Sectional Committee, ET 02 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 'Specification for ceilulosic papers for 
electrical purposes — Part 2 ; Methods of test* issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 
was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Solid Electrical Insulating Mate* 
rials Sectional Committee (ETD 02) and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

This standard (Part 2) is one of the series of Indian Standards which deal with ceilulosic papers for electrical 
purposes This series consists of the following parts' 

Part 1 Definitions and general requirements 

Part 2 Methods of test 

Part 3 Individual materials — Specification 

This standard (Part 2) contains the test methods to be used in testing ceilulosic papers for electrical purposes to 
meet the requirements prescribed in the various sections of Part 3 

This revision has been undertaken to align this standard with IEC 554-2 (1977). 

Certain conventions, however, are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn 
to the following 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appears, referring to this standard, they should be read as 
'Indian Standard'; and 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a 
point ( ) as the decimal marker 

Corrigendum and Amendments 1, 2 and 3 issued to IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) have been printed at the end. 

Only the English language text in the IEC standard has been retained while adopting it in this Indian Standard 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2*1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard 



IS 9XU(Part2) :199S 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1*77) 



CONTENTS 



Introduction and scope 



Page 



Clause 

1. General notes on tests 3 

2 Thickness 3 

3 Substance (mass per square metre, basic weight or grammage) ... .... 4 

4. Apparent density .... ... 5 

5. Tensile strength and elongation . . 5 

6. Internal tearing resistance . . ... 5 

7. Edge tearing resistance . . ... 6 

8. Bursting strength ... 7 

9. Folding endurance .... 7 

10. Moisture content ... 7 

11. Ash 8 

12. Conductivity of aqueous extract ... .... ... 8 

1 3. pH of aqueous extract 9 

14. Chloride content of aqueous extract ... 9 

15. Sulphate content . 12 

16. Conductivity of organic extract. . 12 

17. Dissipation factor of organic extract ... 13 

18. Ajr permeability . . ..... 13 

19. Water and oil absorption (Jtlemm method) ... .14 

20. Oil absorption (modified Cobb method) 15 

21. Electric strength ... 16 

22 Dissipation factor and permittivity of unimpregnated and impregnated paper 17 

23 Conducting paths ... . . ... 19 

24. Heat stability . . . 23 

Figures .... 24 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS *335(P*rt2) iim 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1*77) 

Indian Standard 
CELLULOSIC PAPERS FOR ELECTRICAL PURPOSES 

PART 2 METHODS OF TEST 

( First Revision ) 

Introduction and scope 

This standard is one of a series which deals with insulating cellulosic papers. 

The series will have three parts: 

Part 1 : Definitions and general requirements. 

Part 2 ; Methods of test. 

Part 3: Specifications for individual materials. 

This Part 2 of the standard contains the test methods to be used in testing cellulosic papers for electrical 
purposes to meet the requirements prescribed in the specification sheets of Part 3. 



J . General notes on tests 

1.1 In this standard, reference is made in several places to ISO publications accompanied by a short description 
of the method used. It is to be understood that this short description is meant for identification purposes only 
and that all details should be taken from the ISO publication itself. 

1.2 In this standard, the definitions of "specimen" and "test piece*' as defined in ISO Recommendation R 186 

are used. 

Specimen: A rectangle of paper or board cut to given dimensions from sheets drawn from selected 

units. 

Test piece; The quantity of paper or board on which the determination is carried out in accordance with 
lhe method of te&t. Jt may be taken from a specimen; in some instances it may be lhe specimen 
itself. 

1.3 Unless otherwise specified, the specimen, after being cut* shall be conditioned for not less than 16 h in an 
atmosphere of 23 ± 1 °C and 50 J= 5% r.h. Test pieces are cut from the specimen and tested in 
this atmosphere. 

In case of dispute the conditioning atmosphere shall be 23 ± 1 Q C and 50 ± 2% r.h and shall be approached 
from the dry side (after drying at 70 °C to a moisture content less than 4%). 

1.4 Unless otherwise specified, the number of specimens shall be three. 



2. Thickness 

Thickness shall be measured either in accordance with ISO Recommendation R 534 or, for thin papers, in 
accordance with ISO Recommendation R 433, in each case with the exceptions given below 



IS MM (Fait*) :lffl 
IEC Pub 554-1 (1W7) 

2.1 ISO Recommendation R 534: Determination of the thickness of single sheets of paper 

Principle 

The method is based on the use of a precision dial micrometer to measure the thickness of a single sheet 
when a static load is applied. 

Exceptions 

The test shall be carried out on three conditioned test pieces, one determination being made on each of the 
three test pieces. 

Report mg of the standard deviation is optional. 

The central value is taken as the result, the two others arc reported. The results are given in terms of the 
thickness of a single sheet in microns. 

Where thickness is determined across the width to establish the variation over the width, the details of this 
procedure will be found in Part 3. 



2,2 ISO Recommendation R 438 Method for the determination of the bulking thickness and bulk of paper 



Prmctpte 

The method is based on (he use of a precision dial micrometer to measure the thickness of a stack composed 
of a minimum of five sheets. 

Exceptions 

The test shall be earned out on three conditioned specimens, each composed of five sheets. 

For narrow width material where ihe width is less than the stipulated 250 mm, the five measurements on 
each stack shall be made al approximately equal intervals on a specimen 400 mm in length 

The central value is taken as the result, the two others being reported. The results are given in terms of the 
thickness of a single sheet in microns. 

Where thickness is determined across the width to establish the variation over the width, the details of this 
procedure will be found in Part 3. 



3 Substance (mass per square metre, basic weight or gramma gc) 

Paper grammagc shall be measured according to the method described in ISO Standard 536: Paper and 
board — Determination of grammage, with the following exceptions' 

- Clauses 5 and 6 of J SO Standard 536 are ignored. 

— The test shall be earned out on three conditioned test pieces, one determi nation is made on each of the 
three test pieces. 

— The m&ss is to be determined to an accuracy of 5% on conditioned test pieces of not less than 500 cm*. 

— The central value is taken as the result, tne two others being reported 



IS 9335<F»it2) :199S 
IEC Pub 554.2 (1977) 



Principle 



The area of each test piece and its mass are measured and the mass per square metre is calculated, all 
measurements being made on conditioned test pieces. 

Where grammage is determined across Ihe width to establish the variation over the width, the details of 
this procedure will be found in Part 3. 



4. Apparent density 

The thickness and grammage are determined on each of three test pieces in accordance with Clauses 2 
and 3. For each test piece the apparent density is calculated and the central value of these three densities taken 
as the result, the two others are reported. The apparent density is expressed in grams per cubic centimetre. 



5 Tensile strength and elongation 

Tensile strength and elongation shall be measured according to the method described in ISO Standard 
1924. Paper and board — Determination of the tensile strength, with the following exceptions: 

— Nine measurements are made on test pieces cut from both the machine direction and the cross direction. 

— The central value of the test pieces in each direction, is taken as the result and the highest and the lowest 
values in each direction are reported 

— Alternatively, the results can be expressed as breaking length in metres to the nearest 100 m. 



Principle 

Measurement of the tensile lorce required to cause failure of test pieces 15 mm by approximately 250 mm, 
cut from both directions of the paper, when applied under standard test conditions. 



6 Internal tearing resistance 

Internal tearing resistance shall be measured according to the method described in ISO Standard 1974: 
Paper — Determinauon of tearing resistance. The single tear tester shall be used with the following exceptions 

Nine measurements are made on test pieces cut from both the machine direction and the cross direction 
— The central value of the test pieces, in each direction, i* taken as the result and (he highest and the lowest 
values in each direction arc reported. 

Principle 

Rectangular test pieces having a single cut leaving 43 mm length to be torn and measuring the energy 
required to tear this. 



IS 9335(Part2) : 199* 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 

7. Edge tearing resistance 

7.1 Test apparatus 

An edge tear stirrup (see Figure I T page 241 shall be used, attached to the tensile testing apparatus as 
described in Clause S. The edge tear stirrup consists of a thin steel plate (A) which forms a horizontal plate 
supported oft edge by the ends of a stirrup-shaped frame. 

The thin metal tang of the stirrup frame is fastened in the lower clamp of the tension testing machine, so 
that the vertical centre line of the stirrup coincides with the line connecting the midpoints of the upper and 
lower clamps. The horizontal plate is removable from the stirrup frame and two plates of different thickness 
are supplied for use with papers of different thickness ranges. One plate has a thickness of 1.25 ± 0.05 mm 
and one plate a thickness of 2.50 ± 0.05 mm. The edge of the plate forms a shallow V-notch, the sides of 
which subtend an angle of 150 ± 1°. The sides of the V-notch are semicircular in cross-section and shall be 
smooth and straight. 



7.2 Test piece? 

Nine test pieces shall be cut in the machine direction and nine in the cross direction of the paper, 15 mm to 
25 mm in width and not less than 250 mm in length. 

The test pieoes shall be conditioned according to Sub-clause 1.3. 

7.3 Procedure 

Attach a plate of the proper thickness to the stirrup frame. The plate with the thickness of 1.25 ± 0.05 mm 
is to be used for papers of up to 0.75 mm in thickness and the plate with the thickness of 2.50 ± 0.05 mm 
for thicker papers. 

Fasten the thin tang of the stirrup in the lower clamp (see note) of the tension- testing machine so that 
the vertical centre line of the stirrup coincides with the line connecting the mid-points of the upper and lower 
clamps of the testing machine, and so that the sides of the V-notch are symmetrically located with the hne 
through the mid-points of the clamps. 

Nvte, — The stirrup may be fastened in the upper clamp, if desired. This procedure will require rebalancing the tension- testing 
machine to compensate for the mass of the stirrup, 

Place the lower clamp of the machine so that the lower edge of the upper clamp is about 90 mm above 
Lhe V-notched plate 

Thread the test piece through the stirrup, under the plate, and bring the two ends together and fasten them 
in the upper clamp. 

In this operation, most of the slack in the test piece is taken up, but care shall be exercised not to apply 
a tearing force to the test piece. Make the application of the first increments of load to the test piece very 
slowly if possible, to minimize abnormal strains due to inertia effects. Increase the load so that tearing 
starts in 5 s to 15 s and record this load in kilograms. 



7.4 Results 

Report the central values for each of the two directions of the paper in newtons, mentioning the thickness 
of the plate used, the rate of loading and the width and thickness of the test pieces. 



IS M35(Part2) : 1JM 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1*77) 



8. Bursting strength 



The bursting strength shall be determined according to the method described in ISO Standard 275S: 
Paper — Determination of bursting strength, with the following exceptions: 

— The test pieces shall be conditioned in accordance with Sub-clause 1,3. 

- - The central value shall be taken as the result; the highest and lowest values shall be reported 

Principle 

A test piece, placed in contact with a circular elastic diaphragm, is rigidly clamped at the periphery but 
free to bulge with the diaphragm. Hydraulic fluid is pumped at a constant rate, bulging the diaphragm until 
the test piece ruptures The burstmg strength of the test piece is the maximum value of the applied hydraulic 
pressure 



9, Folding endurance 

9.1 Test apparatus 

A folding tester (Schopper type). 

9.2 Test pieces 

Nine strips 15 mm wide, cut in the machine direction, and nine other strips cut in the cross direction. 

9.3 Procedure 

Clamp the specimen in both clamps Apply a tension of 5 N wuh specimens up to 03 mm in thickness 
and a tension of 10 N with thicker specimens. Determine the number of double folds which the paper with- 
stands, applying a plate of 5 mm in thickness with a radius of curvature of 25 mm, at a speed of 100 to 
200 double folds per minute. 

9.4 Results 

Report the central value of each series to two significant figures, The highest and lowest values shall also 
be reported. 



10. Moisture content 

Moisture content of paper, as received, shall be measured according to the method described in ISO 
Recommendation R 287* Paper — Method for the determination of moisture content of paper (oven-drying 
method) The result should be expressed as percentage moisture of the original mass. Three test specimens 
*>haU be taken from the reel according to Sub-clause 6 2 3 of TSO Recommendation 287 The central value 
obtained is taken as the result; the highest and lowest values are reported 



Principle 

Weigh the te^i piece at the time of sampling and again after drying in an oven at 102 J C to I OS U C lo 
constant mass. 



IS *»5(Fart2) : 1998 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 



11. Ash 



The amount of residue of paper left after incineration shall be determined according to the method described 
in ISO Standard 2144: Paper and board — Determination of ash. 

Three determinations shall be made. The result should be expressed as a percentage of the oven dry mass. 
Report the central value obtained as the result; the highest and lowest values are reported. 



12. Conductivity of aqueous extract 

12.1 Test apparatus 

— A conductivity cell with known cell constant K. 

— A measuring instrument, capable of measuring conductance or admittance to a minimum reading of 
1 u,S with an accuracy of 5*/o, in the frequency range 50 Hz to 3 000 Hz. Alternatively, the resistance may 
be measured with the same accuracy. 

— Wide-mouth 250 cm 3 conical flasks with reflux condensors in acid- and alkali-resistant glass. 



12.2 Procedure 

The determination is to be made on the material as received. One measurement shall be made on each of 
three extractions. First, a blank test shall be carried out on water which has been boiled for 60 ± 5 min in 
the flask to be used. If the conductivity of that water is not more than 200 ^S/m, the flask may be used. If 
the conductivity is more than this value, then the flask shall be boiled with a fresh portion of water. If the 
conductivity of the second test exceeds 200 uS/m then, another flask shall be used. 

The test on the paper shall then be earned out as follows: 

Cut a test specimen weighing approximately 20 g into pieces of about 10 mm x 10 mm. Weigh 5 g into a 
250 cm 8 glass flask with a reflux condenser and add 100 cm* water having a conductivity of not more than 
200 uS/m. The water shall be boiled gently for 60 ± 5 mm, and then cooled in the flask to room temperature. 
It is necessary to take precautions against the absorption of carbon dioxide from the air. 

The extract is then decanted into the measuring vessel for the conductivity to be measured immediately. 
The measuring vessel shall be rinsed twice with the extract. The measurement of the conductivity shall be 
made at 23 ± 0.5 C C 

Notes /. — Extraction in accordance with Method 1 of Clause 14 is an acceptable alternative, but using 5 g in 100 cm 3 . 

2. — li ifi essential to ensure during the taking, storing and manipulation of specimens and test portions intended for lest 
for conductivity, pH and chloride content of aqueous extract, that they arc not contaminated either by the atmos- 
phere, particularly the atmosphere of a chemical laboratory, or by handling with bare hands 

12.3 Results 

Calculate the conductivity of the extract solution as follows 

y - K <G t - CJ 
where: 

y = conductivity of extract solution, expressed in microsiemens per metre 
K = cell constant, expressed in m _1 



B *3J3(Part2) :im 
IEC Pub 554*2 (1977) 

G x = conductance of extract solution, expressed in microsremens 
G z — conductance of blank, expressed in microsiemens 

Report the central value as the result; the highest and lowest values are reported. 

] 3. pH of aqueous extract 

13.1 Test apparatus 

— A pH-meter with glass and calomel electrodes having a sensitivity of at least 0,05 pH units. 

— Wide-mouth 250 cm 5 conical flasks in acid- and alkali-resistant glass* 

13.2 Procedure 

One measurement shall be made on each of three extractions. 

Prepare an extract as described in Sub-clause 12.2. 

The extract shall be decanted only for immediate use, avoiding unnecessary exposure to the atmosphere. 
Calibrate the pH-meter with a buffer solution having a pH value within ±2 pH units of that of the extract. 
Remove the electrodes from the buffer solution and wash them well by rinsing several times in distilled water 
and once in a small quantity of extract. 

Immerse the electrodes in the untUtered extract and measure the pH value of the extract at 23 ± 2 °Q 

Notes 1. — If tile extract is to be used for the dc terminal ion of conductivity, the sample for this determination should be drawn 
from the aqueous extract prior to the pH determination This is because potassium chloride, which diffuses from the 
calomel electrode, would otherwise affect the result. 

2. — See Note 2 of Sub-clause 12.2. 

13.3 Results 

Report the central value as the result; the highest and lowest values are reported. 



14. Chloride content of aqueous extract 

Method i 

14.1 Precautions 

All apparatus for use in this test must be scrupulously clean. It is suggested that all flasks, beakers and funnels . 
be boiled in de-ionized water after normal cleaning and rinsing Handling of apparatus should be by stainless 
steel tongs Similarly, forceps and scissors for sample preparation should be of stainless steel and kept clean 
in the same way. 

Note, — See jKo Note 2 of Sub-clauw: 12 2. 

14.2 Test apparatus 

A measuring device capable of measuring a d c. voltage in the range to 300 m V with an accuracy of 2 mV 
(e.g. an electronic voltmeter or potentiometer such as a pH-meter). 



IS »35<FarU) sl*» 
JEC Pub 554-2(1*77) 



A 600 cm* flat-bottom high-grade resistance glass or quartz flask. 

Steam bath. 

Analytical balance. 

Glass micrometer syringe (Method t only), 

Microburette graduated in 0.01 cm" divisions (Method 2 only). 

Magnetic stimng device. 

Measuring cylinder*, beakers, niter funnels, rods and needles, etc. 

Fast-grade filter papers. 



14.3 Procedure 

One determination shall be znade on each of three extractions. For each extraction, the paper shall be cut 
into strips approximately 50 mm x 10 mm. A mass of approximately 20 g shall be placed in a 600 cm* flat- 
bottom flask and 300 cm 5 of boiling de-ionized or distilled water added, which fulfils the conductivity require- 
ments of Clause 12. 

The mixture shall be kept on a steam bath for 60 min, the mouth of the flask being covered by a loosely 
fitting beaker over the neck. 

The suspension shall then be filtered using suction through a pre-extracted filter paper in a Buchner funnel. 
A flat-ended rod is used to compress the cake of paper residue in order to express as much extract as possible. 

The volume of extract shall be measured and the residual cake weighed (W) t 

The extract shall be returned to a flask similar to the extraction flask and evaporated to dryness in a hot 
water bath ; contamination is prevented by a large beaker (approximately 250 cm 1 ) suspended inverted over the 
flask. 

When completely dry, 20 cm 3 de-iomzed water shall be added to the flask and the drying repeated. 

The extract residue shall be dissolved in 5 cm* 10% HNO„ transferred to a 1 00 cm s beaker and the flask 
twice washed out into the beaker with 5 cm* quantities of acetoue. 

The chloride content of the extract shall then be determined potentiometncally using a magnetic stirrer, glass 
reference electrode and silver wire indicator with a measuring device, e.g, a pH-meter. 

The titrant shall be a solution of AgN0 3 of 0.02 M added in 001 cm 8 quantities from a micrometer syringe 
through a glass needle dripping into the titration cell. 

Titrate a reagent blank consisting of the following: (340 — W) cm 3 of water evaporated to dryness, 5 cm 1 
of 10% HNQ 3f and 10 cm 3 acetone. 



14.4 Results 

The chloride content of the extract solution shall be expressed as the mass of chloride ion, in ppM of the 
mass of the paper, and shall be calculated as follows . 

U - B) M / W - D\ 
chloride content (ppM) = 35.46 x I i _| I x 10 3 



10 



IS 9333 (Parti) : IMS 
IXC Fub 554-2 (1977) 

where. 

M = molarity of the AgNO a solution 
D ~ mass of the dried paper (g) 

A -= cubic centimetres of AgNO, solution used to titrate the extract 
8 = cubic centimetres of AgNOj solution used to titrate the blank 
W — mass of wet paper residue (g) 
V = volume of extract (on*} 
The result is the central value of the three determinations. 

Method 2 

L4.5 This method deviates from Method 1 in the following details: 

— Four grams of paper are treated m 100 cm* of water instead of 20 g in 300 cm* 

— Vigorous boiling is carried out for 60 -h 5 m in 

— Treatment of the extract ls as follows; 

Filter or decant the cooled extract solution and weigh 25 ± I g into ft 200 cm 1 tall-form beaker Add 

125 cm* of acetone and 15 drops of 1% nitric acid. 

Place a stirring rod into the beaker, then place the beaker on the magnetic stirrer and adjust the stirring 

speed so that the surface of the liquid is not broken. 

Immerse the electrodes in the liquid and aUow the meter to stabilize, then start titrating. 

From the microburette, add 0.0025 M AgNOj solution in 01 cm 3 increments and record th*» change 
of potential in millivolts. 

Titrate to an end-point that represents the point of the greatest change in potential, or to a fixed point 

that has been previously determined from a potentiometrjc curve. 

Record the total cubic centimetres used to reach the end -point. 

Duplicate titrations should be run on each extract and should check to i= 01 cm 1 Duplicate specimens 

should check within ±5% except at low leveJs where the differences may be greater, that is below 2 ppM 

Titrate a reagent blank consisting of the following. 25 ± 0.1 g of water 125 cm' of acetone and 15 drops 
of 1°, 

L4 6 Results 

The chloride content of the extract solution shall be expressed as the mass of chloride ion in ppM of the 
mass of the paper and shall be calculated as follows 

chloride content (ppM) - 35 46 — ^— - — x 4 x 10* 

where, 

A ~ cubic centimetres of 0.0025 M AgNO a solution used to titrate the extract 
B = cubic centimetres of 0.0025 M AgNOj solution used to titrate the blank 
M = molarity of AgNO a solution 
D — mass of paper specimen (g) oven dry basis 
The result is the central value of the three determinations. 



11 



IS 9335 (Pari 2) • 1991 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 

15. Sulphate content 

Under consideration. 

1 6. Conductivity of organic extract 

The purpose of this test is to determine whether or not ionizable organic materials are present in the 
insulating materials. Their presence is confirmed by the increase in conductivity of the organic (trichloro- 
ethylene) extract » and the test is considered to have particular significance when applied to insulating materials 
which are to be immersed in chlorinated coolants or impregnants. 

N6te — For precautions to be taken, see Note 2 to Sub-clause 12.2. 

6.1 Test apparatus 

A conductivity cell according to TEC Publication 247, Recommended Test Cells for Measuring the Resis- 
tivity of Insulating Liquids and Methods of Cleaning the Cells The measuring instrument shall be an elec- 
tronic mult rnegohmmeter using not more than 100 V d.c. or a sensitive galvanometer and battery. 

The solvent is laboratory reagent grade trichloroethylene which has been purified by stirring in about I % 
by weight of fuller's earth or another suitable material, e.g. silicon gel and filtering through a sintered glass 
filter. A filter having a maximum pore diametei in the range 5 fim to 15 u,m is suitable. 

Note — Fuller's earth becomes ineffective if allowed to absorb moisture and may be dried by heating in clean air at a tempera- 
ture not exceeding 1 20 °C 

A blank test is carried out before each extraction and if the resultant conductivity consistently exceeds 
5 x 10-* fiS/m the solvent is further punned until the conductivity is not greater than this figure. 

Purified trichloroethylene is stable if kept in the dark or in a brown bottle, but its conductivity should be 
checked before use for an extraction. 

During extraction and ;nea$urement, the solvent should be shielded from strong light, especially direct 
sunlight, and stored in the dark. 



6.2 Procedure 

One determination shall be made on each of three extractions. The extract is prepared by treating the 
material under test as described for conductivity of aqueous extract in Sub-clause 12 2 and the test pieces are 
gently heated in air for about 2 h at a temperature of 80 °C to 100 "C to remove any appreciable amount of 
absorbed water. The material is immediately transferred to a suitable flask and covered with purified tnchlo- 
roethylene using a proportion of 1 g to 10 cm 3 of solvent. The solvent is gently boiled for about 1 h under 
reflux conditions using an all-glass apparatus constructed with ground-glass joints 

At the end of this period, the flask is firmly stoppered and allowed to remain overnight in the dark. Any 
loss of volume through evaporation should be less than 10% 

If not already known, the cell constant AT is determined by means of an aqueous solution of known con- 
ductivity or by the capacitance method. 



12 



IS 9335 (Part 2) : 1WS 
DEC Pub 554-2 (1*77) 

Before filling with the tnchloroethytene extract, the cell is washed thoroughly with distilled water (if last 
used with an aqueous electrolyte), dried and cleaned several times with purified tnchloroethylene. The cell 
is dried before filling and the transfer of the liquid from one vessel to another takes place in a stream of warm 
air to avoid risk of moisture condensing, resulting from cooling; it is necessary to avoid breathing on the 
electrodes. 

The resistance of the extract is measured at d temperature of 15 °C to 25 °C> one minute after the appli- 
cation of the d.c. voltage. 

If R is the measured resistance of the extract, expressed in megohms, and K is the cell constant (m _1 ), then 

the conductivity of the extract, expressed in microsiemens per metre, shall be conductivity of the solvent, 

R 

expressed in microsiemens per metre. 

16.3 Results 

The conductivity of the extract of the material is expressed in microsiemens per metre. 

The central value of three determinations is taken as the result; the highest and lowest values are reported. 



17. Dissipation Factor of organic extract 

Under consideration. 

18. Air permeability 

The air permeability (jf) of paper is defined by the formula* 

era 3 



V 

A t p 



cm 8 ■ s kPa 



where V is a volume of air, expressed in cubic centimetres, passing through a sheet of paper with an area of 
A cm 2 within a time of/ seconds under a constant air pressure difference of p kPa. For instruments which are 
used to measure the middle ranges of air permeability, ranging from 0.01 to 5 units, a pressure differential of 
approximately I kPa (98-1 mm water column pressure) is normally used, 

For papers with lower ranges of air permeability, down to 0.0001 units, instruments with pressure differen- 
tials over the specimen of up to 3.5 kPa can be used, while for high permeability papers, ranging up to 2 x 10* 
units, e.g. electrolytic papers, pressure differentials down to 100 Pa can be used. These pressure differentials 
may be specified, for particular paper qualities, in Part 3 



18.1 Test apparatus 

The apparatus shall comply with the following requirements: 

18.1 .1 The volume shall be measurable to an accuracy of ±2% of the measured value and the time to within i: 1 % 
of the measured value and the rate of flow to an accuracy of ±5%. 



13 



15 5333 (Part 2) : 19M 
DEC Pub 554-2(1*77) 

18. 1 .2 The initial pressure differential over the test piece must be known to 4r 2% and shall not deviate by more than 
5% during the measurement. 

18.1.3 The test piece shall be clamped with an airtight gasket on the pressurized side of the test piece. This gasket 
shall not deform to such an extent that the testing area of the test piece is changed by more than 1 %. 

18. 1 .4 The testing area of the test piece shall be not smaller than 6 cm 1 . An area of 10 cm 1 is recommended. 

18 1.5 When water is used as a displacing medium, the an- flow passing through the test piece shall be in such a 
direction as not to have been previously in contact with the water. 

18.1 .6 The air leakage shall be checked by clamping a hard impermeable material, e.g. a metal foil, in the appar- 
atus in place of the test piece. Any leakage shall be less than 0.025 times the minimum air permeability measur- 
able with a particular instrument. 

18.2 Test pieces 

The test specimen shall be conditioned according to Sub-clause 1.3. Not less than five test pieces shall be 
cut from the test specimen; the minimum size of the test piece shall be such that the piece protrudes noticeably 
in all directions from the clamping unit and provides the testing area required by Sub-clause 18 1 .4. 

18 3 Procedure 

The details of the procedure are dependent on the apparatus being used, but it is essential: 

1) to calibrate accurately the pressure differential to be applied over the test piece; 

2) to ensure steady movement of the cylinder or device controlling the flow of air immediately before and 
during the time the determinations are being made; 

3) to ensure absence of vibration which could affect the air displacement; 

4) to ensure that the test piece is clamped uniformly without distortion; 

5) to ensure that the measurements are made with the apparatus on a level surface. 

18.4 Results 

The results shall be corrected to an air pressure of 1 kPa by the formula in Clause 18. The central value 
obtained by testing five test pieces is taken as the result. The highest and lowest values are reported. Report 
the nominal pressure differential over the test piece. 



19. Water awl otl absorption (Klemm method) 

19.1 Test apparatus 

A shallow dish containing distilled water or oil. 

The oil used shall conform to the requirements of the mineral oil of Class II, as defined in I EC Publi- 
cation 296, Specification for New Insulating Oils for Transformers and Switchgear. 

19.2 Test specimens 

Cut ten test specimens, 25 mm in width and at least 125 ram in length, five being cut parallel with the machine 
direction of the paper and five cut parallel with the cross direction of the paper. 



14 



IS #335 (Part Z) ; 1998 
EC PUb 554-2 (1977) 



19.3 Procedure 



Protect the apparatus against draughts. Suspend the specimens vertically, with one end dipping 6 mm in 
distilled water (oil) at room temperature, and after 10 min note the rise of the water (oil) in the specimen above 
the level of the water (oil) in the container. Record the height of absorption to the nearest I mm for each 
direction. 



19.4 Results 



Report the central value, expressed in millimetres, of each series as the water (oil) absorption of the paper in 
the machine and cross directions respectively, as well as the highest and lowest values of each series. 



20. Oil absorption (modified Cobb method) 

In this test, ojI is applied to a known area of one side of a pack of papers. After a definite time interval the 
oil is poured off f the top sheet is blotted and the increase in weight through absorption of the oil is determined 
by direct weighing. The test ia derived from a test for water ahsorption given in ISO Standard 535- Paper and 
board — Determination of water absorption — Cobb method. 

20.1 Test apparatus 

The apparatus for this test is shown in Figure 2a 9 page 25> and consists of a hollow metal cylinder having an 
internal cross-sectional area of 100 cm 1 and a height of about 50 mm. The cylinder is sealed to a bottom plate 
and is provided with a cover plate consisting of a sheet of oil-resistant rubber of sufficient size to cover the 
cylinder and bonded to a metal plate. 

The cover plate is provided with means of clamping it into the base plate. The thickness of wail of this 
cylinder is not important, but can conveniently be about 6 mm. The IRH (International Rubber Hardness) of 
the oil-resistant rubber sheet shall be not less than 65. The top edge of the cylinder shall be machined smooth. 

A fixture shall be provided which will secure the apparatus To the bench. 

Figure 2b, page 25, gives the requirements for converting the Cobb absorbency tester used for the Cobb test 
for water absorption given m ISO Standard 535. 

20.2 Test pieces 

A test piece comprises a pack of paper sheets each 130 mm x 130 mm ; the number of sheets is to be de- 
termined experimentally and is to be at least one more than the number penetrated by the oil Five test pieces 
are required for each of two series, the first series being carried out with one side in contact with the oil and the 
second with the other. 

Care should be taken when assembling a pack to ensure that none of the sheets is inverted, i e- all the 
sheets should have the same &ide uppermost 

20.3 Procedure 

The oil used will be Class Ti, in accordance with \ EC Publication 296 and should be stored prior to use in 
a sealed container maintained at the conditioning temperature. Use 100 cm* of oil in each test, hut after 
the first test it is sufficient to top the oil up to the required level. 



15 



IS 93M(Part2) ;]998 
IEC Plib 554-2 (1»77) 

Maintain the temperature of the cell and the oil at the conditioning temperature. Determine the mass of 
the test piece. 

Pour 100 cm 3 of oil into the test cell and place the test piece over it so that the oil contacts the "top 1 ' 
side of the paper when the cell js inverted. Insert the cover plate and screw down the wing-nuts tightly. 

Invert the cell and allow the oil to soak into the paper for 45 s, then return the cell to its original position 
in a fixture which holds it to the bench and allow a draining time of 10 s. 

Loosen the wing- nuts and withdraw the test piece from between the body of the cell and the cover plate 
slowly and continuously by pulling on two corners. Withdrawal should be completed in about 10 s and care 
should be taken to ensure that the lower surface of the test piece remains in contact with the front edge of 
the cell. 

Lightly blot the top sheet to remove surplus oil and examine it visually to ensure that this has been achieved. 
Complete the blotting in not more than 10 s. 

Determine the mass of the oil-impregnated test piece and note the number of sheets penetrated. Test all 
Ave test pieces in this way. 

Repeat the above procedure with the opposite side of the test piece in contact with the oil. 



20.4 Results 



Express the oil absorption as the increase in mass m grams per square metre of the circular area exposed 
to oil and give the central value of five results in each test series. A single divergent reading differing by more 
than 20% from the central value shall be excluded from the calculation. If two such divergent readings are 
obtained, a further five tests shall be made. 

If additional divergent readings occur, all tea readings shall be included in determining the central value 
and the oil absorption of the paper shall be reported as variable. 

The oil absorption of (he paper ts the lower of the two results obtained from tests made on opposite sides 
of the sample pack. 



21. Electric strength 

The test shall be carried out in air in accordance with IEC Publication 243, Recommended Methods of 
lest for Electric Strength of Solid Insulating Materials at Power Frequencies 



21.1 Test apparatus 

The apparatus shall be in accordance with Clause 5 of IEC Publication 243. The electrodes shall be in 
accordance with Sub-clauses 6 J 1 or 6.1.3 of that publication. The preferred electrodes are the 25/75 mm 
electrodes. The smaller electrodes shall be used only if the width of the material prevents the use of the large 
electrodes The faces of the electrodes shall be parallel and free from pits or other imperfections 



21.2 Test pieces 

AM test pieces shall be sufficiently large to avoid flash-over 



16 



IS »35(Part2) :1W« 
IEC Pub 354-2 ( 1977) 

The required number of tests may be made on one test piece. Where more than one thickness is required 
to form the test piece, the number of superimposed layers shall be given in Part 3. 

Where the temperature or humidity of the test differ from those of Sub-clause 1.3, the treatment of the 
test piece shall be given in Part 3. 



21.3 Procedure 



The application of voltage shall be in accordance with Sub-clause 7.1 of IEC Publication 243. Criterion 
of breakdown, see Clause 8 of that publication 

Nine tests shall be made. 



21.4 Results 



The result shall be based on the measured thickness. The report shall be id accordance with Clause 1 1 of 
IEC Publication 243. The central value and the lowest value shall be reported in kilovolts per millimetre. 

Notes L — For special papers, a more elaborate statistical evaluation may be required in Part 3. 
2. - Tests using d c. And impulse voltages are under consideration. 



22. Dissipation factor and permittivity of Dttlmpregnited and impregnated paper 

22.1 Test apparatus 

22.1.1 A guarded bridge, as described m IEC Publication 250, Recommended Methods for the Determination 
of the Permittivity and Dielectric Dissipation Factor of Electrical Insulating Materials at Power, Audio and 
Radio Frequencies Including Metre Wavelengths, or equivalent instrument. 

22,1 2 A 50 Hz or 60 Hz generator and a detector for use with the bridge, as described in I EC Publication 250. 
Alternatively, voltage may be supplied from a 50 Hz or 60 Hz main-network, using a transformer and variable- 
ratio auto-transformer. Another frequency may be specified. 



22.1 3 One or more sets of guarded elect/odes, according to 1 EC Publication 250, constructed of a metal having 
high thermal conductivity and not subject to distortion with repealed temperature cycling. The surface 
should be resistant to tarnishing. 

The electrodes shall be of such dimensions that the capacitance to be measured will be within the range 
of the bridge. The gap between the guard and the guarded electrodes shall be as small as practicable 

The electrode surfaces shall be flat within 0.125 (im and shall be maintained in good condition. 

For the testing of impregnated paper, the bottom electrode shall be filled with a nm approximately 10mm 
high round the edge to retain the impregnating liquid. 

A total pressure of 20 kPa (unless another pressure is prescribed in Part 3) is exerted on the test piece by 
addition of mass to ihe upper electrode. 

In order to facilitate removal of moisture from Ihe specimen when testing u impregnated paper, a series 
of holes may be drilled nearly through the upper electrode from the top side and completed through the 



17 



IS 9335 (Part 2) : 1W8 
IEC Pub 354-2(1*77) 

electrode surface by means of a 400 u.m drill. The holes shall not be obstructed by any mass added to the 
upper electrode. To avoid problems in cleaning, drilled electrodes are not recommended for testing impregnated 
papers. 

22.1.4 Vacuum drying equipment consisting of a suitable container, provided with means for bringing measuring 
leads out of the chamber, a gauge for measuring the pressure and a vacuum pump capable of maintaining a 
pressure less than 2.7 Pa (0.02 torr). 

22.1 .5 Heating equipment that provides a means of heating the electrodes and specimens to the specified tempera- 
ture. 

22.1.6 A thermocouple embedded in the guarded electrode to indicate accurately the temperature of the test piece- 
A thermometer may be used if measurements show that it accurately indicates the temperature of the test 
piece, 

22.1.7 Equipment to provide a means of introducing thoroughly dried air or a dry inert gas into the vacuum 
chamber, for example, a train including sulphuric acid and phosphorus pentoxide or activated alumina 
drying apparatus. 

22.1.8 When applicable, impregnating oil in accordance with I EC Publication 296, unless anoiher impregnating 
liquid is specified. Degassing and drying of imp regnant arc achieved by passing the required impregnant down 
through a column of glass beads at a temperature and vacuum sufficient to achieve drying and degassing 
without removal of the lighter fractions of the impregnant 



22.2 Test pieces 

Layers of paper at least 3 mm wjder than the diameter of the guarded electrode 

22.3 Procedure 

One measurement only shall be made. 

22.3.1 Cut from a roll sufficient layers to provide a stack of not less than 100 \im thickness plus two protecting 
sheets and prepare a test piece of the appropriate size. The two outer sheets are removed with tweezers and 
the remaining pad is carefully centered between the electrodes. The actual area under the electrodes shall 
never be touched with bare hands 



22.3.2 Heat the specimen and electrodes to 115 *C, unless otherwise specified, simultaneously evacuating the 
chamber. Maintain 115 ± 5 °C and a chamber pressure of less than 2 7 Pa (0 02 torr) until the test piece is 
dry. It has been found that 16 h at these conditions is sufficient if the upper electrode is drilled to facilitate 
the removal of moisture, otherwise 24 h or more may be required The test piece can be shown to be dry by 
steady-state measurements of dissipation factor. 



22 . 3 . 3 Unimpregnated paper 

Switch off the heater, break the vacuum with dry air and measure the dissipation factor and capacitance 
while the specimen is cooling, The measurements are made at temperatures as close as possible to 115 °C, 
105 °C> 90 °C> 70 °C and 55 X. Make the measurements between 1.2 kV/mm and 1,5 kY/mra. 



18 



IS *H5(Part2) : 19M 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 



22.3.4 Impregnated paper 



Switch off the heater, break the vacuum with dry air and measure the dissipation factor and capacitance 
at a temperature of 115 °C. Provided the dissipation factor is similar to the value obtained on an earlier 
Cest on similar test pieces conducted as in Sub-clause 22.3.3, the chamber is re-evacuated to a pressure higher 
than the vapour pressure of the im pregnant at the teat temperature, and sufficient degassed impregnant is 
transferred to the bottom electrode to allow the paper test piece to be fully immersed in the impregnant. 
The vacuum is broken after 10 min and measurement of dissipation factor and capacitance are made at 
temperatures as close as possible to 115 °C, 105 "C, 90 °C, 70 °C and 55 °C. Make the measurements between 
I 2 kV/mm and 1.5 kV/mm. 

Notes I — It is good practice to verify after the test thai ihe impregnating oi! is not contaminated 
2 — This method is unsuitable for liquids of hifth permittivity, c a. askarels. 

22.4 Results 

The report shall include tht following: 

— curve of dissipation factor as a function of temperature, 

— thickness of the test piece; 

— permittivity calculated in accordance with IEC Publication 250, 

— applied stress, expressed in kilovolts per millimetre; 

— nature of the impregnating liquid, when applicable 



23. Conducting paths 

There are three methods available, the method to be used shall be prescribed in Part 3. 

23.1 Method 1 

This method is particularly appropriate for 100% inspection, where comparatively few failures can be 
expected. 

23. t . 1 Test apparatus 

Electrodes* Two electrodes consisting of a smoothly machined cast-iron or other metal plate, and a set of 
smooth solid brass rollers (see Figure 3, page 26). 

The plate dimension parallel to the direction over which the test specimen is moved shall be at least 1 50 mm; 
the other dimension of the plate shall be at least as great as the width of the test specimen. 

The surfaces of the rullers shall be machined and polished to smooth cylinders. The finished dimensions 
of the brass rollers shall be as follows: 

— diameter: 38 mm; 

— width of face: 25 mm. 

The rollers shall be mounted in two parallel rows above the plate electrode and so arranged that each 
roller may be raised above or lowered oitto the plate surface, automatically aligning the roller surfaces with 
the plate surface. 

The rollers and plate shall be adequately insulated from each other. The rollers shall be mounted so that 
continuity of electrical connection between them and the potential source is ensured when they are rotating. 
The two rows of rollers shall be mounted with their axes 90° to the direction in which the test specimen is 
moved. The rollers in each row shall be spaced 35 mm apart on centre lines, and the two rows shall be so 



19 



IS 9335 (Part 2) : 1*98 
DEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 

placed that the midpoints of the roller* in one row are opposite the midpoints of the spaces in the other row 
as shown in Figure 3, page26< 

The total force exerted by each roller on the surface of the test specimen shall be not more than 3 150 N 
nor less than 2 450 N. A limiting resistance to avoid damage to the electrodes may be employed. 

23.1.2 Voltage 

The voltage shall be 2 V/fim r.m.s., unless otherwise specified in Part 3. 

23.1.3 Test specimen 

The test specimen shall be one of such width that its edges extend at least 25 mm beyond the outer edge 
of the adjacent rollers The test specimen shall be at least 7.5 m in length. 

23 1 .4 Procedure 

Raise the rollers, insert the end of the test specimen and lower the rollers onto the paper surface. Connect 
the electrodes with a potential source of the proper voltage prescribed in Sub-clause 23.1.2. Draw the speci- 
men between the plate and rollers at a *>pecd of 10 m/min to 20 m/min, Count the number of holes burned 
through the specimen, each burned hole being considered a conducting path. 

Instead of counting the number of holes burned, electronic counting may be applied. 

23.1.5 Calculation and expression of results 

a) Calculation- Calculate the number of conducting paths per unit area by dividing the number of failures 
counted by the total area searched, expressed in square metres 

b ) Test report: The report should mention: 

1) the number of conducting paths per square metre; 

2) the total area of paper tested 



23.2 Method 2 

A conducting path in this method has a resistance lower than 50 k£2. The apparatus shall not indicate 
a conducting path when the resistance is higher than 60 kO 

2J.2.1 Test apparatus (see Figure 4, page 26) 

a) Electrodes Two electrodes, one of which consists of a ground metal plate tru^d up flat, and the other 
of a solid ground cylindrical brass or steel roller with an insulating handle The dimensions of the plate 
should correspond to those of the specimens under test 

The dimensions of the roller are as follows* 

— diameter. 50 mm; 

— maximum width: 50 mm, 

— pressure exerted by roller, including handle 1 to 0.2*^ N/mm width of roller 

Mechanual accuracy of roller and plate The results of tests made accoiding to this method are greatly 
dependent upon the mechanical perfection of the surfaces of the plate and roller, if departures from the 
true form much exceed 0025 mm A departure of 02S mm is considered a large error Means for the 



20 



15 f335(P*rt2) : WW 
IEC Pub 554-2(1*77) 

attainment of this degree of accuracy, which is greater than that normally required in electrical instruments, 
are stated below. 

The roller may be turned and polished in a lathe or, preferably, ground to size accurately. The diameter 
of the roller may be measured by a dial micrometer of suitable sensitivity, the roller being rested on a 
flat anvil (free from dust) and its diameter measured from the anvil to the highest point of the roller 
surface, using a rounded micrometer plunger of small radius of curvature. 

Ensure that the diameter so measured does not vary by more than ± 0.0O25 mm along the whole cylin- 
drical length of the roller. 

Ensure that the plate, preferably cast or rolled m one piece, is not less than 25 mm thick. If it is built up 
from thinner plates welded or sweated together, ensure that these plates are of identical material, to avoid 
warping by differential expansion. In either case, the plate h roughly machined to size and flatness, and 
then annealed by prolonged heating (say 24 h at 200 °C to 300 Q C) to avoid subsequent warping. It is then 
ground fiat to an accuracy of ±0.0025 mm, which may conveniently be done upon a surface grinder. If 
this is carefully done on a sufficiently accurate machine, further polishing is unnecessary, the required 
property being flatness rather than polish. If polishing is desired, it is carried out in accordance with optical 
technique, since ordinary polishing will destroy the flatness obtained from grinding. The flatness of the 
plate may conveniently be checked by placing a lamp behind the roller, with the latter resting on the plate 
(free from dust), and observing the line of light between roller and plate. 



Note. — Engineered surface plates 4 m < 0.25 tfi have been used. 

b) Detector; A measuring instrument feeding into a pulse counter which records a pulse whenever there is a 
resistance lower than prescribed. The recording shall be one unit per conducting path over the range 
of time for which the voltage is applied to the conducting path. The counting device shall be capable of 
making separate counts in the case of conducting paths which arc 1 mm or more apart, in the direction 
of the movement of the roller 

c) A protective resistor, the resistance of the total circuit shall be at least 50 JtO. 

d) A source of 1 10 ± 10 V, normally d.c. 

Where desired, an earth connection to the circuit may be made to provide maximum safety. 

23.2.2 Specimens 

a) The specimen shall be large enough to cover the plate completely, the sheet of paper being held in place by 
weights. Several specimens may be tested 

b) An area of at least 1 m 1 shall be tested. 

v) It has been observed when testing thin papers that the specimens need to be handled with the greatest care. 

They should not be touched with the hands, nor should they be placed on any surface cnhcT than that of 
the plate after being taken from the rolls 

23.2.3 Procedure 

Fix the specimen to the plate, malting sure it is flat, by means of weights placed at the ends. Connect the 
plate to one terminal of the 1 10 V supply. 

Connect up the roller, the detector and the resistor, such that the free end of the resistor may be connected 
to the other terminal of the 1 10 V supply. Pass the roller over the paper in parallel strokes, taking care to avoid 



21 



IS M35(P*rt2) :l»g 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1*77) 

overlapping, the speed being appropriate to the performance of the counting unit. Do not apply any extra 
pressure. 

23.2.4 Calculation and expression of results 

a) Calculation: Calculate the number of conducting paths per square metre by dividing the number of con- 
ducting paths counted by the total area searched, expressed in square metres, 

b) Test report: The report should mention: 

1) the number of conducting paths per square metre; 

2) tbe total area of paper tested. 

23.3 Method! 

Mercury electrode test — Dubitier method 

23.3.1 Precautions 

The test should be conducted in a clean atmosphere, preferably in an enclosure completely sealed, except 
for a supply of filtered air. 

Because of the likelihood of contamination, the first six outer turns of the roll of paper to be tested should 
be discarded. Care should be taken that the test roll does not become contaminated by any airborne particles, 
nor come into contact with any dusty surface. 

Mercury has an appreciable vapour pressure at room temperature and this vapour is toxic. Care should be 
taken to handle the liquid so as to avoid spillage and to ensure that personnel are not unduly exposed to 
mercury vapour. The top electrodes should be kept covered and pressure-sensitive adhesive tape has been 
found satisfactory. 

The paper, after it has been tested by running between the electrodes, is contaminated with mercury and 
used specimens should not be allowed to accumulate in the working area. Care should be taken in the dis- 
posal of used specimens, which should be burned in an efficient incinerator with an adequately high smoke 
venting system. 

Note. — Even when all these precautions are taken, accidents may occur with possible harmful effects on health and the environ- 
ment. Consequently, this method is only for use in testing capacitor paper, where i( is appropriate to have d method 
which will detect weak spots as well as conducting particles. When the Lest is made, it is to be under the control of a 
responsible individual fully informed of the dangers associated with the use of mercury. The hazards associated with 
using mercury should be fully appreciated, before the mcrcuiy etecuode teat is included in a national standard or 
national specification for capacitor paper. When included, adequate supervision should be required 



23.3.2 Procedure 

A sufficient length of paper to give a test area of 1 m 2 is passed horizontally between upper and lower 
rectangular electrodes, both of mercury, at not more than 5Q mm/s (see Figure 5, page 27). 

The electrodes are 4.8 mm in the direction of motion of the paper and are not more than 50 mm across the 
paper. They are suitably arranged to cover the desired width of paper without overlap and aligned (top and 
bottom) to a tolerance of 25 mm and thejr supports arc separated by a gap of not greater than 0.05 mm. 

The electrodes are connected into a circuit which operates a counter, capable of operating at a count rate 
of at least 25 units per second, when any one of the following conditions occurs for 10 \is or more . 

L) the resistance between the electrodes falls to 2 left; 



22 



IS 9335(Pvt2) : 1998 
TEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 

2) the fault current to earth rises to a selected value between 0.5 mA and 1.5 mA; 

3) the potential difference between electrodes is reduced to 2.5 V ot less. 

The potential difference between the electrodes is 10 V or 40 V, but other voltages may be used within the 
capability of the circuit. 

Suitable arrangements are made for calibration of the circuit to ensure that these conditions can be met. 

The spurious count level of the instrument should not exceed one unit in any period of 10 min when a piece 
of 0.012 mm polyethylene-terephthalatc film is held stationary between the electrodes. 

Mote. - - An alternative test using electrodes consisling of conducting rubber may be considered for inclusion later. 



24. Heat stability 

The tests made before and after ageing shall be made after conditioning approached from the dry side. The 
ageing period and the temperature shall be specified in Part 3, The guidance ofl EC Publication 216, Guide 
for the Determination of Thermal Endurance Properties of Electrical Insulating Material, shall be followed. 



24. 1 Internal (earing resistance 

The heat stability can be expressed as the decrease m tearing resistance, determined in accordance with 
Clause 6 of th : s standard, after the heat treatment. 

24.2 Bursting strength 

The heat stability can also be expressed as the decrease in bursting strength, determined in accordance with 
Clause 8 of this standard, after the heat treatment. 

24.3 Degree of polymerization 

The heat stability can also be expressed as the decrease in the degree of polymerization, determined in 
accordance with I EC Publication 450, Measurement of the Average Viscometric Degree of Polymerization 
of New and Aged Electrical Papers, after the heat treatment. 



23 



15 933S(Part2) : IMS 
t£C Fvb554-2(Wn 




DETAIL A 



1,25 ±<U» 2,00 *0,« 




Dimensions m millimetres 

Fio \ — Edge tear stirrup. 



24 



IS 93U<Psrt2) :19M 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 




Fig. 2a. — Test apparatus for oil absorbency test 



New ibtt 



Eilitlno 

plate 




New atude 
For lupport 
when Inverted 



Replace «iiiting atude with i mm diameter bran studs 
27 mm long threaded Me X ft 



Oil resistant 



DETAILS 




*** ^r-0 



rubber mat 



dieting hole* 



Existing rJng In new plate 




DETAILS 



New plat* 







2 mm hofaa drill and tap 
• Pilch circle diameter 



New metal baseplata 
with a groove 1,6 mm 
deep x 121 men out- 
side diameter 
x 112.0 mm msWe 
diameter to take 
23 mm deep steet ring. 
Join and teal the two 
with tpo*y adhesive 



a mm diameter hole for 
securing fixture to bench 



X 



Block hoard 
base square 
and symmetrical 




8 mm diameter Met In hardwood corner blocks coutertunk 
lor M6 txrswa SO mm long. The S mm diameter nolea in 
the base ore recessed to pravert tha Ma nuu and washeri 
from protruding below me bete bottom 



Dimensions tn millimetres 

Fig. 2b. — Test apparatus for oil absorbency test (modifications required to Cobb absorbency tester). 



25 



IS 9335 (Parti) :19tt 
EC Pub354-J(l»77) 



Driving rolJeri 



Materia f uft der test 




Materia I under test 



Testing rollers connected to earth 



Metal plate connected tP H.V. supply 



Fio. 3. — Diagrammatic arrangement of test apparatus for conducting particles. 



R « 30 , . , 50 kfl 




Specimen 



1 - pJaic electrode 

2 = roller electrode 

3 = source of 110 V 

4 ** indication and counter device 

^ = alternative positions 



Fig. 4. — Test apparatus. 



IS »335(Part2) : If 9t 
EEC Pub 554-2 (If 77) 



1? preferred 




Insulating material, 

o.a polymtthyl methacrylatt 



Top electrode 



IS preferred 




BcUom electrode 



0,05 max. 



4- 



L'.. 



-«■ A 







Mercury 



]/ 



Paper 



Assembly 



Section A A showing electrodes with paper 
specimen 



Dimensions m millimetres 



Fig. 5 — Electrodes and assembly of mercuT> electrodes . 



27 



M 
G 

S 

c 



C/3 

too 

V) 



-a 

a 

cd 
■*-> 

c 

bp 

O 

ID 
X3 






IS M33(Pwt2) :199S 
IEC Pub 534-2(1*77) 



CORRIGENDU M 



Page 16 

21 Electric strength 

In the first line, instead of 

IEC Publication 243 

read: 

IEC 243-1 (1988) 

21.1 Test apparatus 

In the first line, instead of 

Clause 5 ol (EC Publication 243 

read. 

Clause 7 of IEC 243-1 (1d88) 

In the second line, instead of 

Sub-cJauses 6. 1 1 or 6 1 3 

read 

4 1 1.1 oi 4 1 2 



Page 17 

21 3 Procedure 

In the first tme t instead of 

Sub-clause 7 1 of IEC Publication 243 

read: 

9.1 of IEC 243-1. 

in the second line, instead of 

Clause 8 
read' 
Clause 10. 

2 J 4 Results 

instead of 

Clause 11 of IEC Publication 243 

read' 

Clause 12 of IEC 243-1. 



K »3J5(Pan2) : 1*9* 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1971) 

Amendment Mo. 1 

21.4 Results 

Amend existing Note 2 as follows 

2 — A test using impulse votugri is under consideration 

Complete Clause 21 as follows 

1 1 .5 Test method using d.c 

21 ,5. 1 General notes on the test 

The electric strength should be measured in air, as far as possible according to IEC Publi- 
cation 243- Recommended Methods of Test for Electric Strength of Solid insulating Materials at 
Power Frequencies, since an adequate IEC publication for methods of test for elcclnc strength 
using d.c. does not exist ycl 

21 5 2 Electrodes 

Two cylindrical electrodes made from stainless steel (with a surface fineness of 2 5 \im or better) 
should he used. The faces of the electrodes shall be parallel and free from pits or other impurities. 
The edges shall be removed to give a radius of 3.0 mm. 

The upper electrode should have a diameter of 25 mm and a height of 25 mm. The counter* 
electrode beneath should have a diameter of 75 mm and be approximately 1 5 mm in height and 
should be arranged coaxially, m accordance with Figure la of IEC Publication 243. 

The counter-electrode connected with earth potential could also consist of a plane sheet of 40 jam 
to 50 iim thick aluminmm-foil, 

21.5.3 Test pieces 

The lest pieces should be large enough to prevent flashovers. Two layers of paper one upon the 
other are measured, except when otherwise specified in Part 3. 

The test pieces should originate from one specimen. For example a sheet of 40 cm x 40 cm is 
taken from the paper and cut to two double-layered lest pieces of 20 cm x 20 cm. 

21.5.4 Test proc edure 

The test pieces shall be suspended or piled loosely in no more than 20 layers in a circulating air 
oven and shall be dried at 105 ± 2 5 *C for 60 m in. They are tested within J mm of removal from 
the oven In case of dispute the test shall be earned out inside the oven. 



21 5.5 Number of measurements 

A minimum of nine breakdowns is earned out. When the lower 95% confidence limit on the lest 
results ts required, 20 breakdowns or more are to be made. The lag of the measuring instrument 
should not exceed 1%, 

21.5.6 Measuring procedure 

The tension is to be increased from about one-half of the expected breakdown voltage to break- 
down in 5 s to 10 s. The appropriate breakdown value is found by two previous tests. 



30 



IS »3J5(Part2) .19H 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 

For paper with nominal thickness of ±=25 urn, the tension is increased by 200 V's to 300 V/s until 
breakdown At breakdown, that is to say when the short-circuit current has reached ] mA to 
l.QrnA, the voltmeter shouJd continue to indicate the breakdown voltage. 

Note - The shon-circuit current is linn ted to 1 mA to 1 mA (in order co avoid damage to ihe electrodes) by insertion of a 
protective resistor in scnes w^ii ihe lesi picce. 

21.5.7 Evaluation 

The report shall include the following: 

1} Thickness of the double te>er of paper 

2) Type and size of the electrodes. 

3) Number of breakdowns. 

4) Central value. 

5) Minimum and maximum value. 

6) Electric strength (MV/m-kV/mm), calculated from the central value divided h the thickness 
of double-layered paper. 

7) Where the lower 95% confidence limit is required (^20 measurements); 

x - mean value, 

SD ** simple standard deviation, 

L LC = lower confidence limit = x - (5D 1 64). 



Amendment 2 



Page 4 

Sub-clauses 2.1 and 2.2 
Add to the first paragraph: 

The static load to be applied shall correspond to a pressure of 
100 ♦ 10 kPa. 



31 



IS 9335<I»itt2) :199S 
IEC Ftata 554-2 (1*7?) 



Amendment 3 

Page 14 

19 Water and oil absorption (Klamm method) 
Replace this clause by the following new ctevse: 

19 Rita of water absorption (wlcklng) 

19.1 Principle 

A strip of the malarial to be tested 1$ suspended vertically with one end Immersed In water 
The capillary rise In a given time Is a measure of the absorbency ol the material. The test 
is carried out In an enclosed vessel to provide a moisture saturation at the laboratory 
temperature 

19 2 Reagent 

19.2 1 DMto&d or de-ionized water 

Drinking water shaft be used only If ft can be shown to Qfve results in agreement with 
those obtained with distilled or de-ionfeed water. In the event of dispute, dlstJlled/de- 
ionized water shall be used, 

19.3 Apparatus 

a) A transparent water container at least 250 mm in depth. 

b) A combined lid and test-piece support, fitted with two adjustable distance pieces at 
least 200 mm in length. 

NOTE - A luitabto apparatus it shewn in ftgura 6 and may be conttroctad from matariali mch at 6 mm 
daar acrylic thaau Tha ditUnce ptacat ara pointed a( tha lowar and and ihraadad to pafnut adjustment 



32 



IS >335(Part2) : 1W8 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 

c) A timer capable of indicating times up to 15 min to the nearest second. 

d) A cathelometer or ruler having a graduated straight-edge at least 300 mm in length, 
capable of being read to the nearest 0,5 mm. 

e) Suitable pegs or pins for attaching test pieces to the test-piece support. 
Paper clips, 

g) A pencil. 

h) A straight-edge. 

19.4 Conditioning 

Condition samples according to 1 .3. 

19.5 Test pieces 

Cut ten strips (15 ± 1) mm wide and at feast 200 mm long from the sample in the machine 
direction and, tt required, a further ten strips in the cross-machine direction. 

NOTE - In eetes where * minimum test length of 200 mm is not available, e.g. laboratory hand sheets, 
the required leneth may be made up by joining the last pieces to an mart carrier In such cases, me lenom 
ot the inert carrier should be specified and included in the test report 



Draw a pencil line across each test piece at a distance of (15 ± 1) mm Irom one end. Fix a 
weight, suitable to ensure that the test piece hangs vertically, midway between the line 
and the end of the paper (a paper clip has been found to be suitable). 



19.6 Procedure 

Place the water container on a Hat level surface and add water at (23 ± 2) Q C to a depth of 
(SO 1 5) mm. Maintain the temperature at (23 ± 2) *C throughout the test. Place the lid on 
the container and adjust the distance pieces so that the points just touch the water 
surface. 

Remove the lid from the apparatus and lay it on the working surface with the distance 
pieces horizontal Place a straight-edge across the tips of the points ot the distance pieces 
and lay each test piece in position with Its pencil line along the straight-edge. Fix the test 
piece to the lid by a pin or peg through one ot the holes provided. It is convenient to test 
five test strips at a time 

When ah of the test pieces are fixed m position, replace the lid on the water container so 
that the weighted ends ot the strips are immersed in water up to the 15 mm pencil line and 
immediately start the timer. 

After 10 mm ± 5 s remove the lid with the strips and lay the assembly on the working 
surface. Within 10 s of removal from the water, draw pencil lines through the water fronts 
on the strips If the from is uneven, estimate the average position. 



33 



IS 9336 (Part 2) : 1998 
IEC Pub354-2(1977) 

Measure the distance between the pencil lines to the nearest 0,5 mm. 

NOTES 

t It may be convenient to vary tha time of test but in all such case* the lima taken should be reported. 

Z The results may ba affected by soluble elements In the pa par or the board In order to reduce thl* 
eflecl at much as pot Bible, fresh water can be usad lor each new series of tests 



19.7 Results 

Calculate the mean value of the ten results for each direction tested. 

For absorbencles less than 20 mm/10 min, express the results to the nearest 0.5 mm. 

For absorbencies equal to or greater than CO mm/10 min. express the results to the nearest 
1 mm. 

Calculate the standard deviation of the test results for each direction tested. 

19.8 Test report 

The test report shall include a reference to this standard together with the following 
Information: 

a) lengths of test strips and, if used, inert carrier; 

b) mean and standard deviation of the machine direction water absorption value 
(Klemm); 

c) if required, the mean and standard deviation of the cross-machine direction water 
absorption value; 

d) any departure from this method, including time of immersion or other circumstances 
that may have affected the result 



34 



IS M35(Part2) : 1991 
IEC Pub 554-2 (1977) 



260 min 



X 



^C 



y Lktftost 
/ hofctor 



AdjuttabJe distance 



W««r (aval 



X 



-ffi- 



v«tHi 



200 mln. 



Spirit l«v»l 



Udand 
support 

C21 V«i*l 




Section A-A 



Levelling icrew* 




DimenMionw in mtttrmmtrm* 




Section BB 



Figure 6 - Ktomm absorbency apparatus 



35 



Bama of bdlaa Standard* 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote harmonious 
n development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all iu publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Dircaor {Publications), BIS. 

Review of Ittdiu Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes axe 
needed; if the review indicates thai changes arc needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and * Standards : Monthly Additions 1 , 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. ETD 02 ( 3698 ). 

Amendment! Issued Since Publication 

Amend No Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams. Manaksanstha 

Telephones . 323 01 31. 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

aJJ offices ) 

Regional Offices Telephone 

Central ' Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 1 3233841 

Eastern 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M r V 1. P. Road, Mamktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 i 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern . SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 



f 60 3» 43 
I 60 20 25 



{ 



Southern : C. I T. Campus. IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 f 23 5 02 16, 235 04 42 

235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 M1DC, Marol, Andhen (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 j. 832 78 91,832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD GHAZIABAD GUWAHATI HYDERABAD JAIPUR 
KANPUR LUCKNOW. NAGPUR PATNA. PUNE THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 



Printed «t New IntJt* Printing Pro**, Khurt*. [adit 



