IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

CABLED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR TELEVISION AND SOUND SIGNAL
PART 7 ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPATIBILITY OF SYSTEMS

ICS 33.060.4

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARC

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 4

Radio Communication

Sectional Committee,

LTD 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard Radio Communication Division Council. (Part 7) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication

This standard (Part 7) is a part of a series of Indian Standards on Cabled Distribution Sound Signals. The other parts of the series are given below: Part Part Part Part Part Part I 2 3 4 5 6 Safety requirements Electromagnetic compatability of components Active coaxial wideband distribution components Passive coaxial wideband distribution components Headend Optical equipment (under preparation)

System for Television

and

This Indian Standard is largely based on IEC document lOOD/47/CD `Cabled Distribution and Sound Signals -- Part 12 : Electromagnetic Compatability of System'.

System for Television

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compiled with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999

Indian Standard CABLED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR TELEVISION AND SOUND SIGNAL
PART 7 ELECTROMAGNETIC 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 7) applies to the radiation characteristics and immunity to electromagnetic disturbance of cabled distribution systems for television signals, sound signals and interactive multimedia signals and covers the frequency range 0.3 MHz to 3.0 MHz. I.2 This standard requirements and measurement. specifies EMC performance lays down the methods of COMPATIBILITY OF SYSTEMS space in the form of Energy transferred through electromagnetic waves.

NOTE - By extension, the term `electromagnetic sometimes also covers induction phenomena. 2.2

radiation'

Immunity

(to a Disturbance)

The ability of a device, equipment or system to perform without degradation in the presence of an electromagnetic disturbance. 2.3 Electromagnetic Disturbance

I.3 Cable networks beyond the system outlets (for example, the receiver lead, in simplest terms) which begin at the system outlet and end at the subscriber's terminal equipment shall comply with these requirements provided that no other specific provisions apply. 1.4 The equipment as well as the coaxial cables must comply with the network conditions laid down by the manufacturer of the equipment and the coaxial cable respectively to ensure the proper operation of the network itself. 1.5 It will be the responsibility of the operator of the network to ensure that the cable network meets the requirements of this standard. 1.6 To minimize the risk of interference to other radio services caused by possible radiation from a cable network and to limit the possible penetration of external signals which may interfere with the operation of a network, it is necessary not only to use equipment which satisfies the requirements regarding limits of radiation and of immunity to external fields but also to ensure the integrity of all cable connections on each item of active or passive cable network equipment. 2 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard following defnitions shall apply. 2.1 Electromagnetic Radiation terms and

Any electromagnetic phenomenon which may degrade the performance of a device, equipment or system, or adversely affect living or inert matter.
NOTE - An electromagnetic disturbance may be an electromagnetic noise, an unwanted signal or a change in the propagation medium itself.

2.4 Screening

Effectiveness

The ability of an equipment or system to attenuate the influence of electromagnetic fields from outside the equipment of system or to suppress the radiation of electromagnetic fields from inside the equipment or system. 2.5 Well-Screened A test set-up can be considered `well-screened' if its radiation level, when terminated with a matched load, is at least 20 dB below the expected radiation level of the equipment under test, the test set-up and the equipment being supplied with the same input signal level. 2.6 Electroqagnetic Interference (EMI)

Degradation of the performance of an equipment, transmission channel or system caused by an electromagnetic disturbance. 2.7 Operating Frequency Range signals for which the

The passband for the wanted equipment has been designed. 2.8 Carrier-to-Interference

Ratio

The phenomenon by which energy in the form of electromagnetic waves emanates from source into space.
1

The minimum level difference measured at the output of an active equipment between the wanted signal, and intermodulation products of the wanted signal and/

IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999
or

unwanted linear&es;

signals

generated

due to non-

2.16 Subscriber's

Feeder

-

harmonics unwanted operating

generated

by an unwanted

signal; into the

signals that have penetrated frequency range; and

A feeder connecting a subscriber tap to a system outlet or where the latter is not used, directly to the subscriber equipment.
NOTE A subscriber feeder may include filters and balun

-

unwanted signals that have been converted to the frequency range to be protected (operating frequency range).

transformer.

2.17 Receiver Lead A lead which connects subscriber equipment. 2.18 External Immunity The ability of a device, equipment or network to perform without degradation in the presence of electromagnetic disturbances entering other than via its normal input terminals or antenna. 3 SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS the system outlet to the

2.9 Headend Equipment which is connected between receiving antennas or other signal aurces and the remainder of the cable network, to process the signals to be distributed.
No'fI-: -amplifiers. generators. The

headend may, for example, comprise antenna
converters. combiners, separators and

frequency

2.10 System Outlet A dev'ice for interconnecting receiver lead. 2.11 Spur Network A cable network normally laid out inside buildings (inhouse network) to which splitters, subscriber taps or looped system outlets are connected. 2.12 Ignition Noise The unwanted emission of electromagnetic energy, predominantly impulsive in content, arising from the ignition system within a vehicle or device. 2.13 Building Penetration Loss G G, gain of the low-noise emplifier antenna related to a A, E, attenuator loss limit for the considered a subscriber feeder and a 3.1 Symbols Ac cable loss between. analyser antenna and spectrum

field strength frequency

gain of the transmitting half-wave dipole antenna factor

K, P

-

The ability of buildings, in which networks for the transmission of television signals, sound signals and interactive services are located, to attenuate the influence of electromagnetic fields from outside the buildings or to suppress the radiation ofelectromagnetic fields from inside the buildings. 2.14 Disturbance
location, (interference) which

radiated power of the network related to a halfwave dipole available output power of the signal generator level corresponding to the permitted limit

P,, -

Level disturbance
all

ZJ, at a given
from contributing

The level of an electromagnetic
results sources.

3.2 Abbreviations AM CATV Amplitude Community (network) Modulation Antenna Television

2.15 Degradation

(of Performance)

An undesired departure in the operational performance of any device, equipment or system from its intended performance. NO'I`L~ ~
permanent The term "degradation" failure. can apply to temporary or

DSC EMC

-

Distress, Safety and Calling Electromagnetic Compatability

2

IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999 EMI EPIRB Electromagnetic Interference Indicating
Frequency Range WW Maximum Radiated Disturbance Power dB (PW 5 to to 30 Under consideration 20 43 57 Level Radiated Field Strength dB ( uv/m) Under consideration 21 50 64

Table 1 Radiation Limits (Clauses 4.1.1 and 5. I )

Position Emergy Radiobeacons Frequency Instrument Modulation Landing System

FM ILS ITU-R

-

International Telecommunication Union-Radiocommunication Master Antenna Radio Frequency Television (network)

30

I 000
2 500

I 000 to MATV RF SMATV 2 500

to 3 000

NOTE -

Additional

protection may be required for safety of within the above frequency ranges. life services are given in Annex A.

Satellite Master (network) Television

Antenna

Television

life services operating

Frequency ranges oftypical

4.1.2 Immunity of Cable Networks TV VOR VSB The external immunity limit specifies the reference field strength level outside the building at which a defined RF carrier-to-interference ratio (performance criterion) channel at any point shall be obtained in the wanted in the cable network. The external immunity limit (Table 2) of cable networks is a field strength level to achieve the performance criteria specified in Table 3. Table 2 Immunity Limits (Clause 4.1.2) of the relevant
Frequency MHz Class A Range Field Strength dB (uV/m) Class B

VHF Omnidirectional Vestigial Side Band

Range

4 PERFORMANCE

REQUIREMENTS

4.1 The relevant conditions apolicable to cable networks required to meet the values specified in 4.1.1 4.1.2 are as follows: professional planning

compliance with the requirements Indian Standard (1423 1 series)

use of suitable equipment, components (plugs, connectors, etc) and coaxial cables fulfilling these standards or use of such equipment which can be deemed suitable on the basis of the details of the technical data sheets correct installation of all parts of network equipment including the provision of appropriate connections between cables, plugs and equipment. Therefore only suitable connections of plugs and clamps shall be used. The installation instructions of the manufacturer of the equipment and components shall be considered. 4.1.1 Rudiation from Cable Networks The maximum permitted radiation levels, given in Table 1, shall be applied according to the method of measurement specified in 5.1.

0.15

to

IO00
3 000

114 I14

106
106

1 000 to

NOTES I Class A shall be used where high external field strengths are expected and where it is not possible to plan the channel allocation to avoid these frequencies. 2 The value for Class A results from the immunity loss

requirement for equipment of 106 dB ( uV/m) penetration loss of 8 dB (average building

and a building penetration

I3 dB in the frequency range of 300 to I 000 MHz.

The performance criteria for cable networks refer to AM VSB TV signals in the frequency range 950 to 3 000 MHz. Where other signals (for example digitally modulated signals) are distributed, the lower permissible carrierto-interference ratios of these signals shall not be

3

IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999 applied in order to reduce the immunity network.. The method of measurement specified in 5.2.1. shall of the cable relevant limits may be initially carried out with the terminal equipment connected. Where limits are exceeded, individual sections of the network (for example headend, satellite receiving outdoor unit, distribution network, distribution installation beyond the system outlets and terminal equipment) may be tested in succession to determine beyond any doubt which section of the network does not comply with the limits. 5.1 Radiation from Cable Networks

be chosen

as

Table 3 Carrier-to-Interference Ratio to the Reference Field Strength (Immunity Level) (Cluusrs 4.1.2 and 5.2.1)
Frequency
MHz 5 30 950 to to to 30 950 3 000

Range

Carrier-to-Interference
dB Under consideration > 57 (AM) ~25 (FM)

Ratio

The methods described hereafter are applicable to the measurement of radiation from cable networks (combination of cables, equipment and networks). The number of test frequencies shall be selected to give a realistic representation of the radiation pattern throughout the operating frequency range and to enable the maximum level of radiation to be recorded and the results interpreted accurately. The field strength measurement procedure is used in order to achieve results which are sufficiently accurate and do not require excessive technical effort. The substitution measurement technique is applied to carry out more accurate measurements of the radiated disturbance power level generated by any part of the network. If the radiated field strength is assumed to be the result of a point source of radiation at a distance of 3 m, the two methods are equivalent. The maximum permitted radiation level is given in 4.1, Table 1. 51.1 5.1.1.1 Field Strength Method Equipment required of the

NOTE These requirements may be relaxed only for those channels on which the distributed television or FM radio signals are at their original broadcast frequencies, that is the wanted and unwanted carriers are synchronous. In this case, the required immunity is governed by the subjective acceptability of echoes on the signals distributed on these channels.

5

METHODS

OF MEASUREMENT

Cable networks employing coaxial cables can be a source of interference to a wide range of services that utilise the radio frequency spectrum. These include not only the emergency services, safety of life, broadcasting, aeronautical and radio navigation services but also land mobile amateur and cellular radio services. An existing and planned radio services need t6 be protected, radiation limits specified for cable networks should comply with. These methods of measurement describe the procedures for the testing of cable networks. The purpose of the measurements is to determine:

4

level of radiation generated by cable networks, and of cable networks to external field strengths (for example those radiated by other radiocommunication services and RF applications) incident on these cable networks.

b) immunity

The equipment required for the measurement radiation from a network is listed below: a)

The measurements cover the essential parameters and environmental conditions in order to assess cases of electromagnetic incompatibility between cable networks and other electrical or electronic equipment, networks, installations or other cabled networks with respect to the intended operation of such cable networks. Testing of the cable networks for compliance with the
4

A suitable spectrum analyser (battery powered) with a digital recorder or a plotter. The spectrum analyser should cover the frequencies distributed within the network with a resolution bandwidth (IF bandwidth) of 100 kHz and an appropriate slow sweep speed (for example, time/division greater than 10 ms/div). A calibrated antenna. It is strongly recommended that an antenna with very broad bandwidth is used to reduce the number

b)

IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999 of measurements. It is also recommended that a directive antenna is used to be able to test each side of the street independently of the other one. A good choice would be, for example, periodic antenna covering the frequency from 80 MHz to 1 000 MHz. a logrange 5.1.1.3 Calibration procedure

When a calibrated broadband antenna is used, the limit line shall be obtained for each frequency by calculation with the formula and using the antenna factor given by the antenna manufacturer. U,_= E, - (kA + A,)

c)

A calibrated low-noise amplifier required frequency range. An antenna characteristic. cable of known

covering

the

where u, = level corresponding in dB (uV); to the permitted limit,

loss/frequency E, =

e>

A suitable vehicle to carry the above equipment with the broadband antenna fixed on the top of the vehicle and oriented in order to get the maximum reception level perpendicular to the driving direction. Measurement procedure

field strength limit for the considered frequency in dB (uV/m); antenna factor, in dB; and cable loss between analyser, in dB. antenna and spectrum

k, Ac

= =

5.1.1.2

The antenna shall be connected to the input of the spectrum analyser via the low-noise amplifier, if necessary, with a well-screened and well-matched coaxial cable. Before starting measurements, a calibration procedure (see 5.1.1.3) is required to obtain the limit line related to the limit field values (see 4.1). Then, the measurement procedure can start for the first street, following the centre line of the lane closest to the building, where the distribution network is installed. It is important to drive the vehicle slowly along the street, according to the spectrum analyser operation, to get a clear overview on the screen of the spectrum analyzer. A survey is first conducted in order to ascertain.the frequencies and field strengths of local transmitters so that these may be eliminated from the measurement results. If one or more carriers exceed the limit line, the vehicle stops and the operator checks the frequency(ies) of this (or those) carrier(s). If one or more of the exceeding carriers are emanating from the network, the operator shall record the spectrum analyser pattern and note that place on the map of the town for a future repair. Because of the antenna directivity, the vehicle has to be driven over each street twice to test both sides. 5

If the field strength limit is a very low value, a low noise preamplifier shall be inserted between the antenna and the spectrum analyser. In that case, the formula shall be: J&E,-(k,,+Q+G where G is the gain of the low-noise 5.1.2 Power Method) Method (Substitution amplifier, in dB.

Measurement

In order to obtain more accurate results of the equivalent radiated disturbance power generated by a network or if the measurement accuracy achieved on the basis of the previous measurement procedure is not sufficient, the substitution measurement method shall be applied. 5.1.2.1 Equipment required of the

The equipment required for the measurement radiation from a network is listed below:

a> A

selective measuring receiver covering the frequency range of interest and with sufficient sensitivity.

b) Broadband antennas for the frequency range from
30 MHz to 1 000 MHz and a log-periodic antenna for the frequency range from 1 000 MHz to 3 000 MHz.

cl A signal generator covering the frequency range
of interest and with sufficient output pokier. ratio

4

A transmitting antenna with a front-to-back of minimum 10 dB and a known gain.

IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999

e) An attenuator to be connected to the terminals of
the transmitting antenna. cables.

The maximum disturbance requirements given in 4.1.

power

shall

meet

the

f-l

Suitable measurement

8) Suitable mounting equipment to enable the height
and polarisation of the transmitting adjusted (for example, a telescopic 5.1.2.2 Measurement procedure antenna to be mast).

By the above mentioned measurement method, the ground reflections are eliminated with sufficient accuracy. 5.2 Immunity of Cable Networks by the

First the maximum radiation of the network in the direction of interest shall be measured at a suitable distance with a broadband receiving antenna and a measuring receiver (spectrum analyser) changing the height and polarisation of the antenna to obtain a maximum reading. The maximum measured values and their related frequencies shall be noted (level a,). Then the cable distribution network (either the complete network or a section of it) is replaced by a transmitting antenna supplied by a calibrated signal generator. The antenna shall be a type with a front-to-back ratio of minimum 10 dB, to minimise the reflection effects from the building. An attenuator connected to the base of the antenna is required in all cases in order to avoid any mismatch. The transmitting antenna shall be set up in front of the wall of the building in the area of the supposed maximum radiation source. To minimise other unwanted reflections, the signal generator shall at first be set to a level PsG, so that a sufficient readable value can be noted on the measuring received (level a,). In this position the transmitting antenna shall be fixed. Now the RF level of the signal generator (PSGZ)shall be varied to obtain the same level a, on the measuring receiver. The resulting disturbance following formula: P=P `iG2-Ac-ATfGA where P = radiated power of the network related to a half-wave dipole, in dB (pW); output power in dB (pW); in dB; loss, in dB; and related to of the signal power shall be calculated by

Interference can enter cable network equipment following means: poor or faulty screening (plugs, splitters, etc) of passive

equipment

-

poor or faulty screening of active (amplifiers, converters, etc)

equipment

-

poor of faulty screening of the distribution against induced voltages poor or faulty screening of the distribution against induced currents

cables

-

cables

-

excessive impedance in the ground connection the input terminals of active equipment insufficient interference rejection of power supply on mains powered equipment mounting of connectors

of

borne

-

inadequate

and cables

damage of the screening Unterminated

of cables or connectors equipment

ports of distribution

The carrier-to-interference ratio caused by an external field at any system outlet shall be measured by means of a suitable measuring receiver or spectrum analyser. The results shall comply with the limits given in 4.2. 52.1 Measurement Procedure Using an Existing Disturbing High-Power Local Transmitter In the case of disturbance, ratio shall be measured disturbance. the carrier-to-interference at the outlets subject to

P SG2 = available generator, AC A, G', = attenuation, = attenuator

At first, the wanted signal level in the disturbed channel shall be measured. After-that, the cable network shall be disconnected from the interchange point of the antennas. The disconnected inputs shall be terminated with 75R terminated loads. The disturbance level of the ingress unwanted signal is then measured by means of a measuring receiver in 6

= gain of the transmitting antenna a half-wave dipole in dB.

IS 14231 (Part 7) : 1999 the peak mode, taking into account the bandwidth of the signal. Care shall be taken to ensure that the measuring receiver is well-matched to the network under test and that the relevant return loss is taken into consideration. The difference between the wanted signal level and the level of the interfering unwanted signal level shall comply with the RF carrier-to-interference ratio specified in 4.2, Table 3. If the carrier-to-interference ratio is equal to or gleater than the nominal value, the network meets the requirements. If the carrier-to-interference ratio is less than the required ratio further studies are necessary. All installations beyond the system outlet (receiver leads, receiver, other subscriber installations) shall be disconnected from the network under test for the purposes of these studies. In the majority of cases disturbance is caused by these items. The measurement of the disturbance level shall be repeated. After the measurement, the operating condition of the network shall subsequently be restored. If all these provisions do not lead to a better carrier to interference ratio, it must be assumed that the interfering signals intrude into the cable network. Then the interfering fields strength outside the building shall be measured in the vicinity of the assumed point of penetration. The maximum field strength shall be determined by changing the site of the antenna. The field strength limit at which the carrier-to-interference ratios according to Table 3 shall be met is indicated in 4.2. If the interfering field strength is equal to or lower than this value, the network does not meet the requirements and measures shall be taken by the network operator to improve the immunity of the network. If the measured interfering field strength exceeds this value, the cable network requirements do not correspond to the requirements of other radio services (high power local transmitter). Then, a solution of this problem shall be achieved by the national regulatory authorities and by the radio services operators.

ANNEX A
(Clause FREQUENCY
Frequency (MHz) 74.800 Range

4.1 .l) LIFE SERVICES
Service

RANGES

OF TYPICAL

to 75.200

Aeronautical Aeronautical Emergency (EPTRBs). DSC distress, International EPIRBs EPIRBs protection is also required

radionavigation; radionavigation; position

ILS marker beacons VOR and ILS localiser Radiobeacons

108.000 to 117.975 121.450 to 121.550

indicating

156.525 156.762 5 to 156.837 5 242.950 to 243.050 406.000 to 406.100 In some areas additional

safety and calling marine distress, safety and calling

for radio astronomy

bands and other radio services.

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bzncuu ofIndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development ofthe activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does n'ot preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. LTD 20 (1795).

Amendments

Issued

Since

Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I IO 002 Telephones : 323 01 3 1, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
:

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 { 323 3841 337 84 99,337 85 61 ( 337 86 26,337 91 20 60 38 43 t 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,23523 15 ( 832 92 95,832 78 58 1 X327891,8327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110 002
l/l3 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. I'. Road. Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700 054

Eastern Northern

:

:

SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

I60 022

Southern Western

:

C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 I3 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC'. Marol, Anclheri (East) MLJMBAI 400 093

:

Branches

:

AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. .lAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGI'UR. PATNA. PIJNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed al

: Pmbhal Olfset Press. New Delhi-2

