UDC 621.833.351.38

(

Third-Reprint

OCTOBER

1~993)

IS:7403-1974

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

CODE OF PRACTICE STANDARD
1. Scope -This Tdssist in selecting involved.

FOR SELECTION HELICAL

OF

WORM

AND

GEAR BOXES

code has been prepared for the guidance of machinery manufacturers and users, to correct size of worm or helical gear boxes for the application and operating conditions

2. Data for Proper Selection and helical gear boxes. 2.1 Prime Mover 3) Type - Electric cylinder) ;
b)

-

The following

data are essential to select correct type and size of worm i

motor, and

steam engine

or internal

combustion

engine

(multi-cylinder

or single-

Rated power;

c) Sneed (if variable, 2.2 Driven Machine
a) Type-

indicate

speed range and frequency

of variation).

Such as kiln, conveyor,

etc;

b) Actual power or torque necessary to drive the machine at desired speed; c) Speed; and d) Operating conditions, ambient temperature such as hours per day, whether continuous or intermittent, and any other special working conditions. details of reversal,

Service 3. Service Factors - A gear box is rated to a specific application by the use of service factors. factor S is the ratio of maximum power rating of a particular size of gear box to the power required for driving the machine or equipment to which the gear box is coupled. s = Maximum rated power Actual power required

3.1 Each application has its own conditions and operating requirements, and Table 1 covers the list of service factors. In this list, the first column gives the type of prime mover, and the second column the duration of service. Columns 3 to 6 cover the numerical values of the service factors, divided into four classes, corresponding respectively, with an operation with uniform, moderate shock and heavy shock loads. 3.1.1 The service factors given in Table 1 are based on the assumption that the system is free from severe critical or torsional vibrations, and that the maximum momentary or starting loads do not exceed 200 percent of the normal load (100 percent overload). in which 4. Application Classification - The load characteristics of various machines and-equipment reduction gear boxes are used, have -been classified according to their operating conditions in Table 2. This table is intended as a guide to assist in deciding the appropriate service factor for a particular duty, and should Abe used in conjunction with service factors given in Table 1.
5.

Basic

Steps

for

Selection
S -The appropriate service factor for the application is determined by

5.1 Determine Service Factor referring to Tables 1 and 2.

5.2 Calculate Equivalent Power - Equivalent power is equal the machine at desired speed multiplied by service factor. Equivalent 5.3 Determine Speed Ratio R WLS. fj _ wHs
WLS

to the actual

power

required

for driving

power

= Actual

power XS speed shaft, WHS by the

This is obtained

by dividing the speed of high

speed of IoW speed shaft

Adopted

13 August

1974 I BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN.

0 January 1975, BIS
I OF
9 NEW

Gr2

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

S'TANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 7403-1974
5.4 Select Size from Rating Table - The rated power for the size of unit selected should be equal to, or greater than the calculated equivalent .power for the given speed ratio of the gear box selected. The gear box selected can take momentary roads 5.5 Check for Momentary or Peak LoadHowever, in case the peak power requirements of the-driven machine exceeds the rated power. than 100 percent the rated power, the size selected should have rated power equal to or greater of the peak power. Momentary load means a load which acts for a period of not more than 15 of twice by more than half seconds.

5.6 Check Brake Torque - When a motor or engine is equipped with brake, whose torque rating exceeds that of the motor or engine, the torque rating of gear box selected should exceed brake toraue, all other things being equal. 5.7 Check Overhung Load - If a sprocket, pulley or spur pinion is mounted on the output shaft, over~hung load is imposed on the shaft. The equivalent overhung load in kg is calculated as under:
p _Ax975000xK

-

NxR

where P= A= K= N= R= The load factors equivalent load factor; shaft speed in rpm; and pitch radius of sprocket, pulley are as under: Member K 1.00 1.25 1.50 3.00 be less than the maximum permissible overhung loads on or spur pinion in mm. overhung load in kg ; actual power carried by the shaft in kW;

Overhung

Sprocket Spur pinion V-belt sheave <Iat belt pulley 5.8 The calculated gear boxes. overhung loads should

TABLE

1

SERVICE

FACTORS

(Clauses 3.1 .l , 4 and !.I )

Prime

Mover

Duration of Service Hours/Day Uniform

Service Nature

Factors

I of Load on Gear Unit from Driven*Machine
Moderate Shock Heavy Shock Worm

Heavy Shock,
Helical and Spur (6)

(1)

(2)
or steam : 8 :`4

(3)

(4)

(5)

El;;yrd;nzotor

0.75 0.8 0.9 1.25 1 .oo

1 0.9 .o 1 .l 1.5 1.25

1.3 1.25 1 .45 1 .55 .75

1.40 1.5 1.65 ~2.00 1 .75

Multi-cylinder internal combustion engine

z 8 :t

0.9 1 .o

:::5 1.35 1 .75 1.5

1 .25 ::;

::;z 1 .90 2.25 2.00

:::5 1.5

2.00 1 .75

Single-cylinder internal combustion engine

z 8 :t

1 .l 1.25 1 .35 1.5 1 .75

1 .35 1.5 1 .65 2.0 1 .75

1 .75 1 .85 1.95 2.05 2.25

1 .90 2.00 2.15 2.50 2.25

2

TABLE

2

LQAD

CHARACTERISTICS (Clauses

VALUES 4 and

FOR 5.1)

DIFFERENT

APPLICATIONS

J = Uniform Load ti = Moderate Shock Load H=Heavy Shock Load HI= High Inertia Load. Manufacturer to be consu!ted.

,t
Driven Machine Type of Load Driven Machine Igitators: Pure liquids Liquids and solids Liquids -variable 3lowers: &;rifugal Vane 3rewing and distilling: Bottling machinery Brew kettles - continuous duty Cookers-continuous duty Mash tubes-continuous duty Scale hopper-frequent starts Tan filling machines Cane knives Tar dumpers Tar pullers Tlarifiers Tlassifiers Clay working machinery: Brick press Briquette machine Clay working machinery Pug mill Zompressors: Ca;terifugal Reciprocating Single-cylinder multi-cylinder loaded or fed: Jig drives Manoeuvering winches Pumps Screen drive Stackers Utility winches Dry dock cranes: Main hoist Auxiliary hoist Boom, luffing Rotating swing or slew Tracking, drive wheels Elevators: Bucket-uniform load Bucket-heavy load Centrifugal discharge Bucket continuous Escalators Freight Gravity discharge Man lifts Passenger lifts Fans: Centrifugal Induced draft Large-mine, etc Large-industrial Light-smaller diameter Feeders: zon Disc Reciprocating Screw Food industry: Beef slicer Cereal cooker Dough mixer Meat grinders Generatorshot weld;ng Hammer mills duty not uniformly fed: Hoists: Heavy duty Medium duty Skip laundry washers reversing Laundry tumblers Line shafts: Driving processing Light Other line shafts equipment Type of Load

density

! M U u"

u" U : U M H M U M

! 1

Conveyors-uniformly Apron %:mbly Bucket Chain Flight Oven Screw Conveyors-heavy Apron %emb'y Bucket Chain Flight Live roll Oven Reciprocating Screw Shaker Cranes: Main hoists Bridge travel Trolley travel Crusher: Ore Stone Sugar Dredges: Cable reels Conveyors Cutter head drives

Lumber industry: Barkers-hydraulic-mechanical Burner conveyor Chain saw and drag saw Chain transfer Craneway transfer De-barking drum Edger feed Gang f ed Green I hain Live rolls Log deck Log haul-incline Log haul-well type Log turning device

( Continued)

3

IS:

7493-1974

TABLE

2

LOAD

C~HARACTERISTICS

VALUES

FOR

DIFFERENT

APPLICATIONS-Contd

Driven

Machine

Type

of Load

Driven

Machine

Type

of Load

Main log conveyor Off bearing rolls Planer feed chains Planer floor chains Planer tilting hoist Re-saw merry-go-round conveyor Roll cases Slab conveyor Small waste conveyor-belt Small waste conveyor-chain Sorting table Tipple hoist conveyor Tipple hoist drive Transfer conveyors Transfer rolls Tray drive Trimmer feed ' Waste conveyor Machine tools: Bending roll Punch press-gear driven Notching press-belt driven Plate planers Tapping machine mother machine tools and main drive Auxiliary drives Metal mills; Draw bench carriage and main drive Pinch, dryer and slitters Table conveyors non-reversing group drives Wire drawing and flattening machine Wire winding machine Reversing Mi&-rotary type:

Log haul Presses Pulp machine reel Stock chest Suction role Washers and thickeners Winders Printing presses Pullers: Barge haul Pumps: F Centrifugal Proportioning Reciprocating : Single acting, 3 or more cylinders Double acting, 2 or more cylinders Single acting, 1 or 2 cylinders Rotary Gear type Lobe, vane grubber and plastics industries: Crackers Laboratory equipment Mixing mills Refiners Rubber calenders Rubber mill-2 on line Rubber mill-3 on line Sheeter Tubers and strainers Warming mills Sand muller Sewage disposal equipment: Bar screens Chemical feeders Collectors Dewatenng screws Scum breakers Slow or rapid mixers Thickeners Vacuum filters Screens: Air washing Rotary-stone or gravel Travelling water~intake Slab pushers Stockers Sugar industry: Cane knives Crushers Mills Textile industry: Batchers Calenders Cards Dry cans Dryers Fybei~ machinery

:: M" 1 U HI

Cement kilns Dryers and coolers FtGl;;other than cement Rod : Plain Wedge

bar

Tumbling barrels Mixers: Concrete mixers-continuous Intermittent Constant density Variable density Oil industry: Chillers Paraffin filter press Rotary kilns Paper mills: Agitators (mixers) Barker-auxiliaries-hydraulic Barker-mechanical Barking drum Beater and pulper Bleacher Calendars Calendars, super Converting machine, except platers fZzZ;;yors Cutters-platers Cylinders Dryers Felt stretcher Felt whipper Jordans

U u" M U

M u" M

Ii
M

cutters-

Mangles ;$rrs Slashers Soaps Spinners Tenter frames Washers Winders Windlass

4

Reprography

Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

