( Reaffirmed 2003 )

1s : 4545 ( a'art 6 ) - 1983

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT ON RECEIVERS FOR TELEVIsION BROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART 6 SELECTIVITY AND RESPONSE TO UNDESIRED SIGNALS

( First Revision )
Radio Communications
Chairman
SHRI H. S. JOLLY

Sectional Committee,
All India Radio,

LTDC 20

Representing New Delhi

Members to Shri H. S. Jolly ) \ ADDITIONAL DIRECTORSTANDARDS (S& T ) ( Alternate ) CDR S. S. BAIDWAW SHRI A. K. BASAK S-1
SHRI V. V. R. PRABHU ( Alternate ) H. M. BHATNAGAR SHRI V. K. SETHI ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. CHANDRAMOULI SHRI K. RAMAWHU ( Alternate ) SHRI 0. P. KHUSHU I Alternate

JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S & T ) - IV LTXDR A. BHO MICK ( Alternate

Ministry Ministry

of Railways ( RDSO ) of Defence (DPI) (N ), New Delhi Small Scale New Industry, Delhi

) Development Commissioner, New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Bharat Electronics

Association,

Ltd, Bangalore

SHRI R. 0.

DEODHAR

SHRI M. L. DHAR SHRI P. K. DHINGRA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. GHOSE SHRI N. KRISHNAN KUTTY ( Alternate SHRI B. P. GHOSE SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI J. GUPTA SHRI T. S. Buxr ( Alternate ) SHRI J. GUPTA SHRI P. S. SACHDEV ( Alternate SHRI B. S. GUPTA Dd S. K. HAJELA SHRI S. JANAKIRAMAN SHRI R. P. MATHIJR ( Alternate ) LT-COL KRISHAN LAL LT-COL B. S. NATRAJAN ( Alternate

Wireless Planning and Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communications ), New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Indian Telephone ) National Test House, Calcutta The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers Association ( RETMA ), Bombay Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay Industries Ltd, Bangalore

) Federation of Associations of Small Industries of India, New Delhi of Electronics and Telecommunication Institution Engineers, New Delhi Directorate of Coordination ( Police Wireless ), Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi Ministry ) ( Continued on page 2 ) of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi

0 INDIAN

Copyright

1986 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Zrzdian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or of in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement copyright under the said Act.

IS z 4545 ( Part' 6 ) - 1983 ( Conrinued from page 1) Members
&RI R. LALWANI SHRI V. V. CHAUDHARY ( Afternate ) SHRI R. C. PAWDEY SHRX C. M. KRISHNA MZIRTHY ( Alternate SHRI A. K. N. PRASAD SHRI M. G. SRIDHARAN ( Alternate ) SHIU W. V. RAMANA SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BARKER ( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. RANGOLE SHRI H. K. JAIN ( Alternate SHRI M. SANKARALINGAM SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate SHRI S. SHARMA Da K. S. K. SAI ( Alternate SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN SHRI ISHWAR DUTT ( SHRI SURESHCHANDRA SHRI K.K. TANEJA Posts & Telegraphs Ministry of Defence

Representing
Board, ( DTD New Delhi ), Bangalore & P ) ( AIR

)

Hindustan Electronics Directorate

Aeronautics

Ltd, Bangalore

Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Engineering of Supplies Research and Institute, New

Centr~\,atectronics Direct;c;a General

) ) )

Disposals,

Department

of Electronics,

New Delhi Development

Electronics Trade and Technology Corporation Ltd, New Delhi

Alternate)

National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi DirectDog; General of Technical Development, Gujarat Communications and Vadodara Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Electronics

New Ltd,

SHRI-H. S. DUBEY ( Alternate SHRI C. M. THIRUMURTHY SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, DirectQr_( Electronics )

)

Member )

Secretary
SHRI D. K. NAYYAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI

Panel for TV Receivers,
Convener SHRI N. N. MOHANTP

LTDC 2O/P3
New Delhi

All India Radio,

Members
SHRI A. S. GUIN ( Alternate to Shri N. N. Mohanty ) SHRI M. L. ARORA ASSISTANTWIRELESSADVISER ( PLANNING-I ) SHRI H. M. BHATNAGAR SHRI R. B. LAL ( A!ternate SHRI R. S. BHATNAGAR SHRI K. B. BORKER SHRI M. BUTCHI RAJ~J SHRI P. JANARDHAN( SHRI R. K. CHAKRAVARTI SHRI A. GHAFFAR SHIU S. JANAKIRAM SHRI K. L. KANDOI SHRI S. MITRA SHRI INDERJEET BANAUDHA( SHRI C. L. KAUL ( Alternate SHRI A. RAZZAQUE REPRESENTATIVE SHRI P. K. SANDELL SHRI C. S. ARORA ( Alternate I ) SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN ( Alternute SHRI V. V. R. SASTRY SHRI V. K. SEKHRI SHRI SLJRESH CHANDRA SHRI INP~RJEET BANAUDHA ( II )

M/s Chawla & Company, New Delhi Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing ( Ministry of Communication ). New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Association, New Delhi
Federation of Associations of Small Industries India Ltd, New Delhi Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad of

)

Alternate )

Department of Electronics, New Delhi U.P. Electronics Corporation Ltd, Lucknow Information & Public Relations Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad The Radio Electronic and Television Manufacturers Association, Bombay Elect;z;iRegtonal Test Laboratory ( North ), New

Alternate I ) II )

Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, Pilani Tamil Nadu Local Administration Radio and Television Manufacturers Organization, Madras Electronics Trade and Technology Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Electrozm,Components Industries National Physical Laboratory,

Association,

New

New Delhi

Alternate )

2

IS : 4545 ( Part 6) - 1983

Indian Standard

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT ON RECEIVERS FOR TELEVISION BROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART 6 SELECTIVITY (

AND

RESPONSE

TO UNDESIRED

SIGNALS

First Revision )
FOREWORD
Part 3 Geometrical properties of the picture Part 4 Synochronizing quality Part 5 Sensitivity Part 7 Fidelity Part 8 Compatibility with audio visual recording equipment Part 9 Electrical and acoustic at audio frequency measurements

0.

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 6 ) (First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 December 1983, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The first version of IS : 4545 covered the methods of measurement for television broadcast receivers having monochrome vision reception. With the introduction of colour television receivers, this ._ standard is now _.being _^__ revised to make it applicable to receivers deslgned, fbr both monochrome and colour vision reception and published in a number of parts to deal with various aspects of characteristics of television receivers. 0.3 This standard ( Part 6 ) covers methods of measurement for selectivity and response to undesired signals of television receivers. Other parts in this series are: Part 1 General considerations Part 2 Tuning properties ments and general measure-

0.4 This standard ( Part 6 ) is largely based on IEC Publication 107-l ( 1977 ) Recommended methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General considerations electrical measurements other than those at audio frequencies, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with Is : 2-1960". *Rules for rounding off numerical
values ( revised ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 6 ) covers methods of measurements relating to selectivity and response to undesired signals namely:

1.2 This standard ( Part 6 ) shall be read conjunction with 1s : 4545 (Part 1 )-1983*. 2. SINGLE SIGNAL SELECTIVITY

in

a>Single

b) 4 Intermediate frequency interference ratio, d) Image interference ratio, 4 Spurious responses, f ) Internally generated undesired signals, d Cross modulation, h) Inter-modulation, and

signal selectivity, Multiple signal selectivity,

2.1 Definition - The single signal selectivity of a television receiver is represented by 8 characteristic showing either: ( a ) the relationship between the input signal level and the input signal frequency at constant amplification for constant output at rhe video detector, or ( b > the relationship between output level at thevideo detector and input frequency for constant input signal level, It depending upon the method of measurement.
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General considerations (first revision ).

j)

Frequency

doubling special test.

IS : 4545 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 gives a certain measure of the receiver's ability to reject undesired signals at nearby frequencies. 2.2 Method of Measuremeut - The measurement shall be carried out with the receiver tuned to each television channel for which it has been designed or at least to a representative number of channels in each television band for which A television signal in the operation is intended. channel to which the receiver is tuned, is applied to the receiver input terminals through a suitable The receiver controls are matching network. set so that standard output is obtained for both vision and sound for two different input signal levels. These two input signal levels are the lowest level for which the receiver can give standard video output voltage and the level of -50 dB ( mW ) or the maximum usable input signal level whichever is the higher. Any AGC circuit is made inoperative and a fixed bias equal to the AGC bias corresponding to the two input level is determined and applied to the controlled circuits. The measurements below are carried out for each of these two setting of the receivers. Instead of the television signal, a radiofrequency carrier 30 percent sine-wave amplitude modulated with a suitable audio-frequency tone, for example, lkHz, is now applied to the receiver through a suitable matching input terminals The carrier signal generator is tuned network. to the vision carrier frequency. The input signal level is adjusted until the audio tone output obtained is 12 dB below the standard video output voltage as indicated by an oscilloscope connected to the video detector or equivalent circuit point. The input signal frequency is varied over a sufficientlv wide range to cover at least the adjacent television channel. the signal source and indicator. In this case, the input level is adjusted so that the maximum of the response corresponds to the standard video output voltage. Care shall be taken to ensure that the response is not distorted by the presence of time constants, dc restorers, clamps or similar devices in the associated receiver circuits. The signal generator sweep speed must be sufficiently slow to avoid the response of regions of high selectivity such as traps being distorted.
may not be NOTE - This method of measurement applied to receivers using multiplicative intermediate freauencv demodulation or to receivers in which the `AGe circuit cannot be rendered inoperative Furthermore, the application of continuous wave or purely sinewave modulated signals may giv;n risse;; anomjlous operation in some receivers. cases, the methods of measurement described in 2. g, 2.5 and 3 shall be applied.

2.3 Presentation of Results - The results of the measurements of each of the two settings of the receivers are represented as a function of frequency by a graph. The frequency is plotted eon a linear scale as abscissa and respectively signal input ratio or the response relative to the vision carrier frequency expressed in decibels on a linear scale-as o<dinatk. The 0 db level corresponds to the frequency of the vision carrier ( see Fig. 1 A ). 2.4 Alternative Method of Measurement - The measurement shall be carried out with the receiver tuned to each television channel for which it has been designed or at least to a representative number of channels in each television band for which operation is intended. A television signal in the channel to which the receiver is tuned is applied to the receiver input terminals through a suitable matching network. The receiver controls are set so that standard output is obtained for both vision and sound for two different input signal levels. These two input signal levels are the lowest level for which the receiver can give standard video output voltage and the level of -50 dB ( mW ) or the maximum usable input signal level whichever is the higher. Measurements are carried out for each of these two input levels.

The response is measured at a number of frequency settings of the carrier signal generator co-channel including the coGchannel sound, chrominanc~e sub-carrier and the vision, sound and chrominance sub-carrier frequencies of the adjacent channels, plus any other rejection points. At each of these frequencies, the Input signal level is adiusted until an output vo!tage Two signal generators are then applied to the 1TdB below the -standard video output voltage receiver by~means of a suitable combining netis obtained. The single selectivity is expressed work. The first corresponds to the vision carrier by the ratio of the input signal level at these frequency of the channel to which the receiver is frequencies to the input signal level at the vision tuned and is modulated by a picture signal giving carrier frequency, both giving an output voltage and blankrise to normal synchronizing of 12 dB below the standard video output voltage. ing levels but having a constant signal during If it is not possible to obtain an output voltage carrier results in zero of 12 dB below standard output voltage at any the active line that level. The second signal generator has a frequency within the range under consideration, mean level relative to the first signal generator measurement may be carried out at a different corresponding to 50 percent of white level. It is level of output voltage, for example, to avoid overloading. In this case, the output level used modulated 30 percent by a I 000 Hz sine-wave and for the measurements shall be given with the and gated off during the synchronizing blanking intervals. The second signal generator results. is tuned across the frequency range of interest, Alternatively, a swept signal generator and logarithmic oscilloscope display may be used as the level of the 1 000 Hz sine-wave signal being 4

IS c4545 (IPart 6 ) - 1983
dB 50

40

30

20

10

0

40

42

44

46

`48' I !

50

521 I 1""
Sound carrier

i I I
Adjacent sound carrier

Vision

'

i56

(MHz)
58 6-O
Frequency

carrier

I
,
Adjacent vision sub-carrier

carrier

Chrominance

FIG. 1A EXAMPLEOF A SINGLE SIGNAL SELECTIVITYCURVE measured at appropriate frequencies. frequency required to generate a beat of a given level at the video detector, when accompanying NOTE - This method of measurement may be applicable to receivers using positive picfure modulation. a television signal the picture content of which is at black level or white level. It provides a 2.5 Presentation of Results - The results of the measure of the receiver's -ability to reject signals measurements of each of the two settings of the at nearby frequencies receiver are represented as a function of freA television signal in the channel to which quency by a graph. The frequency is plotted on a linear scale as abscissae and respectively signal the receiver is tuned, is applied to the receiver input ratio or the response relative to the vision input terminals through a suitable combining network and a suitable matching network. carrier frequency expressed in dB on a linear scale as ordinate ( see Fig. 1A ). 3.2 Method of Measurement - The measurements shall be carried out with the receiver tuned 3. MULTIPLE SIGNAL SELECTIVITY to each television channel for which it has been 3.1 Definition - The multiple signal selectivity designed or at least to a representative number of channels in each band for which operation is of altelevision receiver is represented by a characteristic showing the input signal level of a given intended. 5

k3 :4545( Fart 6j - X983

A cw signal generator adjustable in frequency corresponding to the two input signal levels and over a range extending to at least the two adjathe two levels of picture content. cent channels, is applied to the other input of Due allowance shall be made in the results for the combining network. The receiver controls the measurements taking place at beat signal are set so that the standard output is obtained levels 12 dB below the standard video output for both vision and sound for two different input signal levels. These two input signal levels are voltage, thus adding 12 dB to the value of rejecthe lowest level for which the receiver can give tion at the various frequencies. ~Where measurestandard video output voltage ( that is, the gain ments are carried out at a different beat level as limited sensitivity ) and the level of -50 dB described above, this is the value that shall be taken into consideration ( see Fig. 1B >. ( mW ) or the maximum usable input signal level. The following measurements are carried 4. INTERMEDIATE FREQUENCY out for each of these two input levels. In some INTERFERENCE RATIO cases, it may not be possible to carry out a measurement at the input level corresponding intermediate frequency to the gain limited sensitivity since noise may 4.1 Definition - The interference ratio of a television receiver repremask the signal, in which case the input level sents the ability of the receiver to reject a signal corresponding to the noise-limited sensitivity in the intermediate frequency band. shall be used. 4.2 Method of Measur~ement - The measureThe cw signal tuned to the frequency of interest is applied to the receiver in addition to the ment is carried out by either the single signal selectivity measurement method or the multiple television signal. The resulting beat is observed by an oscilloscope connected to the video detector signal selectivity method. The measurement is output of equivalent point. The cw signal level repeated with the receivertuned to each television channel for which it has been designed or at is adjusted until a peak-to-peak output voltage least to a representative number of channels in of 12 dB below the standard video output voltage is obtained. The measurement is carried out each television band for which operation is intended. For receivers with a balanced antenna with the cw signal set to the vision, chrominance input, the measurements are made with balanced and sound carrier frequencies of both adjacent and unbalanced input of the interfering signal. channels and any other rejection points. The signal generator frequency is adjusted The response at the co-channel sound carrier within the intermediate frequency band until frequency is measured by removing the sound frequency response is signal from the television signal and tuning the a maximum intermediate obtained and also to the vision carrier frequency cw signal generator to the soundcarrierfrequency, the beat being measured as above but care shall of the channel to which the receiver is tuned. The ratio between the input signal levelsrequired be taken to allow for the effect of any interto give an output voltage 12 dB below the carrier sound signal take-off or video intercarrier standard video output voltage at these two frefrequency trap. quencies is the intermediate frequency interThese measurements are carried out with the ferenc ratio. If it is not possible to obtain an television signal having the picture content output voltage of 12 dB below the standard corresponding to black level and again corresvideo output voltage when the intermediate ponding to white level. When carrying out tests frequency signal is applied, the intermediate with the picture content at white level, care frequency interference ratio may be determined shall be taken to avoid spurious effects due to at a lower output level. In this case, the output overloading of subsequent video stages or the level used for the measurements shall be given high tension supply to the picture tube. These with the results. effects may be avoided for instance, if there is a subsequent video contrast control available or in The results are presented in the same manner the case of the high tension supply, by removing as those described in 2.5 and 3.3 respectively. the video drive to the picture tube. 5. IMAGE INTERFERENCE RATIO The multiple signal selectivity is expressed by the ratio of the cw input signal level at the 5.1 Definition - The image interference ratio of a television receiver represents the ability of the frequencies of interest to the vision carrier mput signal level. If it is not possible to obtain an receiver to reject a signal at the image frequency. output voltage of 12 dB below the standard video 5.2 Method of Measurement - The method of output voltage for the beat at any frequency of results are under consideration, the measurement and the presentation within the range carried out in exactly the same manner as that measurements may be carried out at a different for the intermediate frequency interference ratio level of output voltAge, for example, to avoid and is repeated with the receiver tuned to each overloading of the receiver stages. channel for which it has been designed or at least to a representative number of channels in 3.3 Presentation of Results - Four values may each television band for which operation is be tabulated for each frequency of measurement 6

lis:4545(Farf6)-19&
Signal Ratio

50

' Adjacent 40

sound

]ndiace;t

vision

(

(

1

30

20

10

Vision 0

carrier

I

I

Chrominance 0

40

42

44

46

48

50

52

54

56

58

60

62

64

MHz

Frequency

FIG. 1B

EXAMPLE OF MULTIPLE SIGNAL SELECTIVITY ( ONE SET OF MEASURINGCONDITIONS>

intended. In this case, the signal generator frequency is adjusted within the image channel and the adjacent channel it of the image until a maximum for two or more significant image response are obtained. 6. SPURIOUS RESPONSES

signal levels as mentioned in 36, 31 and 47 of Part 5 of this standard. These input signal levels shall be given with the results. In addition to the television signal referred to above, an interfering carrier, sine-wave amplitude modulated 30 percent with a suitable audiofrequency tone, for example 1 kHz, is applied to the receiver input terminals through a suitable The level of the interfering combining network. signal is made as high as possible, bearing in mind the effects of cross-modulation, its value being stated and its frequency varied over a wide-range, which shall also be stated. This frequency range may extend upwards from 150 kHz and shall include the significant parts of the radio-frequency spectrum, in mind bearing possible local conditions. Special attention shall -be paid to the LF, MF, HF, VHF and UHF broadcast bands, also those allocated for mobile, amateur and radio-telephone use. In some 7

-6.1 Definition - Spurious responses may be caused if external signals or one of their internally generated harmonics mix with the receiver local oscillator frequency or one of its harmonics or in combination with an internally generated spurious oscillation and thereby producing and interfering signal in the intermediate frequency passband or at the video detector. Suchresponses may also be caused by cross-modulation. 6.2 Method of Measurement - The procedures to be described shaH be followed for two conditions corresponding to the lowest and highest

IS f 4545 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 cases the SHF bands used for radar and pointto-point communication may be important. Care shall be taken that the television input signal and the interfering carrier are adequately free from harmonics. The picture screen is observed and -every time an interference pattern is noticed, the interfering carrier level is reduced until the pattern remains just visible. This level and the frequency range over which the pattern remains visible, is recorded for every spurious response encountered. The levels of the interfering carrier for which sound interference is just audible, are also recorded. It is desirable to check the interference observed in each case with an unmodulated interfering carrier. The measurements shall be carried out with the receiver tuned to each channel for which it has been designed or at least to a representative number of channels in each television band for which operation is intended. 6.3 Presentation of Results - The results and measurements are represented in a graph with the frequency plotted on a logarithmic scale as abciasse and the ratio between the interfering and desired signals expressed in dB on a linear scale as ordinates. The two levels mentioned in 6.2 and the channel to which the receiver is tuned shall be indicated. An example is shown in Fig. 2.
Channel 3, high signal level. dB

7. IWWz;LLY

GENERATED

UNDESIRED

7.1 Definition - The following are the commonest sources of internally generated unwanted signals. 4 Harmonics of the vision and sound intermediate frequency signals that fall into the radio-frequency passband to which the receiver is tuned. b) Harmonics of the desired input signal mixing with harmonics of the local oscillator producing signals that fall within the intermediate frequency passband of the receiver. 4 Harmonics of the carrier chrominance signal that fall within the intermediate frequency passband of the receiver or the radio-frequency passband to which the receiver is tuned. 4 Harmonics of the reference or regenerated chrominance sub-carrier that fall within the intermediate frequency passband of the receiver or the radio-frequency passband to which the receiver is tuned. 4 Video signal components appearing in the audio channel causing interference in the sound output. f 1 Sound modulation appearing in the synchronizing circuits causing interference with synchronization. !?ISound modulation and intercarrier beats appearing in the video amplifier causing

102 FIG.

103

104

105

kHz

2

EXAMPLE OF SPURIOUSRESPONSES 8

IS : 4545 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 three input signal levels is the level'corresponding to either the gain-limited sensitivity or the noiseh) limited sensitivity. The second is a level of -50 dB ( mW > or the maximum usable input signal level and the third, the intermediate signal j) level. The following measurements are carried out for each of these three input levels. The television k) signal to which the receiver is tuned has a 50 percent level grey pedestal-as picture modulation, The signal generator is tuned to the frequency of interest and the level increased until an output voltage of the tone modulation at the picture 7.2 Method of Measurement - A television tube electrodes is obtained, that is, unless another signal is applied to the receiver input terminals, the picture modulation being a test pattern as value has been specified 12 dB below the standard video output voltage. described in 2.12 of IS : 4545 ( Part 1 ) -1983* and sound modulation where applicable at 90 If it is not possible to obtain an output percent. voltage 12 dB below the standard video output The performance is investigated with the voltage, measurements may be carried out at a receiver tuned and a television signal applied different level of output voltage that shall be for each televisionchannel for which it has been given with the results. Frequencies to which designed or at least to a representative number the tone modulated signal generator are set may of channels in each television band for which depend upon local conditions but frequencies operation is intended. shall be avoided where the measurement process is affected by beats resulting from the receiver The observations are carried out with input selectivity or spurious responses. Measurements signals corresponding to the lowest and the shall be made with the signal generator set to highest levels and a note is made where any suitable frequencies in the band to which the interference pattern in the picture or equivalent receiver is tuned and to frequencies in other interference in the sound output is observed. bands used for television and VHF sound radio If the receiver is equipped with manual tuning, the tuning adjustment is varied to either side of broadcasting and mobile communications transmissions in the area for which the receiver is ~optimum to determine whether the interference intended. effect critically depends upon the receiver tuning. interference on the picture screen. Deflection waveforms appearing in the interference in audio amplifier causing the sound output. Deflection waveforms appearing in the video systems causing interference, in the picture. Spurious self-oscillation having frequency components interfering with the radiofrequency, intermediate frequency, video frequency or audio-frequency signal. 8. CROSS-MODULATION 8.1 Definition --Cross-modulation occurs when two or more signals are applied to a television receiver and the modulation of an unwanted signal is transferred to the wanted signal over a range of input signal levels. This form of interference is distinct from those arising due to the receiver selectivity and intermodulation. 8.2 Method of Measurement - The measurement shall be carried out with the receiver tuned to each channel for which it has been designed or at least to a representative number of channels in each television band for which operation is intended. A television signal in the channel to which the receiver is tuned is applied to the receiver input terminals through a suitable combining network and a suitable matching network. Asignal generator covering the required range of frequencies and 90 percent sinewave amplitude modulated with a suitable frequency tone, for example 1 kHz, is applied to the other input of the combining network. The receiver controls are set so that the standard output is obtained for both vision and sound for three different input signal levels. The first of these
*Methods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General ( first revision ). for television considerations

8.3 Presentation of Results - Values for the level of interfering signal applied to the receiver to obtain cross-modulation products having a voltage 12 dB below the standard video output voltage arc tabulated for all measurement frequencies and television signal input levels. Due allowance shall be made in the results when measurements are made at cross-modulation product levels other than 12 dB below the standard video output voltage. 9. ]INTERMODULATION 9.1 Definition - Intermodulation occurs when two unwanted signals are applied to a television receiver together with a wanted signal and modulation products between the two unwanted signals give rise to an interfering signal within the wanted channel. This form of interference is distinct from those arising due to the receiver selectivity and cross-modulation. 9.2 Method of Measurement - Measurements shall be carried out with the receiver tuned to each channel for which it has been designed or at least to a representative num-ber of channels in each television band for which operation is intended. A television signal in the channel, to which the receiver is tuned, is supplied to the receiver input terminals through a suitable combining network and a suitable matching 9

Is : 4545 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 network. Two cw signal generators covering the required range of frequencies are connected to the other two inputs of the combining network. The receiver controls are set so that the standard output is obtained for both vision and sound for three different input signal levels. The first of these three input a signal level is the level corresponding to either the gain-limited sensitivity or the noise-limited sensitivity. The second, a level of - 50 dB ( mW ) or the maximum usable input signal level, and the third, the intermediate signal level. The following measurements are carried out for each of these three input levels. The television signal to which the receiver is tuned has a 50 percent level grey pedestal as picture modulation. The signal generators are tuned to the frequencies of interest with such a relationship that any signal generated by intermodulation shall be off-set from the vision carrier frequency of the wanted signal between 1 and 2 MHz in the direction of sound carrier of the wanted signal. The level of the signal generators is increased until an output voltage of the resulting signal between the modulation product derived from the cw signal generators and the vision carrier of the wanted signal is 12 dB, unless otherwise specified, below -the standard video output voltage at the picture tube electrodes. If it is not possible to obtain an output voltage 12 dB below the standard video output voltage, measurements may be carried out at a different level of output voltage to be stated with the results The frequencies to which the cw signal generators are set are those that will give rise directly or from their harmonics to an interfering signal in the channel to which the television receiver is tuned. The particular frequencies selected may depend upon local conditions but frequencies shall be avoided when the measurement process is affected by other signals. These may result from receiver selectivity, spurious responses or components of the video signal such as harmonics of the horizontal scanning frequency. The frequencies used to generate the interfering signal shall be those used for television and VHF sound radio broadcasting and mobile communications transmissions in the area for which the receiver is intended. Where available a spectrum analyzer may be used to simplify the measuring process. 9.3 Presentation of Results - Values for the level of the pair of interfering signals applied to the receiver to obtain intermodulation products having a voltage 12 dB below the standard video output voltage are tabulated for all measurement frequencies and television input signal levels. Due allowance shall be made in the results when measurements are made of intermodulation product levels other than 12 dB below the standard video output voltage. 10. FREQUENCY DOUBLING SPECIAL TEST FOR RECEIVERS USING MULTIPLICATIVE INTERMEDZATE FREQUENCY DEMODULATION 10.1 Definition - Although the generation of even order harmonics of the modulation frequency may occur in most intermediate frequency doubling has a special systems, frequency significance in i.f. sections using multiplicative demodulation. When the carrier channel contains a sideband corresponding to a component of the modulation frequencies that is not elimilimiting action, nated by the filtering or multiplication occurs giving rise to a spurious double frequency component in the passband output. 10.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative range of channels in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 )-1983" and the method used stated in the results. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system and a The input signal suitable matching network. level is adjusted to be between those level defined in 37 and 47 of Part 5 of this standard and in such a way that noise effects do not influence measurement. The sound carrier is removed and the radiofrequency carrier is modulated with a video signal having sinewave picture modulation in the range from approximately 100 kHz upwards, adjustable to swing over the following ranges: a) black level to white level, b) 25 percent to 75 percent picture modulation, and c) 40 percent to 60 percent picture modulation ( see Fig. 3 ). A selective voltmeter or spectrum analyzer-is connected to a suitable point following the intermediate frequecy video detector to observe the demodulated signal. The sinewave modulation is varied in steps from a frequency of approximately 100 kHz to a frequency higher than the difference between the sound and vision carrier frequencies. At each frequency the ratio of the wanted modulation sinewave signal and any generated second harmonic is measured. Particular care shall be taken to carry out measurements in the vicinity of modulation frequencies of half the difference frequency between sound and vision carriers.
*Methods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General
(first revision ).

for television considerations

10

IS : 4545 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
--_-_
White level

--_-Black level

--~-~----_---__--____--____
White level

----------------uII____ 25% Black

level

--

______

c____-----__---~

White -----Go% ----_-A_--Black 40%

level

level

FIG.

3 VIDEO SIGNAL WAVEFORM FOR LUMINANCECHANNEL FREQUENCYRESPONSE MEASUREMENT WITH SINE-WAVE OR SWEPT FREQUENCYPICTURE MODULATION signal output, the ratio between the two values of available power being expressed in decibels. Care shall be taken that the measurement is not influenced by the effects of an AGC system or a limiting device. The asymmetrical signal shall be applied through a resistive network to the radio-frequency input terminal device of the receiver as shown in Fig. 4. The configuration of this network is based on the assumption that the input impedance for the asymmetric mode is very high as compared to the value of Run and is not necessarily applicable if this condition is not met. The value of Run in

10.3 Presentation of Results - The results are presented by plotting the difference in level between the modulation frequency and the generated harmonics in decibels as a function of the modulation frequency, indicating specifically the frequency corresponding to half the difference bet ween sound and vision carriers. 11. UNBALANCE RATIO OF THE BALANCE~D RECEIVER INPUT 11.1 The unbalance ratio is determined by measuring the available power of an asymmetrical signal that produces a specified value of output signal and the available power of a normal balanced signal that produces the same value of

Balanced

Input

*These resistors shall be equal to within &I ;~RR""-&Rl un - + Ri
FIG.

percent.

4 CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENTS FOR APPLYING AN ASYMMETRICAL SIGNAL TO A RECEIVERWITH A BALANCEDRADIO-FREQUENCY INPUT TERMINALS

IS : 4545 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 practice depends upon the installation, but a value of 600 Q is representative of this parameter. Both signals~shall be applied, and the necessary available power calculated.
NOTE- The accuracy of the method of measurement is limited, particularly at the higher frequencies used for television and care must be taken in interpreting the results.

12. MAINS INTERFERENCE SUPPRESSION RATIO 12.1 Definition - The mains interference suppression ratio is a figure representing the ability of the receiver to reject undesired signals entering the receiver by the mains connection. 12.2 Sources of interference may inject currents into the mains, which may couple into the radiofrequency circuits. These currents will be predominantly of the unbalanced types as described in 11.1. The considerations concerning characteristic impedances and equivalent voltage source are the same, the only difference being that the values of the characteristic impedances of the mains are lower. The equivalent mains network average values are Rbi = 150 ohms and Run = 150 ohms.
12.3 Method -of Measurement - The measurement shall be carried out both at the signal frequency and at the intermediate frequency, the

resulting figures being called the RF and IF mains interference suppression ratio respectively. An asymmetrical signal 50 percent sine-wave amplitude modulated at 1000 Hz, shall be applied through a resistive network so that the output impedance RI = 112'5 ohms and through two resistances equal to 75 ohms and two capacitors to each of the two mains wires, as near as possible to the point where the mains lead enters the receiver. The outer conductor of the coaxial cable used for this purpose shall be connected for radio-frequencies to the receiver ground connection very near to the place where the mains lead enters ( see Fig. 5 >. The mains voltage shall be applied through the network shown in Fig. 5. The signal generator shall be tuned for maximum response of the receiver and adjusted to obtain an output voltage of 12 dB below standard video output voltage. The available power J!P at point A shall be determined. 4X The signal generator shall than be connected to the aerial terminals in the normal manner and the signal level at the vision carrier frequency required to obtain an output voltage of 12 dB below standard video output voltage shall be measured. The ratio of the two levels, expressed in. dB, shall be recorded.

RECEIVER

6ONNECTIONS

MAINS

SOURCE RESISTANCE Ri = 112.511
For all measuring frequency

i

2 > 1 000 8 X < IO !2

FIG. 5

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASUREMENT OF MAINS INTERFERENCE SUPPRESSION RATIO

12

