IRT AAF IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


uga Aiat akt festet 
ain Tatu — ota fèm 


SITIT 3 3TET-TITE utsett 
( FAT GRA ) 


Design and Construction of Pile 
Foundations — Code of Practice 
Part 3 Under-Reamed Piles 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30, 93.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM SA 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEERNE TH art, ag faset — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 10 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Piles find application in foundations to transfer loads from a structure to competent subsurface strata having 
adequate load-bearing capacity. The load transfer mechanism from a pile to the surrounding ground is complicated 
and is not yet fully understood, although application of pile foundations is in practice over many decades. Broadly, 
piles transfer axial loads either substantially by friction along its shaft and/or by the end bearing. Piles are used 
where either of the above load transfer mechanism is possible depending upon the subsoil stratification at a 
particular site. Construction of pile foundations require a careful choice of piling system depending upon the 
subsoil conditions, the load characteristics of a structure and the limitations of total settlement, differential 
settlement and any other special requirement of a project. The installation of piles demands careful control on 
position, alignment and depth, and involve specialized skill and experience. 


Under-reamed piles are of bored cast in-situ and bored compaction concrete types having one or more bulbs 
formed by suitably enlarging the borehole for the pile shaft. With the provision of bulb(s), substantial bearing or 
anchorage is available. These piles find application in widely varying situations in different types of soils where 
foundations are required to be taken down to a certain depth in view of considerations like the need, 


a) to avoid the undesirable effect of seasonal moisture changes as in expansive soils; 

b) to reach competent strata; 

c) to obtain adequate capacity for downward, upward and lateral loads and moments; or 
d) to take the foundations below scour level/liquefiable strata. 


However, the construction feasibility of under-ream/bulb should be examined as per soil characteristics, 
particularly in case of clean/river sands. 


When the ground consists of expansive soil, for example black cotton soil, the bulb of the under-reamed pile 
provides anchorage against uplift due to swelling pressure apart from the increased bearing. In case of filled-up 
or otherwise weak strata overlying the firm strata, enlarged base in the form of under-reamed bulb in firm strata 
provides larger bearing area and piles of greater bearing capacity can be made. In loose to medium pervious sandy 
and silty strata, bored compaction piles can also be used, as the process of driving reinforcement cage in the 
freshly filled concrete in the bore increases the load carrying capacity of the piles. Under-reamed piles may also 
be used under situations where the vibration and noise caused during construction of piles are to be avoided. The 
provision of bulb(s) is of special advantage in under-reamed piles to resist uplift and they can be used as anchors. 


The recommendations made in this standard are based on the general principles applicable to pile foundations and 
the experience of construction of a large number of engineering works. 


IS 2911 (Part 1) was originally published in 1964 and included provisions regarding driven cast in-situ piles, 
precast concrete piles, bored piles and under-reamed piles including load testing of piles. Subsequently the portion 
pertaining to under-reamed pile foundations was deleted and covered in IS 2911 (Part 3) : 1980 ‘Code of practice 
for design and construction of pile foundations: Part 3 Under-reamed pile foundations (first revision)’. At that 
time, it was also decided that the provisions regarding other types of piles should also be published separately 
for ease of reference and to take into account the recent developments in this field. Consequently, Part 1 of this 
standard was revised in 1979 into three sections. Later, in 1984, a new section as (Part 1/Sec 4) was introduced in 
this part of the standard to cover the provisions of bored precast concrete piles. IS 2911 (Part 1/Sections 1 to 4) 
were again revised in 2010. The portion relating to load test on piles has been covered in a separate part, namely, 
IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 ‘Design and construction of pile foundations — Code of practice: Part 4 Load test on piles 
(second revision)’. 


Considerable assistance was provided by CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee, for including the 
provisions on under-reamed piles in the first version of this standard, and thereafter in bringing out the separate 
standard for under-reamed piles in 1980. This revision of the standard (Part 3) has been brought out to bring it in 
line with other parts of this standard which have since been revised in 2010 and to align the provisions with the 
design and construction practices prevalent in the field. 


(Continued to third cover) 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PILE 
FOUNDATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 3 UNDER-REAMED PILES 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 3) covers the design and 
construction of under-reamed piles having one or more 
bulb(s) formed along the pile shaft. 


1.1.1 This standard covers under-reamed piles of 
maximum depth up to 10 m. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. Title 

269 : 2015 Ordinary Portland cement — 
Specification (sixth revision) 

455 : 2015 Portland slag cement — 
Specification (fifth revision) 

456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 

875 Design loads (other than 


(Part 3) : 2015 earthquake) for buildings and 
structures — Code of practice: 
Part 3 Wind loads (third revision) 


1489 Portland pozzolana cement — 
Specification 
(Part 1): 2015 Fly ash based (fourth revision) 
(Part 2): 2015  Calcined clay based 
(fourth revision) 
1498 : 1970 Classification and identification 


of soils for general engineering 
purposes (first revision) 

1786 : 2008 High strength deformed steel 
bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement — Specification 
(fourth revision) 


IS No. 


1892 : 2021 


1893 (Part 1): 
2016 


2720 
(Part 5) : 1985 
(Part 40) : 1977 


2911 
(Part 4) : 2013 


2974 
(Part 1) : 1982 


4968 
(Part 2) : 1976 


6403 : 1981 


8041 : 1990 


8043 : 1991 
12330 : 1988 


12600 : 1989 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


Title 


Subsurface investigation for 
foundations — Code of practice 
(second revision) 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 
General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


Methods of test for soils 


Determination of liquid and 
plastic limit (second revision) 


Determination of free swell 
index of soils 


Design and construction of pile 
foundations — Code of practice: 
Part 4 Load test on piles 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for design 
and construction of machine 
foundations: Part 1 Foundation 
for reciprocating type machines 
(second revision) 


Method for subsurface sounding 
for soils: Part 2 Dynamic method 
using cone and bentonite slurry 
(first revision) 


Code of practice for 
determination of Oo bearing 
capacity of shallow foundations 
(first revision) 

Specification for rapid 
hardening Portland cement 
(second revision) 

Hydrophobic Portland cement — 
Specification 

Specification for sulphate 
resisting Portland cement 


Portland cement, low heat — 
Specification 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Allowable Load — The load which may be 
applied to a pile after taking into account its ultimate 
load capacity, group effect, the allowable settlement, 
negative skin friction and other relevant loading 
conditions. 


3.2 Anchor Pile — An anchor pile means a pile meant 
for resisting pull or uplift forces. 


3.3 Batter Pile (Raker Pile) — The pile which is 
installed at an angle to the vertical using temporary 
casing or permanent liner. 


3.4 Bored Cast in-situ Pile — Piles formed by boring 
a hole in the ground by percussive or rotary method 
with the use of temporary/permanent casing or drilling 
mud and subsequently filling the hole with reinforced 
concrete. 


3.5 Bored Compaction Pile — A bored cast in-situ 
pile with or without bulb(s) in which the reinforcement 
cage is driven by suitable method in the freshly filled 
concrete in the bore. If the pile is with bulb(s), it is 
known as “under-reamed bored compaction pile’. 


3.6 Cut-off Level — It is the level where a pile is 
cut-off to support the pile caps or beams or any other 
structural components at that level. 


3.7 Elastic Displacement— This is the magnitude 
of the displacement of the pile head during rebound 
on removal of a given test load. This comprises two 
components, 


a) elastic displacement of the soil participating in 
load transfer; and 


b) elastic displacement of the pile shaft. 


3.8 Factor of Safety — It is the ratio of the ultimate 
load capacity of a pile to the safe load on the pile. 


3.9 Gross Displacement — The total movement of the 
pile top under a given load. 


3.10 Initial Load Test — In this test, a test pile is tested 
to determine the load carrying capacity of the pile by 
loading either to its ultimate load or to two and half 
times the estimated safe load. 


3.11 Initial Test Pile — One or more piles, which are 
not working piles, may be installed if required to assess 
the load-carrying capacity of a pile. These piles are 
tested either to their ultimate load capacity or to two 
and half times the estimated safe load. 


3.12 Load Bearing Pile — A pile formed in the ground 
for transmitting the load of a structure to the soil by the 
resistance developed at its tip and/or along its surface. 


It may be formed either vertically or at an inclination 
(batter pile) and may be required to resist uplift forces. 


If the pile supports the load primarily by resistance 
developed at the pile tip or base, it is called ‘End bearing 
pile’ and, if primarily by friction along its surface, then 
‘Friction pile’. 


3.13 Multi-Under-Reamed Pile — An under-reamed 
pile having more than one bulb. The pile having two 
bulbs is known as double under-reamed pile. 


3.14 Net Displacement — The net vertical movement 
of the pile top after the pile has been subjected to a test 
load and subsequently released. 


3.15 Routine Load Test — A working pile is subjected 
to load testing for a test load up to 1.5 times the safe 
load. 


3.16 Safe Load — It is the load derived by applying a 
factor of safety on the ultimate load capacity of the pile 
or as determined from load test. 


3.17 Ultimate Load Capacity — The maximum load 
which a pile can carry before failure, that is, when the 
founding strata fails by shear as evidenced from the 
load settlement curve or the pile fails as a structural 
member. 


3.18 Under-Reamed Pile — A bored cast in-situ 
or bored compaction concrete pile with an enlarged 
bulb(s) made by either cutting or scooping out the soil 
or by any other suitable process. 


3.19 Working Load — The load assigned to a pile as 
per design. 


3.20 Working Pile — A pile forming part of the 
foundation system of a given structure. 


4 NECESSARY INFORMATION 


4.1 For the satisfactory design and construction of bored 
cast in-situ and bored compacted under-reamed piles 
and pile foundation, the information on the following 
aspects is necessary: 


a) Site investigation data as laid down in IS 1892 or 
any other relevant Indian Standard. Sections of 
trial borings, supplemented wherever appropriate 
by penetration tests, should incorporate 
data/information down to depth sufficiently below 
the anticipated level of founding of piles but this 
should generally be not less than 5 m beyond 
the pile founding level. Adequacy of the bearing 
strata should be ensured by supplementary tests, 
if required. 

The nature of the soil both around and beneath the 
proposed pile should be indicated on the basis of 
appropriate tests of strength, compressibility, etc. 
Ground water level and conditions such as artesian 


b 


— 


conditions, if any, should also be recorded. Results 
of chemical tests to ascertain the sulphate, chloride 
and any other deleterious chemical content of soil 
and water should be indicated. 


c) A qualitative indication of the degree of 
expansiveness of soil is given in Annex A. The 
free swell index of soil should be determined in 
accordance with IS 2720 (Part 40). 


In case rock is encountered, adequate description 
of the rock to convey its physical conditions as 
well as its strength characteristics should be 
indicated. 


d 


— 


In case of weathered rock, adequate physical 
description and its expected physical behaviour 
on boring should be indicated. 


e 


wm 


General plan and cross-section of the building 
showing type of structural frame, including 
basement, if any, in relation to the proposed pile 
cap top levels. 


f) The general layout of the structure showing 
estimated loads and moments at the top of pile 
caps but excluding the weight of the piles and caps 
should be provided. The top levels of finished pile 
caps shall also be indicated. 


g) All transient loads due to seismic, wind, water 
current, etc, are to be indicated separately. 


h) Sufficient information about structures existing 
nearby should be provided. 


j) In soils susceptible to liquefaction during 
earthquake which shall be ascertained as per 
IS 1893 (Part 1), appropriate analysis may be 
done to determine the depth of liquefaction and 
consider the pile depth accordingly. 


4.2 As far as possible, all information in 4.1 shall be 
made available to the agency responsible for the design 
and/or construction of piles and/or foundation work. 


4.3 The design details of pile foundation shall give 
the information necessary for setting out and layout 
of piles, cut-off levels, finished cap level, layout and 
orientation of pile cap in the foundation plan and the 
safe capacity of each type of pile, etc. 


4.4 Due note shall be taken of the experience of 
under-reamed and other piles in the area close to the 
proposed site and any soil strata report thereof. 


5 EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 


5.1 The selection of equipment and accessories would 
depend upon the type of under-reamed piles chosen for a 
job after giving due considerations to the subsoil strata, 
ground water condition, types of founding material and 
the required penetration therein. Also it will depend on 
economic considerations and availability of manually 
or power operated equipment. 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


5.2 A typical list of equipment for manual construction is 
given in Annex B. 


5.3 Bore holes may be made by earth augers. In case of 
manual boring, an auger boring guide shall be used to 
keep the bores vertical or to the desired inclination and 
in position. 


After the bore is made to the required depth, enlarging 
of the base shall be carried out by means of an 
under-reaming tool. 


5.4 Stabilization of bore holes may be done either 
by circulation or by keeping bore full of drilling mud 
(bentonite). 


5.5 In ground with high water table having unstable pile 
bores, boring and under-reaming may be carried out 
using a suitable drilling mud. Requirements for bentonite 
drilling mud are given in 8.4. In normally met soil strata, 
drilling mud can be poured from top while boring and 
under-reaming can be done by normal spiral earth auger 
and under-reamer. The level of drilling mud should 
always be about one metre above water table or the 
level at which caving in occurs. In case of very unstable 
strata with excessive caving in, continuous circulation 
of drilling mud using suitable pumping equipment and 
tripod, etc, alongwith modified auger and under-reamer 
may be used. 


5.6 To avoid irregular shape and widening of bore hole 
in very loose strata at top, a casing pipe of suitable length 
may be used temporarily during boring and concreting. 


5.7 For improved control over the inclination of batter 
piles, a tripod hoist with fixed pulley should be used for 
lowering in of under-reaming tools. 


5.8 For placing the concrete in bore holes full of drilling 
mud or subsoil water, tremie pipe of not less than 
100 mm diameter should be used. 


5.9 For batter under-reamed piles, the reinforcement 
cage should be placed guiding it by a chute or any other 
suitable method. If concreting is not done by tremie, it 
should be done by chute. 


5.10 In under-reamed bored compaction piles, suitable 
devices should be used for guiding the movement of drop 
weight and specified core assembly for its driving. For 
operating the drop weights, suitable winch of adequate 
capacity with hoisting attachment should be used. 


5.11 Kentledge 


Kentledge should be used as dead weight for applying 
test load on a pile. 


6 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


6.1 General 


Under-reamed pile foundations shall be designed in 
such a way that the load from the structure they support, 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


can be transmitted to the sub-surface with adequate 
factor of safety against shear failure of sub-surface 
and without causing such settlement (differential or 
total), which may result in structural damage and/or 
functional distress under permanent/transient loading. 
The pile shaft should have adequate structural capacity 
to withstand all loads (vertical compression, uplift, 
lateral) and moments which are to be transmitted to the 
subsoil and shall be designed according to IS 456. 


6.1.1 In expansive soils, the minimum length of piles 
shall be 3.5 m below ground level. In case of expansive 
soil deposits of shallow depth overlying non-expansive 
competent strata or rock, piles of shorter length can 
also be provided. 


However, in case of high to very high expansive soils, 
due care shall be taken to establish the minimum depth 
of pile with the top-most (first) bulb located below the 
level of significant moisture variations/active zone. 


6.1.2 The diameter of under-reamed bulbs may vary 
from 2 to 2.5 times shaft diameter depending upon the 
feasibility of construction and design requirements. 
In bored cast in-situ under-reamed piles and 
under-reamed bored compaction piles, the bulb 
diameter shall be normally 2.5 and 2 times the shaft 
diameter, respectively. 


6.1.3 The spacing of bulbs should not be less than 
1.5 times the diameter of bulb. 


6.1.4 The first bulb should be at a minimum depth of 
2 times the bulb diameter below ground level or cut-off 
level, whichever is lower. 


6.1.5 Under-reamed piles with more than two bulbs are 
not advisable without ensuring their feasibility in strata 
needing stabilization of boreholes by drilling mud. 
The number of bulbs in case of under-reamed bored 
compaction piles should not exceed two in such strata. 


6.1.6 The minimum diameter of pile shaft shall be 
250 mm. However, in case of strata/ground water 
consisting of excessive chemicals such as sulphates and 
chlorides, or piles with tremie concreting, the minimum 
diameter of the pile shaft shall be 300 mm. 


6.1.7 Under-reamed batter piles in dry soil conditions 
can be constructed with batter not exceeding 15°. 


6.1.8 The construction feasibility of 
under-ream/bulb should be examined as per soil 
characteristics, particularly in case of clean/river sands. 


6.1.9 For guidance, typical details of bored cast in-situ 
under-reamed pile foundations are shown in Fig. 1. 


6.1.10 Adjacent Structures 


6.1.10.1 When working near existing structures, care 
shall be taken to avoid damage to such structures. 


IS 2974 (Part 1) may be used as a guide for studying 
qualitatively the effect of vibration on persons and 
structures. 


6.1.10.2 In case of deep excavations adjacent to piles, 
proper shoring or other suitable arrangement shall be 
made to guard against undesired lateral movement of 
soil. 


6.2 Design of Piles 


The load carrying capacity of under-reamed piles 
depends mainly on the pile dimensions and soil strata. 
Axial load on a pile is transmitted by point bearing at the 
tip and the projected area of the bulb(s), and skin friction 
along the pile shaft. Depending upon the nature of soil 
and pile geometry, in addition to the skin friction on 
shaft, friction can develop on the soil cylinder between 
the extreme bulbs. In under-reamed bored compaction 
piles, the mechanism of load transfer remains the same 
but soil properties along the shaft improved by the 
process are considered. In uplift load, point bearing 
component at tip is absent but unlike other straight shaft 
piles, point bearing on an annular projection of the bulb 
is present. Lateral load and moment are sustained by 
horizontal soil reaction developed along the pile length, 
which depends on several factors. 


The design of piles shall be such that it has an adequate 
factor of safety, 


a) as a structural member to transmit the imposed 
loads; 


b) against failure of strata due to reaching ultimate 
strength. Further, it should ensure that the desired 
limit of settlement is not exceeded; 


c) the pile capacities shall be established/confirmed 
by initial load tests as per IS 2911 (Part 4). 


6.2.1 Pile as a Structural Member 


The pile should have adequate strength to sustain the 
design loads. The pile cross-section should be checked 
for combined effect of vertical loads (compressive and 
uplift) and/or lateral loads and moments. The pile shaft 
should be designed as a short/long column considering 
both concrete and steel (see 6.2.2) as per IS 456, unless 
otherwise specified in this standard. In case of latter, 
the permissible increase in stresses shall be taken for 
wind load and seismic forces [see IS 875 (Part 3) and 
IS 1893 (Part 1)]. 


6.2.2 Reinforcement in Piles 


6.2.2.1 The design of reinforcement depends upon the 
installation conditions. The nature of the subsoil and 
the nature of load to be transmitted by the shaft-axial, 
or otherwise. The design shall be in accordance with 
6.2.1. However, the minimum area of longitudinal 
reinforcement shall be 0.4 percent of the cross-sectional 
area of the pile shaft and shall be provided throughout 
the length. 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


GL 


STIRRUPS 
STIRRUPS 


2 Dy Min, 

OR 

1750 mm, Min FOR 
EXPANSIVE SOIL 


BORING LEVEL 


FOR MAKING 
FIRST BULB 
1.25TO15D, 
Dal — — (CC DISTANCE BETWEEN TWO BULBS ) 
APPROX. 
SECOND / ©, 
0.55 Du TO 0.75Du fast BULB “Si 
LI 
i 
! a 
i 22 
COVER | Ç 
75 TO 100 mm 0.55 Dy TO 0.75 Dy 


Ø= 45° APPROX, @2= 30°- 45° APPROX, D 


1A SECTION OF SINGLE 
UNDER-REAMED PILE 


ao 
Dj 


y= 2.5 D NORMALLY 


1B SECTION OF MULTI- 
UNDER-REAMED PILE 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


FIG. I TYPICAL DETAILS OF BORED CAST IN- 


6.2.2.2 The main reinforcement of the pile shall extend 
above cut-off level for at least the development length 
to be embedded into the pile cap/grade beam. 


6.2.2.3 The minimum diameter of the rings shall be 
8 mm and the spacing of the rings shall be not less 
than 150 mm. Stiffener rings of suitable diameter and 
spacing should be provided in the reinforcing cage to 
impart adequate rigidity to the reinforcing cage during 
handling and installation. Stiffener rings preferably of 
12 mm diameter at every 1.5 m centre to centre spacing 
should be provided along the entire length of the cage. 
Minimum 6 numbers of vertical bars shall be used for 
a circular pile and minimum diameter of vertical bar 
shall be 12 mm. The minimum clear horizontal spacing 
between the adjacent vertical bars shall be four times 
the maximum aggregate size in concrete. If required, 
the bars can be bundled to maintain such spacing. 


SITU UNDER-REAMED PILE FOUNDATIONS 


6.2.2.4 Clear cover to all reinforcement including rings 
in pile shaft shall be not less than 50 mm, which shall be 
increased to 75 mm in case of aggressive environment 
of sulphates, etc. In addition, the clear cover of the 
main reinforcement from the pile tip shall be 75 mm 
to 100 mm. 


6.2.3 Safe Load 
Safe load on a pile shall be taken as the least of the 
following, 
a) By calculating ultimate load from soil properties 
and applying suitable factor of safety; 
b) By load test on pile as provided in IS 2911 
(Part 4); and 


c) By working out safe load as per Annex C 
considering soil data. 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


6.2.3.1 Ultimate load capacity (using the static formula) 


The ultimate load capacity of a pile can be calculated 
from soil properties. The soil properties required are 
strength parameters, cohesion, angle ofinternal friction 
and soil density. If these properties are not available 
directly from laboratory and field tests, they may be 
indirectly obtained from in-situ penetration test data 
[see IS 4968 (Part 2) and IS 6403]. The success of the 
approach essentially depends how realistically the soil 
properties are determined or deduced. 


a) Cohesive soils 
For cohesive soils the ultimate load carrying 
capacity of an under-reamed pile may be worked 
out from the following expressions: 
Q ANC, +tANCHCA + ACA, 
where 
Q = ultimate load capacity of pile, in kN; 
A = cross-sectional area of pile tip, in m°; 


N = bearing capacity factor, may be taken 
as 9; 


C = average cohesion at pile tip, in KN/m?; 


A,= 7/4 (D?— D’) where D, and D are the 
under-reamed and shaft diameter, in m, 
respectively; 


C' = average cohesion of soil around the 
under-reamed bulbs, in kN/m?; 


a= adhesion factor layer depending on the 
consistency of soil (see Note 4); 


C = average cohesion of the soil along the pile 
shaft, in kN/m?; 


A = surface area of the shaft (to be taken above 
under-reamed bulb), in m”; and 


A' = surface area of the cylinder circumscribing 
the under-reamed bulbs, in m”. 


The above expression holds for the usual spacing 
of under-reamed bulbs spaced at not more than 
one-and-a-half times their diameter. 

NOTES 

1 The first two terms in formula are for end bearing and the last 
two for friction components. 

2 If the pile is with one bulb only, the third term will not 
occur. 

3 For calculating uplift load, first term will not occur in 
formula. 

4 The value of adhesion factor a depends on the undrained 
shear strength of the clay, and may be obtained from Fig. 2. 


b) Granular soils 


For granular soils the following expression be 
used, 


1 1 
Q. = a DaN, +y.d, LA +4, FP AN, 


r=n 1 
+Y.N, 2a, +57 Dy-K tanë x (d? +d; -d;) 


where 


A = 7/4 D?, in m° (where D is shaft 
diameter, in m); 


A, = 7/4 (D: — D’), in m? (where 
D, is the under-reamed bulb 
diameter, in m); 

n = number of under-reamed 
bulbs; 


y = average unit weight of soil 

(submerged unit weight in 

strata below water table), in 

kN/m?; 

bearing capacity factors 

depending upon the angle of 

internal friction (see Notes 3 

and 4); 

d = depth of the centre of different 
under-reamed bulbs below 
ground level, in m; 

d = total depth of pile below 
ground level, in m; 


= 
5 

a. 
= 
l 


K = earth pressure coefficient 
(usually taken as 1.75 for 
sandy soils); 

Ó = angle of wall friction (may 
be taken equal to the angle of 
internal friction @); 


d, = depth of the centre of first 
under-reamed bulb, in m; and 
d = depth of the centre of the last 


under-reamed bulb, in m. 


NOTES 


1 The first two terms in the formula are for bearing 
component and the last one for friction component. 


2 For uplift bearing on tip, will not occur. 


3N ; factor can be taken for general shear failure according 
to IS 6403. 


4 N. applicable for bored piles are given in Fig. 3. 


ADHESION FACTOR, a 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


0.8 


0.6 


0.4 


0.2 


BEARING CAPACITY FACTOR , Nq 


20 


UNDRAINED SHEAR STRENGTH, C, (kN/m?) 


40 60 80 100 120 140 160 


(For C < 40 kN/m?, take a = 1) 


FIG. 2 VARIATIONS OF 0 WITH C, 


500 


100 


o 
O 


10 
20 


25 30 35 40 
ANGLE OF INTERNAL FRICTION , Ø 


Fic. 3 BEARING CAPACITY FACTOR, N, 


45 


180 


200 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


c) Soil strata having both cohesion and friction 
In soil strata having both cohesion and friction 
or in layered strata having two types of soil, the 
bearing capacity may be estimated using pile 
capacity derived from both the formula. However, 
in such cases the load tests will be a better guide 
[see IS 2911 (Part 4)]. 

d) Under-reamed bored compaction piles in 
sandy/silty (non-plastic/low plastic) strata 


For under-reamed bored compaction piles in 
sandy/silty (non-plastic/low plastic) strata, the 
formula in 6.2.3.1 (b) shall be applicable but the 
modified value of Ø will be used as given below: 


Ø = (Ø + 40)/2 
where 
Ø = angle of internal friction of virgin soil. 


The values of N, N. and ó are taken corresponding 
to Ø.. 


The value of the earth pressure coefficient K will 
be 3. 


Factors of safety 
Factor of safety should be chosen after considering, 


e 


x 


1) the reliability of the calculated value of 
ultimate load capacity of a pile, 


2) the types of superstructure and the type of 
loading, and 


3) allowable total/differential settlement of 
the structure. 


When the ultimate load capacity is determined 
from static formula, the factor of safety would 
depend on the reliability of the formula and the 
reliability of the subsoil parameters used in the 
computation. The minimum factor of safety on 
static formula shall be 3. The final selection of a 
factor of safety shall take into consideration the 
load settlement characteristics of the structure as a 
whole at a given site. 


Higher value of factor of safety for determining 
the safe load on piles may be adopted, where, 


i) settlement is to be limited or unequal 
settlement avoided, 


ii) large impact or vibrating loads are 
expected, and 


iii) the properties of the soil may deteriorate 
with time. 


6.2.3.2 Pile load tests 


The safe load on pile(s) in compression, uplift and 
lateral shall be determined by carrying out load test on 
piles in accordance with IS 2911 (Part 4). There should 
be a minimum of two numbers of initial pile load tests 
for first 200 piles and additional one test for every 
additional 200 piles and part thereof. The frequency of 
testing stipulated above is applicable for each diameter 


of pile and rated capacity of pile in each type (mode) 
of loading. The number of tests may be increased if the 
strata is erratic and for important structures. 


6.2.3.3 Safe load as per Annex C 


Safe load should be worked out as per Annex C 
considering the soil data. 
NOTE — Safe loads as given in the above referred table are 


symptomatic. Safe load carrying capacity of pile shall be 
worked out as per 6.2.3. 


6.2.3.4 Permissible increase over safe vertical 
compression load on piles 


a) Overloading 


When a pile in a group, designed for a certain safe 
load is found, during or after execution, to fall just 
short of the load required to be carried by it, an 
overload up to 10 percent of the pile capacity may 
be allowed on each pile. The total overloading 
on the group should not, however, be more than 
10 percent of the capacity of the group subject to 
the increase of the load on any pile being not more 
than 25 percent of the allowable load on a single 
pile. 

b 


— 


Transient loading 


The maximum permissible increase over the safe 
load of a pile, as arising out of wind loading, is 
25 percent. In case of loads and moments arising 
out of earthquake effects, the increase of safe load 
on a single pile may be limited to the provisions 
contained in IS 1893 (Part 1). For seismic forces, 
under-reamed piles shall be treated as point 
bearing piles. The seismic and wind forces shall 
not be considered to act simultaneously. For 
transient loading arising out of superimposed 
loads, no increase is allowed. 


6.2.4 Negative Skin Friction or Drag Down Force 


When a soil stratum through which a pile shaft has 
penetrated into an underlying hard stratum, compresses 
as a result of either it being unconsolidated or it being 
under a newly placed fill or as a result of remoulding 
during installation of the pile, a drag-down force 
is generated along the pile shaft up to a point in 
depth where the surrounding soil does not move 
downward relative to the pile shaft. Existence of such 
a phenomenon shall be assessed and the allowable 
load shall be suitably reduced, subject to the condition 
that the under-ream/bulb is provided below the strata 
susceptible to negative skin friction. 


6.2.5 Lateral Load on Piles 


A pile may be subjected to lateral force from a number 
of causes, such as wind, earthquake, earth pressures, 
effect of moving vehicles, plant and equipment, etc. 
The lateral load carrying capacity of a single pile 
depends not only on the horizontal subgrade modulus 


of the surrounding soil but also on the structural 
strength of the pile shaft against bending consequent 
upon application of a lateral load. While considering 
lateral load on piles, effect of other co-existent loads 
including the axial load on the pile should be taken into 
consideration for checking the structural capacity of 
the shaft. The method for pile capacity analysis under 
lateral load is given in Annex D. 


Because of limited information on horizontal subgrade 
modulus of soil and pending refinements in the 
theoretical analysis, it is suggested that the adequacy 
of a design should be confirmed by pile load tests. In 
the zone susceptible to liquefaction which shall be 
determined in accordance with IS 1893 (Part 1), the 
lateral resistance of the soil shall not be considered. 


6.2.5.1 Fixed and free head conditions 


A group of three or more pile connected by a rigid pile 
cap shall be considered to have fixed head condition. 
Caps for single piles must be interconnected by grade 
beams in two directions and for twin piles by grade 
beams in a line transverse to the common axis of the 
pair so that the pile head is fixed. In all other conditions 
the pile shall be considered as free head condition. 


6.2.6 Batter Piles (Raker Piles) 


Raker piles are normally provided where vertical piles 
cannot resist the required applied horizontal forces. 
In the preliminary design, the load on a raker pile is 
generally considered to be axial. The distribution of 
load between raker and vertical piles in a group may 
be determined by graphical or analytical methods. 
Where necessary, due consideration should be made 
for secondary bending induced as a result of the pile 
cap movement, particularly when the cap is rigid. Free 
standing raker piles are subjected to bending moments 
due to their own weight or external forces from other 
causes. Raker piles, embedded in fill or consolidating 
deposits, may become laterally loaded owing to the 
settlement of the surrounding soil. 


Under-reamed piles can be constructed with batter not 
exceeding 15° with vertical. 


6.2.7 Spacing of Piles 


6.2.7.1 Spacing of piles shall be considered in relation to 
the nature of ground, the types of piles and the manner 
in which the piles transfer the load to the ground. 


6.2.7.2 Generally, the centre to centre spacing for cast 
in-situ under-reamed piles in a group is two times 
the bulb diameter (2D ), however, it shall not be less 
than 1.5 D. The maximum spacing of piles should 
generally not exceed 3 m. If the adjacent piles are of 
different diameter, the value of larger bulb diameter 
shall be considered. The centre to centre spacing for 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


under-reamed bored compaction piles is generally 
1.5 times the bulb diameter (1.5 D ). 


6.2.8 Pile Groups 


6.2.8.1 In order to determine the load-carrying 
capacity of a group of piles, a number of efficiency 
equations are in use. However, it is difficult to 
establish the accuracy of these efficiency equations 
as the behaviour of pile group is dependent on many 
complex factors. It is desirable to consider each case 
separately on its own merits. 


6.2.8.2 The load-carrying capacity of a pile group may 
be equal to or less than the load-carrying capacity of 
individual piles multiplied by the number of piles in 
the group. 


6.2.8.3 In load bearing walls, piles should generally 
be provided under all wall junctions to avoid point 
loads on beams. 


6.3 Grade Beams 


6.3.1 The grade beams supporting the load bearing 
walls shall be designed taking due account of arching 
effect due to masonry above beam. The beam with 
masonry due to composite action behaves as a deep 
beam. 


For the design of grade beams, maximum bending 
moment of w/?/30, where w is uniformly distributed 
load per metre run and / is the effective span in metres, 
shall be considered. For considering composite action, 
the minimum height of wall shall be 0.6 times the pile 
spacing. The brick strength should not be less than 
3 N/mm’. For concentrated loads and other loads 
which come directly over the beam, full bending 
moment should be considered. 


6.3.2 The minimum overall depth of grade beams 
shall be 200 mm. An equal amount of reinforcement 
shall be provided at the bottom and top of the beam. 
The longitudinal reinforcement both at bottom and top 
should not be less than three bars of 12 mm diameter 
with clear cover of 50 mm. Spacing of stirrups of 
8 mm diameter bars should not be more than the depth 
of grade beam. 


6.3.3 In expansive soils, the grade beams and 75 mm 
levelling concrete course shall be provided over 40 mm 
down gravel layer/mechanically stabilized mix (MSM) 
layer having a minimum compacted thickness of 
300 mm and minimum width equal to five times the 
width of grade beams (see Fig. 4). 


6.3.4 In case of exterior beams over piles in expansive 
soils, plinth protection with proper slope shall be 
provided. 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


GRADE BEAM 


Ve WIDTH OF WALL / BEAM (B) 


REINFORCEMENT 


MAY BE ELIMINATED IN 
CASE OF VERTICAL CUTS 


LEVELLING COURSE 


4A GRADE BEAM IN NON-EXPANSIVE SOILS 


TO BE FILLED AND COMPACTED IN 
LAYERS BY NON - SWELLING SOIL 


ME SE ELBEN UPTO 95 PERCENT OF PROCTOR 


(B) 


GRADE BEAM 


(40 mm DOWN AGGREGATE |. 
OF QUALITY COMPLYING | 


x. 


a REINFORCEMENT: 


75 mm 


300 mm, Min 


TO IS 383 ) 


DENSITY 


LEVELLING 
COURSE 


All dimensions in millimetres 


4B GRADE BEAM IN EXPANSIVE SOILS 


FIG. 4 TYPICAL SECTIONS OF GRADE BEAM 


6.4 Design of Pile Cap 


6.4.1 The pile caps may be designed by assuming 
that the load from column or pedestal is dispersed at 
45° from the top of the cap to the mid depth of the 
pile cap from the base of the column or pedestal. The 
reaction from piles may also be taken to be distributed 
at 45° from the edge of the pile, up to the mid-depth 
of the pile cap. On this basis, the maximum bending 
moment and shear forces should be worked out at 
critical sections. The method of analysis and allowable 
stresses and structural design should be in accordance 
with IS 456. 


6.4.2 The pile cap shall be deep enough to allow 
for necessary anchorage of the column and pile 
reinforcement. 


6.4.3 The pile cap should be rigid enough so that the 
imposed load could be distributed on the piles in a 
group equitably. 


6.4.4 In case of a large cap, where differential settlement 
may occur between piles under the same cap, due 
consideration for the consequential moment should be 
given. 


6.4.5 The clear overhang of the pile cap beyond the 
outer most pile in the group shall be a minimum of 
150 mm. 


6.4.6 The cap is generally cast over a 75 mm thick 
levelling course of concrete. The clear cover for main 
reinforcement in the pile cap shall not be less than 
60 mm. 


6.4.6.1 In expansive soils, the pile cap and 75 mm 
levelling concrete course shall be provided over 40 mm 
down gravel layer/mechanically stabilized mix (MSM) 
layer having a minimum compacted thickness of 
300 mm and extending minimum 150 mm beyond the 
pile cap. 


6.4.7 The embedment of pile into cap should be 75 mm. 
7 MATERIALS 


7.1 Cement 


The cement used shall be any of the following and the 
type selected should be appropriate for the intended 
use: 


a) Ordinary Portland cement conforming to IS 269, 


b) Rapid hardening Portland cement conforming to 
IS 8041, 


c) Portland slag cement conforming to IS 455, 

d) Portland pozzolana cement (fly ash based) 
conforming to IS 1489 (Part 1), 

e) Portland pozzolana cement (calcined clay based) 
conforming to IS 1489 (Part 2), 

f) Hydrophobic cement conforming to IS 8043, 


g) Low heat Portland cement to 


IS 12600, and 


h) Sulphate resisting Portland cement conforming to 
IS 12330. 
The other requirements as specified in IS 456 shall also 
be complied with. 


conforming 


7.2 Reinforcement 


The reinforcement shall be high strength deformed steel 
bars conforming to IS 1786. The other requirements as 
specified in IS 456 for reinforcing bars shall also be 
complied with. 


7.2.1 For under-reamed bored compaction piles, the 
reinforcement cage shall be fabricated by spot welding 
the rings with main reinforcement to withstand the 
stresses during driving process. 


7.3 Concrete 


7.3.1 Consistency of concrete to be used for cast in-situ 
under-reamed piles shall be consistent with the method 
of installation of piles. Concrete shall be designed as 
per IS 456 so as to have homogeneous mix having a 
slump/workability consistent with the method 
of concreting under the given conditions of pile 
installation. 


7.3.2 The slump should be between 150 mm and 
200 mm at the time of pouring. 


7.3.3 The minimum grade of concrete to be used for 
under-reamed piles shall be M 25. For sub-aqueous 


11 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


concrete, the requirements specified in IS 456 shall 
be followed. The minimum cement content shall be 
400 kg/m? in all conditions. The concrete for piles in 
aggressive surroundings due to presence of sulphates, 
etc, should have a concrete mix of appropriate type of 
cement in suitable proportion as per IS 456. 


7.3.4 For the concrete, water and aggregates 
specifications laid down in IS 456 shall be followed in 
general. 


7.3.5 For tremie concreting, aggregates having nominal 
size more than 20 mm should not be used. 


7.3.6 For under-reamed bored compaction piles rapid 
hardening cement (see 7.1) shall not be used. 


8 CONSTRUCTION 


8.1 Under-reamed piles may be constructed by selecting 
suitable installation techniques at a given site depending 
on subsoil strata conditions and type of under-reamed 
pile and number of bulbs. The construction feasibility 
of under-ream/bulb should particularly be examined in 
case of sand, clean/river sands. 


8.2 In construction with the equipment given in 5, 
initially boring guide is fixed with its lower frame 
levelled for making desired angular adjustment for 
piles at batter. Boring is done up to required depth and 
under-reaming is completed. 


8.2.1 In order to achieve proper under-reamed bulb, the 
depth of bore hole should be checked before starting 
under-reaming. It should also be checked during 
under-reaming and any extra soil at the bottom of 
bore hole removed by auger before reinserting the 
under-reaming tool. 


8.2.2 The completion of desired under-reamed bulb is 
ascertained by, 


a) the vertical movement of the handle; and when no 
further soil is cut; or 
b) by any other suitable method. 


8.2.3 In double or multi-under-reamed piles, boring is 
first completed to the depth required for the first (top) 
under-ream only and after completing under-reaming, 
boring is extended further for the second under-ream 
and the process is repeated. 


8.2.4 In a pile group, number of under-ream/bulb 
should be same. 


8.3 Control of Piling Installation 


8.3.1 Under-reamed piles should be installed by 
installation technique, covering, 


a) the manner of borehole stabilization, that is, use of 
drilling mud; 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


b) manner of concreting; and 


c) choice of boring tools in order to permit 
satisfactory installation of a pile at a given site. 
Detailed information about the subsoil conditions 
is essential to determine the installation technique. 


8.3.2 Control of Alignment 


Piles shall be installed as accurately as possible 
according to the design and drawings either vertically 
or to the specified batter. Greater care should be 
exercised in respect of installation of single piles or 
piles in two-pile groups. As a guide, for vertical pile a 
deviation of 1.5 percent and for raker pile a deviation 
of 4 percent should not be exceeded. Piles should not 
deviate more than 75 mm or D/6 whichever is less from 
their designed positions at the cut-off level. In the case 
of single pile under a column the positional deviation 
should not be more than 50 mm or D/6 whichever is 
less. In case of piles deviating beyond these limits and 
to such an extent that the resulting eccentricity cannot 
be taken care of by redesign of the pile cap or grade 
beam, the piles shall be replaced or supplemented by 
additional piles. 


8.4 Use of Drilling Mud 


8.4.1 The drilling mud to be used for stabilizing the 
borehole in bored piling work should conform to the 
requirements given in Annex E. 


8.4.2 In case a borehole is stabilized by use of drilling 
mud, the specific gravity of the mud suspension should 
be determined at regular intervals by a suitable slurry 
sampler. Consistency of the drilling mud shall be 
controlled throughout the boring as well as concreting 
operations in order to keep the hole stabilized as well 
as to avoid concrete getting mixed up with the thicker 
suspension of the mud. 


8.4.3 The concreting operations should not be taken 
up when the specific gravity of bottom slurry is more 
than 1.12. The slurry should be maintained at minimum 
1.5 m above the ground water level. 


8.5 Cleaning Boreholes 


If a borehole is stabilized by drilling mud, the bottom 
of the hole shall be cleaned of all loose and undesirable 
materials by augering before commencement of 
concreting. 


8.6 Concreting 


8.6.1 Concreting as per IS 456 shall be done as soon as 
possible after completing the pile bore. The bore hole 
full of drilling mud should not be left unconcreted for 
more than 12 to 24 h depending upon the stability of 
bore hole. 


12 


8.6.2 In case the pile bore is stabilized with drilling 
mud or by maintaining water head within the bore 
hole, the bottom of bore hole shall be carefully cleaned 
by augering or suitable means and pile bore shall be 
checked for its depth before concreting. In such cases, 
concreting shall be done by tremie method. 


8.6.3 The following requirements shall be followed for 
tremie concrete work: 


a) The concrete should be coherent, rich in cement 
(not less than 400 kg/m?) and of slump between 
150 mm and 200 mm; 


The tremie should be water tight throughout its 
length and have a hopper attached to its head by a 
water tight connection; 


b 


wm 


c 


— 


The tremie pipe should be large enough in relation 
to the size of the aggregate. For 20 mm down 
aggregate, the tremie pipe should have a diameter 
not less than 100 mm; 


d 


wm 


The tremie pipe should always be kept full of 
concrete and should always remain at least 1 m 
into the concrete in the bore hole with adequate 
margin against accidental withdrawal of tremie 
pipes; 

The pile should be concreted wholly by tremie and 
the method of deposition should not be changed 
midway to prevent laitance from being entrapped 
within the pile; and 


e 


wm 


f) 


All tremie pipes should be cleaned before and 
after use. 


8.6.4 Normally concreting of the piles should be 
uninterrupted. In exceptional cases of interruption 
of concreting, it shall be resumed within | or 2 h. In 
case such an interruption is made while using tremie 
method of concreting, the tremie shall not be taken out 
of the concrete. Instead it shall be raised and lowered 
from time to time to prevent the concrete around the 
tremie from setting. 


8.6.5 In case of withdrawal of tremie out of the 
concrete, either accidentally or to remove a choke in 
the tremie, the tremie may be reintroduced in a manner 
to prevent impregnation of laitance or scum lying on 
the top of the concrete already deposited in the bore 
and concreting resumed as mentioned in 8.6.4. The 
fresh concrete will emerge out of the tremie displacing 
the laitance and scum and prevent impregnation or 
laitance of scum in the fresh concrete. 


8.6.6 For under-reamed bored compaction piles, the 
pile bore is first filled up with concrete without placing 
any reinforcement. Soon after, the specified core 
assembly shall be driven and extra concrete shall be 
poured in simultaneously to keep the level of concrete 
up to the desired level. 


8.6.7 The top of concrete in a pile shall be brought 
above the cut-off level to permit removal of all laitance 
and weak concrete before capping and to ensure good 
concrete at the cut-off level. The reinforcing cages 
shall be left with adequate protruding length above 
cut-off level for proper embedment into the pile cap. 


8.6.8 Where cut-off level is less than 1.5 m below 
working level, concrete shall be cast to a minimum 
of 300 mm above cut-off level. For each additional 
0.3 m increase in cut-off level below the working 
level, additional coverage of minimum 50 mm shall 
be allowed. Higher allowance may be necessary 
depending on the length of the pile. When concrete 
is placed by tremie method, it shall be cast up to the 
ground level to permit overflow of concrete for visual 
inspection or to a minimum of one metre above cut-off 
level. In the circumstances where cut-off level is below 
the ground water level, the need to maintain a pressure 
on the unset concrete equal to or greater than water 
pressure should be observed and accordingly length of 
extra concrete above cut-off level shall be determined. 


8.6.9 Sampling, testing and acceptance criteria shall be 
as per IS 456. 


8.7 Defective Pile 


8.7.1 In case, defective piles are formed, they shall 
be left in place. Additional piles as necessary shall be 
provided. 


8.7.2 Any deviation from the designed location, 
alignment or load capacity of a pile shall be noted and 
adequate measures taken well before the concreting of 
the pile cap and plinth beams. 


8.7.3 While removing excess concrete or laitance above 
the cut-off level, chipping by manual or pneumatic 
tools shall be permitted seven days after pile casting. 
However, good concrete is to be ensured at cut-off level 
by pouring fresh concrete after removal of all the weak 
concrete. 


13 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


8.8 Estimation of Concrete Quantity 


After concreting, the actual quantity of concrete shall be 

compared with the average obtained from observations 

made in the case of a few piles already cast. If the actual 

quantity is found to be considerably less, the matter 

should be investigated and appropriate measures taken. 
NOTE — If the estimates of concrete consumption is on the 
volume of bore holes and not on the basis of concrete quantity 
actually consumed, the concrete used may be found smaller 
than estimated and cement consumption may work out to be 
less. 


8.9 Recording of Pile Details 


8.9.1 A daily site record shall be maintained for the 
installation of piles and shall essentially contain the 
following information: 


a) Date of installation including sequence of 
installation in case of piles in a group; 

b) Number and dimension of the pile including 
length and diameter of shaft and bulbs, number of 
bulbs, type of pile, reinforcement details, grade of 
concrete, slump and mark of the pile; 

c) Depth bored and depth of under-ream/bulb; 

d) Time taken for boring, concreting and empty 
boring, chiseling and whether the pile is wet or 
dry; 

e) Cut-off level and working level; 

f) Sample bore log in the initial stage or when major 
variation occur; 

g) When drilling mud is used, specific gravity of the 
fresh supply and contaminated mud in the bore 
hole before concreting shall be recorded regularly; 

h) Method of boring; 

j) Ground water level; and 

k) Any other important observation. 


8.9.2 Typical data sheet for facility of recording pilling 
data is shown in Annex F. 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
[ Clause 4.1 (c) ] 
DEGREE OF EXPANSIVENESS 


A-1 The degree of expansiveness and consequent 
damage to the structures with light loading may be 
qualitatively judged as per Table 8 of IS 1498. 


A-1.1 In areas of soil showing high or very high 
differential free swell values, conventional shallow 
strip footings may not be adequate. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 5.2 ) 
EQUIPMENT FOR UNDER-REAMED PILES (MANUAL CONSTRUCTION) 


B-1 EQUIPMENT 
B-1.1 Normally the following equipment will be 
required in manual operation: 

a) An auger; 

b) An under-reamer; 

c) A boring guide; and 

d) Accessories like spare extensions, cutting tool, 

concreting funnel, etc. 


B-1.1.1 For the piles of size larger than 300 mm and 
for larger depths additional equipment required will be 
a portable tripod hoist with a manually operated winch. 


B-1.1.2 For piles in high ground water table and 
unstable soil conditions, boring and under-reaming 
shall be carried out with bentonite slurry using suitable 
equipment. Tremie pipe shall be used for concreting. 


B-1.1.3 The additional equipment normally required for 
under-reamed bored compaction pile are the following: 
a) Drop weight for driving the core assembly; and 

b) Pipe or solid core. 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 6.2.3 and 6.2.3.3 ) 
SAFE LOAD ON UNDER-REAMED PILES 


C-1 SAFE LOAD TABLE 


Safe loads as given in Table 1 are symptomatic. Safe 
load carrying capacity of pile shall be worked out as 
per 6.2.3. 


C-1.1 The safe bearing, uplift and lateral loads for 
under-reamed piles given in Table 1 apply to both 
medium compact (10 < N < 30) sandy soils and 
clayey soils of medium (4 < N < 8) consistency 
including expansive soils. The values are for piles with 
bulb diameter equal to 2.5 times the shaft diameter 
(N denotes corrected SPT value). 


Col 4 and Col 5 of Table 1 provide the minimum pile 
lengths for single and double under-reamed piles, 
respectively, in deep deposit of expansive soils. The 
values given for double under-reamed piles in Col 7 
and Col 11 are only applicable in expansive soils. 


14 


C-1.5 For dense sandy (N > 30) and stiff clayey 
(N = 8) soils, the safe loads in compression and uplift 
obtained from Table | may be increased by 25 percent. 
The lateral thrust values should not be increased 
unless the stability and strength of top soil (strata up 
to a depth of about three times the pile shaft diameter) 
is ascertained and found adequate. For piles in loose 
(4 < N < 10) sandy and soft (2 < N < 4) clayey soils, the 
safe loads should be taken 0.75 times the values shown 
in the Table. For very loose (N < 4) sandy and very soft 
(N < 2) clayey soils, the values obtained from the Table 
should be reduced by 50 percent. 


C-1.6 The safe loads obtained from Table 1, should be 
reduced by 25 percent if the pile bore holes are full of 
subsoil water or drilling mud during concreting. No 
such reduction may be done if the water is confined to 
the shaft portion below the bottom-most bulb. 


C-1.7 The safe loads in uplift and compression given 
in Table 1 or obtained in accordance with C-1.2 to 
C-1.6 should be reduced by 15 percent for piles with 
bulb of twice the shaft diameter. But no such reduction 
is required for lateral loads shown in Table 1. 


C-1.8 The safe loads for under-reamed bored 
compaction piles can be worked out by increasing the 
safe load of equivalent bored cast in-situ under-reamed 
pile obtained from Table I by 1.5 times in case of medium 
(10 < N < 30) and 1.75 times in case of loose to very 


15 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


loose (N < 10) sandy soils. Depending upon the nature 
and initial compactness of strata, pile geometry and 
lay-out of piles, this increase may be up to a factor of 2. 
The values of lateral loads should not be increased by 
more than 1.5 times in all cases. In obtaining safe load 
of under-reamed bored compaction pile the reduction 
for pile bore holes full of subsoil water or drilling mud 
during concreting should be taken 15 percent instead 
of 25 percent as given in C-1.6. The reduction for piles 
with twice the bulb diameter is to be taken 10 percent 
instead of 15 percent as given in C-1.7. 


16 


2021 


IS 2911 (Part 3) 


LA ST Sv'I 08'I STE IT 61 VT £9 (44 OG GE OST I 005 (TA 
St Ov og I 09 I SL'ST SLI LI SIT STS SE Sy SE STII Ost (A 
Ov TE STI Srl IC val SI 61 Tv 87 Ov GE 000 I 007 (aI 
VE 0 c or I SET 81 TI vl STI 9E LAY SL`€ GE 076 SLE en 
FI OT 580 SO I CI 8 TI TI LAY 91 Se Se OSL 00£ (n 
ST SI OL'O S8'0 6 9 60 STI 81 LI GE GE STI OST G 
(sD (p) (ED (cD (an (on) (6) (8) (L) (9) (9) (p) (£) © 0) 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ul u tu nu 
ysu ysu ysu ysu 
poureor powear Wo 0E Wo OE Wo 0E wo og 
-Jopun -Iopun od ad pourea1-1apun pəureər3:əpun ed Jod poulvol-lopuy) poWleol-lopuy, powea-opun o polueor-lopun) 199-211 əd JO 
əlqnoq oldulg ƏseƏr9Gq oseanou] olgnodg a[3us asea1naq ISLIJOUJ əlqnoq ajug əlqnoq aug pourai-1apuN 199W- 
ee Nil — 4 x. > i 
me NE 
JSNIY I, [e1o)eT 32UBISISIY IJAN ur SPEOT aes uorssəiduioo Paw ƏZIS 


(1-9 əsnp|O ) 
SOS U0)J0) elg Supnioul sprog AvAv[D put Apues ut sag PIOWvIY-19PUL] 1715-41 SVD PIJ I[63DJƏA 10J PEO JLS I AQEL 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 6.2.5 ) 
ANALYSIS OF LATERALLY LOADED UNDER-REAMED PILES 


D-1 GENERAL 


D-1.1 The ultimate resistance ofa vertical pile toa lateral 
load and the deflection of the pile as the load builds 
up to its ultimate value are complex matters involving 
the interaction between a semi-rigid structural element 
and soil which deforms partly elastically and partly 
plastically. The failure mechanisms of an infinitely 
long pile and that of a short rigid pile are different. 
The failure mechanisms also differ for a restrained and 
unrestrained pile head conditions. 


Because of the complexity of the problem only a 
procedure for an approximate solution that is adequate 
in most of the cases is presented here. Situations that 
need a rigorous analysis shall be dealt with accordingly. 


D-1.2 The first step is to determine, if the pile will 
behave as a short rigid unit or as an infinitely long 
flexible member. This is done by calculating the 
stiffness factor R or T for the particular combination of 
pile and soil. 


Having calculated the stiffness factor, the criteria for 
behaviour as a short rigid pile or as a long elastic pile 
are related to the embedded length L of the pile. The 
depth from the ground surface to the point of virtual 
fixity is then calculated and used in the conventional 
elastic analysis for estimating the lateral deflection and 
bending moment. 


D-2 STIFFNESS FACTORS 


D-2.1 The lateral soil resistance for granular 
soils/normally consolidated clays which have varying 
soil modulus is modeled according to the equation: 


£ =n,z 
Yy 
where 


p= lateral soil reaction per unit length of pile at 
depth z below ground level; 


y= lateral pile deflection; and 
n, = modulus of subgrade reaction for which the 
recommended values are given in Table 2. 


D-2.2 The lateral soil resistance for over-consolidated 
clays with constant soil modulus is modeled according 
to the equation: 


Pog 
Yy 


where 
k 0.3 


— x — 


15 B 


where k, is Terzaghi's modulus of subgrade reaction 
as determined from load deflection measurements on a 
30 cm square plate and B is the width of the pile 
(diameter in case of circular piles). The recommended 
values of k, are given in Table 3. 


Table 2 Modulus of Subgrade Reaction for 
Granular Soils/Normally Consolidated 
Clays, n,, kN/m" 


( Clause D-2.1) 


SI Soil Type N Range of n, 
No. (Blows/30 cm) kN/m? x 10° 
Dry Submerged 

W (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Very loose sand 0-4 «0.4 «0.2 

ii) Loose sand 4-10 0.4—2.5 0.2—1.4 
iii) Medium sand 10-35 2.5 — 7.5 1.4— 5.0 
iv) Dense sand >35 7.5-20.0 5.0—12.0 


NOTE — The n, values may be interpolated for intermediate 
standard penetration values, N. 


Table 3 Modulus of Subgrade Reaction for 
Over-consolidated Clay, k, KN/m` 


( Clause D-2.2 ) 


SI No. Soil Unconfined Range of k, 
Consistency Compression 
Strength, q, 
kN/m? kN/m’? x 10? 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Soft 25-50 4,5 — 9.0 
ii) Medium stiff 50 — 100 9.0 — 18.0 
iii) Stiff 100 — 200 18.0 — 36.0 
iv) Very stiff 200 — 400 36.0 — 72.0 
v) Hard > 400 > 72.0 


NOTE — For q, less than 25, k, may be taken as zero, which 
implies that there is no lateral resistance. 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


D-2.3 Stiffness Factors 


D-2.3.1 For Piles 
Consolidated Clays 


: i EI 
Stiffness factor T, in m = 5 sa 
h 


E= Young’s modulus of pile material, in MN/m?; 


in Granular  Soils/Normally 


where 


I= moment of inertia of the pile cross-section, in 
mi; and 

modulus of subgrade reaction, in MN/m? 
(see Table 2). 


T|, 


D-2.3.2 For Piles in Over-consolidated Clays 
Stiffness factor R, in m = = 
KB 


Young’s modulus of pile material, in MN/m?; 
moment of inertia of the pile cross-section, 
in mi; 

k 


1.5 
MN/m’, see also Note); and 

width of pile shaft (diameter in case of circular 
piles), in m. 


NOTE — Table 3 shall be referred if the average unconfined 
compression strength, q, is greater than or equal to 100 kN/m?. 


0.3 
x (see Table 3 for values of k, in 


D-3 CRITERIA FOR SHORT RIGID PILES 
AND LONG ELASTIC PILES 


Having calculated the stiffness factor T or R, the criteria 
for behaviour as a short rigid pile or as a long elastic 
pile are related to the embedded length L as given in 
Table 4. 


Table 4 Criteria for Behaviour of Pile Based on its 
Embedded Length 


( Clause D-3 ) 


SI No. Type of Pile Relation of Embedded Length 
Behaviour with Stiffness Factor 
Linearly Constant 
Increasing 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Short (rigid) pile L<2T L<2R 
11) Long (elastic) pile L2ZAT L23.5R 


NOTE — The intermediate L shall indicate a case between 
rigid pile behaviour and elastic pile behaviour. 


18 


D-4 DEFLECTION AND MOMENTS IN LONG 
ELASTIC PILES 


D-4.1 Equivalent cantilever approach gives a simple 
procedure for obtaining the deflections and moments 
due to relatively small lateral loads. This requires the 
determination of depth of virtual fixity, z, 


The depth to the point of fixity may be read from the 
plots given in Fig. 5. e is the effective eccentricity of the 
point of load application obtained either by converting 
the moment to an equivalent horizontal load or by 
actual position of the horizontal load application. R and 
T are the stiffness factors described in D-2.3. 


D-4.2 The pile head deflection, y shall be computed 
using the following equations: 


. H (e +72; y 3 
Deflection, y = ——Y—Ü10 ....... for free 
3E1 head pile 
. H(e+z; y å 
Deflection, y = ——x10" ....... for fixed 
12ET head pile 
where 
H= lateral load, in kN; 
y= deflection of pile head, in mm; 
E= Young’s modulus of pile material, in kN/m°; 
I= moment of inertia of the pile cross-section, in 
mi; 
z,= depth to point of fixity, in m; and 
e= cantilever length above ground/bed to the 


point of load application, in m. 


D-4.3 The fixed end moment of the pile for the 
eguivalent cantilever may be determined from the 
following expressions: 


Fixed end moment, M, = H(e*z,) ......... for 
free head pile 
I H (e +Z; ) 
Fixed end moment, M, = ————— .......... for 
2 fixed head pile 


The fixed head moment, M, of the equivalent cantilever 
is higher than the actual maximum moment M in the 
pile. The actual maximum moment may be obtained 
by multiplying the fixed end moment of the equivalent 
cantilever by a reduction factor, m, given in Fig. 6. 


i 


LIR OR LIT 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


— —— FREE HEAD PILES 
— — — — FIXED HEAD PILES å 


Where 
L,=eand Lí = z 


1:9 


— __ — __ FOR PILES IN GRANULAR SOILS / 
\ NORMALLY CONSOLIDATED CLAYS 


1.7 — \ 
1.5 — — — — > FOR PILES IN 
) OVER- CONSOLIDATED 
CLAYS 


1.3 Jan L — L lo 
0 2 4 6 8 10 


LIR OR L/T 


Fic. 5 DEPTH OF FIXITY 


19 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


Ë 

x 

O 

= 

O 

< 

LL 

za 

O 

H| 

O 

I 

a 

LU 

M 
2 4 6 8 10 12 

LÆR ORL, ZT 
FOR PILES IN OVER-CONSOLIDATED CLAYS 
————— FOR PILES IN GRANULAR SOILS / 

NORMAL CONSOLIDATED CLAYS 
6A FOR FREE HEAD PILES 

Ë 

x 

O 

= 

O 

< 

LL 

Z 

O 

= 

O 

=) 

O 

Ul 

MX 


05 10 15 20 25 
L,/R ORL,/T 


FOR PILES IN OVER-CONSOLIDATED CLAYS 
a FOR PILES IN GRANULAR SOILS / 
NORMAL CONSOLIDATED CLAYS 


6B FOR FIXED HEAD PILES 


FIG. 6 DETERMINATION OF REDUCTION FACTORS FOR COMPUTATION 
OF MAXIMUM MOMENT IN PILE 


20 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 8.4.1) 
REQUIREMENTS OF DRILLING MUD (BENTONITE) 


E-1 PROPERTIES 


The bentonite suspension used in bore holes is basically 
a clay of montmorillonite group having exchangeable 
sodium cations. Because of the presence of sodium 
cations, bentonite on dispersion will break down into 
small plate like particles having a negative charge on 
the surfaces and positive charge on the edges. When 
the dispersion is left to stand undisturbed, the particles 
become oriented building up a mechanical structure of 
its own. This mechanical structure held by electrical 
bonds is observed as a thin jelly like mass or membrane. 
When the jelly is agitated, the weak electrical bonds are 
broken and the suspension becomes fluid again. 


E-2 FUNCTIONS 


E-2.1 The action of bentonite in stabilizing the sides 
of bore holes is primarily due to thixotropic property 
of bentonite suspension. The thixotropic property of 
bentonite suspension permits the material to have the 
consistency of a fluid when introduced into a trench 
or hole. When left undisturbed it forms a jelly like 
membrane on the borehole wall and when agitated it 
becomes a fluid again. 


E-2.2 In the case of a granular soil, the bentonite 
suspension penetrates into the sides under positive 
pressure and after a while, forms a jelly. The bentonite 
suspension then gets deposited on the sides of the 


21 


hole and makes the surface impervious and imparts a 
plastering effect. In impervious clay, the bentonite does 
not penetrate into the soil, but deposits only as thin film 
on the surface of hole. Under such condition, stability 
is derived from the hydrostatic head of the suspension. 


E-3 REQUIREMENTS 
The bentonite powder and bentonite suspension used 
for piling work shall satisfy the following requirements: 


a) The liquid limit of bentonite when tested in 
accordance with IS 2720 (Part 5) shall be 
400 percent or more. 


b 


— 


The bentonite suspension shall be made by mixing 
it with fresh water using a pump for circulation. 
The density of the freshly prepared bentonite 
suspension shall be between 1.03 g/ml and 
1.10 g/ml depending upon the pile dimensions and 
the type of soil in which the pile is to be bored. 
The density of bentonite after contamination with 
deleterious material in the bore hole may rise up to 
1.25 g/ml. This should be brought down to at least 
1.12 g/ml by flushing before concreting. 


wma 


The marsh viscosity of bentonite suspension 
when tested by a marsh cone shall be between 
30 to 60 stoke; in special cases it may be allowed 
up to 90 stoke. 


c 


d) The pH value of the bentonite suspension shall be 
between 9 and 11.5. 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 8.9.2 ) 
DATA SHEET 
DIS GRENEN ease sa 
Te oats cat aaa pè ki aren e n ite tea a hala a cies ua a DES SEE e SO ES FE Fe eat a ee ek ea ke teense 
Dåté of CA AWA Vè crits er n ka tes dani n e e ol SEE ie lap ae okt kai ii 
Date piltri pi commenced sie mel daime sikm iste debake a a l ak dia yememiş waqasa dawa PA Aa 
Actual or anticipateddateforcompletionofpilingwork............................................... 
Number of pile u gu nedetid eee Ae eda 
TEST PILE DATA 
Pile: Pileitesticommenced L.A sara Saka kaseler ke a al plore deli NE at delu ke dead 
Pile test completed va serdi Sineme lemek ie bea alan Gl kyk del 
Pilèetype $§ = —«-._ Da ao e nee Pe RAE ne da ek se A kaban Ze spas eee lal almama a e A AD 
(Mentionproprietarysystem,ifany).................................... oins 
Size Shaft bal so ask reel belim pese o e ent 
Bulb(s) 
Pile specification: Number of Bulbs svigers eee cade mit a ili lk sedaner 
Reimforcement................... NOU sema did: for sere iii (depth) 
Sequence of piling: From centre towards the periphery or from periphery towards the centre 
(for Groups) 
Concrete: Mix tato, Li ss by volume/weight or 
Strength after... uum antenne days...............................Nimm? 
Quantity of Cément/m?: viske ağ dae ised 
Extracementadded,ifany:....................................... 
Details:of drilling müd Used? svar sesam eee ye aşyrmak sağmal paz a aaa ye 
Time taken for Concreting: sea u n A EDE la Whee el de i an 
Quantity of concrete-Actiial:: 4s tait e tè rè poko enza sağına yası add Haneda lada 
TW Ore tical? ke. Suc deed oo es e A 
Test Loading: 
Maintamèd load/Cychic loadinig/C.R.P imleme ladin eidet hae 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


Capacity of jacks coves uu sa ayna aussi E kenèp sakes Saas cade Ie ibi sila 
fanchorpilesused.give................................... ING Wen th a eee ote tand dan Madde Sail al 
Distanceoftestpilefromnearestanchorpike................................................ 
Test pile and anchor piles were/were not working piles. 

Method of taking observations: 
Dial gaugés/ Engineers leyel aaa tòl nt pre ee ee et cia bade paşam date braste 
Reduced level of pile tip sasa no 0110000480) sok kwè ne hed da daya dees e ne a ee 


General Remarks: 


Results: 
Workingloadspecifiedforthetestpile..................................................... E aa 
Settlement specified for the test påle uvaner e kaban a a tap PRA SSA saa kasa, 
Settlement specified for the: structure ea si çe aa a co a a lr Ge b li 
Working load accepted for a single pile as a result of the test ..................................... r ene ea on oorasessnson 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


BORE HOLE LOG 
1. Site of bore hole relative to test pile position ..................... EEn EA EEA EERTE AES 
2.Ifnoborehole,givebestavailablegroundconditions........................................ 
Soil Soil Reduced Soil Depth Thickness 
Properties Description Level Legend Below G.L. of Strata 


Position of the 

tip of pile to 

be indicated thus — > 
Standing ground 

water level indicated 


thus ZÉ 
METHOD OF SUBSURFACE INVESTIGATION 


Trail pit/Post-hole auger/Shell and auger boring/Percussion/Probing/Core-drilling/Shot drilling/Sub-surface 
souriding by conés or Standard samplet vere» uu. uuu. au exes aa aaa ea a Ne W es as aged ee ka ek SANS AE 


Attachments to the report: Graphs, showing the following relations: 
a) Load vs Time, and 
b) Settlement vs Load. 


24 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX G 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 202/395, Jodhpur 
Park, Kolkata 700068) 


In Personal Capacity (D-1903, PWS, 7 Hills, 
Narsingi(v), Kokapet Road, Ranga Reddy 
500089) 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Association of Piling Specialists (India), Mumbai 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Noida 


CEM Engineers & Consultants Pvt Ltd, Bhubaneswar 
Cengrs Geotechnica Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Central Designs Organization, Water Resources Deptt, 
Govt of Maharashtra, Nashik 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New 
Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


DR N. Som (Chairman) 


Dr D. N. NARESH (Vice Chairman) 


SHRI P. S. BANSOD 
SHRI V. RAMAMURTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
SHRI LALIT MOHAN PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHANWA AMOL SHINGAREY 
SHRI CHANDRAMOULEESWAR S. (Alternate) 


SHRI V. T. GANPULE 
SHRI MADHUKAR J. LODHAVIA (Alternate) 


SHRI C. PUSHPAKARAN 
SHRI HEMANT MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


Suri ASHOK BASA 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 

SHRI Ravi SUNDARAM (Alternate I) 

SHRI SORABH GUPTA (Alternate II) 
DIRECTOR 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 

EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR 

SHRI SIDHARTHA MITRA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJESH KHARE 

SHRI SAUROBH Kumar (Alternate) 
Dr R. CHITRA 

SHRI MAHABIR Dixit (A/ternate) 
SHRI DIPANKAR PAUL 

Suri T. K. Roy CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 
SHRI MANOJIT SAMANTA 

DR S. GANESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI KANWAR SINGH 

Dr P. S. PRASAD (Alternate) 
Dr P. KAMATCHI 

SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA (Alternate) 
Dr K. G. BHATIA 
SHRI GOVIND RAM SHIROMANI 

SHRI K. K. Gupta (Alternate) 
PROF ASHOK KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI V. K. PANWAR 
SHRI SANJOY BHOWMIK (Alternate) 


25 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


Organization 


F S Engineers Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Geodynamics Ltd, Vadodara 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Ground Engineering Limited, New Delhi 

Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 

Hydraulic and Engineering Instruments (HEICO), 
New Delhi 


Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 
ITD Cementation India Ltd, Kolkata 

Jadhavpur University, Kolkata 

Keller Ground Engineering Pvt Ltd, Chennai 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), New 
Delhi 


MN Dastur & Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 
Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 


Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. VERGHESE CHUMMAR 
SHRI VENKATARAMANA. N. HEGGADE 
SHRI SANDEEP M. GHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI RAVI KIRAN RAMESH VAIDYA 
SHRI SUJAN KULKARNI (Alternate) 
DR TIMIR BARAN GHOSAL 
SHRI PRASHANT TUKARAM ILAMKAR (Alternate) 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri K. A. KESHVANI 
SHRI R. S. Vasava (Alternate) 


SHRI JATTINDER SINGH 

SHRI RAUNAQ SINGH (Alternate) 
SECRETARY 
PROF T. G. SITHARAM 

PROF G. L. SIVAKUMARA BABU (Alternate) 


DR G. V. RAMANA 

DR J. T. SHAHU (Alternate I) 

DR PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate II YP) 
PROF PRIYANKA GHOSH 
PROF SUBHADEEP BANERJEE 

PROF RAMESH K. KANDASAMI (Alternate) 
PROF DEEPANKAR CHOUDHURY 

PROF DASAKA Murty (Alternate) 
PROF MAHENDRA SINGH 

PROF VISHWAS A. SAWANT (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
DIRECTOR (T) (Alternate) 


PROF T. G. SITHARAM 

Dr B. K. MAHESWARI (Alternate) 
SHRI MANISH KUMAR 

SHRI SACHIN Kamat (Alternate) 
PROF SIBAPRIYA MUKHERJEE 

PROF RAMENDU BIKAS SAHU (Alternate) 
SHRI V. V. S. RAMADAS 

SHRI MADAN KUMAR ANNAM (Alternate) 
Dr K. S. RAMAKRISHNA 

SHRI JESUDOSS ASIRVATHAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RANJAN KUMAR PANDEY 
SHRI AJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


DR ABHIJIT DASGUPTA 
SHRI SUVENDU Dey (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR RAY 


Suri H. N. ASWATH 
SHRI ANIL PRUTHI (Alternate) 


Dy CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DESIGN) (A/ternate) 


26 


Organization 


Nagadi Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

National Institute of Disaster Management, New 
Delhi 

NTPC Limited, Noida 

Research Designs and Standards Organization 
(Ministry of Railways), Lucknow 

RITES Limited, Gurugram 


Safe Enterprises, Mumbai 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Simplex Infrastructures Limited, Chennai 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


Telangana State Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 


The Pressure Piling Co (I) Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity, New Delhi (Flat No. 220, Ankur 


Apartments Mother Dairy Road, Patparganj, 
Delhi 110092) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 2911 (Part 3) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


Dr V. V. S. RAO 
DR N. SANTOSH RAO (Alternate) 


DR CHANDAN GHOSH 
SHRI AMIR ALI (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDER KUMAR 
SHRI MOHIT JHALANI (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER SINGH 
SHRI S. K. OJHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK GARG 
SHRI S. K. Kapoor (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANDIPAN HORE (Alternate Il) 


SHRI VIKRAM SINGH RAO 
SHRI SURYAVEER SINGH RAO (Alternate) 


PROF Y. K. JAIN 


SHRI SHANKAR GUHA 
DR V. BALAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
Suri B. N. NAGARAJ (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI J. SRIDEVI 
SHRI P. JOHN VICTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. C. DESHPANDE 
SHRI PUSHKAR V. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST “F” AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Panel for Review of IS 2911 (Part 3), CED 43: P7 


Organizationse 


Cengrs Geotechnica Pvt Ltd, Noida 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Noida 


CEM Engineers & Consultants Pvt Ltd, Bhubaneswar 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Ground Engineering Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, Gurugram 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANJAY GUPTA (Convener) 
SHRI C. PUSHPAKARAN 

SHRI ASHOK BASA 

SHRI SAUROBH KUMAR 

SHRI KANWAR SINGH 

SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JAIN 

PROF SUBHADEEP BANERJEE 
SHRI S. K. PRASAD 

SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 


27 


(Continued from second cover) 


This Indian Standard is published in four parts. The other parts in the series are: 


Part 1 Concrete piles 
Part 2 Timber piles 
Part 4 Load test on piles 


Part 1 of this standard consists of the following four sections under the general title, Design and construction of 
pile foundations — Code of practice: Part 1 Concrete piles. 


Section | Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
Section 2 Bored cast in-situ concrete piles 
Section 3 Driven precast concrete piles 
Section 4 Precast concrete piles in prebored holes 
In the present revision of this standard (Part 3), the following major modifications have been made: 
a) Definitions of various terms have been modified as per the prevailing engineering practices. 
b) Use of under-reamed piles of a maximum depth up to 10 m has been permitted. 


c) Caution regarding examining the construction feasibility of under-ream/bulb as per soil characteristics, 
particularly in case of clean/river sand has been added. 

d) Procedures for calculation of bearing capacity, structural capacity, factor of safety, lateral load 
capacity, etc, have also been modified to bring them at par with the present practices. 

e) Provisions on overloading and transient loading have been modified. 

f) Design parameters with respect to adhesion factor, earth pressure coefficient, modulus of subgrade 
reaction, etc, have been revised to make them consistence with the outcome of modern research and 
construction practices. 

g) Minimum grade of concrete to be used in under-reamed pile foundations has been revised to M 25. 

h) Various provisions on concrete and concreting have been revised based on IS 456 : 2000 ‘Plain and 
reinforced concrete — Code of practice (fourth revision)’. 

j) Requirement for minimum reinforcement has been modified. 

k) Need for assessment of liquefaction potential of soil as per IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 ‘Criteria for 
earthquake resistant design of structures: Part 1 General provisions and buildings (sixth revision)’ has 
been included. 

m) Caution regarding use of safe load tables has been added and the provisions in the table have been 
modified. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries for pile foundations, in addition to relating it to the practices in the 
field in this country. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 43 (14033). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T, Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


