( Reaffirmed 2012 )

Indian Standard

DESIGNOFCROSSDRhNAGEWORKSCODEOFBRACTICB
PART 1 GENERAL FEATURES (

First Revision )

UDC

626-861-1 : 006.76

%I 8 BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002 July 1993 Price Group 6

Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee,

RVD 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Cross drainage works are structures which are constructed to negotiate an aligned carrier canal over, below or at the same level of a drainage or another carrier channel/canal. channel/

The code of practice for design of cross drainage works is formulated in two parts, Part 1 dealing with general features and Part 2 with specific requirements, for various types of cross drainage works. This standard was first published in the year 1975. Based on the experience of various departments including Central Water Commission and Irrigation Department, a need was felt to make its provisions up-to-date, and hence, this revision has been prepared. The principal modifications are in respect of correcting the terminology of some of the terms and covering it separately [ see IS 4410 ( part lS/Sec 5 ) : 1992 ] categorizing the various cross drainage works as is being done in practice, arriving at design flood, loss of head etc. The modifications made in this standard are based on the suggestions received from various states thus making the provisions more clear and in line with the practice being followed in this country by major states. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off jn accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993

Indian Standard

DESIGNOFCROSSDRAINAGEWORKSCODEOFPRACTICE
PART 1 GENERAL FEATURES (
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 1) covers general features pertinent to the design of various types of cross drainage works and incorporates investigations and studies connected therewith. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 4410 (Part ll/Sec 5) : 1977 and IS 4410 (Part lS/Sec 5) : 1992 will apply. 4 CATEGORIES OF CROSS DRAINAGE WORK!3 4.0 Cross drainage works can be classified under the three broad categories listed at 4.1 to 4.3, based on the type of the structure to negotiate a canal over, below or at the same level of the drainage channel. 4.1 Stru'ctures for Canal Over a Natural Drainage Channel The structures falling under this category are aqueducts, syphon aqueducts and culverts. Maintenance of structures in this category is relatively more convenient, as these are generally above the ground and hence open for inspection. 4.2 Structures for Canal Underneath a Natural Drainage Channel

First Revision )
before deciding upon the site and type of crossing. As a general guide, for deciding upon the type of the cross drainage work, important considerations are as given below: a) Full supply level and functions of canal vis-U-L& high flood level of the drainage channel, b) Topography of terrain, Cl Regime of the stream? d) Foundstion strata, e) Dewatering requirements, 9 Ratio of design flood to be provided in drainage channel to the discharge in the canal, and fit) Envisaged head loss. 51.1 FullSupplyLevels ofcanadvis-a-vis High Flood

Level (HFL) of Draitrage Channel

The choice of any particular type of cross drainage

The structures falling under this category are superpassages and syphons including well syphons. In case of syphons the maintenance is diffhzult as these run below the natural drainage channel and are, therefore, not easily accessible-to inspection. 4.3 Structures for Canal Crossing a Natural
Drainage Channel at the Same Level

`. i '

Structures falling under this category are level crossings and inlets, with or without escapes. NOTE -Wherever the word `canal' is used, it should
be meant as `canal/carrier channel'.

SELECTION OF THE DRAINAGE WORK
5

TYPE

OF CROSS

5.1 While aligning the canal, the type of c?oss drainage work envisaged should always be kept in view. The economics of various types of cross drainage works vi.s-a-vb alternative aligmnents should be considered

work is dependent on the high flood level (HFL) in the ( drainage channel to be negotiated. Aqueducts are generally proposed when the bed level of canal is well above the HFL of the drainage channel. Superpassages are generally proposed when the full supply level (FSL) of the canal is well below the bed level of the drainage channel. When the bed level of the canal is at, or below, the HFL of the drainage channel, the depression of the bed of the drainage channel is often a mop economical proposal and in such cases syphon aqueducts may be considered. 5.1.2 Topography of Terrain Detailed examination of the topography of the terrain is essedtialtg locate a stable reach of the drainage channel'with good foundations permitting, preferably, a right-angle crossing. Topography of the terrain may also permit diversion of one channel into another and locating the cross drainage work below the confluence of the two channel for greater economy. 5.1.3 Regime of Drainge Channel The regime of a drainge channel requires careful examination. For drainage channel carrying high sediment charges or drift materials, the possibility of choking up of the syphon and the effect of fluming of the drainage channel should be kept in view. 5.1.4 Foundatioli Strata The selection of the most suitable site and a good design, for any cross drainage work is intimately related to the engineering properties of the foundation 1

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993 sub-strata at various alternative sites. These properties have, therefore, to be determined by site explorations. Where an alternative site, meeting other criteria, is available, the final choice would obviously depend 011 the location where the sub-strata available close to the - bed of the stream is firm. 5S.S Dewatering Requirements In the executibn of foundation works for cross drainage structures dewatering of foundations may pose serious problems. An accurate estimate of the cost and procedure of dewatering requires to be carefully worked out when designs involve laying of foundations below the ground water table. 5.1.6 Ratio of Design Flood in Drainage Channel to the Discharge in Canal Negotiating a canal below the drainage chamlel is generally more difficult and involves more head loss. However, if the topography and other features warrant a choice to be made between canal syphon and syphon aqueduct, then canal syphon may be preferred, only if the ratio of canal discharge to the design flood is substantially low. 5.1.7 Envisaged Head Loss The choice of ani particular type of cross drainage work is also dependent on the head loss that can be pennitted in the canal. Whereas higher head loss can throw some area out of command, restriction on head loss may necessitate provision of wider sections making the structure costly. 6 DATAREQUIREMENT 6.1 For any type of cross drainage work some data is required which is common to all types of cross drainage works. A location map for the work with results of subsurface exploration conducted at site, cross sections of the stream, upstream and downstream of the proposed site, should be prepared, as given in 6.2 to 6.9. 6.2 An index map to a suitable scale showing the recotnmended location of the cross drainage structure, the alternative sites of crossings investigated and rejected, the existing communications, the general topography of the country and the importa?& habita.J 1 tions in the vicinity. 6.3 A catchment area map to a suitable scale, with contour markings at suitable intervals showing the main drainage channel front its sources together with all its tributaries. The map should also show the various locations of raingauge stations, gauging sites, etc, as also the general soil types and land use (that is forests, cultivated and uncultivated areas). The hydrological observation sites should also be marked. Existing, under construction or proposed embankments and flood management measures should also be shown. 6.4 A detailed survey plan of the drainage chamlel to suitable scale showing important topographical features extending considerable distances, downstream and upstreatn, of the proposed site of crossing and I either of its banks. 6.5 Asite plan to a suitable scale showin& details of the site selected and extending upstream and downstream, of the centre line of the proposed crossing and covering its approaches to sufficient distances, so as to demarcate levels, cadestral survey plot numbers, important topographical features like depressions near the proposed alignment of canal, general sub-soil water levels (with slope, if possible), etc. 6.5.1 The other requirements for the plan at 6.5 are: a) reference to the position of the bench-mark used as datum with its full description and reduced level; b) the lines and identification numbers of the cross sections and longitudinal sections of drainage chamiel taken within the scope of site plan and exact locations of their extreme points; 4 the locations of the various trial pits and/or. borings with tlteir identification numbers; dj The contour of the drainage channel at intervals between 0'5 m to 1'5 m depending upon the terrain. This interval r!iay be greater in mourtainous regions; The direction of flow of water; e) The angle of direction of crossing; and 0 Cross alignment of canal further upstream for g) some distance beyond the limits of cross drainage works. 6.6 A cross section of the drainage cham~el at the proposed site of the crossing to appropriate vertical and horizontal scales indicating the following information: a) Cross section covering the bed and banks ofthe channel portion and the ground levels beyond the banks covering the entire flood plane, or from ridge to ridge at close intervals to sufficient distances on either side showing all uneven features and habitations, if any; b) Nature of the soil in bed, banks and approaches, with trial pit or bore-hole sections showing the levels and natures of the various strata down to stratum suitable from foundation considerations and front considerations of safe bearing capacity of soil; c); Low-water level; and d). *%%-&n flood level. 6.7 Longitudinal section of the drainage charulel covering a reasonable reach to suitable scale, showing the location of the cross drainage work, with levels of the observed flood, the low water and the bed levels at suitably spaced intervals along the line of the deep water channel. 6.8 Anotegiving the salient features relating to the catchment area, the meteorological conditions experienced thereon, besides the following other points:

a) Any b)
2

predictable (future) alteration in the land use; Storages in the catchment (artificial or natural)

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993 and embankment breaches that have occurred in the past; Short duration intensity and frequency data in respect of rainfall in the catchment; Liability of the site to seismic disturbances; Likelihood of heavy sediment charge or floating timber, Particulars of foundation exploration data incidental to design requirements; and Recuperation tests, where foundation depth is more than 3 m below the water table and where the strata are pervious. 6.10.2 Drainage Channel 1. Extent and nature of drainage area (catchment' area); 2. Maximum annual rainfall and the period (years) of data; 3. Maximum intensity of rainfall with year; 4. Maximum observed flood discharge at the site; 5. Maximum flood level; 6. Water surface slope; 7. Site plan of proposed crossing including contours; 8. Log of borehole or trial pit data; 9. Type of bed load of drainage chamtel; section of the stream for 10. Longitudinal suitable distance ups&ream and downstream of the canal depending upon site conditions; 11. Cross section of the drainage chamrel for a distance 100 m to 300 m upstream and downstream, at intervals of 10 m to 50 m; 12. Waterways provided in road and railway bridges or other hydraulic structures on the drainage channel; 13. Spring water level at the crossing site in May and October; and 14. Silt factor. 7 DESIGN FLOOD FOR DRAINAGE CHANNEL

4 4 e) f) g)

6.9 A note giving the salient design features of structures existing upstream or downstream of the proposed site. 63.1 Presence of dams, barrages, weirs, etc, on the natural drainage chamtel in the vicinity either upstream or downstream, may affect the hydraulic characteristics of the natural drainage channel, like obliquity and concentration of flow, scour, silting of bed, change in bed levels, flood levels, etc. These effects should be considered in the design of the cross drainage work. 6.10 For preparing the design of a cross drainage structure, the following specified hydraulic data should -- also be made available. 6.10.1 Canal 1. 2 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Full supply discharge, Q; Bed width; Full supply depth; Water surface slope; Bed level; Bed slope; Full supply level; Top of bank level; Cross section of canal showing Natural Ground
Level;

7.1 Design blood for drainage chamtel to be adopted for cross drainage works should depend upon the size of the canal, size of the drainage channel and location of the cross drainage. A very long canal, crossing a drainage channel in the initial reach, damage to which is likely to affect the canal supplies over a large area and for a long period, should be given proper weightage. 7.2 Cross drainage structures are divided into four categories depending upon the canal discharge and drainage discharge. Des&n flood to be adopted for these four categories of cross drainage structures is given in Table 1.

10. Subsoil water level; and 11. Nature pf bed material and value of `n' (rugosity coefftcient in Manning's formula). i' Tible 1 Design Flood Values (Clauses 7.2 an&TA). cstegory of Srructu~
A
B C D NOTES Canal Discharga in

rn?sce

*Estimated &&age
Diiarge in m'/sac Ail discharges O-150 Above 150 O-100 Above 100 O-150 Above 150

F=qu~;;$Duisp
1 in 25 years 1 in 50 years 1 in 100 years 1 in 50 years 1 in 100 years ~1inlOOyears As per Note 2

O-O.5
05-15 15-30 Above 30

1 XX desigo
2

flood IO be adopted as mentioned ia this table should in no case, be less than the observed flood.

la case of very huge cross drainage StNCIUfeS where estimated drainage discharge is above 150 cumecs and canal design discharge is more than 3Octonecs, the hydroloe should be examined in detail and appropriate &sign flood adopted, which should in no case be less than 1 in 100 years flood.

*This refers IO the discharge estimated on the t)asis of river parameters curresponding to maximum observed flood level.

3

Is 7784 (Part 1) : 1993 7.3 Where possible, the discharges determiued by different methods mentioned in IS : 5477 (Part 4) :1971 ' should be compared to see if any large variations are exhibited and the most reasonable value, giving weightage to the one based on observed data, should be adopted. Where there are cross drainage works already existing on the same drainage channel, full data regarding the observed flood should be obtained and the new cross drainage works designed, with such modifications in the design flood as may be considered necessary. 7.4 To safeguard against unforeseen nature of flood intensities the foundation of the cross drainage structure should be checked for a check flood discharge of value twenty percent higher than the design flood given in Table 1. 8 HYDRAULIC 8.1 Waterway 8.1.1 Waterway.for a cross drainage wfirk is fixed from hydraulic and economic considerations with particular reference to: a) design flood, b) topography of the site, c) existing and proposed sectiou aud slope of the drainage channel in the vicinity of the crossing, d) peimissible amux, and e) construction and maintenance aspects. 8.1.2 ..Ih plains, the drainage channels are generally in alluvium and the waterway usually provided in works without rigid floor is about sixty to eighty percent of the perimetei, given by Lacey's formula: Pw = C [Q]"' DESIGN ASPECTS where PW = wetted perimeter in m; c = a coefficient varying from 4'5 to 63 according to local conditions, the usual value adopted being 4'8 for regime channel; and Q = design flood in m3/s. 8.1.2.1 The value of wetted perimeter obtained from 8.1.2 is the total waterway between the two faces of the abutments. 8.1.2.2 In works `with rigid floors, however, waterway. can be further flumed within the permissible limits of velocity negotiated through the available ventages. Ordinarily such velocities should be limited to the values given in Table 2 8.13 For sub-vountaiuous and mountainous terrains with flashy flows, the waterway is provided within the width of the existing stream. Where the slope of the natural drainage channel is quite steep suitable methods may be adopted to bring the velocity within the desired limits. 8.1.4 The minimum dimension of openings should be such as to permit, as far as possible, manual clearing of deposits therein. 8.2 Clearauce for Aqueducts 8.2.1 Rectangular Openings The clearance will depend upon the relative levels of the canal bed and high flood level of the draiuage channel. Values given in Table 3 are suggested as suitable minimum clearances (taking iuto account allowable afflux) for purposes of design, where available.

Table 2 Maximum Permissible Velocities. ( Clause 8.1.2.2 )
SI No.
(1) I? ii) ljpes of Floors (2) Metals face (steel and cast iron lined) Face of concrete grade M 30 and above grade &elow M 30 Maximum Penuissihle Velocity (3) m/s 10

iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) W

i**

'
.

6
4 %LIW = 3 4 25 2 4 15-2 07-l

Stone masonry face with cement pointing Stone masonry face with cement plaster Brick masonry face with cement plaster Brick masonry with cement pointing Hard rock Murum Soil silt NOTES

1 Whe*_flow
2

carries abrasive materiai$ with it, the permissible valuea may be further reduced by 25%.

Hard steel troweling, power floating, sqotb surface finish and conCnuous long curing can have higher abrasion resistance, and higher velocities than that given in this table can be permitted, for surface using cemen!.

4

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993 Tuble 3 Miuimum
SI No.
(1) 9 ii) iii) iv) v) Below 3 3 and above but below 30 30 and above but below 300 300 and above but below 3 WO 3 000 and above Design Flood (2) m3h

Vertical Clearances

for Rectangular
Minimum

Openings
Vertical Clearance (3) mm 450 600 900 1200 1500

8.2.1.1 Ifthe minimum clearances specified in Table 3 are not available; safety of the superstructure should be ensured against likely repercussions. 8.2.2 Arch Openings Minimum clearance measured to the crown of the arch should normally be given as recommended in Table 4. 8.23 In the case of drainage channels, due to progressive silting is anticipated, clearance specified in Table 4 should allow for such aggradations depending of silting. 83.4 Free Board wbere a bed rise the permissible be increased to upon the extent

8.4.3 The efzect of afflux on the submergence of the surrounding coantry should be specially studied. 8.4.4 The afflux may be calculated by either of the methods given at 8.4.4.1 and 8.4.4.2. 8.4.4.1 Rational formuiae Broad crested weir discharge formula or orifice discharge formula depending upon the flow conditions through the cross drainage work openings, may be applied for calculating afflux. When the performance of the cross drainage work openings remains unaffected by the depth downstream of the obstruction, that is, a standing wave is formed, weir formula is applicable, otherwise the orifice formula holds good. Approximately, when the downstream depth D, above the crest is more than eighty percent of the upstream depth D, the weir formula does not hold good. a) Weir formula : Q = 1'70 C, LH3R where discharge through the openings iu m3/s; coefftcient of discharge accounting for losses in friction; the values may be taken as under : Condition Value I) Narrow openings with 0'94 or without floors 2) Wide openings with floors 0'96 3) Wide openings without floors 0'98 L = ~ I&ar_waterway in m; H.2 total energy head upstream of the obstruction in m, that is, D, + V2/2 g D, = depth of flow upstream in m; and Q = c w=

On aqueduct structures, the free board is reckoned horn the high good level (including afflux) in case of drainage channel and from the full supply level in case of canals, to the formation level of guide bank or canal embankment. The free board should not be less thau 900 mm. Wherever heavy wave actions are auticipated, the free board should be suitably increased. 8.3 Clearance 83.1 Clearance for Superpassages

Clearances of about fifty percent of those recommended in 8.2.1 and 8.2.2 mutalk mutandis may be provided in case-of superpassages. 83.2 Free Board in 8.2.4 may be provided.

Free board recommended 8.4 Alflux

8.4.1 The afilux to be adopted in the designsllduld that which would correspond to the design flood.

be

8.4.2 The afflux should be restricted to such a value that the resulting velocity does not cause serious bed scour in the drainage or does not create submergence which cannot be permitted.

Table 4 Minimum Cleannces for Arch Opeuiugs ( Clauses 8.2.2 and 8.2.3 )
SI No. (1) 9 ii) iii) iv) Less than 3 3 and above but less than 6. T, 6 and above but less tban 21 21 and above Arch Opening (2) m Clearrace (3) Rise or 0% m whichever is more 2/3 rise or 10 m whichever is more 2/.3 rise or 125 m which'ever is more 2/3 rise or 15 m whichever is more

5

IS 7784 (Pert 1J : 1993 = velocity head where v is the average velocity in the approach section worked out from the known width (W) of unobstructed section. width of unobstructed section. w= b) Orifice formula v*/2g

Q = CoP dn LD,
where discharge through the opening in m3/s, Q= c, = coefftcient of discharge, g = acceleration due to gravity in m/s', L Dd h e = = = = linear waterway in iii, depth downstream of the obstruction in m, afflux in m, a factor accounting for recovery of some velocity as potential head on emergence from the cross drainage work openings, and average velocity in approach section in m/s.

,

O*'
0.6

I 0)

0*4 0.2 0 0:5 0.6 O-7 0.6 0.9 t.(

-fOR+-FIG. 2 COEWWENT`e' INTHEORLFKE FORMULA If the value of Vvaries considerably in the unobstructed cross section of the drainage channel, as in the case of a drainage chamtel which spills over its banks, Vfor the purposes of this formula may be taken as the average velocity in the main chamtel and correspondingly the value of A should be determined by dividing the total discharge by V. 8.4.4.3 In case of readily erodable beds, fi~ll afflux as. calculated from 8.4.4.1 or 8.4.4.2 may not occur. 8.5 Depth of Scour 8.5.1 Mean De&t ofScour The mean depth of scour in metros below the check/high flood level may be calculated from the equation : d,,,, = 1'34 %

V

=

The value of `C,' and `e' to be adopted are given in Fig. 1 and 2 The afflux can be calculated knowing (a) the discharge, (b) the unobstructed width of the stream, and (c) the average depth downstream of the cross drainage work opening.

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.6

0.9

1.0

FIG. 1 COEFFKJENT `C,' INTHEORIFKEFORM&A 8.4.4.2 Empirical formula When the area of obstruction is not very large compared to the original unrestricted area, the following formula gives reasonably good results : h where h = afflux in m, V = velocity in the unobstructed drainage channel in m/s, A = the unobstructed se:tional afea of the drainage chamtel in m , and a = sectional area of the drainage channel provided in the construction in m2. 6

where

[I
sf

2 In

. Di yt&%charge in cumecs per metre width. The value of Di should be the maximum of the following: 9 the design flood divided by the erfective linear waterway between abutments or guide bunds, as the case may be. ii) The value obtained should take into account any concentration of flow through a portion of the waterway assessed from the study of the cross section of the drainage channel. Such modifications of the value may not be deemed applicable to minor cross drainage structures with overall waterway less than 60 m. iii) Actual observation, if any.

IS 7784 (I'M 1) : 1993 KSF = the silt factor for representative sample the bed material obtained up to the level the deepest anticipated scour and given the expression 1'76 [C&J'" `c&' being the weighted mean diameter millimetres.
NOTES

of of by in

is representect*as the sum of these losses as applicable. Thus, if the toTal loss of head is denoted by H then :
H = h, + h2 +
la, +

h,

where IQ = losses at the inlet and outlet (for syphon), /I: = losses at elbows or bends (for barrel), losses due to transitions (other than syphon), 113 = and 114 = losses due to skin friction (for barrel and trough).
8.6.1 Lass ofHead at the Inlet and at the Outlet of Syplms

1 d, may be taken as thegrain sizeat 50% passing from grain size distribution curve. 2 The above method of estimating & is based on Lacey's theory for regimeconditions in alluvial beds. 8.5.2 Maximum Foundation
The maximum Depth of Scour for Design of

depth of scour below the Highest Flood Level (H.F.L.) at obstructions and configurations of the channel should be estimated from the value of `d,,' on the following basis : located in a foundations

The formula for the losses at the entrance may be taken as:
11, = [l +jJ $

where
hi =

For the design of piers and abutments straight reach and having individual without any floor protection works : i) In the vicinity of piers ii) Near abutments 2'00 d

fi

I,27 dll approach retained 2'00 d,, scour all around -

V

For the design of floor protection works, for raft foundations or shallow foundations, the following scour values should be adopted: i) in a straight reach ii) at a moderate bend iii) at a severe beud iv) at a right angled bend 1'27 d sm 1'50 d sm 1'75 d sm 2'00 d sm

g 8.6.2 Loss of Head Due to Elbows or Bends in Barrels computed in accordance IS 2951 (Part 2):1965.

loss of head at entrance or at exit in m; = a coefficient which provides for the loss of head on entry. It may be taken, for all practical design purposes, as 0'08 for a bell mouth entrance and as 0'505 for cylindrical entrance with sharp edges (unshaped mouth of the same sectional area of the barrel); = velocity in syphou iu m/s; aud = acceleratiou due to gravity h m/s*.

The loss of head due to elbows or bends It,, may be

with the procedure given iu

NOTE - The values of scour depth obtained as above may be suitably modified where actual observed data is available. 8.6 Loss of Head (Energy Loss) When water flows through any structure there are head losses due to various factors mentioned in~`8.6.1 to 8.6.4. The total loss of head occurring for a flow
SI NO. Type of Transition Inlet
1 Streamline warped 0'1 2 Slraight `warped

8.6.3 Well designed inlet aud outlet transitions are necessary at the upstream and downstream approaches of cross drainage works. Following estimates of losses in the transitions I13 generally hold for normal dcsigu and installatiou conditions. These are not applicable to syphons as for them this aspect is covered in 8.6.1. These losses exclude losses covered by introduction trash racks OII upstream approaches. of

8.6.4 Loss of Head due to Skin Friction in the Barreki and Troughs
%I_ -

`. Losses

J-vz" 1-I 2g

yz- 4 o-2 i 2g 1 03 { J-VI 2g I;- vj 2s 1

3

Straight warped with bottom corner fillets

I

0.4 1

where

`1 ~1 = velocity of flow before [he transition in m/s ~2 = velocity of flow atier the transition in ~~/s, and = acceleration due

8

to gravity in m/s*.
7

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993 8.6.4.1 The.loss of head due to skin friction in the barrels `hb' may be computed in accordance with the procedure given in IS 2951 (Part 1) : 1965. 8.6.4.2 Loss of head due to friction in troughs h, should be calculated by the Mamling's formula namely: v = i RV3,.SV2 where v R S n To choose the value of `n' refer to IS 2912 : 1964. Depending upon the smoothness, hardness and rendering of surfaces of the structure (concrete, plaster or masonry, etc), planeness, workmanship and quality control the value of rugosity coefficient `n' may be reduced for design purposes from the typical value, so as to achieve reliability in head loss estimates. Manning's constant depends upon the characteristics of the material and the surface roughness. In absence of actual investigation or established norms being available, value of Maiming's constant as given in Table 5 may be assumed.

= means velocity in m/s, = hydraulic means radius in m, = slope, and = Mann&g's constant.

Table 5 Values of Manning's Coeflicient

Qpe

ofSurface

Material Range

Value of II Normal Design Value (3)

(1) Concrete

(2)

0 2)

Hard, smooth fmisb, troweled Float fmish

0011 to 0014 0013 to 0015 0015 lo 0.022 001 to 0012 0012 to 0018 0014 lo 0020 0013 LO 0016 0011 to 0014 0012 0016 0018 0016 0013

3) Uofmished (oat properly floated) 4) Neat cement smootb finish 5) Steel shuttering finish a) Wooden planks shuttering tioish -0 Large panel plywood shuttering finish 8) Large panel smooth form finish, rich concrete @I30 grade and above) with joints grounded smooth, and all defects rectified Gunited (rough job)

9)

0018 to OU25 0016 to 0'023 oU09 IO0012

0.022 0019 0'011

10) Guoited (go&i plane job) 11) Smooth concrete surface with epoxy or polymer treatment Ma.lonty 1) Glazed brick, good workmanship very fine joints *' .J 8 2) Good quality brick masonry in cement mortar 3) Rubble masonry in cement mortar 4) Dry rubble 5) Dressed ashlar masonry

001 I lo 0'015 0012 to 0018 0017 to$rk3Q 0023 IO 0'035 0013 IO0'018 I

0013 0018 dU25 0032 0016

8.7 Wu~sition

Walls

Transition walls as seen in plan, should at their ends, turn nearly at right angles to the flow in the chamlel and should extend for a minimum length of 0.6 m into the earth bank. Suitable pitching may be provided to the slopes, beyond the trausitiou end. 8.8 Fluming Ratio `il

percent may not be adopted. For the purpose ofcomputing the Uuming ratio of canal, the width at mid depth may be taken as one hundred percent. In drainage channel when the course is undefined, a fluming ratio from seventy to ninety percent of the Lacey's wateMray may bc adopted. 8.9 Structure alid Earth Work Connection The earth mass in vicinity of the rigid structure is tile connection between rigid structure aud flexible earthwork. The rigid structure is nou settling, relative

Except when dictated by conditions particular to a specific structure, a fluming ratio less than seventy 8

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993

to the earthwork. The deflectious, settlements and other movements in the rigid structure are comparatively very small. The rigid structure may consist of masonry, PCC, RCC, etc. The connection between rigid structures and' earthwork is to be desigued so as to reduce the differeutial settlement, and to avoid the possibility of formation of a separatiou (cleavage) betweeu the two. The conditiou of counectiou between the rigid structure and the earth work affects the seepage, creep coefficient arid piping and thus affects the stability of the earthwork. For the couuection, soil of proper qualities should be chosen. The method and the amount of compaction should be as required. 8.Y.l The. canal embaukment adjoining the cross drainage structure should have adequate provisious to avoid possibility of auy breach aud to minimize seepage. The outer slope of the embankment should have a clear cover of 600 mm over the desigucd phreatic line (see IS 7894 : 1975) for the worst combiuation of desigu flood in natural draiuage chaancl and aiuiual low water level. High earth bauks (say over 5 m above ground) should be checked for stability of slopes and provisiou of rock-toe with tilter should be made. Rip-rap or pitching should be doue up to a level 0.5 m above HFL plus afflux as applicable (see IS 10751:1983, IS 11532:1985, IS 12094:1987, IS &X37:1985). For large drainage channel properly desigued guide banks may be required. 8.9.2 The water Uow through various soil strata should be engineered. Flow uet through earth work aud foundatiou strata is to be estimated. Exitgradieutofseepage water should be limited withiu the permissible limit. Adequate fouudatiou depth or cut-off or curtaiu walls may be provided of suitable depth so as to get scfe exit gradient, which may be worked out iu accordauce with Khosla theory for two dimeusioual flow. In large structures three dimeusioual seepage flow may be cousidered for estimatiug exit gradient. 8.9.2.1 The permissible creep coefficieut (head loss per unit length) through soil may depeud upou degree of compaction, whether it is rebilled, actions &soilStNChIrC counectiou or interface, relative movtmeuts between soil aud rigid structure, probable settlements, etc. Generally the permissible value of exit gradicut for flow through dirfereut types of soils cau be adopted as below : 1 in 4 1 in4to5 1 in 5 to 6 1 in 6 to 7 8.9.2.2 At cutry,tiud of seepage path, au allowance, as discount, should be assumed for settlemeut aud iuetficieut maiuteual,ce, scparatiou, cracking, c$c. At exit end a discouut or allowauce should be assuulcd against erosion, scour or settlement. In absence of au estimate, the allowance may be 0.6 m high at entry point aud 9 Clay Shingle Coarse sand Fine sand

1 mat exit point. This allowance iu height is the length over which creep coefficient is to be assumed as zero. 8.9.2.3 From the plot of tlow net, the differential desigu pressure (soil aud hydraulic) on the rigid structure cau be estimated. 8.9.3 The bottom slabs of box (or barrel) or culverts should be checked for safety against the uplift force in a severe combinatiou of forces chosen. CBecks should coiisist of: a) safety against movement or flotatiou during construction and in service, and further b) check for design stresses with severe combinatiou of uplift. 8.9.3.1 For safety against flotation or movement, if required, the gravity loads cau be increased by increasiug thickucss of members, providiug additioual couCrete or masonry for weight, or anchoring the members iuto the fouudatiou strata or deeper. The sum of down ward equilibratiug forces should be at least 1.2 times the upward buoyancy force. For checking the stress couditiou in -the members, the dead loads or the dowuward equilibratiug force (such as anchorage) should be reduced by dividing these by 1.2. Anchorages aud parts of auchorage system should be checked for stresses uuder full load required for safety against floating. 8.Y.4 Whcu tlow is through multi barrel, at the upstream aud dowustream ends, stop-log grooves may be provided by extcndiog the partition wall, so as to facilitate isolating oue or more barrels for maiutcuauce or repair. Euds of the partitious of multi-barrels should be provided with cut aud ease water shapes so as to minimize the energy loss. 8.10 Abrasion
Resistance

Structural members in the bed of the flow should be safe against abrasion loss. Depending ou the velocity of llow aud the abrasiou causing debris (stone gravel, saud silt, ctc) it may hold, the structural mcmbcr iu the bed should be hard euough aud of suf[icicntly high, streugth or it should be giveu a treatmcut or wearing coat to enhauce the abrasion resistauce. Fitchiug of heavy weight stoues, stoue masonry or high grade coucrete overlays may be provided. Apart froitLthc&e.d of llow, the mcmbcrs ou the sides may also,be suhjectcd to abrasion, though the material causing abrasion may be less effective OII the sides thau at the bottom. Hence due cousidcratiou for durability of sides, alougwith the llow should be givcu. 9 FOUNDATION 9.1 Fouudatious of a cross drainage work should be dcsigucd to satisfy the rcquircmcuts of allowable bcariug capacity of the fouudatiou strata uudcrcritical loads iucludiug positive pressure couditious (i.e. IIO uplift or tcrrsion), seismic effects, antiripatcd scour and settlc111ent.

9.1.1 The sub grade at the fouudatiou lcvcl lbr knowu shape aud size of fouudalious, depth below ground level, expected sub-soil water lcvcl and cugiuceriug

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993 properties should be safe in bearing capacity. Comparatively lower pressures are allowed on foundations ou sub-grades prone to appreciable settlement. 9.1.2 As far as possible, the foundation should bear on homogeneous, undisturbed and unifonn sub-grade of fairly dense type. Where foundations have to be provided on sub-grade of different types suitable joints should be provi'dcd to avoid cracks due to differential settlement, the tolerance limit has to be evaluated for each case. 9.13 The permissible maximum differential settlement of the foundation strata estimated should not exceed 1 in 400. In case of structures sensitive to differential settlement, the tolerance limit has to be evaluated for each case. 9.1.4 When the seismic effect is considered, higher bearing capacity may be adopted in accordance with IS 1893 : 1984. 9.1.5 The foundations should be taken sufficiently deep to secure firm strata from considerations of settlement, overall stability and avoidance of undermining due to erosion. The depth of foundation of various members should be such that these are safe against scour or are protected against it. If sound rock is met with, at the higher levels than the anticipated scour, scour criteria will not be applicable. Tension (i.e. negative contact pressure) can be allowed only if foundation strata consists of hard rock, however, such negative contact pressure should be neglected in the design calculations. 9.1.6 Maximum depth of scour should be computed for stream as in 8.5 from check high flood level (CHFL). Either the foundation or cut-off wall if provided, under the foundation should be taken to a depth 1.333 times the scour depth estimated below CHFL or 1.05 times the scour depth estimated for probable maximum tlood (PMF). Either depth of foundation, or depth of cut-off if provided,`should also be governed by permissible gradient of seepage water in 8.9.2. In case of canal having erodablc bottom (i.e. unlined) similar checks should be done for full supply discharge. ; 9.1.7 Where concrete or masonry fltio%!Is provided under the works, scour condition is not applicable and the foundatio,ns are usually taken to about 1.5 m below the floor levels with suitable cut off for the concrete or masonry floors. However where such a floor is not provided, foundations are taken to provide a margin below the anticipated scour level (usually called grip length) of about 0.33 times the maximum depth of scour. 10 MODEL STlJDlES tested on models. These studies should infer ulia. taken into account the impact of ancillary componcnts of the structure, namely, the approaches, end connections, aftlux bun&, Hnors, p:otectioii
arrangements structures and on either any upstream Or dowmtream

the canal or the drainage DETAILS

chan-

nel. 11 MISCELLANEOUS 11.1 Waterstops Waterstops, also referred to as water seals, are generally of three types, namely : (a) rubber water seals, (b) metal water seals, and (c) synthetic material seals. The waterstops are used in and across all joints where leakages are detrimental to structural safety or the water needs are to be conserved. The locations where waterstops are provided in various types of cross drainage works arc described below:

a) Aqueduct

b)

4

In R.C.C. through side walls and bottom slab over each pier in a continuous length and at the junction of transition and R.C.C. trough, both in the floor and wing walls. Syplron-At expansion joints and at the junction of ea'ch of the sloping limbs in a continuous form and at the junction of the transition walls and floors with the barrel, both at the entry and exit in a continuous form. Sirperpassage -At the junction between the drainage trough wing walls, namely, trough wall of R.C.C. and wing wall of masonry and all the expansion joints in a continuous length.

11.2 Weep Holes Weep holes are small openings in the retaining walls, like wings (i.e. transitions of natural stream). These are to facilitate the drainage of backfilis and avoid build up of pressure. Weep holes may be provided above the flow net line of zero water pressure, under the condition of canal llowing full and natural stream with lowest am!ual llow. W&?daleS if provided, should have filters with gfgded material suitably provided to avoid piping of earth fill behind the wall and also to avoid choking of the holes. The provision of weep holes should be so, as to not render the creep coefficient of seepage unsafe, and. should also not contribute to enhanced loss of canal water. 11.3 Ikurings For safe transfer of load from superstructure to substructure suitable bearings should be provided between the trough bottom and pier abutment to cater for the various movCments occurring in the superstructure under different combinations of load.

10.1 Owing to a number of complex factors in the design of hydraulic structures and specially when the designs are based on empirical fqrmulae, adequate answers cannot be obtained through a$ialytical methods only. Therefore, it would be in the best interest, if the designs for major cross drainage works are first 10

IS 7784 (Part 1) : 1993

ANNEX

A

( Clause 2.1 )
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS
IS No. Title IS No. Title

1893 : 1984 2912 : 1964

Criteria for earthquake resistant design 08 structures Cfoiirth revision) Recommendations for liquid flow measurement in open channels. by slope area methods (approximate methods) Recommendations for estimation of flow of liquids in closed conducts : Part 1 Head loss in straight pipes due to Criction resistance.

4410 (Part 151 Set 5) : 1992 5477 1'9";: 4) : 7894 : 1975 8237 : 1985

Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects : Part 15 Canal structures, Section 5 Cross drainage workds (/ht
revision)

Method for fixing the capacities reservoirs : Part 4 Flood storage

of

Code of practice for stability anyalysis of earth dams Code of practice for protection of slope for reservoir embankments (first revision)

2951 @aPa;2) :

Recommendations for estimation of flow of liquids in closed conduits : Part 2 Head loss in pipes and fittings.

10751 : 1983 Criteria for design of guide banks for alluvial rivers 11532 : 1985 Guidelines bankments for construction (levee) of river em-

Glorssary of terms relating to river val4410 (Part ll/Sec 5) : ley projects : Part 11 Hydrology, Section 1977 S.Floods

12094: 1987 Guidelines for planning and desgin of river embankments (levees)

11

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark 1s governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturero or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standard0 BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Aci, 2986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright
BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be.addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. RVD 17 ( 56 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices :
, . _,`!

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone

,,Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

;

L-w.

331 01 31
. I 331 13 75

37 84 99, 37 85'61 I 37 86 26, 37 86 62 53 38 43,
1 53 23 84

53 lb 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

235 02 16,
I 235 15 19,

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 `i
t

632 92 95, 632 78 91,

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. KANPUR. JAIPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurj~. ~no~a

