**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4761 (1968): Unsupported PVC Rainwear [PCD 12: Plastics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

(Reaffirmed 2003) 

Edition 1.2 

(1977-07) 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
UNSUPPORTED PVC RAINWEAR 

(Incorporating Amendment Nos. 1 & 2) 



UDC 687.173 



© BIS 2004 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



Price Group 5 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
UNSUPPORTED PVC RAINWEAR 

Plastics Sectional Committee, CDC 17 

Chairman Representing 

Shri N. SRINIVASAN The Plastics Institute (Indian Section), New Delhi 

Members 

Shri C. I. Almaula Polychem Ltd, Bombay 

SHRl S. K. Sanchvi ( Alternate) 
SHRl K. J. Baiakrjshna Ministry of Defence (R & D) 

Shri K. K. Ganguli ( Alternate) 
SHRl C. BHACAT The Metal Box Co of India Ltd. Calcutta 

Dr S. S. Mai hotra ( Alternate) 
Si iri G. R. Bhide Garware Plastics Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Cardmaster Hylam Limited, Hyderabad 

Shri S. J. Hasan ( Alternate) 
Shri P. H. CASHMAN Philips India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri K. G. Chandrasekharappa Indian Telephone Industries Ltd. Bangalore 
Shri P. Das Ministry of Defence (R & D) 

Deputy Director, Standards Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) 
(Carriage) 

Chemist & Metallurgist ( Alternate) 
Shri M. L. Ganguli The Indian Cable Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri I. P. Ghosh ( Alternate) 
DR S. Canguli I.C.I. (India) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Judhaii Indian Plastics Federation, Calcutta 

Shri V. V. Ketkar ( Alternate) 
Dr S. L. Kapur National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR), Poona 

Shri K. B. Kulkarni Indo Nippon Chemical Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. 1. Bhua ( Alternate) 
Shri S. Mitra Calico Mills, Chemical Division, Bombay 

DR B. R. C. Anand ( Alternate) 
Shri S. N. Mukherji National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Bose ( Alternate) 
Shri G. N. Parikh AH India Plastics Manufacturers Association, 

Bombay 

Secretary ( Alternate) 
DR H. N. Patel The Plastics & Linoleum Export Promotion Council, 

Bombay 
Shri Raman M. Patel The Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J. M. Shroff ( Alternate) 
Shri R. Parikshit Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri J. E. Prince National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd. Bombay 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 4761 - 1968 



Plastics Sectional Committee, CDC 17 

Members Representing 

Shri T G Punwani Bright Brothers Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

ShriT W Bhojwani {Alternate) 
Shri S Ramaswamy Chemicals and Plastics India Ltd, Madras 

SHRI R Kai ioas ( Alternate) 
Shri D A Rrrs Kosmek Plastic Manufacturing Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N J Misquita (Alternate) 
SHRI R A Shah Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri I M Mihia (Alternate) 
SHRI V SUBRAMANIAN Heavy hlectricais (India) Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri R C Mishra ( Alternate) 
Shri D Das Gupta, Dlrectoi General ISI ( Ex officio Member) 

Dtrectoi (Chem) 

Secretaries 

Shri M S Saxi na 

Deputy Director (Chem) ISI 

DrG M Saxi na 
Deputy Director (Chem), ISI 

Unsupported PVC Sheets Subcommittee, CDC 17:5 

Convener 
Shri Raman M Pa ill The Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri J M Shroi r ( Alternate to 
Shri Raman M Patel ) 
Shri Atmaram Hunuraj Aiiuja Ahuja & Sons, Bombay 
Shri M H Kajui All India Plastics Manufacturers Association Bombay 

Secretary (Alternate) 
Shri S Mitra Calico Mills. Bombay 

DR B R C Anand ( Alternate) 
SHRI J E PRINCE National Organic Chemicals Industiies Ltd, Bombay 

SHRI P G SUIARIA Reliable Rainwear, Bombay 

SHRI D H RACUU ( Alternate) 
Shri P C Vi rma Caprihans (India) Pvt I td, Bombay 

ShriS K VtRMA ( Alternate) 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
UNSUPPORTED PVC RAINWEAR 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 17 June 1968, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 

0.2 There has been a sizeable demand for PVC rainwear in India and in 
the last few years, the overall demand has increased considerably. Indian 
Standard specification for unsupported flexible vinyl film and sheeting 
(IS : 2076- 1 962) stipulates the requirements of basic material used in the 
manufacture of rainwear. As the thin gauge PVC film or sheeting has 
shown satisfactory application in the rainwear trade, no minimum limit 
of thickness is laid down in this specification. This standard, therefore, 
lays down the minimum requirements for sheeting or film to give 
satisfactory wear and also for the strength of seams, particular attention 
being paid to those areas in the garment where the stress is the greatest. 
No attempt has been made to lay down the requirements other than those 
considered essential for style pattern or cut, since these clearly follow the 
dictates of fashion and are points which will be assessed by the buyer. 

0.3 This standard contains a clause 4.1 which calls for agreement 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 

0.4 This edition 1.2 incorporates Amendment No. 1 (August 1974) and 
Amendment No. 2 (July 1977). Side bar indicates modification of the 
text as the result of incorporation of the amendments. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of 
sampling and test for rainwear made from unsupported PVC film and 
sheeting. It does not cover the design and style of the rainwear. 

* Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS : 4761 1968 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS : 2828-1964* and those given below shall apply. 

2.1.1 Point Source — It is a part of welding process when the welding 
rod fixes the button attachment or the belt loop and makes a mark on 
the polyvinyl chloride sheet. 

2.1.2 Seam — The line of junction resulting from the joining of 
separate parts. 

3. REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Material — The rainwear shall be manufactured from unsupported 
flexible vinyl film and sheeting conforming to IS : 2076-19621. 

3.2 Sizes 

3.2.1 The rainwear shall be of either umbrella bodied (having a 
broader perimeter) or parallel bodied. 

3.2.1.1 Ladies — For actual bust size of 90 cm, the minimum bust 
measurement of the garment shall be 120 cm. The perimeter shall be 
either 150 cm (in case of umbrella bodied garments) or bust 
measurement of the garment + 5 cm, Max (in case of parallel bodied 
garments) taken 1 10 cm from the centre of the collar seam. For other 
si/es (in case of umbrella bodied garments only) the difference between 
the bust size and bust size of the garment shall be not less than 25 cm 
and between the latter and the perimeter not less than 36 cm. 

3.2.1.2 Gents — For actual 100 cm chest, the minimum chest 
measurement of the garment shall be 130 cm. The perimeter shall be 
either 160 cm (in case of umbrella bodied garments) or chest 
measurement of the garment + 5 cm, Max (in case of parallel bodied 
garments) taken 1 10 cm from centre of the collar seam. For other sizes 
(in case of umbrella bodied garments only) the difference between the 
chest size and the chest size of the garment shall be not less than 
36 cm and between the latter and the perimeter not less than 25 cm. 

3.2.1.3 Children ~~ These sizes shall be based on length. The length 
shall be measured from the centre of the collar seam to the hem. The 
bust measurement shall be not less than the length and the skirt 
measurement measured at the bottom shall be not less than 30 cm 
more than the length. 

3.2.2 All measurements shall be made with the garment fastened and 
the overlap excluded. The bust and chest measurement shall be taken 
at the level of the bottom of the armhole. 

3.3 Fabrication — In cutting and fabricating the garments, no strain 



•Glossary of terms used In the plastics Industry. 
tSpecification for unsupported flexible vinyl film and sheeting. 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

shall be left, especially around the curves and the point sources. The 
fabrication shall not in any way affect the durability and appearance of 
the garments. 

3.4 Collar — The collar shall be not less than double the thickness of 
the material from which the garment is made. 

3.5 Fastenings — The rainwear shall be provided with the following 
minimum number of fastenings: 

a) Garments with nominal length up to 80 cm 3 buttons 

b) Garments with nominal length more than 4 buttons 
80 cm but not more than 105 cm 

c) Garments with nominal length more than 5 buttons 
105 cm 

3.5.1 The position of the bottom fastening shall be at least at 60 
percent of the total distance from the top of the garment. 

3.5.2 The size of buttonholes shall be suitable for the size of button 
used. 

3.5.3 The overlap at the front shall be not less than 5 cm when the 
garment is fastened and pulled taut. 

3.5.4 In case of slide fastener, the closed fastener shall either pass the 
water penetration test for seams as specified in 3.7 or shall have the 
overlap as specified in 3.5.3. 

3.6 Strength of Seams — The strength of all seams shall be such 
that when tested by the method prescribed in Appendix A, they shall 
not break under a load of 180g/0.01 mm of nominal thickness of the 
material or 1 .8 kg, whichever is greater. 

3.7 Water Penetration Test — All seams shall show no penetration 
of water when tested by the method prescribed in Appendix B. 

3.8 Strength of Pockets — If any pockets are provided, they shall be 
of such strength that no failure occurs under a load of 4.5 kg when 
tested by the method prescribed in Appendix C. 

3.9 Strength of Button Attachment, Buttonholes, Belt Loops, 
Hangers and Other Apertures — The strength of the button 
attachment, buttonholes, belt loops, hangers and other apertures shall 
be such that no failure occurs under a load of 4.5 kg when tested by the 
method prescribed in Appendix D. 

3.10Headwear — Headwear, if provided, shall meet the 
requirements of the rainwear wherever applicable. 

4. PACKING AND MARKING 

4.1 Packing — The material shall be packed as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

4.2 Marking — The material shall be marked with the following 
information: 

a) Name of the manufacturer and recognized trade mark, if any; 

b) Size of the garment; 

c) Lot number; and 

d) Other instructions, namely, the cleaning and precautions to be 
taken while in use, shall also be furnished in a pamphlet 
alongwith the garment on the following lines: 

The garment shall be wiped with a damp cloth. If necessary, soap 
and warm, not hot, water may be used, followed by rinsing with cold 
water. It shall not be ironed; creases fall out on hanging in a warm 
room. Dry cleaning materials shall not be used, and the garment 
shall not be left near a fire or a radiator to dry. The garment shall 
not be allowed to come in contact with polished, painted or 
lacquered surfaces as some of the finishes will stick to it. 

4.2.1 The garments may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

No It — The use of the ISI Certification Maik is governed by the piovisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act. and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder Presence of this mark on products covered by an 
Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the lequirements of that standard, under a well defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality conttol during production I his system, which is devised and supei vised 
by ISI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguaid that the products as 
actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI foi conformity to the standard 
Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the ISI Ceitification Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers oi processois, may be obtained from the Indian 
Standards Institution 

5. SAMPLING 

5.1 Representative samples of the material shall be drawn as 
prescribed in Appendix E. 



APPENDIX A 

{Clause 3.6) 

DETERMINATION OF STRENGTH OF SEAMS 

A 0. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

A-0.1 This test is carried out by applying the load to the test piece for a 
specified time after fixing the same in a grip. 



IS : 4761 - 1968 



A 1. APPARATUS 

A- 1.1 The apparatus consists of two grips capable of accommodating 
test piece 25 mm in width for welded seams and 75 mm in width for 
stitched seams, a suitable stand, a weight support and a series of 
weights capable of being fitted to the weight support ( see Fig. 1 ). 




STANO 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Apparatus for Seam Strength Test 

A- 1.1.1 Laboratory screw clips of 40 mm width constitute suitable 
grips for this test. Means shall be provided for attaching them to the 



IS : 4761 1968 

stand and the weight support in such a manner that the tension is 
uniformly applied to the test specimen. 

A-2. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 

A-2.1 For Welded Seams — A test piece 25 mm wide and 
approximately 100 mm in length shall be cut at right angles to the 
direction of the weld in such a manner that the seam is equidistant 
from each end of the test piece. At least three test pieces shall be cut 
from each weld. 

A-2. 2 For Stitched Seams — A test piece approximately 75 mm wide 
and 100 mm in length shall be cut at right angles to the seam direction 
in such a manner that the seam is equidistant from each end of the 
test specimen. The thread of the stitched seam shall then be unpicked 
from each edge of the test piece so that a stitched length of 25 mm 
remains in the centre of the test piece. The test piece shall then be cut 
down in width until the width is exactly 25 mm, care shall be taken 
not to sever the loose ends of the thread. The loose ends of the thread 
shall then be tied at each end of the test piece. Three test pieces shall 
be cut from each seam to be tested. 

A3. PROCEDURE 

A-3.1 Mount the test piece in the grips so that the grips are 50 mm 
apart with the seam equidistant and parallel to each grip. Suspend one 
grip from the stand and attach to the other grip the weight carrier. 
Add the weights to the weight carrier so that the total load applied 
plus the weight of the carrier is that specified in 3.6 but taking 
precautions that no tension is applied to the test piece until all the 
weights have been attached to it. Then release slowly the weight 
carrier over a period of approximately 5 seconds and leave suspended 
for a total period of 30 seconds from the time of first applying the load. 

APPENDIX B 

(Clause 3.7) 

WATER PENETRATION TEST FOR SEAMS 

B0. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

B-0.1 This test is carried out by spraying water on the seams. 

B-l. APPARATUS 

B-l.l The apparatus ( see Fig. 2 ) consists of a stand fitted with clamps 
to support the funnel, metal rose, gauze and specimen holder. A glass 

8 



IS : 4761 - 1968 



funnel approximately 100 mm in diameter connected by means of a 
rubber tubing to a metal rose is suitable. The rose shall have a single 
hole (approximately 0.75 mm in diameter) such that 100 ml of water 
introduced into the funnel flows in 5 minutes. A square of 500-micron 
wire gauze with approximately 150 mm sides shall be supported along 
one edge by a suitable clamp and positioned 600 mm vertically below 
the centre of the rose. 



GLASS FUNNEL 



RUBBER TUBING 



SEAM 
TEST PIECE 




METAL ROSE 



150 SQ APPRO* 
500 MICRON 
WIRE GAUZE 



RUBBER BAND 



FILTER PAPER 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Apparatus for Water Pene tration Test 

B-1.2 The sample holder shall consist of a 125 mm diameter or square 
shallow metal container into which a 120 mm filter paper may be 
fitted. The seam to be tested shall be fitted over the metal container 
and secured in position by means of a rubber band. The sample holder 
shall then be clamped at an angle of 45° with its centre 700 mm 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

vertically below the centre of the rose. The filter paper fitted into the 
sample holder shall first be brushed lightly with a water soluble dye. 

B 2. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 

B-2.1 A 150 mm square test piece shall be cut so that the seam to be 
tested runs parallel to the side of the square and is 75 mm from one 
side. Alternatively, a seam may be tested in situ if damage to the 
garment is to be avoided. A dyed filter paper shall be placed in the 
metal container, the seam placed along a diameter of the sample 
holder and held in place by means of a rubber band. 

B-3. PROCEDURE 

B-3.1 Mount the sample holder at 45° and fix the test piece with the 
seam as shown in Fig. 2. Pour 100 ml of water into the funnel and 
spray on to the sample. Dismantle the assembly and examine the filter 
paper for evidence of water penetration. 



APPENDIX C 

( Clause 3.8) 

DETERMINATION OF STRENGTH OF POCKETS 
CO. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

C-0.1 It is determined by applying the specified load on the pocket 
fixed between hooks. 

CI. FOR PATCH POCKETS 

C-l.l Apparatus — The apparatus consists of suitable stand, weight 
support, series of weights, clamps and smooth rigid hooks as shown in 
Fig. 3. Ordinary laboratory screw clips and the stand and support 
described in A-l are suitable. 

C-1.2 Procedure — Fit a hook by its long edge into the top of the 
pocket and support by means of a screw clip from the top of the stand. 
For patch pockets, the garment shall be bunched and held by the screw 
clip alone at the top. Fix the second hook similarly on the opposite side 
of the pocket. Load the weight carrier with the appropriate weights 
and attach to the hook, care being taken to apply no tension to the test 
piece until all weights have been attached. When loaded release slowly 
the weight carrier over a period of approximately 5 seconds and leave 
suspended for a period of 5 minutes measured from the time of first 
applying the load. 

10 



IS : 4761 - 1968 



STANO 



CLAMP 



POCKET 
UNOER TEST 



HOOKS 




WEIGHT SUPPORT 
WEIGHT 



Fig. 3 Apparatus for Determining the Strength of Pockets 
C-2. FOR SIDE POCKETS 

C-2.1 Apparatus — The apparatus consists of a suitable stand, weight 
support, series of weights, clamps and 'S' hook (fabricated from 6 mm 
Steel rod by bending round a 25 mm mandrel). Ordinary laboratory 
screw clips and the stand and support described in A-l are suitable. 



11 



IS : 4761 1968 

C-2.2 Procedure — Attach the top of the side pocket by means of a 
screw clip to the top grip of the stand. Place the S' hook over the 
combined pocket opening and welt so that the end of the hook projects 
into the pocket without piercing the sheeting. Load the weight carrier 
with the appropriate weights and attach to the *S' hook, care being 
taken to apply no tension to the test piece until all weights have been 
attached. When loaded, release slowly the weight carrier over a period 
of approximately 5 seconds and leave suspended for a period of 5 
minutes, measured from the time of first applying the load. 

APPENDIX D 

( Clause 3.9 ) 

DETERMINATION OF STRENGTH OF BUTTON 

ATTACHMENT. BUTTONHOLES, BELT LOOPS, 

HANGERS AND OTHER APERTURES 

D-l. DETERMINATION OF STRENGTH OF BUTTON 
ATTACHMENT 

D-1.0 This test is carried out by applying load to the buttons fixed in 
the stand. 

D-l.l Apparatus — The apparatus consists of a suitable stand, 
weight support, series of weights and clamps, as shown in Fig. 4 and 5. 
Ordinary laboratory screw clips and the stand and support described 
in A-l are suitable. 

D-l. 2 Preparation of Test Pieces — A 75 mm wide strip shall be cut 
from the garment with the button equidistant from each edge. At least 
25 mm at either end of the button shall be allowed when cutting out 
the test piece. 

D-l. 3 Procedure 

D-l. 3.1 Rigid Buttons — Fold the test piece so that the free ends are 
attached by a screw clip to the top clamp of the stand. Fix the weight 
carrier round the button and attach the appropriate weights to it. No 
tension shall be applied to the test piece until all weights have been 
added. Release slowly the weight carrier over a period of 
approximately 5 seconds and leave suspended for a period of 5 
minutes, measured from the time of first applying the load. 

D-l. 3.2 Flexible Buttons — Fold the test piece and attach to the stand 
in the same way as for rigid buttons. Fold the button outwards on to 
itself and clamp the tips together using a screw clip. Attach the weight 

12 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

carrier to this screw clip and carry the test in exactly the same manner 
as prescribed for rigid buttons. 

D-2. DETERMINATION OF STRENGTH OF BUTTONHOLE 

D-2.0 Outline of the Method — This test is carried out by applying 
load to the buttonholes fixed in the stand. 

D-2.1 Apparatus — The apparatus consists of a suitable stand, 
weight support, series of weights, clamps and smooth, rigid hook 
(fabricated from 6 mm steel by bending round a 25 mm diameter 
mandrel) ( see Fig. 6). Ordinary laboratory screw clips and the stand 
and support described in A-l are suitable. 



CLAMP 




BUTTON 



WEIGHT SUPPORT 



WEIGHT 



Fig. 4 Apparatus for Determining the Strength of 

Rigid Buttons 



13 



IS : 4761 - 1968 




UPPER CLAMP 



BUTTON 



LOWER CLAMP 



WEIGHT SUPPORT 
WEIGHT 



Fig. 5 Apparatus for Dei ermininc the Strength of 

Flexible Buttons 

D-2.2 Preparation of Test Piece — A 75 mm wide strip shall be cut 
from the garment with a buttonhole equidistant from each edge and 
with its length parallel to the edge. At least 25 mm at either end of the 
buttonhole shall be allowed when cutting out the test piece. 

D-2.3 Procedure — Mount the test piece by folding the end three times. 
Attach a screw clip to it and fix over the top support of the stand. Insert 
the hook supporting the weight carrier into the bottom of the buttonhole. 
Load the weight carrier with the appropriate weights while taking 
precautions that no tension is applied to the test specimen until all the 
weights have been attached to it. When loaded, release slowly the weight 
carrier over a period of approximately 5 seconds and leave suspended for 
a period of 5 minutes, measured from the time of first applying the load. 

14 



IS : 4761 1968 




BUTTON- 
HOLE 



WEIGHT SUPPORT 



WEIGHT 



FIG. 6 



Apparatus for Determining the Strength 
of Buttonhole 



D-3. DETERMINATION OF STRENGTH OF HANGING LOOPS 

D-3.0 Outline of the Method — This test is carried out by applying 
the load to the hanging loops. 

D-3.1 Apparatus — The apparatus consists of a suitable stand, weight 
support, series of weights, clamps and 4 S' hook (fabricated from 6 mm 
steel rod by bending round a 25 mm mandrel) . Ordinary laboratory screw 
clips and the stand and support described in A-l are suitable. 

D-3.2 Procedure — Fold the garment and attach a screw clip to it. Place 
the screw clip into the top grip of the stand so that the hanging loop is 
suspended downwards and fix the 'S* hook into the loop. Load the weight 
carrier with the appropriate weights and attach to the 'S' hook, care being 
taken to apply no tension to the test piece until all the weights have been 
attached. When loaded, release slowly the weight carrier over a period 
of approximately 5 seconds and leave suspended for a period of five 
minutes, measured from the time of first applying the load. 

15 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

APPENDIX E 

( Clause 5.1 ) 

SAMPLING OF UNSUPPORTED PVC RAINWEAR 
El. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

E-l.l Lot -- All the rainwears of the same size fabricated with 
materials of essentially identical properties preferably belonging to the 
same batch of manufacture shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

El. 2 Each lot shall be examined separately forjudging conformity to 
the requirements of this specification For this purpose, a number of 
rainwear shall be selected at random from each lot. The number of 
rainwear to be selected shall depend on the size of the lot and shall be 
in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1 . 





TABLF 1 


SCALE OF SAMPLING 




Loi Si/i 




NUMB! R OJ 


PERMISSIBLE 


NUMBLR 01 




RAINWl ar to bi 


NUMBER OI 


RAINWrAR ro BE 






Snrc ihD 


Dnmivrs 


SuBibcrrnf-OR 

DrsrRucnvh 

Tfsis 


(1) 




(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


Up to 50 




8 





2 


51 to 100 




13 





3 


101 , 300 




20 





4 


301 ., 1 000 




32 


1 


5 


1 001 and over 




50 


2 


6 



E-1.3 The rainwear shall be selected at random from the lot. In order 
to ensure randomness of selection, use shall be made of random 
number tables. In case random number tables are not readily 
available, the following procedure may be adopted: 

Starting from any rainwear in the lot, count them in one order as 

1, 2, 3, etc up to rand so on. Every rth rainwear shall be 

withdrawn to constitute the sample, r being the integral part of Nln, 
where N is the number of rainwear in the lot and n the number of 
rainwear to be selected. 

E 2. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

E-2.1 All the rainwears selected in E-1.3 shall be examined for all 
requirements except those specified in 3.6, 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9. Any 
rainwear failing in one or more of these requirements shall be 
considered as defective. The lot shall be considered satisfactory in 

16 



IS : 4761 - 1968 

respect of these requirements if the number of defectives in the sample 
does not exceed the number given in col 3 of Table 1. Only the 
satisfactory lot shall be passed on for further tests. 

E-2.2The lot found satisfactory in E-2.1 shall be tested for 
requirements specified in 3.6, 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9. The number of 
rainwear to be tested for each of these requirements shall be in 
accordance with col 4 of Table 1 and shall be taken at random from 
those already selected in E-1.2. The lot shall be considered to have met 
the requirements of this specification if none of the rainwear fails in 
any of these requirements. 



17 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standai dilation marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS This does not preclude the free use in the course 
of implementing the standard of nuessary details such as symbols and sizes type or grade 
designations Fnqulnes relating to copyright be addiessed to the Director (Publications) BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are Issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments Standards are also 
reviewed periodically a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review Indicates 
that no changes are needed if the review indicates that changes are needed it is taken up for 
revision Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest 
amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of BIS C atalogue and Standards Monthly 
Additions 

This Indian Standard has been developed by Technical Committee CDC 17 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No 



Date of Issue 



Amd No 1 



August 1974 



Amd No 2 



July 1977 



BUREAU Of INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters 



Manak Bhavan Bahadur Shah 7afar Marg New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones 323 0131 323 33 75 323 94 02 

Regional Offices 

C entral Manak Bhavan 9 Bahadur Shah Zafai Marg 
NEW DELHI 1 10002 

Eastern 1/14 C I T Scheme VII M V I P Road Kankurgacht 
KOLKATA 700054 

Northern S( 335 336 Sector 34 A CHANDIGARH 160022 



Southern C I T Campus lVCiossRoad CHENNAI 600113 



Western 



Branc hes 



Manakalaya E9MIDC Marol Andheri (East) 
MUMBA1 400093 



Telegrams Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 



323 76 17 
323 38 41 

1337 84 99 337 85 61 
(337 86 26 3*7 9120 

60 38 43 
60 20 25 

I 235 02 16 235 04 42 
{235 15 19 235 23 15 

832 92 95 832 78 58 
832 78 91 832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR COIMBATORE 
FAR1DABAD GHAZIABAD CUWAHATI HYDERABAD JAIPUR KANPUR I UCKNOW 
NAGPUR NALAGARH PATNA PUNE RAJKOT THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
VISHAKHAPA1NAM 



