( Reaffirmed 2000 )

Indian Standard

MEDICAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENTDENTAL X-RAY EQUIPMENTRADIATION SAFETY

UDC 621 386'1 : 616'314-073'75

: 614'876

0

BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 3 MARC

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI March 1993

Electromedical

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

MHD

19

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electromedical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. The widespread utilization of ionization radiation in medical diagnosis has brought in its wake the need for exercising regulatory control and standardization for safety measures to ensure adequate protection to the patient and the user. The Atomic Energy Regulatory Beard ( AERB ), Bombay, is entrusted with the responsibility of developing and implementing appropriate regulatory measures aimed at ensuring radiation safety. This standard is intended to provide necessary guidance for the manufacturer and the user of dental X-ray equipment to ensure that the patient and the occupational workers are not exposed to radiation in excess of the operational limits specified under the Radiation Protection Rules, 1971. The manufacturer shall ensure that the radiation protection measures in this equipment are provided and maintained in conformity with these specifications by subjecting them to inspection by the competent authority ( AERB, Bombay ). For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13709 : 1993

Indian Standard
MEDICAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT DENTAL X-RAY EQUIPMENT RADIATION SAFETY
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard specifies the measures for radiation safety of dental X-ray equipment used in medical practice by persons having adequate knowledge and understanding of radiation hazards and protection.

3.5 Automatic Exposure Control A device which automatically controls one or more technique factors ( see 3.26) to obtain at a pre-selected location(s), a required quantity of radiation. 3.6 Beam Axis

2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 6567 : 1972 Standards Title Radiation protection for an X-ray tube in a protective operating tube housing, between 10 kV and 400 kV 1986 X-ray Diagnostic medical equipment: Part 1 General requirements safety and (jirst revision > Medical electrical equipment X-ray equip-Diagnostic ment: Part 3 Radiation safety requirements are necessary

A line from the source through X-ray fields. 3.7 Beam Limiting Device

the centres

of the

A device which provides a means dimensions of the useful beam. 3.8 Control Panel

to restrict

the

7620 (Part

1):

That part of the X-ray control, upon which are mounted the switches, knobs, push-buttons and other hardwares necessary for manually setting the technique factors. 3.9 Dental Cone A device used in dental radiology to ensure a required focal spot-to-skin distance and to recognize the direction of the axis of the useful beam. A dental cone may include a beam limiting device and protective shielding. 3.10 Dental Source Assembly The tube housing assembly consisting of tube, high voltage and/or filament transformers, permanent filtration and the beam limiting device, 3.11 Dental `Equipment' X-Ray Equipment ) ( henceforth termed

7620 (Part

3) : 1991

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, ing definitions shall apply. 3.1 Accessible Surface the follow-

The external surface of the X-ray tube enclosure or housing provided by the manufacturer. 3.2 Aluminium Equivaient

In respect of a material under specified conditions, the thickness of aluminium that under those conditions, affords the same attenuation as that material and is expressed in mm Al. 3.3 Assembler Any person engaged in the bling, replacing of installing components into an X-ray sub-system. 3.4 Attenuation A decrease in radiation intensity caused absorption and scattering in a medium. by business of assemone or more equipment or a

X-ray equipment designed for radiological nation of the mouth, teeth and jaws purpose of diagnosis or visualization. 3.12 Exposure

examifor the

The quotient dQ/dm where dQ is the absolute value of the total charge of the ions of one sign produced in air when all the electrons ( negatrors and positrons ) liberated by photons in a volume element of air having mass dm are completely stopped in air. In case of leakage radiation, the value is expressed in terms of air kerma. The SI unit of air kerma is Gray (Gy ) or milligray ( mGy). Air kerma of one Gray is equal to energy absorption of 1 J/kg of air exposed to radiation. 1

IS 13709:1993 3.13 Filter A layer of radiation attenuating material incorporated in the tube housing to preferentially absorb the less penetrating components of the useful beam. Permanent filter is the lilter which is an integral part of the tube housing and which cannot be removed by the user unlike the added filter. 3.14 Half-Value Layer ( HVL ) 3.23 Rated Tube Current The maximum allowable tube current.

3.24 Rated Output The maximum output terminals 3.25 Source

Voltage at the

allowable peak potential of the X-ray tube.

The focal spot of the X-ray tube. 3.26 Technique Factors 01'

The thickness of specified material which when the path of a beam of introduced into radiation attenuates the beam of radiation to one-half of its original value. 3.15 Image Receptor Any device, such as, fluorescent screen or radiographic film which converts incident X-ray photons either into a visible image or into another form which can be further transformed into a visible image. 3.16 Intensifying Screen radiography X-radiation to on

The technique factors are the conditions operation. These are specified as follows:

a) For capacitor

energy storage peak tube potential in kV and charge in mAs;

equipment, quantity 01 for in

b) For

field emission equipment rated pulsed operation, peak tube potential kV and number of X-ray pulses; and

cl For all other equipment,

A layer of material used in direct intensify the: action of incident radiog.raphic film. 3.17 Lead Equivalence It is the thickness of lead conditions of irradiation, attenuation as the material 3.18 Leakage Radiation

peak tube potential in kV and either tube current in mA and exposure time in second or the product of the tube current and exposure time in mAs.

3.27 Useful Beam which under specified affords the same under consideration. The part of the emergent radiation from an X-ray tube housing which is capable of being used for the purpose for which the X-ray equipment is intended. 3.28 X-Ray Control A device which controls input power to the X-ray high voltage generator and/or the X-ray tube. It includes equipment which controls the technique factors of an X-ray exposure. 3.29 X-Ray Tube ( henceforth termed `Tube' )

Radiation emanating from the dental X-ray source assembly other than (a) the useful beam and (b) the radiation produced when the exposure switch or timer is not activated. 3.19 Mobile Equipment be moved periods of means of

Transportable equipment designed to from a location to another between use on its own wheels or similar support. 3.20 Portable Equipment

Any electron tube which is designed for the conversion of electrical energy into X-ray energy. 4 MARKING 4.1 All components except high voltage generators contained within the tube housings and beam limiting devices which are integral parts of tube housing shall be permanently inscribed or affixed thereon, the model number and serial number of the product which shall be clearly visible. Every dental X-ray equipment shall bear the following marking on the external surface of the main X-ray control panel: a) the X-radiation Fig. 1. b) A readily permanent warning symbol as given in visible

The equipment designed to be hand carried from one location to another between periods of use. 3.21 Primary Protective Barrier

The material excluding filters placed in the useful beam and incorporated into the equipment by the manufacturers to reduce the radiation exposures during to the equipment/personnel operation. 3.22 Radiation Protection

Measures taken to minimize exposure to patients, medical and paramedical staff and general public so as to limit the biological consequences of ionizing radiation to acceptable levels. 2

discernible and clearly mark or label indicating

1) the source of manufacture, 2) the serial number,

IS 13709: 1993

CAUTION X-RAY >

FIG. 1 3) the type designation, 4) rated voltage, rating 5) maximum instantaneous supply voltage and frequency, 6) and 7) year of manufacture, 8) the country c) With respect 1) indication of manufacture.

X-RADIATION WARNING SIGN b) the following manufacturer equipment: written information with respect from the to the

( mA ),

1) Maximum requirements or power maximum line current, and 2) Nominal focal spot size of the X-ray tube target and the method of its determination. 5.2 The following information with each equipment: a) General description shall he supplied

to X-ray tube, of the source of manufacture,

2) the model designation, 3) the serial number, 4) year of manufacture, and 5) the country of manufacture.
of an X-ray tube in a previously manufactured tube housing assen;bly shall be subject to the provisions of Ihe above paragraph. The assembler shall remove, cover. previously affixed inscriptions. or deface any tags or lab:is which are no longer applicable.

of the equipment,

b) Characteristics c) Details d) Details

of the generator, and

of controls,

NOTE - The replacement

of other accessories. equipment details: operating manual, shall instructions, be

5.3 Each dental X-ray provided with the following a) Manual containing

d) The location of the focal spot along the X-ray beam axis within 1j1.4mm, and e) The minimum permanent filtration in the useful beam provided by the assembly expressed as millimetres of aluminium specified peak tube equivalent at a potential. 4.2 Cones and diaphragms shall be marked with the appropriate field size and distance of source to X-ray field plane for which the field size is referred to. 5 ACCOMPANYING 5.1 Every dental provided with: DOCUMENTS X-ray equipment shall be

b) Maintenance/service c) Spare parts list, and d) Circuit 6 RADIATION diagram. SAFETY

6.1 Every dental X-ray machine shall be designed and constructed as specified in IS 7620 (Part 1 ) : 1986. 6.1.1 All components used in the manufacture/ assembly of dental X-ray equipment/accessories except those specified in this standard shall conform to the relevant Indian Standard specifications on the design, construction and performonce. 6.2 Every dental X-ray tube fixed and correctly aligned housing. 3 shall be securely within the tube

and maintenance instructions a) installation supplied by the manufacturer of the device, that if followed by trained and experienced personnel, will provide adequate radiation safety; and

IS 13709: 1993 6.2.1 The manufacturer of X-ray tube housing assembly shall specify the source to beam limiting device distance and maintaiu this for the tube housing assembly within a tolerance of &3 mm. 6.3 The required vibration X-ray tube housing exposure position during operation. shall maintain without drift its or

4 Where

the device is battery operated, a visual indicator that shows whether the battery is adequately charged for proper operation.

6.4 ;Dental X-ray equipment shall, where more than one X-ray tube is controlled by one control panel, be designed to include the following safety features: a) An interlock such that it is not possible to energize more than one X-ray tube at the same time. b) A readly visible indicator that shows when that tube is connected and is ready to be energized on each X-ray tube housing or in close proximity to each housing so as to be clearly distinguishable from the position of the housing. c) A readily visible indicator showing which X-ray tubes are connected and ready to be energized at the X-ray machine control panel. 6.5 Every dental X-ray machine shall be designed and constructed to include the following features: 6.5.1 The voltage of the X-ray tube shall be maintained at its selected value to within 3 kilovolts when the line voltages supply, having an impedance equivalent to 1 ohm, varies by i 10 percent of its nominal value. This requirement shall be verified at the manufacturer's premises. 6.5.2 The control panel with following features: of

6.5.3 An exposure switch ( deadman type ) of a kind that requires continuous pressure by the operator to complete the circuit and where the switch is on a cable, the cable shall be of such a length as to enable the operator to stand at least 3 m away from the X-ray source. 6.5.4 Radiation filters that: port of limiting

affixed to the exit a) are permanently the X-ray tube housing, or beam device, or both; and b) provide total attenuation beam at least equivalent by:

of the useful to that afforded

1) 2'5 mm Al for machines designed to operate with X-ray tube potential above 70 kV ( peak ), and 2) 1'5 mm AI for machines designed operate with X-ray tube potential at below 70 kV ( peak ). to or

6.5.5 Keyed filter interlock switches or other positive means to ensure that the necessary added filtration is in place in any tube housing assembly that: inherent filtration of 0'5 mm a) has permanent or less aluminium equivalence, and b) is designed filtration. to be operated with added

a) A separate warning light in clear view the operator that respectively indicates

1) when the control panel is energized and the device is ready to produce X-rays, and 2) when the X-rays are produced. b) Where the device has adjustable technique factors, electrical meters or other indicators that enable the following factors or any combination thereof to be indicated before the exposure is initiated: 1) Operating tube voltage in kilovolts, 2) Tube current 3) The exposure Where c> in milliamperes, time in seconds. and

6.5.6 A timer such that:

a) termination

of an exposure shall not cause automatic resetting of the timer to its original setting, the

b) an exposure

cannot be initiated with timer set at zero or its `OFF' position,

4 repeat exposures
recycling exposure terminated

cannot be initiated with timers without the release of switch to reset timer, of X-rays is automatically after

4 the production

the device has non-adjustable technique factors, permanently fixed marks other or label or electrical meters or indicators that enable at specific source to image receptor distance, the following factors or any combination thereof to be indicated before the exposure is initiated: 1) Operating tube potential in kilovolts, 2) Tube current 3) The exposure in milliamperes, time in seconds. 4 and

1) a preset time interval when the equipment is operating in a fixed milliamperage mode, and 2) a preset milliampere-second when the equipment is operating in a variable milliamperage mode or variable time mode or both,

4 the range of exposure time shall not exceed
5 seconds.

IS 13709:1993 7 BEAM LIMITATION AND PROTECTION AGAINST PRIMARY AND STRAY RADIATION 7.1 Leakage The leakage radiation at a distance of 1 m in maximum direction from the focal spot of the X-ray tube does not exceed 100 milliroentgen ( mR ) or 1 mGy in one hour under any exposure conditions within the rated limits of the X-ray tube. While measuring the leakage radiation, useful beam shall be completely blocked by at least 10 HVL of lead. 7.1.1 Compliance for requirement in 7.1 determined by measurements averaged area of 100 cm2 with no linear dimension than 20 cm ( see 5 of IS 6567 : 1972 ). 7.2 Beam Limiting Devices shall be over an greater 7.2.3 Beam limiting devices shall provide at least the same degree of attenuation of unwanted radiation as required of the X-ray tube housing and limit the size of the useful beam: a) at image receptor of equipment designed for panoramic examination to size that does not exceed by more than two percent of the source-to-image receptor distance for each dimension of the scanning slit; b) to the size of the image receptor or a diameter of 300 mm, whichever is smaller, at a distance of 1'5 m from the focal spot in equipment that is designed for cephalometric examination; and
C)

to a maximum linear dimension of 70 mm at the end of the localizing cone or beam limiting appliances for all other equipment. FOR DENTAL EQUIPMENT

7.2.1 These shall be provided to limit the useful beam to the area of clinical interest. The beam limiting devices in combination with the tube housing shall comply with the requirements for leakage radiation specified in 7.1. 7.2.2 Dental X-ray assemblies for use with intraoral film shall be provided with dental cones ensuring the minimum focal spot-to-skin distance required below and with permanently included fixed size diaphragms. For the use of interchangeable dental cones, provision shall be made that a diaphragm is in place limiting the useful beam so as not to exceed the maximum permitted size. The minimum focal spot-to-skin distance ensured by means of dental cone, shall be as low as the values given below: Maximum Tube Potential kV Minimum Focal Spot-to-Skin Distance mm 100 200 300

8 REQUIREMENTS RADIOGRAPHIC

8.1 For dental X-ray examination, it shall be ensured that the prescribed dose equivalent limits for the operator are not exceeded. In the accompanying documents (see 5 ), attention shall be drawn to the necessity for gonad shielding of the patient during dental examinations, particularly if the direction of the useful beam or expected stray radiation requires additional protective shieldings. 8.2 The control circuit of equipment specially designed for dental radiography ( see 8.3, 8.4 and 8.5) shall be so constructed as not to allow the use of the equipment for fluoroscopy. It shall not be possible to make repeat exposures without release of the exposure switch. 8.3 The equipment specially designed for dental radiography on film inside the mouth shall comply with the following requirements:

a) The exposure

50 to 60 Above 60 and up to and including 75 Above 75

7.2.2.1 The cones for dental radiography on intraoral film shall meet the following requirements: The a> diameters of the useful beam at the distal end of the dental cone shall not exceed 75 mm.

shall be controlled solely by means of a deadman switch so constructed that exposure is maintained only by continuously activating the switch and a timing device. The timing deviec shall be designed to terminate any uninterrupted period of exposure after a preset duration in a range which does not exceed 5 seconds.

b) Dental X-ray assemblies

b) For cylindrical

and divergent dental cones, with and without open end, the maximum size of the useful beam shall comply with the area of the dental cone at the distal end.

for use with intraoral films shall be provided with the beam limiting cones. The cone shall provide the same degree of protective shielding as is required for X-ray tube assembly.

c) Interchangeable

cones with permanently included fixed diaphragm shall be marked with the diameter of the cross-section of the useful beam at the distal end of the dental cone. 5

shall be made to recognize the position of focal spot and the direction of the axis of the useful beam. documents (see 5 ). d) In the accompanying attention shall be drawn to the necessity of providing additional protective shielding for the operator, such as, protective screens and aprons for conditions of high work load.

cl Provision

IS 13709: 1993

4 X-ray

equipment designed for dental radiography with in&a-oral film only and a useful beam not exceeding 75 mm diameter at the distal end of the dental cones may be used as mobile equipment. above, particularly for the extra-oral use of films, it shall be ensured that the requirements for the limitation of the beam as given in 8.1 are fulfilled.

shield as required assembly.

for

the

X-ray

tube

Protective shielding to attenuate the residual radiation shall form an integral part of the equipment. 8.5 Equipment for dental panorama radiography with intra-oral tube shall satisfy the following requirements: a) The X-ray tube assembly shall be provided with means for adequate filtration to minimize the dose to the patient. b) The minimum value of total equivalent filtration in the useful beam shall be not less than 2'5 mm Al. c) Means shall be provided to recognize the position of the focal spot and the direction of the useful beam. d) Suitable protective shielding, such as, applicators shall be provided to minimize the dose to tissues which do not have to be irradiated for the purpose of producing a satisfactory radiograph.

f) For application other than those mentioned

8.4 Equipment for dental panoramic curved field tomography shall comply with the following requirements: Means shall be provided to maintain during the exposure, a minimum focal spot-toskin distance of 150 mm.

b) The exposure shall be controlled

solely by means of a deadman switch so constructed that the exposure is maintained only by continuously actuating the switch. phragm fixed to the X-ray tube assembly shall provide the same degree of protective

d Outside of the useful beam, the slit dia-

Standard Mark by the provtsrons of the Bureau q/ Indian The use of the Standard Mark is governed Standards Acr, 1956 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requrrements of that standard under a well defined system of inspectron, testing and quality control whtch is devtsed and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of condrttons under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade course of implementing the standard, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no if the review indicates that changes are needed. it is taken up for revision. Users of changes are needed; Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. MHD 19 ( 2227 ) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

qf Indian
marking

Standards

Act,

1986

to

and quality

certification

promote of goods

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Central Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices )

Shah Zafar

Marg

I
Maniktola I 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 1 53 38 43, 53 23 84 { 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 632 92 95, { 632 78 91, 160036 600113

Telephone 13 75 31 331 01

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VI1 M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 1V Cross Road, Marol, MADRAS Andheri

37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Northern Southern Western Branches

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East )

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at I'rintrade.

New Delhi,

India

