UAT Wap IS 6518 : 2017 
Indian Standard panna! 


IAA A detec ch fada at 
antefstent 


( ZRT FRAT ) 


Guidelines for Control of Sediment 
in Reservoirs 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 17.120.20 


© BIS 2017 


mA AM Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM FS, 9 FGM WAL At, ve feeeit-110002 
Hizib m MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2017 Price Group 2 


Reservoirs and Lakes Sectional Committee, WRD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Reservoirs 
and Lakes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Sedimentation of reservoirs is a natural phenomenon and is a matter of vital concern for storage projects in 
meeting the various demands, like irrigation, hydro-electric power, flood control, etc, since it affects the useful 
capacity of the reservoirs based on which the projects are expected to be productive for a design period. Further 
the sediment deposition adds to the forces on structures in dams, spillways, etc. 


The rate of sedimentation will depend largely on the annual sediment load carried by the stream and the extent to 
which the same will be retained in the reservoir. This in turn, depends upon a number of factors; such as the area 
and nature of the catchment, land use pattern ( cultivation practices, grazing, logging, construction activities and 
conservation practices ), rainfall pattern, storage capacity, period of storage in relation to the sediment load of the 
stream, particle size distribution in the suspended sediment, channel hydraulics, location and size of sluices, 
outlet works, configuration of the reservoir, and the method and purpose of releases through the dam. 


Therefore, attention is required to each one of these factors for the efficient control of sedimentation of reservoirs 
with a view to enhancing their useful life. Because of the limited data available, the recommendations are only of 
general character. 


This standard was first prepared in 1972 and revised in 1992. It is being revised now to update its contents in line 
with the current experience and practices. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test for analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6518 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR CONTROL OF SEDIMENT IN 
RESERVOIRS 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the various engineering 
measures for the control of sediment in reservoirs. 


1.2 It does not cover the agronomical and forestry 
measures in detail for the control of watershed erosion 
and the situations arising out of landslides, avulsions, 
etc, in the reservoir. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
5477 


Title 
Methods for fixing the capacities of 
reservoirs 
General requirements (first revision) 
Dead storage (first revision) 
Live storage (first revision) 
Flood storage 


(Part 1) : 1999 
(Part 2) : 1994 
(Part 3) : 2003 
(Part 4) : 1971 


12182 : 1987 Guidelines for determination of 
effects of sedimentation in planning 
and performance of reservoirs 

3 GENERAL 


3.1 Where a reservoir storage capacity is large in 
comparison to the annual run-off from the catchment 
area (large capacity inflow ratio), all the waterborne 
sediment carried by the run-off water may be deposited 
in the bed of the reservoir. The bed load may generally 
deposit along the thalweg or pre-reservoir course, but 
the suspended sediment which takes a long time to settle 
will spread more evenly all over the reservoir bed. A 
small amount of sediment deposit in the reservoir may 
be removed by the water drawn off through sluice 
outlets, but such action is generally local. 


3.1.1 When the run-off of the catchment of reservoir 
is large in comparison to the reservoir capacity (small 
capacity inflow ratio), the reservoir discharges the 
surplus freely for long periods, and it is possible that a 


considerable proportion of the sediment in suspension 
may be passed off with the surplus water, but the bed 
load and a part of suspended sediment will be deposited 
in the reservoir bed. 


3.2 The probable rate of sedimentation in any proposed 
reservoir may be estimated in the following ways: 


a) From the observations of sediment load 
carried by the streams, 

1) using simulation models; and 
2) using sediment transport, 

b) From predictions on the basis of total erosion, 
its transportability and reservoir trap 
efficiency; and 

c) On the basis of sedimentation in existing 
reservoirs with similar catchment 
characteristics, the sedimentation deposits of 
which have been surveyed over a sufficiently 
long period. 


4 METHODS FOR CONTROLLING THE 
SEDIMENTATION 


4.1 There are several factors involved in controlling 
sedimentation in reservoirs and they relate to aspects 
on, 


a) design of reservoir; 
b) control of sediment inflow; and 
c) control by outlet works. 


All these aspects are to be simultaneously taken note 
of and appropriate measures be adopted. 


4.2 Design of Reservoirs 


The capacity of reservoirs is governed by a number of 
factors which are covered in IS 5477 (Parts | to 4). 
From the point of view of sediment deposition, the 
following points may be given due consideration: 


a) The sediment yield which depends on the 
topographical, geological and 
geomorphological set up, meteorological 
factors, land use/land cover, intercepting 
tanks, etc; 

b) Sediment delivery characteristics of the 
channel system; 


IS 6518 : 2017 


c) The efficiency of the reservoir as sediment 
trap; 

d) Theratio of capacity of reservoir to the inflow; 

e) Configuration of reservoir; 

f) Method of operation of reservoir; and 

g) Provisions for silt exclusion. 


4.2.1 The rate of sediment delivery increases with the 
quantum of discharge. 


4.2.2 The percentage of sediment trapped by a 
reservoir with a given drainage area increases with the 
increased capacity. In some cases an increased capacity 
will however, result in greater loss of water due to 
evaporation. However, with the progress of 
sedimentation, there is decrease of storage capacity 
which in turn lowers the trap efficiency of the reservoir. 


4.2.3 The capacity of the reservoir and the size and 
characteristics of the reservoir and its drainage area 
are the most important factors governing the annual 
rate of accumulation of sediment. Periodical reservoir 
sedimentation surveys provide guidance on the rate of 
sedimentation. In the absence of observed data for the 
reservoir concerned, data from other reservoirs of 
similar capacity and catchment characteristics may be 
adopted. 


4.2.4 Sedimentation takes place not only in the dead 
storage but also in the live storage space in the reservoir. 
The practice for design of reservoir is to use the 
observed suspended sediment data available from key 
hydrological networks and also the data available from 
hydrographic surveys of other reservoirs in the same 
region. 


This data may be used to simulate sedimentation status 
over a period of reservoir life as mentioned in IS 12182. 


4.2.5 Raising the Dam at Periodic Intervals 


Engineering economic analysis of some reservoir 
projects probably would show that it is cheaper to build 
a substantially lower dam initially, and to raise it at 
intervals until its ultimate height for the given original 
capacity so that long useful life may result. Stage-wise 
construction also provides lower trapping efficiency 
and less evaporation in the initial stages. 


However, this method may not be feasible in all the 
existing dams. Wherever this method is contemplated, 
proper consideration should be given on the strength 
of the existing foundation for the proposed ultimate 
height. 


4.3 Control of Sediment Inflow 


There are many methods for controlling sediment 
inflows and they can be divided as follows: 


a) Watershed management/soil conservation 


measures to check production and transport 
of sediment in the catchment area, and 


b) Preventive measures to check inflow of 
sediment into the reservoir. 


4.3.1 The soil conservation measures are further sub- 
divided as: 


a) Engineering, 
b) Agronomy, and 
c) Forestry. 


4.3.1.1 The engineering methods include, 


a) use of check dams formed by building small 
barriers or dykes across stream channels. 


b) contour bunding and trenching; 
c) gully plugging; and 
d) bank protection. 


NOTE — Check dams are sometimes known as settling basin 
or sedimentation basin. 


4.3.1.2 The agronomic measures include establishment 
of vegetative screen, contour farming, strip cropping 
and crop rotation. 


4.3.1.3 Forestry measures include forest conservancy, 
control on grazing, lumbering, operations and forest 
fires along with management and protection of forest 
plantations. 


4.3.2 Preventive measures to check inflow of sediment 
into the reservoir include, 


a) Restricting the waste/sediment entering into 
the reservoirs due to agricultural and 
infrastructural activities surrounding the 
submergence; and 


b) Construction of by-pass channels or conduits. 
4.3.3 Check Dams 


a) They help to arrest degradation of stream bed 
thereby arresting the slope failure; and 
b) They reduce the velocity of stream flow, 


thereby causing the deposition of the sediment 
load. 


Check dams become necessary, where the channel 
gradients are steep and there is a heavy inflow of 
sediment from the watershed. They are constructed of 
local material like earth, rock, timber, etc. These are 
suitable for small catchment varying in size from 40 to 
400 hectares. It is necessary to provide small check 
dams on the subsidiary streams flowing into the main 
streams besides the check dams in the main stream. 
Proper consideration should be given to the number 
and location of check dams required. It is preferable to 
minimize the height of the check dams. If the stream 
has, a very-steep slope, it is desirable to start with a 


smaller height for the check dams than may ultimately 
be necessary. 


4.3.3.1 Check dams may generally cost more per unit 
of storage than the reservoirs they protect. Therefore, 
it may not always be possible to adopt them as a primary 
method of sediment control in new reservoirs. However, 
feasibility of providing check dams at a later date should 
not be overlooked while planning the construction of a 
new reservoir. 


4.3.4 Contour Bunding and Trenching 


These are important methods of controlling soil erosion 
on the hills and sloping lands, where gradients of 
cultivated fields or terraces are flatter, say up to 10 
percent. By these methods the hill side is split up into 
small compartments on which the rain is retained and 
surface run-off is modified with prevention of soil 
erosion. In addition to contour bunding, side trenching 
is also provided as per requirement. 


4.3.5 Gully Plugging 


This is done by small rock fill dams. These dams will 
be effective in filling up the gullies with sediment 
coming from the upstream of the catchment and also 
prevent further widening of the gully. 


4.3.6 Bank Protection 


This is achieved by terracing, revetment, retaining 
walls, gabions and spurs. 


4.3.7 By-Pass Canals, Tunnels and Conduits 


The various methods in this category require the 
construction of some type of diversion dam or weir at 
the head of the reservoir basin, and a canal, tunnel or 
conduit leading around the reservoir to a point below 
the dam where the flow may re-enter the main channels. 
In such cases the flood flows of sediment laden water 
are by-passed to the downstream of the dam. In some 
cases where topography permits construction of new 
off channel reservoirs can be considered. These 
reservoirs will invariably have a forebay and check dam 
on the upstream for trapping the sediment. The stored 
water in the forebay is led to the reservoir and the 
sediment trapped is flushed through by by-pass channel/ 
conduit/tunnel to the main channel downstream of the 
dam. 


4.4 Control of Sediment Deposition 


The deposition of sediment in a reservoir may be 
controlled to a certain extent by designing and operating 
gates or other outlets in the dam in such a manner as to 
permit selective withdrawals of water having a higher 
than average sediment content. The suspended sediment 
content of the water in reservoirs is higher during and 
just after flood flow. Thus, more the water wasted at 


IS 6518 : 2017 


such times, the smaller will be the percentage of the 
total sediment load to settle into permanent deposits. 
There are generally two methods: (a) density currents, 
and (b) waste-water release, for controlling the 
deposition and both will necessarily result in loss of 
water. 


4.4.1 Density Current 


Water at various levels of a reservoir often contains 
radically different concentrations of suspended 
sediment particularly during and after flood flows. If 
all wastewater could be withdrawn at those levels where 
the concentration is highest, a significant amount of 
sediment might be removed from the reservoir. Because 
a submerged outlet draws water towards it from all 
directions, the vertical dimension of the opening should 
be small with respect to the thickness of the layer and 
the rate of withdrawal also should be low. With a view 
to passing the density current by sluices that might be 
existing, it is necessary to trace the movement of density 
currents and observation stations (consisting of 
permanently anchored rafts from which measurements 
could be made of temperature and conductivity gradient 
from the surface of the lake to the bottom, besides 
collecting water samples at various depths) at least one 
just above the dam and two or more additional stations 
in the upstream (one in the inlet and one in the middle) 
should be located. 


4.4.2 Waste-Water Release 


Controlling the sedimentation by controlling waste- 
water release is obviously possible only when water 
can be or should be wasted. This method is applicable 
only when a reservoir is of such size that a small part 
of large flood flows will fill it. 


In the design of the dam, sediment may be passed 
through or over it as an effective method of silt control 
by placing a series of outlets at various elevations. The 
percentage of total sediment load that might be ejected 
from the reservoir through proper gate control will 
differ greatly with different locations. It is probable 
that as much as 20 percent of the sediment inflow could 
be passed through many reservoirs by venting through 
outlets designed and controlled. 


4.4.3 Scouring Sluicing 


This method is somewhat similar to both the control of 
waste-water release and the draining and flushing 
methods (see 4.4.2 and 4.5.3). 


The distinctions amongst them are the following: 


a) The waste-water release method ejects 
sediment laden flood flows through deep 
spillway gates or large under-sluices at the rate 
of discharge that prevents sedimentation. 


IS 6518 : 2017 


b) Drainage and flushing method involves the 
slow release of stored water from the reservoir 
through small gates or valves making use of 
normal or low flow to entrain and carry the 
sediment, and 

c) Scouring sluicing depends for its efficiency 
on either the scouring action exerted by the 
sudden rush of impounded water under a high 
head through under-sluices or on the scouring 
action of high flood discharge coming into the 
reservoir. 


4.4.3.1 Scouring sluicing method can be used in the 
following: 


a) Small power dams that depend to a great 
extent on pondage but not on storage; 

b) Small irrigation reservoirs, where only a small 
fraction of the total annual flow can be stored; 


c) Any reservoir in narrow channels, gorges, etc, 
where water wastage can be afforded; and 

d) When the particular reservoir under treatment 
is a unit in an interconnected system so that 
the other reservoirs can supply the water 
needed. 


4.5 Removal of Sediment Deposit 


The most practical means of maintaining the storage 
capacity are those designed to prevent accumulation 
of permanent deposits as the removal operations are 
extremely expensive, unless the material removed is 
usable. Therefore, the redemption of lost storage by 
removal should be adopted as a last resort. The removal 
of sediment deposit implies in general, that the deposits 
are sufficiently compacted or consolidated to act as a 
solid and, therefore, are unable to flow along with the 
water. The removal of sediment deposits may be 
accomplished by a variety of mechanical and hydraulic 
or methods, such as excavation, dredging, siphoning, 
draining, flushing, flood sluicing, and sluicing aided 
by such measures as hydraulic or mechanical agitation 
or blasting of the sediment. The excavated sediments 
may be suitably disposed off so that, these do not find 
the way again in the reservoir. 


4.5.1 Excavation 


The method involves draining most of or all the water 
in the basin and removing the sediment by hand or 
power operated shovel, dragline scraper or other 
mechanical means. 


The excavation of silt and clay which constitute most 
of the material in larger reservoirs is more difficult than 
the excavation of sand and gravel. Fine-textured 
sediment cannot be excavated easily from larger 
reservoirs unless it is relatively fluid or relatively 
compact. 


4.5.2 Dredging 


This involves the removal of deposits from the bottom 
of a reservoir and their conveyance to some other point 
by mechanical or hydraulic means, while water storage 
is being maintained. 


Dredging practices are grouped as: 


a) Mechanical dredging by bucket, ladder, etc; 

b) Suction dredging with floating pipeline and a 
pump usually mounted on a barge; and 

c) Siphon dredging with a floating pipe extending 
over the dam or connected to an opening in the 
dam and usually with a pump on a barge. 


NOTES 


1 Practicality of the two methods, namely, excavation and 
dredging, requires to be carefully considered in any particular 
case. 


2 Suitable measures to prevent deposition of the dredged silt in 
the natural channel where it is discharged need to be adopted. 


4.5.3 Draining and Flushing 


The method involves relatively slow release of all stored 
water in a reservoir through gates or valves located 
near bottom of the dam and the maintenance thereafter 
of open outlets for a shorter or longer period during 
which normal stream flow cuts into or directed against 
the sediment deposits. Therefore, this method may be 
adopted in flood control reservoirs. 


4.5.4 Sluicing with Controlled Water 


This method differs from the flood sluicing in that the 
controlled water supply permits choosing the time of 
sluicing more advantageously and that the water may 
be directed more effectively against the sediment 
deposits. While the flood sluicing depends either on 
the occurrence of flood or on being able to release 
rapidly all of a full or nearly full supply of water in the 
main reservoir is empty. The advantage of this method 
is that generally more sediment can be removed per 
unit of water used than in flood scouring or draining 
and flushing. 


4.5.5 Sluicing with Hydraulic and Mechanical 
Agitation 


Methods that stir up break up or move deposits of 
sediment into a stream current flowing through a 
drained reservoir basin or into a lake current moving 
through and out of a full reservoir will tend to make 
the removal of sediment from the reservoir more 
complete. Wherever draining, flushing or sluicing 
appear to be warranted, the additional use of hydraulic 
means for stirring up the sediment deposits, or 
sloughing them off, into a stream flowing through the 
reservoir basin should be considered. It has, however, 
limited application. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 10 (0595). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


