NAT AWA IS 9439 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Ula & HE Aa eNA A aH 
uR yroa 


(AT JPET ) 


Glossary of Terms Used in Water 
Well Drilling Technology 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 73.100.30 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 4 


Diamond Core and Water Well Drilling Sectional Committee, MED 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Diamond Core and Water Well Drilling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


The standard was first published in 1980 and revised in 2002. 
The standard has been revised to incorporate terminologies used in water well drilling technology. 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 9439 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN WATER 
WELL DRILLING TECHNOLOGY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard cover definition/explanation of the terms 
generally used in water well drilling technology. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard listed below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


2800: 2019 Code of practice for construction and 
testing of tubewells 


3 TERMINOLOGY 
A 


3.1 Abandoned Well — A well which is no longer 
used. In many places, abandoned wells are filled with 
cement or concrete grout to prevent pollution of ground 
water bodies. 


3.2 Acidic — Water or soil whose pH is below 7.0. 


3.3 Acidizing — The process of introducing acid into 
the well or borehole for dissolving soluble material and 
later removal of the same to enlarge the cavities and 
remove encrustation from well screens and cementing 
from gravel/filter pack. 


3.4 Additive — An auxiliary agent added for 
conditioning of drilling fluid to obtain desired physical 
properties. 


3.5 Air Drilling — The drilling process in which air 
or gas is used as medium for removal of drill cutting 
from the bore. 


3.6 Air Line — A small diameter pipe inserted in the 
well with or without ejector for developing the well 
with airlift/compressed air method. 


3.7 Air Line Lubricator — An apparatus that 
feeds a controllable quantity of lubricator into 


the air stream to provide lubrication to pneumatic 
components/accessories of machine. 


3.8 Air Rotary Drilling — A drilling method where 
compressed air is used as drilling media for lifting the 
formation cuttings from bottom of the hole. 


3.9 Alkaline — Water or soil whose pH is above 7.0. 


3.10 Alluvial — Relating to, composed of, or found in 
alluvium. 


3.11 Alluvium — Sediments deposited by erosional 
processes, usually by streams. 


3.12 Annular Space/Annulus — The space between 
the drill pipe and wall of the hole. 


3.13 Annular Velocity — The up-hole return velocity 
of drilling fluid or air in the annulus usually expressed 
as m/min. 


3.14 Antifoam — A chemical reagent added to acid to 
prevent or retard foaming during acidizing. 


3.15 Aquifer — A formation, group of formations or 
part of a formation that contains sufficient saturated 
permeable material to yield economical quantities of 
water to wells and springs. 


3.16 Artesian Well — A well driving its water from a 
confined aquifer in which the water level stands above 
the ground surface, synonymous with flowing artesian 
well. 


3.17 Auxiliary Brake — A revolution retarder, used 
in conjunction with mechanical or air brake-generally 
installed on the draw works drum shaft. 


B 


3.18 Backpressure — A pressure that can cause 
water to backflow into the water supply when a user’s 
wastewater system is at a higher pressure than the 
public system. 


3.19 Bailer/Sand Bucket — A section of steel pipe 
fitted with a hook or a ring hook at one end and a valve 
on the other which is lowered into the borehole, cased 
or uncased, to remove formation cuttings and water. 


IS 9439 : 2022 


3.20 Barytes — Barium sulphate, the commercial 
product contains small amounts of iron oxide, silica and 
other minerals. It is mixed with drilling fluid to increase 
its density for better lifting of formation cuttings. 


3.21 Bentonite — A finely powdered highly plastic, 
colloidal clay used in preparing drilling mud, which is 
mixed with water to prepare drilling fluid. 


3.22 Bit — A cutting tool attached to the bottom of drill 
string/stem for cutting the rock formation. 


3.23 Bit Breaker — A heavy steel plate which fits 
in the rotary table and holds the bit while it is being 
unscrewed from the drill stem. 


3.24 Bit Nozzle — A fluid porthole in the bit. 


3.25 Blowout — A sudden and violent escape of gas, 
oil or water from a borehole being drilled when high 
pressure is encountered. 


3.26 Borehole — Any hole bored or drilled in the land 
for prospecting/production of oil, mineral or water. 


3.27 Blowout Preventer — A device attached 
immediately above the surface casing to prevent the 
blowout. 


3.28 Breakout — The act or process of unscrewing 
a threaded joint between the drill pipes, casings etc. 
while with drawing them from the borehole. 


3.29 Bridge — An obstruction to circulation in the 
annulus. It is usually formed by caving of the wall of 
the hole or by intrusion of large boulder or within filter 
pack during gavelling and development. 


C 


3.30 Cable Tool/Percussion Drilling — A form of 
well drilling that is accomplished using a weighted 
string of drilling tools attached to hoisting cable that is 
repeatedly lifted and dropped. The force of the impact 
crushes the material at the bottom of the borehole. The 
crushed material is periodically cleared using a bailer. 
Also see IS 2800. 


3.31 Casing Pipe — Steel or plastic pipe lowered in 
the borehole to protect it from collapsing. The casing is 
driven into the borehole to seal it off from surface water 
contamination. 


3.32 Casing Shoe — A heavy wall steel coupling or 
band at the bottom most part of the lowest casings for 
smooth travel during driving of the casing pipes. 


3.33 Cathead — A auxiliary hoisting device used for 
handling light loads and for lifting and dropping tools 


or making and breaking joints. It is also used during 
hammering process. 


3.34 Catline — Hoisting or pulling line used in 
conjunction with cathead to lift heavy equipment and 
tools. 


3.35 Catwalk — A ramp on the side of a rig, fitted to 
the derrick floor, where the pipes are laid using the cat 
line. 


3.36 Cementing/Grouting — It is the act of injecting 
certain substances mostly slurry of cement into the 
annulus between the casing and drilled hole. This 
secures the casing in place and excludes undesired 
water and other fluids from the well bore. 


3.37 Cement Plug — A hardened cement slurry at the 
bottom of the casing pipe. It is later drilled through, 
when the cement is set. 


3.38 Cement Slurry — A mixture of cement and water 
used for pumping inside the bore hole for the purpose 
of grouting the bore hole. 


3.39 Circulate or circulation — To pump drilling 
fluid through the drilling stem and back to the surface 
through the annulus or down the annulus to bottom of 
hole and back to surface through the drill stem. It applies 
to circulate the drilling fluid when drilling is suspended 
to collect formation samples from the bottom of the 
hole, or the drilling is suspended for unseen reasons or 
awaiting other operations. 


3.40 Collector Well — A well located near a surface 
water supply used to lower the water table and thereby 
induce infiltration of surface water through the bed of 
the water body to the well. 


3.41 Control Console — Horizontal or vertical panel 
on which the operator’s controls are located. 


3.42 Core — It is a cylindrical shaped sample of the 
undisturbed formation obtained from the bottom of the 
hole. 


3.43 Coring — The act of obtaining an undisturbed 
sample (core) of the formation using a core barrel. 


3.44 Core Barrel — It is used to obtain core of the 
formation. Single tube, double tube and triple tube core 
barrels which are available. 


3.45 Crown Block — An assembly of wire line sheaves 
mounted on the uppermost portion of derrick or mast. 


3.46 Cuttings — Particles of the formation generated 
due to the cutting action of the bit at the bottom of the 
hole. 


D 


3.47 Derrick/Mast — A vertical steel frame of 
sufficient height on the rig that has pulleys on the top 
for hoisting and lowering of drill string and also support 
the crown block, top drive, pull down chains, etc. 


3.48 Deadline — Refers to the end of the drilling line, 
which is not reeled on the drum. This end is anchored 
to the mast substructure and does not move up or down 
during various operations. 


3.49 Die Overshot — It is tool shaped as a long-tapered 
die of heat-treated steel designed to fit over the top of 
the fallen drill pipe. It can be rotated to cut threads on 
the fallen pipe and fish it out. 


3.50 Dilution — To add water to the cement slurry or 
the drilling fluid (mud) so that it can easily be pumped. 


3.51 Direct Circulation Rotary Drilling — Under 
direct rotary drilling method the borehole is drilled by 
rotating a bit and cuttings are removed by circulation 
of drilling fluid pumped in through drill stem. Also 
see IS 2800. 


3.52 Down the hole drilling — It essentially involves 
a pneumatic hammer at the bottom of a drill string. 
It relies on three elements for drilling holes: bit load, 
rotation, and air. These active elements combine to 
achieve crushing of rock formation. As the drill string 
slowly rotates, the drilling hammer is forced into 
the rock repeatedly. Striking power is provided by 
compressed air driving a piston inside the hammer. 


3.53 Drag Bit — A rotary bit that has two or more 
cutting blades with hard faced cutting edges. It is 
used for fast penetration in unconsolidated or semi 
consolidated sediments. 


3.54 Drawdown — The drop in the water table or level 
of groundwater when water is being pumped from a 
well; the amount of water used from a tank or reservoir; 
the drop in the water level of a tank or reservoir. 


3.55 Draw Works — A power driven winch or winches 
equipped with clutch and brakes for controlling hoisting 
and lowering of drill string or casing pipe etc. 


3.56 Drill Collar — A heavy drill pipe attached 
immediately above the drill bit to put weight on the bit 
for steady drilling and minimization of deviation of the 
borehole. 


3.57 Driller — A technical person who operates the 
drilling machine/rig. 


3.58 Drilling Mud — It is a type of drilling fluid 
prepared by mixing bentonite or similar clays in water 
and maintaining a consistency in gel strength and 
viscosity. 


IS 9439 : 2022 


3.59 Drill Pipe — Special heavy-duty seamless tubing 
with tool joints. Each joint is equipped with tool joint 
pin on one end and a tool joint box on the other for easy 
connection with other drill pipe. These are attached to 
the bit/ drill collar on one end and the kelly on the other 
to transmit rotational action from the rig to the bit. The 
drill string consists of drill pipe also convey drilling 
fluid to cool the bit and remove the cuttings from the 
bottom of the hole. 


3.60 Drill String/Stem — Depending upon the type of 
drilling all components attached in a line from the bit 
at the bottom to the sub/adopter, drill collar, drill pipe 
connected to the machine on the surface form a drilling 
string. 


3.61 Drive Bushing — Devise used for transmitting 
torque from the rotary table/drill head to the kelly and 
still allowing vertical movement of kelly as drilling 
progresses. 


3.62 Drive Head — A sub fastened to the top of casing 
pipe to take the blow of drive weight. 


3.63 Drive Pipe — A pipe or casing driven through the 
over burden. 


3.64 Drive Weight, Hammer or Block — Used in 
percussion drilling to give blows on top of the casing to 
drive it into the formation. 


3.65 Dry Hole/Duster — A well with no productivity. 


3.66 Dust Collector — A device attached to an air 
drilling rig for collecting dust or cuttings during its 
operation. 


3.67 Dust Diverter — Collar and hose attached to the 
air drilling rig to divert dust and cutting away. 


E 


3.68 Elevators — Device that latch around the drill 
pipe/casing, attached by links to the travelling block for 
raising or lowering the drill pipe or casing pipe from or 
into the borehole. 


3.69 Expansion Reamer — A cutting tool that can 
be expanded or contracted by hydraulic or mechanical 
means; used to enlarge or ream the borehole below the 
casing pipe. It is also called adjustable or under reamer. 


F 


3.70 Feed — Process of applying required pressure on 
the bit to obtain downward movement. 


3.71 Fish — The object or tool that is broken off or 
dropped in the hole is called the fish. 


3.72 Fishing — The act of retrieving the fish is called 
fishing. 


IS 9439 : 2022 


3.73 Fishing Tools — Various tools used to fish out 
the dropped or broken left out part of the drill string. 
Examples are taper tap, die collar, junk mill with 
fishing neck, releasing and circulating over shot with 
basket grapple, magnet and releasing spear with bull 
nose nut etc. 


3.74 Fishing Magnet — A special powerful magnet 
attached to a rope or drill string to fish out iron or steel 
material from the borehole. 


3.75 Fishing Tap — A tap of a heat-treated steel 
designed to fit on the top of the lost drill pipe to cut 
thread when rotated and gets tightly fitted to the fish. 


3.76 Filter Cake — The suspended solids that are 
deposited on the borehole wall especially on porous 
medium. 


3.77 Filter/Gravel Pack Material — Sand or gravel 
that is smooth, uniform, clean, well rounded and 
siliceous. It is placed in the annulus of the well between 
the borehole and well screen to prevent formation 
material from entering the screen. 


3.78 Foot Valve — A type of check valve that is 
attached to the end of the suction pipe of the pump in 
well. to prevent the backflow of water into the well 
while allowing the pump to suck water from the well. 


G 


3.79 Gel Strength — It is a measure of drilling fluid’s 
ability to support suspended particles when the fluid is 
at rest. 


3.80 Gravel Well — A type of water well where the 
casing is set in an unconsolidated mixture of rock 
fragments or pebbles. 


3.81 Ground Water — Water within the earth that 
supplies wells and springs; water in the zone of 
saturation where all openings in rocks and soil are 
filled, the upper surface of which forms the water table. 


3.82 Grout — A cement slurry of a consistency that 
can be forced into a borehole through a pipe and placed 
at desired depth interval. 


3.83 Grouting — It is the act of injecting certain 
substances mostly slurry of cement into the annulus 
between the casing and drilled hole. This secures the 
casing in place and excludes undesired water and other 
fluids from the well bore entering the screen. 


H 


3.84 Hoisting Line — Wire rope used on the draw 
works to hoist or lower the drill string. 


3.85 Hole — Same as bore hole or well bore. 


3.86 Hook Load — It is used to measure the maximum 
hoisting capacity of the machine. 


I 


3.87 Idler — On the drilling rig, an idler pully or 
sprocket is provided in connection with belt drive or 
chain drive to maintain desired tension in the belt or 
chain. 


3.88 Impression Block — It is a block to obtain an 
impression of the top of the fallen material (fish) in a 
bore for choosing fishing method. 


J 
3.89 Jet — A directed, rapid flow of fluid from a nozzle. 
K 


3.90 Kelly — It is a square, hexagonal or round with 
a lengthwise groove or flute cut into the outside wall, 
with an inside hole. It is joined with swivel at the top 
and drill pipe below the square, hexagonal or grooved 
circular section engage the rotary table so that the 
rotation of the rotary table is transmitted to drill string. 


L 


3.91 Loss of Circulation — The loss of drilling fluid 
inside the bore hole while drilling. This is due to the 
nature of formation encountered or crevices. 


3.92 Lead Packer — it consists of lead moulded on 
to a coupling or weld fitting. It is expanded by sewage 
block to make tight sand seal between two different 
sizes pipes. 


M 


3.93 Making a Joint/Connection — The act of adding 
of a new drill pipe on the drilling string suspended in 
the bore hole. 


3.94 Marsh Funnel — A calibrated funnel used in 
determining the viscosity of the drilling mud/fluid. 


3.95 Master Bushing — Adopter to reduce the opening 
size of the rotary table to accommodate various sizes 
bushings, slips etc. 


3.96 Mud Balance — An instrument consisting of a 
cup and graduated arm with sliding weight and resting 
on a fulcrum for measurement of mud weight. 


3.97 Mud Gun — A pipe fitted to the mud pump 
through a hose that can throw a jet of water or drilling 
mud under high pressure back into the mud pit to mix 
the additives and stir the mud for better consistency. 


3.98 Mud Mixing — Preparation of drilling fluid 
by mixing water and bentonite and other required 
additives. 


3.99 Mud pit — It is a pit/sump which is dug at a 
drilling site close to the drilling machine for the purpose 
of mixing the mud with the water for its circulation 
inside the borehole with the help of a pump. Normally 
2 or 3 mud pits are made at a drill site. One for the 
purpose of mixing the mud for allowing it to swell for 
the desired period. And another pit is for the purpose of 
collecting the return fluid from the borehole. The return 
mud collected in this pit is again discharged in the main 
pit through hydrocyclone. 


3.100 Mud Pump — A large double acting duplex 
pump used for circulation of mud in the borehole. 


N 


3.101 Nozzle — A small spout to direct the flow of 
fluid efficiently. 


O 


3.102 Overburden —The rock/soil mixture that sits 
atop bedrock. It can be comprised of rock, clay, gravel, 
sand or soil. This is sealed off from the well by the well 
casing, except in the case of gravel wells, where the 
casing ends in the gravel formation. 


P 


3.103 Penetration rate — The rate at which the bit 
proceeds in deepening of the borehole. 


3.104 Permeability — The ability of a water bearing 
material to transmit water. It is measured in terms of 
quantity of water passing through a unit cross section, 
in a unit time, under 100 percent hydraulic gradient. 


3.105 pH — Numeric value that describes the intensity 
of the acid or basic (alkaline) conditions of a solution. 
The pH scale is from 0 to 14, with the neutral point at 
7.0. Values lower than 7 indicates it is acidic in nature 
and greater than 7.0 indicates it is basic in nature. 
Technically, pH is the logarithm of the reciprocal 
(negative log) of the hydrogen ion concentration 
(hydrogen ion activity) in moles per litre. 


3.106 Pipe Handling Equipment — Equipment for 
storing, adding and removing of drill pipe. 


3.107 Power Take Off — The mechanism of 
transmitting power from the engine to the other 
components of the drilling rig. Itis usually accomplished 
by a separate shifting arrangement in the transmission. 


IS 9439 : 2022 


3.108 Pull Down — It is defined as follows: 


a) Thrust or weight applied to the bit through the drill 
string and 


b) The mechanism which provides either the hoisting 
or pulling power. 


3.109 Pump — A device which increases the pressure 
of the fluid moving through it. 


R 


3.110 Reamer — Cutting tool or bit used for enlarging 
the diameter of the borehole. 


3.111 Reaming — The act of enlarging the diameter of 
the borehole during drilling operation. 


3.112 Reverse Circulation Rotary Drilling — In 
reverse circulation rotary drilling, flow of drilling fluid, 
which is generally water, is reversed when compared 
with direct rotary method. The drilling fluid and its 
load of cuttings move upward inside the drill pipe and 
are discharged by the pump into a settling pit. Also 
see IS 2800. 


3.113 Rig — A machine used for drilling a borehole. 


3.114 Rotary Drilling — A form of well drilling 
where a turning hammer assembly or a roller bit is 
incrementally lowered into the ground to create the 
borehole. A lifting agent is continually pumped through 
the hammer to remove drillings from the borehole. This 
can be comprised of an air/water mixture, an industrial 
drilling fluid, or mud. Time required to drill a well is 
drastically reduced compared to cable tool methods. 


3.115 Rotary Drive — It is a power shaft to transmit 
driving power to the rotating element. 


3.116 Rotary Hose — A hose that leads from the stand 
pipe to the swivel, also called fluid or swivel hose. 


3.117 Rotary Table, Power Swivel or Top Head 
Drive — It is a rotational unit that transmits the rotation 
to the kelly and ultimately to drill string and bit. 


S 


3.118 Safety Hook — A hook with a spring-loaded 
latch that prevents the load from accidently slipping off 
the hook. 


3.119 Sand Content — Percentage of sand in the 
bentonite or additives to drilling fluid/mud. 


3.120 Sewage Block — It is made up of steel as a 
circular block with lower half tapering to smaller 
diameter. It is used to expand the lead packer. 


IS 9439 : 2022 


3.121 Shale Shaker — A vibrating screen/mesh that 
removes coarser cuttings from the circulating fluid 
before it enters the mud pit. 


3.122 Sheaves — Disc type or wheel type parts of the 
travelling block or crown block with circumference 
grooved for a selected diameter of wire rope. These can 
be mounted on bushings or bearings. 


3.123 Slips — Wedges used to hold the drill or the 
casing pipes and prevent them from slipping through 
the opening in the rotary table when the bit is lifted 
from the bottom or when adding or disjoining a drill 
pipe/kelly. These may be power or hand actuated. 


3.124 Settling Pit — These are the small pits made on 
the path of the return drilling fluid for the purpose of 
settling of the cuttings before reaching the main mud 


pit. 


3.125 Stabiliser — These are bars or rollers fitted 
(welded) around the drill collar for more effective 
drilling straight bore holes. 


3.126 Stand Pipe — A vertical pipe or hose fixed 
approximately to the middle of the mast and connected 
to the mud, rotary or swivel hose for carrying drilling 
fluid/air. 


3.127 Sub/Adopter — It is used to facilitate the 
connection between two different diameter pipes. A sub 
is normally provided between the bit and the lowest 
drill pipe. It is also small in length and provided with a 
pin at one end and a tool joint box on the other. 


3.128 Submersible Pump — A type of well pump that 
resides inside the borehole. A submersible pump can 
draw water from a much lower depth than a shallow 
well pump because it pushes the water up and out the 
well, rather than pulling it from the well at the surface 
level. 


3.129 Swivel — A device that permits the passage of 
mud or air from stationary hose into the rotating Kelley 
or drill pipe. 


T 


3.130 Thinner — A substance mixed with mud to 
reduce its viscosity and gel strength without lowering 
the density. 


3.131 Travelling Block and Crown — A block with 
pulleys for wire ropes and a hook at the base used for 
lifting and lowering of drilling pipes, kelley etc. 


3.132 Thread Protector — These are small cup like 
device put on or into the ends of the drill pipe, subs, 
stabilizers and on top end of bits to protect the threads 
from damage mainly during transportation. 


3.133 Tong — Tong is a kind of tool for making or 
breaking a joint of pipe similar to a pipe wrench. 


3.134 Tool Joint — Threaded part of a drill pipe which 
is box type on one end and pin type on the other. 


3.135 Transfer Case — A transmission junction to 
distribute power from engine to various sections of 
the rig. 


U 


3.136 Unconsolidated Formations — Naturally 
occurring earth formations that have not been lithified. 
Alluvium, soil, gravel, clay, and overburden are some 
of the terms used to describe this type of formation. 


WwW 


3.137 Wall Hook — It is fishing tool made of 
casing pipe with small cut sections on the pipe in the 
rectangular shape with one circumferential side not cut 
and then pushing the cut sides into the pipe to protrude 
into it. Four such sections at 90 degrees form a reduced 
diameter opening in the centre of the pipe. This pipe 
is lowered in the hole to catch the fish by centering it. 


3.138 Water Injection System — Used for adding 
water to the down hole air stream for increasing 
efficiency of cleaning action. Also, used for controlling 
dust in the hole. 


3.139 Water well — A bored, drilled, or driven shaft 
or a dug hole whose depth is greater than the largest 
surface dimension and whose purpose is to reach 
underground water supplies to store or bury fluids 
below ground. 


3.140 Well Screens — A filtering device that serves 
as the intake portion of tube wells constructed in 
unconsolidated or semi-consolidated aquifers to permit 
water to enter the well structure. It is a filtering device 
used to prevent sediments from entering a water well. 


3.141 Wetting Agent — Additive that reduces surface 
tension. 


3.142 Water Table — Level below the earth’s surface 
at which the ground becomes saturated with water. The 
surface of an unconfined aquifer which fluctuates due 
to seasonal precipitation. 


IS 9439 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Diamond Core and Water Well Drilling Sectional Committee, MED 21 


Organization 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


AMKO Mining And Drilling Equipment Pvt Ltd, 
Mumbai 


AQSEPTENCE Group (India) Pvt, Ltd (Formaly 
known As Johnson Screens India Pvt, Ltd) 


Atlas Copco (I) Ltd Pune 


Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and 
Research, Hyderabad 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 


Central Mine Planning and Design 
Institute Limited, Ranchi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Drilbits International Private Limited, Nashik 

Drillmax Rigs Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

DTE of Mines and Geology, Udaipur 

Epiroc Mining India Limited, Nashik 

Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), 
Dhanbad 

Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 

Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 

Indian Pump Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 

In Personal Capacity 


(90 Mayur Vihar, Sec 48, Chandigarh) 


In Personal Capacity 
(24/A Chandra Vihar Colony, Dhanbad) 


In Personal Capacity 
(F-401, Maruti Sadan, Begumpet, Hydrabad) 


Kores (India) Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative (s) 


SHRI AJAY AGARWAL (Chairman) 
SHRI ANUP KUMAR Jour (Alternate) 
SHRI S. SHANKAR (Young Professional) 
Suri C. B. Trwari (Young Professional) 


Suri M. G. KUVAWALA 
Suri H. M. KuvawaLa (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH ARORA 
SHRI ANIL C. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHUDHANSHU NIGAM 
SHRI S. DATTA MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. CHATTOPADHYAY 


SHRI G. L. MEENA 
SHRI NIDHISH VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL SAVANUR 
SHRI A.V. RAMAKRISHNA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMJEET VERMA 
DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. V. RAMANA MURTHY 
SHRI TUSHAR PAUL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. BIJLANI 
SHRI R. B. Desar (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. PARIHAR 
SHRI N. K. JONWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJEET KUMAR 
SHRI CHANDAN GHOSH (Alternate) 


DR A. K. PATHAK 


PROF J. RAMKUMAR 
PROF SUDHANSHU SHEKHAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Pror B. K. GANDHI 
SHRI VARUN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI YOGESH MISTRY 

SHRI UTKARSH A CHHAYA (Alternate) 
SHRI MAHESH CHANDRA JINDAL 
ProF C. K. JAIN 


SHRI A. B. ANAND 


SHRI SANDEEP DHOLI 


IS 9439 : 2022 


Organization Representative (s) 
Mecon Limited, Jharkhand Suri B. K. SINHA 
Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd, Nagpur Suri J. G. JANGLA 
Mining Associates Pvt Ltd, Asansol SHRI RAM BABU BANSAL 
RITES Ltd, Gurugram SHRI S. KUNAL 
SHRI P. C. DEWLI (Alternate) 
Rockdrill (India), Jodhpur SHRI KAMALKISHOR GUPTA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Ku. GUPTA (Alternate) 
Sandvik Smith Asia Ltd, A P SHRI RANGAYYA NAIDU 
SHRI N. BHASKARA REDDY (Alternate) 
The Singareni Collieries Co Ltd, Kothagudem SHRI V. RAMA RAO 
SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA (Alternate) 
Usha International Ltd, Gurugram SHRI ROHIT MATHUR 
SHRI MUDIT MATHUR (Alternate) 
Water & Power Consultancy Services (India) Ltd, SHRI AMITABH TRIPATHI 
Gurugram Dr J. K Rat (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU JYOTSNA KINDO 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 21 (14792). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


