**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8006 (1988) : Recommendations for handling of timber 
pallets [TED 12: Freight Containers and Pallets] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62V869-82-002-71 [674] IS : 8006 - 1988 



Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR HANDLING OF TIMBER PALLETS 

( First Revision ) 



1. Scope — Recommends the procedure to be followed in safe handling and use of pallets during 
loading, transporting and storing them. 

2. Terminology 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 3971-1976 'Glossary of terms on 
pallets ( first revision )' along with the following shall apply. 

2.1.1 Pallet handling truck — A truck with two elevating type fingers (forks) operated by 
mechanicallinkage or hydraulic pump to enable pallet to be elevated just clear off the ground for 
movement. 

2.1 .2 Pallet stacking truck — A truck fitted with mast, forks and elevating mechanism capable of 
transporting, raising and lowering pallets for the purpose of stacking. 

2.1.3 Vacuum-pack — A pack in which the air has been withdrawn from the pack before sealing it. 

3. Loading 

3.1 For making pallet load, the pallets conforming to IS ; 4300-1967 'Specification for box pallets 
for through transit of goods', IS -.7276-1979 'Specification for non-expendable pallets (first revision )' 
and IS : 9340-1979 'Specification for expendable pallets' shall be used. 

3.2 Each type of merchandise shall be palletized to its own pattern designed to achieve maximum 
stability and safety of the goods handled, taking into consideration the safe working load and 
dimensions limits set. A degnate and correct strapping/fastening shall be used for various cargos. 

Note — Bag cargo which has specially to be exported in palletized form shall he vacuum packed with side bag walls 
so that it gives a flat top surface and does not get loosened during transportation. 

3.3 Where the pallet load consists of mixed goods, care shall be taken to place heavier packages at 
the bottom. 

3.4 The top of the pallet load shall be levelled off to allow other goods to be safely stowed over it, 
where necessary. 

3.5 The pallet shall be loaded uniformly as far as it is reasonably practicable, so as to avoid damage 
resulting from the movement of load during handling and transportation. 

4. Handling ( Including Stacking ) 

4.1 General— In every operation, care shall betaken to ensure that the handling equipment is 
suitable for the load and is used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 

4.2 Pallets shall not be pushed with forks which can cause damage or involve the risk of toppling the 
pallets. 

4.3 Forks should be horizontal when entering into and withdrawing from the pallets. Forks inserted 
at an angle cause the tips of the forks to dig into the top deck boards causing such parts of the 
pallet to break off, the fork heels can graze the bottom deck boards. After forks have been inserted 
correctly, a pallet should be picked up and then tilted backwards. Regular checks should be made 
for bending and distortion of forks. 



Adopted 28 February 1988 © August 1S88, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002, 



IS :8006 -1988 

4.4 A firm level surface ( maximum gradient 1 percent ) should be provided, clear of obstructions and 
projections which might damage the lower deck of the pallet. Pallet should not be placed on uneven 
surfaces. 

4.5 If the forks are longer than the narrow dimension of the pallet ( that is, designed to handle two 
pallets simultaneously ) then the pallet stop should be fitted which will enable a single pallet to be 
handled in the recommended manner without forks protruding beyond the one pallet. The pallet 
stop should be retractable and fitted to the fork carriage of the truck in such a manner that, in the 
retracted position, it will not foul any moving parts. 

4.6 Lifting and handling should be carried out with the forks of the handling equipment inserted into 
the space beneath the pallet specifically designed for this purpose. Forks should intend into the 
pallet to a distance of at least 75 per cent of the dimension parallel to the fork, but should not 
protrude from the opposite side (see 4.2 and 4.3 ). 

4.7 Care should be taken to avoid damage when handling pallets, for example, by raising and 
lowering them carefully, not dragging them over the ground or over other pallets, and by careful 
driving to avoid collisions. 

4.8 Front-supported carriers (such as pallet trucks, narrow gauge stackers) are not always suitable 
for lifting all types of pallets. Narrow arm stacking trucks and reach trucks are generally suitable for 
lifting pallets without a base plate of four-way-entry pallets with an incomplete perimeter base which 
are used as only two-way-entry pallets. Where a narrow arm stacker can lift on the carriage, no 
high lifting can be done. With hand pallet trucks lifting outside a pallet profile frequently causes 
pallet damage. 

4.9 The cperator/driver should fully lower the forks of a truck and immobilize it before leaving it for 
any purpose and 'trail' the load rather than 'push', wherever possible. 

5. Positioning of Loaded Pallets on Vehicles 

5.1 When loading pallets on vehicles for transportation, the sequence of loading should be from 
front to rear of the vehicle from alternate sides where possible, ensuring that each pallet is loaded 
squarely with the preceding ones. 

6. Interchange between different Transport Media 

6.1 When goods on containers are affected by water absorption, care should be taken not to use 
wet pallets. 




.3 Length of the slings should be considerably long so that the cargo on the deck-board of the 
allet and the edge-board are not damaged. Step sling is preferable for lifting the pallets by crane 
^r derricks. 

6.4 At the time of lifting the pallets by cranes or derricks, it should not slant on any of the sides. 
It is suitable to attach the sling with the pallets at 60° angle. 

7. Maintenance 

7.1 All pallets should be handled carefully at all times and shall not be dropped from a height, 
specially en to their corners. 

7.2 They shall be stacked ( preferably under cover in a dry, well-drained area not exposed to rain or 
excessive sunlight ) in such a manner as to allow rotation cr use, 

7.3 It is the pallet user's responsibility to ensure that all equipment in use are properly maintained 
and to withdraw from the system anything considered unsafe. 

7.4 Pallets shall be examined for damage by all users on delivery when loaded. Where a damaged 
pallets is found, it shall not be used and shall bo isolated. The demand pallets shall be marked at 
diagonally opposite vertical sides of the top corners with Post-Office red paint ( No. 538 ) specified 
in IS : 5-1978 'Colours for ready mixed paints and enamels {third revision)' . The size of the mark 
shall be 1C0X1C0 mm (see Fig. 1 ). 



IS : 8006- 1988 



POSITION OF MARKENG 




FIG. 1 MARKING ON DAMAGED PALLET 



8. Staff Training 



8.1 All personnel involved in the handling of pallets should be properly trained in correct procedures 
for their loading, and in the operation of pallet handling trucks, in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. 

8.2 Only trained/experienced personnel should operate pallet stacking trucks. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Pallets can have a longer working life if they are handled with reasonable care, and small di 
are repaired immediately. Regardless of strength and durability, any pallet may break or dama 
mishandling. 

This standard was first published in 1976 recommending the procedure to be follow 
efficient handling of goods by the medium of pallets. The revision of this standard has b 
necessary to clarify the intent of the standard and to make it more useful. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS 6407 : Part 2 : 
'Cage pallets for retail use : Part 2 Guide to the safe handling and use of collapsible cage palSeis 
at 300 kg', issued by the British Standards Institution ( BSI ) 



ifects 
go by 

^d in 
n felt 

1 984 
-ated 



Printed at Swatantra Bftarat Press, Ol 



