( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 11315 ( Part 9 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES
PART 9 NUMBER OF SETS

Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee,
Chairman

BDC 73

Representing

DR BHAWANI SINGH
Members

University

of Roorkee, Roorkee of Uttar
Station,

ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICER D!R\!%R ( CW & PRS )
SHRI S. L.

Irrigation Department, Government Pradesh, Roorkee Cent;ulyer and Power Research

MOKHASHI ( AIfernUfe ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi Karnataka Engineering Research Station, DIRECTOR ( CHIEFENGINEER ) Krishnarajasagara SHRI R. NARASIMHA IYENGAR( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), DR A. K. DUBE ?ha-nbad ( Bihar ) Irrig;t'p""nj;;; Power Department, Amritsar SHRI P. S. GOSAL DIRECTOR DR UDAYV. KULKARNI DR G. S. MEHROTRA SHRX A. GHOSH( Alternate ) SHRI M. D. NAIR
SHRI

Hindus& Construction Co Ltd,.Bombay Centra;a;lLing Research Institute ( CSIR ), Associated Instrument Manufacturers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi ( India )

Paop T. S. NAGARAJ ( Afternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta P. L. NARULA Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI T. K. NATRAJAN New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi PROPT. RAMAMURTHI Da G. V. RAO ( Alternate )
( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1987 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under theIndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the Dublisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11315 ( Part 9 ) - 1987
( Continued from page Members 1) Representing

DR Y. V. RAMANA
DR G. V. RAO RESEARCHOFFICER ( MERI SECRETARY DIRECTOR (C) ( Alternate SHRI C. D. THATTE SHRI G. RAMAN, ) )

Indian Geotechnical Society, Delhi Government Irrigation Department, Maharashtra, Nasik CentraLlzioard of Irrigation and Power,

National Geophysical ( CSIR ), Hyderabad

Research

Institute
of New

Irrigaticn Department, Government of Gujarat Director General, BIS ( Ex-oficio Member >

Director

( CIV Engg )
Secretary SHRI K. M. MATHUR Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

Rock Slope Engineering, Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4
Convener PROF L. S. SRIVASTAVA Members DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI A. GHOSH ( Alternate SHRI 13. D. BALIGA ) Central Building Roorkee Centrgha;Fal;;g Cemindia ) Research Research Limited, Institute ( CSIR Institute Bombay ), University of Roorkee, Roorkee

( CSIR ),

SHRI A: P. BANERJEE SHRI D. J. KETKAR ( Alternate SHRI D. G. KADKADE . SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) DR T. RAMAMURTHY DR K. G. SHARMA (Alternate DR YUDHBIR

Company

Jaiprakash

Associates

Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Institute ( CSIR ),

Central Road Research New Delhi Indian Institute
)

of Technology, of Techology,

New Delhi Kanpur

Indian Institute

2

IS : 11315 ( Part 9 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTIONS OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES
PART 9 NUMBER OF SETS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 9 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1987, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engi.neering Division Council. 0.2 In view of the advancement in the Field of Rock Mechanics, a number of methods for assessingthe strength characteristics of the rocks and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee of Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is therefore essential that the structure of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified description of rock masses and discontinuities, and it may be possible to design engineering structures in rock within minimum of expense in-situ testing. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of i&situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 0.3 Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistocity planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistance, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number of sets, and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 0.4 It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various parameters to 3

IS : 11315 ( Part 9 ) - 1987 describe discontinuities in rock masses is being formulated in various This part covers Number parts with each part covering one parameter. of Sets. 0.5 Number of sets describe the number of discontinuity sets comprising the intersecting discontinuity system. The rock mass may be further divided by individual discontinuities. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 1. SCOPE 1.1This standard ( Part 9 ) covers the method description of the number of sets of discontinuities 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 11358-1986t shall apply. 3. GENERAL 3.1 Both the mechanical behaviour and the appearance of a rock mass will be dominated by the number of sets of discontinuities that intersect one another. The mechanical behaviour is especially affected since the number of sets determines the extent to which the rock mass can deform without involving failure of the intact rock. The appearance of the rock mass is affected since the number of sets determines the degree of overbreak that tends to occur with excavation by blasting ( see Fig. 1 ). 3.2 The number of sets of discontinuities may be a dominant feature of rock slope stability, though traditionally the orientation of discontinuities relative to the face is considered of primary importance. However, if sufficient sets exist the probability of instability may be reduced almost to zero. On the other hand a large number of sets having close spacing may change the potential mode of slope failure from translaticnal or toppling to rotational/circular. 3.3 In the case of tunnel stability three or more sets will generally constitute a three-dimensional block structure having considerably more `degree of freedom' for deformation than a rock mass with less than three sets. For example a strongly foliated phyllite with just one closely spaced joint set may give equally good tunnelling conditions as a massive *Rules for ronnding off numerical values ( rdsed). tGlossary of terms and symbols relating to rock mechanics. 4 the definitions of terms given in

for the quantitative in rock mass.

IS : 11315 ( Part 9 ) - 1987 granite with three widely spaced joint sets. in a tunnel will usually be strongly dependent The amount of overbreak on the number of sets.

ONE JOINT

SET

THREE

JOINT

SETS

FIG. 1 EXAMPLESTHAT DEMONSTRATE THE EFFECTOF THE NUMBER OF JOINT SETS ON THE MECHANICAL BEHAVIOUR AND APPEARANCEOF A ROCK MASS 3.4 The number of sets forming an intersecting

system of discontinuities divide the rock mass and describe the apfiearance and form of the rock mass. The information is obtained from visual recognition during 5

IS : 11315 ( Part 9 ) - 1987 rock mass suryey exposure. 4. PROCEDURE 4.1 The number of sets uill often be a fuccticn of the size of the area mapped, In a preliminary investigation it is important to record all sets present. The recognition of individual sets will usually proceed simultaneously with the orientation measurements. Up to 150 discontinuity planes (joints ) may need to be measured, and the number of sets can usually be determined by contouring discontinuity plane (joint ) poles plotted on polar equal area nets.
NOTE1 - Systematic discontinuity (joint ) sets should be distinguished from systematic discontinuities (joints ) when recording the number of sets. In general, systematic discontinuities ( joints ) will be persistent features, with individual discontinuities (joints ) parallel or sub-parallel in plan, while nonsystematic discontinuities ( joints ) display random rather than oriented patterns in plan and section. Problems of set identification when sets cannot readily be distinguished in the field may be reduced by utilizing statistical tests for identifying trends in the distribution of poles plotted on polar equal area nets. NOTE 2 - Incipient discontinuities such as those that may develop parallel to bedding, or parallel to foliation or cleavage, should be included in the local estimate of the number of sets, if it is considered that the method of excavation employed will suficiently disturb the rock mass to cause development of these features into equivalent bedding joints, foliation joints, etc. NOTE 3 - The number of sets recorded uill tend to be a function of the size of area mapped, and should be interpreted accordingly. The spacing of individual sets will play an important role in this interpretation. For example, four sets recognised following a `conventional' survey of an area ( using the pole contouring method ) may include some sets with such wide spacing that these would be of little relevance to the stability of a short length of tunnel, though possibly of considerable importance to the stability of a major slope.

and/or

study

of photographic

recording

or rock

4.2 If orientations are consistent, careful sampling may reduce the number of discontinuities (joints ) that have to be measured to define thenumber of sets. 4.3 In the detailed stages of field investigations, the number of sets present locally should be recorded as a supplement. The stability of a given section of tunnel or rock slore, or the deformability of a given foundation will be a function of the relevant number of sets found locally, rather than of the total number mapped in whole area. 4.4 Visual recognition of the number of sets shou!d be accompanied by some system of numbering for identification purposes. For example the most svstematic and Dersistent set can be labeiled "set No. 1" and so on. ( Fig. i ). Alternatively sets can be numbered in the order of their importance to stability. 6

IS : 11315 ( Part 9 ) - 1987 5. PRESENTATION OF RESULTS visually as part

5.1 The number of joint sets present can be represented of the presentation of orientation data.

5.2 The number of joint sets occurring locally ( for example, along the length of a tunnel ) can be described .according to the following scheme: I massive, occasional random joints II one joint set III one joint set plus random IV two joint sets V two joint sets plus random VI three joint sets VII three joint sets plus random VIII four or more joint sets IX crushed rock, earth-like Major individual discontinuities basis. should be recorded on an individual

7

INTERNATIONAL Base Units QZ.4U?Ztity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS)

Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol m kg 8 A K cd mol

Amount of substance Supplementary Units Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

Unit radian steradian

Symbol rad sr

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb T HZ S V Pa

Definition IN 1J 1w 1T 1 Hz 1s 1v 1 Pa = 1 kg.m/s* = 1 N.m = 1 J/s = 1 Wb/ma = 1 c/s&1) = 1 A/V = 1 W/A = 1 N/ma

1 Wb = 1 v.s

