( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 11485- 1985

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR HYDRAULIC DESIGN OF SLUICES IN CONCRETE AND MASONRY DAMS
Spillways Including Energy Dissipators Sectional Committee, BDC 54

Chairman
SRRI

Rcpresen t ing Irrigation Department, ~Gandhinagar Government of Gujarat,

J. F. MISTRY Members

DR A. S. CRAWLA CHIEF ENGINEER ( DAM DESIGN )

University of Roorkee ( WRDTC ), Roorkee Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI LAX~I NARAYAN ( Alternate ) CAIEF ENGINEER, CD0 Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( DAMS ) ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEER AND DII~EGTOR Maharashtra EngineeringResearch Institute, Nasik SHRI K. A. GRAMPUROHIT ( Alternate ) CHIEZ ENGINEER ( PWD ) Irrigation Department, Government of Karnataka, Mysore SWERINTENDIN~ ENGINEER ESIGNS) ( Alternate ) CHIiFD ENGINEER/R-� UM- Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Punjab, DIRECTOR Amritsar CHIEF ENGINEER, THEIN DAM Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, DESIGN Chandigarh DII~ECTOR ( SPILLWAYS & POWER PLANT ) ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENQIN~ER & DIRECTOR, Irrigation Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, INSTITUTE OF HYDRAULICS & Madras HYDROLOOY POONDI DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( HYDRAULICS ) ( Alternate) SHRI M. L. Dns Irrigation and Power Department, Government of Orissa. Bhubaneswar SHRI B. DASS Irrigation and Waterways Directorate, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta DIRECTOR Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune SHRI R. M. K~ATSURIA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 @ Cqyright 1986

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indiun Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 j and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the I publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11485-1985
( Continues from page 1 ) Members DIRECTOR(CMDD-I) KUMARI E. DIVATIA Representing

Central Water Commission, New Delhi National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi j Consulting Engineering Services ( India ) Pvt Ltd, SRRI K. K. FRAMJI New Delhi PROF HARI KRISHNA ( Alternate ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta DR JAQDISH NARAIN Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township SHRI S. P. JAIN SRRI J. C. BASUR ( Alternate ) Jaiprakash Associated Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Snnr D. G. KADKADE SHRI A. B. ODAK ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Haryana, SRRI H. K. KHOSLA -Chandigarh SRRI M. L. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, SHRI M. U. PURO~IT Gandhinagar SHRI N. B. DESAI ( Alternate ) Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Bangalore SHRI M. S. RAMA RAO The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. M. SAVU~~ SHRI M. V. S. IYENGAR ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, SUPERINTENDINO ENO~NEER Bombay (MD) SHRI V. N. PENDSE ( Alternate ) KUMARI PRATIMA NAIDU ( Alternate ) Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara SHRI C. D. TRATTE SHIZI B. K. RAO ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, DR R. S. VARSHNEY Lucknow Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI K. K. SHARMA Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

IS:11485- 1985

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR HYDRAULIC DESIGN OF SLUICES IN CONCRETE AND MASONRY DAMS

0. 0.1This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the Spillways Including Energy Dissipators Sectional Committee had been ~approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Sluices are provided in the body of the dam to release regulated supplies of water for a variety of purposes which are briefly listed below:

4 b) 4 4 f) d h) j>

River

diverson;

Irrigation; of hydro-electric for municipal power; or industrial in conjunction uses; with the spillway; temporarily stored in the storage in anticipa-

Generation c> Water

supply

To pass the flood discharge

Flood control regulation to release water flood control storage space or to evacuate tion of flood inflows; Depletion reservoir remedial

of the reservoir in order to facilitate inspection of the rim and the upstream face of the dam for carrying out measures, if necessary; flows for satisfying prior right uses downabatement of stream

To furnish necessary stream; and

For maintenance of a live stream for polation, preservation of aquatic life, etc.

0.3 The flow through a sluice may be either pressure flow or free flow along its entire length or a combination of pressure flow in part length and free flow in the remainder part. 0.4 In the formulation of International co-ordination this standard due weightage has been given to among standards and practices prevailing in

IS:11485-1985
different countries in addition in this country. This has been following publication: EM-1 110-2-1602 Hydraulic Army ,Corps of Engineers. to relating it to the practices in the field met by deriving assistance from the design of reservoir outlet works, U.S.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
in concrete 1.2 lays down the criteria and masonry dams. for hydraulic design of sluices

It does not cover the hydraulic

design of openings

for penstocks.

2. TYPES

OF SLUICES
may be classified depending upon their purpose, their operation or their alignment. The first two types have been in 0.2 and 0.3. Based upon their alignment, sluices may be as under.

2.1 Sluices
hydraulic described classified

2.1.1 Straight Barrel Sluice - The barrel of this sluice is kept nearly horizontal between the entry and exit transitions ( see Fig. la). This sluice has the advantage of having minimum length due to which lesser friction losses take place. 2.1.1.1 conditions: Horizontal sluices are generally used under the following

a) When

the sluices are drowned

at the exit; and for

b) When they have to be located at or near the river bed level, example, in construction sluices for river diversion. 2.1.1.2 throughout The width of the sluice barrel is generally the length except in the entry transaction. kept

uniform

2.1.1.3 If the sluice is designed for pressure flow conditions then the top profile of the sluice may be given a slight constriction in accordance with 3.4.1. On the other hand, if free flow conditions prevail then no such constriction is required. barrel of this sluice is generally 2.1.2 Trajectory Type Sluice - The kept horizontal downstream of the entry transition up to the service gate Beyond the service gate the bottom of to facilitate resting of the latter. the sluice conforms to the parabolic path of the trajectory and meets the downstream face of the dam section tangentially ( see Fig. 1 ). 4

IS : 11485- 1985
OoWNSrREAM FACE OF SPILLWAY/NON-OVERFLOW

RGENCV

GATE

IA
UPSTREAM OF DAM FACE

Straight

Barrel Sluice

1B

Trajectory

Type Sluice

FIG. 1 2.1.2.1 shall be:. The equation

TYPE OF SLUICE profile after the service gate

of the bottom x2 = k.H.y

where k= coefficient ( A value of about 4 is generally used depending on the distance avaiIable to accommodate this curve in the reach between the service gate and the downstream face of the spillway/non-overflow section ). head at the centre line of the gate opening. of any point on the profik 5 ( see Fig. lb ).

H= x,y

= co-ordinates

IS : 11485 - 1985
In case the trajectory profile defined by the above ~equation would not permit meeting the downstream face tangentially, the adjustment of pro& may be effected alternatively by introducing a small tilt in the co-ordinate axes through a small transition zone just downstream of service gate. 2.1.2.2 The width of the sluice is kept uniform except in the entry transition. 2.1.2.3 stream of the sluce. 3. DESIGN throughout the length

The height of the sluice is gradually reduced from downthe service gate to the exit in order to ensure pressure flow in The constriction shall be in accordance with 3.4.1.

CONSIDERATIONS

of Size and Number of Sluices - The size and number of sluices required to pass the desired discharge at a predetermined reservoir elevation may be found based on the type of flow required to be maintained in the sluice, that is, either pressure flow or free flow or a combination of both. The sluice dimensions shall be so proportioned as to provide a minimum of two number of sluices but simultaneously to permit inspection and repair of the same.
3.1.1 Pressure Flow in the Sluice - For following basic relation may be used: HT = hL + hv where pressure flow conditions, the

3.1 Fixation

HT = total head needed
produce head; discharge;

to overcome

various

head

losses

to

hL = the cumulative
and

losses of the system in terms

of velocity

hv == velocity

head at the sluice exit.

For a free discharging sluice Hr shall be measured from the reservoir I~f the outflowing water surface to the centre of the sluice at the exit. jet is supported on a downstream floor the head shall be measured to the point of greatest contraction and if the sluice is submerged at the exit The losses shall then the head shall be measured to the tail water level. consist of trashrock losses, entrance losses, friction losses, gate or valve They may be exlosses, bend losses, expansion and contraction losses. pressed in terms of velocity head. The above equation may be re-written in a simplified form as follows:

HT = XL.---

LIZ

2g

IS : 11485- 1985 Then Q = al where 2g HT 7
L

J

KL = constant,
V-

which is obtained losses in the system;

after

considering where

all the the cross

velocity in the portion sectional area is al;

of the sluice

al = cross sectional area of the sluice, where the velocity is V; g = acceleration due to gravity; and the sluice at a predeter-

Q = ~i~~~,g,essa~v~~rpe~~v~~i~~gh . 3.1.2

Frte Flow ( Open Channel Flow > in the Sluice

3.1.2.1 When open channel flow is controlled by regulating the following relation shall be used. Q = --&/G where
C.L. ( HI 312 Hi 313)

gates,

Q= g= L= &Hz =
C=
TABLE 1

discharge

to be passed through the sluice; due to gravity; ) up to the

acceleration

width of the sluice; heads ( including the velocity of approach bottom and top of the gate, respectively; and coefficient of discharge ( see Table
OF DISCHARGE,

1 ).
ENTRANCES

COEFFICIENT

C, FOR CONDUIT

( Chzuu 3.1.2.1 ) PARTICULARS COEBFICIENT OF DISCHARGE, C c___--__--_*.--_-_-_--_-1-`-7 Average Minimum Maximum Il.70 0.81 0'95 0.60 0.68 0.71 O-63 0.70 0.82

Gate in thin wall-unsuppressed contraction Gate in thin wall-bottom sides suppressed Gate in rounded thin wall-corners and

7

IS:11485

- 1985

3.1.2.2 When there is high rail water either due to canal water supply level or downstream ituences in the streambed, the regulating gate~opening may be either partly or entirely submerged. For the unsubmerged part of the gate opening the discharge shall be calculated according to 3.1.2.1. However, for the submerged part of the gate opening discharge shall be calculated by the following relation: Q= where Q = discharge ing, through submerged portion portion of the gate openC.A. 1/ 2gH

A = area of the submerged H = difference
and C = between

of the sluice, and downstrem water levels,

upstream

coefficient of discharge for submerged orifice or tube flow. ( Its value generally varies between 0.62 to 0.81).

3.1.3 For calculating the size of the sluice and plotting the water surface profile maximum losses should be considered. However, minimum losses shall be considered for the design of the energy dissipation arrangements for the flow through sluices. 3.2 Shape of Sluices - Generally rectangular gates are preferred. Therefore, the shape of sluices is also normally kept rectangular. Generally the height of the sluice is kept as 1.5 times the width. However, circular shapes may also be provided when small diameter openings ( less than one metre ) are required to be regulated by valves. 3.3 Entry Transitions - The efficient functioning of a sluice depends to a great extent on the design of its entry transitions. TO obtain the best inlet efficiency, the shape of the entrance should simulate that of a jet discharging into air. A bell mouth entrance which conforms to or slightly encroaches upon the free jet profile will provide the best entrance shape. Elliptical entrances have been found to be suitable. 3.3.1 For a rectangular be defined by the following
_I X2

or square equation
__

sluice the entrance

transition

may

02

+

( o.&q5

= l

where D is the vertical height of the sluice ( downstream of the entrance curve ) for top and bottom curves and the horizontal width of the sluice ( downstream of the entrance curve ) for the side curves. 8

1s : 11485- 1985
3.3.2 For _a rectangular entrance with bottom placed even with upstream floor, the side curves at the entrance may be defined by the above equation. However, the top contraction curve may be given by the following equation:
X2

YZ
+ height (0.67

02 where D is the vertical transition. 3.3.3 For a circular following equation:

D )2 = '
downstream transition of the entrance by the

of the sluice the entry

entrance

is given

( O*5x; where tion.

)Z +

YZ (0'15D)z

=

1 of the entrance transi-

D

is the diameter

of the sluice downstream

3.4 Exit of the Sluice - The exit of the sluice shall be tangential to either the downstream face of the spillway/non-overflow section or the bucket or it may be upturned ( see Fig. 2 ). 3.4.1 In order to ensure the pressure flow conditions throughout the length of the sluice and to avoid negative pressures the section of the sluice should be constricted at the exit so as to give reduced crosssectional area commensurate with the increase in the velocity of flow. A constriction of 10 to 15 percent in ilow area is generally found adequate by effecting constriction in the roof profile only. 3.4.2 When the exit of the sluices is not drowned, the top profile of the sluices is given a small turn of about 1.0 to 1.5 metres normal to the downstream face of the spillway/non-overflow section. This helps in the aeration of the sluice ( see Fig. 2 ). 3.4.3 In case of an upturned exit, the shape and dimensions of the profile may be best worked out on the basis of the model studies. It has to be used with caution in spillway/non-overflow sections because the flow from the sluice may damage the energy dissipation arrangements of the spillway or the downstream face of the spillway/non-overflow section, if it falls over them. Alternatively, a jet disperser of suitable shape, based on model studies may be provided. 3.4.4 In case the sluices are located in a spillway section, then no separate energy dissipation arrangements are necessary. However, if they are provided in a non-overflow section, then separate energy dissrpation arrangements may have to be provided. 9

IS : 11485- 1985

TANGENTIAL SPILLWAY
i7

TO PROFILE

SLUlCE

___f

UPTURNED SLUICE __~ _
-\ \

FIG. 2

TYPESOF 10

SLUICE

EXIT

IS : 11485 - 1985 3.4.5 In case the spillway and eyebrow deflectors Mary be provided be provided at the exit end. sluice run together then either sluice on the exit of the sluice or aeration

3.5 Control Devices - The flow through sluices is controlled by either gates or valves. Generally, two sets ~of gates, that is, emergency and service gates are provided. In case of construction sluices, the flow is generally uncontrolled and only stoplogs are provided for the eventual plugging of the sluices. Where the construction sluices are required to be closed under flowing water, provision of emergency gates may be considered. 3.5.1 The control ( service ) gates shall be located as far upstream as possible. The operation and servicing may be done from operation galleries/chambers in the dam (see Fig. 3 ). In order to repair the gates without emptying the reservoir should they become inoperative, the usual practice is to install a guard or emergency gate further upstream in the sluices. These emergency gates may be placed either at the entrance or inside the sluice and operated from galleries.

UPSTREAM FACE OF OAM -., SLUICE OPERATION CHAMBER

/

1
-AIR VENT

GATE

NOTE - The above dimensions meet local requirements.

are

suggestive

only.

These

may be changed to

FIG. 3 A TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT WITH GATES OPERATION FROM OPERATION CHAMBER ( DETAILS OF GATES AND HOBTS NOT SHOWN ) 11

IS : 11485- 1985 3.5.2 Sometimes when the sluice have to be located at high levels near the crest in the spillway section, where it is not possible to provide a the sluices may also be located in thick gallery for gates operation, spillway piers in which the gates are operated from the top of pier ( see Fig. 4 ).

~SPILCWAY PER SiEC-flGklAL PLAN FIG. 4

AA

TYPICAL DETAILS OF SLUICE LOCATED IN THICK SPILLWAY PIER

3.5.3 In case of high heads ( more than 30 m ) gate controls may also be located near the downstream end of the sluice to minimize possibilities of cavitation. the 3.5.4 For better slot hydraulics, practicable and adequately streamlined. 12 gate slots should be as small as

IS : 11485- 1985 3.6 Air Vents - Air vents of suitable size should stream of the control gates to supply air and thereby cavitation damages. The air demand for calculating may be calculated from the following formulae:
i) For hydraulic jump formation 6 ( FI, in the conduit 1 )l*J fi = 0.006 ii) For spray flow p = 0.20 F,, iii) For free flow p = 0.09 Fl, where p = air-demand Fl, = Froude =
VlC cc

be provided downavoid or minimize the size of air vent

ratio

-

volume flow rate of air volume flow rate of water contracta

number

at Vena

1/ g he

Velocity

of flow at the vena contracta of flow at the vena contracta due to gravity.

dl, = Depth g =

Acceleration

The size of air vents as determined above assume that the maximum air demand occurs at a gate opening of 80 percent fully open and the maximum air velocity in the vent does not exceed 50 m/s. Air vent passages should use generous bend radi and gradual transitions to avoid The air vent intakes should be losses and particularly excessive noise. so located that they are inaccessible to the public and should be protected by grills. The intake entrance average velocity should not exceed 10 m/s. The air vent exit portal should be designed to ensure spread of air across The air vent should terminate into a the full width of the conduit. plenum located in the conduit roof and immediately downstream of the gate. The plenum should extend across the full width of the conduit and should be vaned so that the air flow is evenly distributed. 3.6.1 The size of the air vent should be such that the downstream of the gate does not normally exceed 2 m. 3.6.2 Hydraulic jump formation in the sluice should avoided. When unavoidable, sufficient clearance shall above the jump profile to avoid choked jump conditions. 3.6.3 operate pressure drop

normally be be provided

Normally a sluice located in a spillway section should not simultaneously with the spillway. However, if it is obligatory 13

IS : 11485 - 1985
to run the sluice in conjunction with the spillway, proper aeration should be ensured at the exit either by running the sluice partially full or by providing a suitable air-vent at the exit of the sluice. 3.6.4 Sometimes a steel liner may also be provided in the sluices near the gates to avoid cavitation damages. In case of control being located at the exit end, the entire length of sluice shall be provided with steel liner. 3.7 Made1 Studies - Hydraulic model studies are desirable to test the efficacy of the hydraulic design of the sluice and to verify the airdemand. They should be done for the pre-determined minimum reservoir elevation at which the sluice is designed to pass the required discharge and also for higher reservoir elevations under the gate opening necessary to pass the same discharge.

14

