Wd Aah IS 6547 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


fía de ease — fafirite 
(Teal FRAT ) 


Electric Chain Hoists — 
Specification 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 53.020.30 


© BIS 2015 


RAs AA A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 AERRME AHL AM, as feeei-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 7 


Cranes, Lifting Chains and Its Related Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Cranes Lifting Chains and Its Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1972. This revision has been undertaken to incorporate changes based on the 
experience gained in the implementation of the Indian Standard. 


In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


AS B273-1968 ‘Specification for chain blocks, power operated’, Standards Association of Australia. 
AS CB2-1960 ‘SAA Code for cranes and hoists’, Standards Association of Australia. 
HMA 400 — ‘Electric chain hoists’, Hoist Manufacturers Association, USA. 


ASME HST-1-1999 (reaffirmed 2004) ‘Performance standard for electric chain hoists’, American Society 
of Mechanical Engineers. 


This standard is in general agreement with the applicable requirements of IS 3938 : 1983 ‘Specification for 
electric wire rope hoists’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6547 : 2015 


Indian Standard 
ELECTRIC CHAIN HOISTS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


SECTION 1 GENERAL 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the design, manufacture, 
testing and operation of all industrial service electric 
chain hoists of the following types: 


a) Lug suspended ( see Fig.1), 
b) Hook suspended (see Fig. 2), and 


c) Trolley suspended (see Fig. 3) — Three types 
of trolley suspended— push pull type, hand 
geared type and motor operated type (see 
Fig. 3A). 


1.1.1 This standard also lays down the minimum 
requirements to ensure safety. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of the standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Electric Chain Hoist — An electro-mechanical 
appliance whose principal function is lifting or 
lowering or both of loads with a calibrated short link 
or roller chain between the sheave and the lifting block. 


3.2 Capacity or Safe Working Load — The 
maximum safe working load in kgs / tonnes that the 
hoist is designed to carry in service. This shall be 
specified by the manufacturer of the hoist and marked 
boldly and clearly on the hoist and hook block. Applied 
loads shall include all handling devices used, such as 
buckets, magnets and grabs. 


3.3 Basic and Permissible Stress — All permissible 
stresses specified in IS 800, IS 816 and IS 1024 are 
basic stresses for the purpose of this standard, and the 
permissible stresses in this standard are basic stresses 


applied with the applicable duty factor (see 6.2). 


3.4 Height of Lift — The distance between the upper 
most and lowest limits of travel of the hook block. 


3.5 Hoisting Speed — The velocity in m/min at which 
the hoist will lift the rated load. 


3.6 Head Room — Measured with the hook block in 
the highest position with full load, and it is the distance 
between the saddle of the hook block and the following 
points: 


a) The top of the lug or centre line of suspension 
holes on lug suspended hoists, 

b) The saddle of the top hook on hook suspended 
hoists, and 

c) The bottom of the beam or rail on trolley 
suspended hoists. 


3.7 Lug Suspended Hoist — A hoist whose upper 
suspension members are lugs. 


3.8 Hook Suspended Hoist — A hoist whose upper 
suspension member is a hook. 


3.9 Trolley — A wheeled carriage from which the hoist 
is suspended. The trolley may be push pull type, hand- 
operated or motor-operated type. 


3.10 Trolley Suspended Hoist — A hoist whose upper 
suspension member is a trolley for the purpose of travel 
on a suitable runway. 


3.11 Electric Dynamic Brake — An electric motor 
acting as a brake by regenerative counter torque or 
dynamic means. 


3.12 Electrically Operated Brake — A friction brake 
actuated or controlled by electric / electromagnetic 
means. 


3.13 Limit Switch — A device to cut off the power to 
motor automatically at both ends of hook path or at 
any desired limit of travel. 


3.14 Electrical Characteristics — Clearly specified 
electrical characteristics consisting of voltage, phases, 
cycles if a.c. power is used, and voltage only if d.c. 
power is used. 


IS 6547 : 2015 


3.15 Load Sprocket — A hoist component that 
transmits motion to the load chain. This component is 
also called load chain wheel. 


3.16 Idler Sprocket — A freely rotating device that 
changes the direction of the load chain. This device is 
also called idler wheel, idler sheave, pocket wheel or 
chain wheel. 


3.17 Hook Block or Load Block — The assembly of 
lower load hook or shackle, swivel, bearing, pins, 
sprocket and frame suspended by the load chain. 


3.18 Load Chain — The load lifting chain in the hoist. 
It shall be a calibrated short link chain as per 
IS/ISO 3077 or a calibrated roller chain when in 
agreement with the user. 


3.19 Reeving — A system in which a chain travels 
around sprockets. 


3.20 Pendant Station — Electrical controls station 
with push button suspended from the hoist for operating 
the unit. 


4 CAPACITY, HOISTING 
LIFTING HEIGHT 


SPEED AND 


4.1 Industrial electric chain hoists shall be rated 
according to capacities as follows: 


0.25, 0.5, 1.00, 2.0, 3.2, 5.0, 6.3, 7.5, 10, 15 
and 20 MT 


However, higher capacity electric chain hoist can be 
supplied in agreement with the user. 


4.2 Hoisting speeds may range from | m/min to 20 m/ 
min depending on the application, usage and 
manufacturer’s design. Higher speeds can be offered 
on mutual agreement between the manufacturer and 
the buyer. The actual lifting speed shall be within +2 
percent of the manufacturer’s rating. Chain hoists may 
be designed to offer either single or dual hoisting speed 
with the use of dual speed motor and control. In special 
applications VVE / Inverter drives with programmable 
step may be used to achieve dual hoisting speed or 
variable hoisting speed. Tolerance is not applicable for 
creep speed. 


5 CLASSIFICATION 


The hoists shall be classified in three group of 
mechanism with respect to the estimate of use, 
frequency of application and variation of magnitude 
of the load ( see Table 1 ) and the effect of impact [see 
Table 1 and IS 13834 (Part 1)]. 


Fic. 1 LUG SUSPENDED ELECTRIC 
CHAIN Hoist 


Fic. 2 Hook SUSPENDED ELECTRIC Fic. 3 TROLLEY SUSPENDED ELECTRIC 
CHAIN Holst 


CHAIN Holst 


IS 6547 : 2015 


PUSH PULL TROLLEY 
ELECTRIC CHAIN HOIST 


HAND OPERATED TROLLEY 
ELECTRIC CHAIN HOIST 


MOTOR OPERATED TROLLEY 
ELECTRIC CHAIN HOIST 


Fic. 3A TYPES OF TROLLEY SUSPENDED ELECTRIC CHAIN Holst 


SECTION 2 MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 


6 DESIGN AND FABRICATION 


6.1 General 


The materials used in the construction of hoists shall 
be properly selected for the stresses encountered when 
the equipment is used in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s recommendations. The design of the 
component parts of the hoist shall include due 
allowance for the effects of the duty which the 
mechanism will perform in service and shall be in 
accordance with the requirements of 6.2 and 6.3. 


6.2 Design on Strength Basis 


In the design of a component on the basis of ultimate 
strength, the value of the stress factor used shall be the 
basic stress factor multiplied by the duty factor for the 
appropriate hoist class; where basic stress factor shall 
be not less than 5 and the duty factor shall be as given 
in Table 1 for the respective mechanism. Normally the 
electric chain hoists are designed to offer M3, M5 and 
M6. 


6.3 Design on Life Basis 


Components designed on the basis of life shall have a 
rated life of not less than 10 years of 250 days per year 
for Class M3 300 days per year for Class M5, and 
333 days per year for Class M6. 


Table 1 Duty Factor and Life of Mechanism 
(Clauses 5, 6.2, 6.3.1, 8.1 and 8.3.3) 


Sl Mechanism Duty Factor Maximum Total 
No. Class Running Life 
as per Strength Wear hours per h 
IS 13834 day 
(Part 1) 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) M3 1.06 0.4 1.0 3 200 
ii) M5 1.25 0.5 1.5 6 300 
iii) M6 1.32 0.6 3.0 12 500 


6.3.1 The running hours per day or the life in hours 
used for the purpose of the design of the components 
shall be the value specified in Table 1 for the 
appropriate class. 


6.4 Design on Dynamic Load Basis 


Power transmission parts shall be designed so that the 
dynamic stresses calculated for the rated load shall not 
exceed the fatigue and endurance limit of the material 
used. 


6.5 Welding 


Steel parts may be joined by any fusion-welding 
process provided the welding is in accordance with 
the relevant Indian Standard. The design shall be such 
that the maximum permissible stresses in the welds 
shall not exceed those given in IS 807 and IS 1024. 


IS 6547 : 2015 


6.6 Bolts and Nuts 


All bolts and nuts shall comply with the relevant Indian 
Standard. 


6.6.1 Bolts in tensions shall be avoided wherever 
possible. Black bolts shall not be used for transmitting 
lifting loads. Bolts and set screws in rotating parts shall 
be locked. 


6.7 Keys and Keyways 


Keys and keyways shall be as per IS 2048. Keys shall 
be so fitted or secured that they cannot work loose. 


7 LOAD CHAIN AND ACCESSORIES 


7.1 Load Chain and Chain Anchorages 


7.1.1 Load chain shall be Grade T or higher made of 
alloy steel, machine calibrated, heat treated and proof 
tested short link chain as per IS/ISO 3077 or other 
equivalent International Standard so that the finished 
hoist chain complies with mechanical properties. 


7.1.2 On special approval from customer alloy steel, 
heat treated machine calibrated roller chain may be 
used. 


7.1.3 Chain shall be accurately pitched, calibrated and 
heat treated. 


7.1.4 If a load is supported by more than one part of 
load chain, the tension of the part shall be equalized. 


7.1.5 The load chain anchorages, associated fittings 
and frames both at the lifting end and at the slack end 
shall be at least equal in strength subject to factors to 
the general design of the block. 


7.1.6 Roller chain anchorages shall be articulated. 


7.2 Chain Wheels 
7.2.1 Material 


The load chain drive wheel shall be of 45C8 of 
IS 2004 or alloy steel material and heat treated to 
adequate strength suitable for use with the load chain 
employed. 


7.2.2 Design 


The design of the load chain wheel drive shall be such 
that, so as to ensure effective operation with the load 
chain. The load chain wheel shall have pockets 
accurately machined or shaped to fit the links of the 
Grade T of IS/ISO 3077 load chain which shall operate 
freely and smoothly over the load wheel and without 
causing damage to the chain. Minimum number of 
pockets on the load wheel shall be four. Sprocket type 
wheels for roller chain shall be machined or shaped 
from alloy steel heat treated material. 


7.2.3 Chain Guide 


Enclosed chain guides shall be provided to ensure that 
the hoist load chain enters the sprocket in the proper 
position to prevent misalignment or jamming of the 
hoist load chain and chain wheel. These guides (if 
bolted) shall have means to prevent loosening under 
vibration. 


7.2.3.1 Where roller guides are used, the edges of their 
centre groove shall be radiused or chamfered to prevent 
damage to the load chain. 


7.2.4 Chain Stripper 


A chain stripper may be provided for binding of the 
chain with the sprocket while unwinding or entering. 


7.2.5 Chain Collector/Containers 


Chain shall be freely suspended and where necessary 
a chain collector shall be fitted. The chain collector 
shall be so designed as to permit the chain to enter the 
chain block in a manner that will not damage the chain 
or chain block and allow smooth flow out of the 
container. The chain container shall be made of 
processed canvas or steel. 


7.3 Idler Wheel 
7.3.1 Material 


The idler/drive wheels shall be of C45 or C5;;Mn,, or Eg 
material of adequate strength suitable for use with the 
load chain employed. 


7.3.2 Design 


Where the design of the idler wheel provides for more 
than four pockets, the wheel shall have accurately 
pitched pockets for the reception of the load chain. 
Idler wheels in bottom assemblies shall be fitted with 
guards to prevent injury to persons handling the hook 
block whilst the chain block is in use. 


7.3.3 Chain Guides 


The idler wheel shall be provided with chain guides so 
shaped as to prevent the chain from twisting or leaving 
the wheel when passing round the wheel. 


7.4 Hooks and Hook Fittings 
7.4.1 Hooks 


Hooks shall be made of closed die, alloy steel forged 
or conforming to relevant Indian Standards. All hooks 
shall be equipped with latches. All hooks shall be proof 
tested to 200 percent of safe working load. 


7.4.1.1 Where the hook is supplied with a nut, the nut 
shall be held securely by a pin of diameter not less 
than one-quarter of the nominal thread diameter with 
a minimum of 2.5 mm. 


7.4.1.2 The length of shank engaged by the nut on the 
load side shall be not less than 75 percent of the 
nominal diameter of the thread before pinning and the 
outside diameter of the bearing surface of the nut shall 
be not less than 1.4 times the nominal diameter of the 
thread. 


7.4.1.3 All suspension assemblies which are not readily 
detachable for inspection for wear of parts, particularly 
hook shanks, shall be designed to permit the amount 
of wear to be measured by alternative means. 


7.4.1.4 Every hook and hook block shall be 
permanently marked with its safe working load 
provided that its safe working load does not exceed 
that marked on the chain block. 


7.4.2 Crossheads 


Unless otherwise approved, hook crosshead shall be 
of a single-piece steel construction. 


7.4.3 Trunnions 


Trunnions shall project through the cheek plates of the 
blocks by not less than 3 mm and shall incorporate 
means for preventing the spreading of cheek plates. 
Where a trunnion is of the oscillating type adequate 
bearing surfaces shall be provided. 


7.5 Hook Swivels 
7.5.1 Top Hook 


Where the top hook is required to swivel, it shall be 
fitted with plain bearings which may incorporate 
friction washers. Ball or roller bearing may also be 
used with friction washers. 


7.5.2 Bottom Hook 


The bottom hook shall be so designed that it shall be 
free to swivel in the loaded conditions without twisting 
the load chain. Hooks shall be equipped with safety 
latches. 


8 TRANSMISSION 
ANCILLARIES 


DEVICES AND 


8.1 Bearings 


Bearing shall be selected for the load spectrum factor 
and corresponding total life in accordance with 
IS 13834 (Part 1) (see Table 1). 


8.1.1 Permissible Types 


All running shafts and wheels running on fixed axles 
or pins shall be fitted with ball, roller anti-friction 
bearings unless otherwise specified. 


8.1.2 Design 


Due allowance shall be made for impact and side 


IS 6547 : 2015 


thrusts and where necessary, spherical seatings and 
separate thrust bearing of suitable dimensions shall be 
used. 


8.1.2.1 Ball and roller bearings shall conform to the 
dimensions specified in IS 5669. 


8.1.3 Lubrication of Bearings 


Provision shall be made for lubrication of all moving 
parts and bearings, while the hoist is in service except 
where life-lubricated bearings are used. Ball and roller 
bearings shall, in addition, be lubricated before 
assembly. Lubricating nipples and adapters shall be 
easily accessible and shall generally comply with the 
relevant Indian Standards. All exposed bearings shall 
be suitably sealed or shielded. 


8.1.3.1 Lubrication arrangements shall be such as to 
require infrequent attention. 


8.2 Shafts 
8.2.1 General 


Shafts shall be designed for the load spectrum factor 
and corresponding total duration in hours in accordance 
with IS 13834 (Part 1). 


8.2.2 Material 


All shafts shall be made of steel of minimum grade 
45C8 of IS 1570 or alloy steel as per IS 4367 or 
higher. 


8.2.3 Shaft Keys 


Where practicable, keys and keyways and splines shall 
conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 


8.3 Gears 
8.3.1 Types 


The gears used in the electric chain hoist shall be 
machined and hardened as per IS 4460. 


8.3.2 Material 


All gears shall be of steel of minimum grade C,, or 
En, as per IS 1570. 


8.3.3 Design 


Gears shall be designed for proper strength and surface 
durability in accordance with the appropriate class of 
mechanism as per IS 13834 (Part 1) using the duty 
factor given in Table | as minimum for the appropriate 
class of mechanism. 


8.3.4 Keying 


Keys and keyways in gear trains shall comply with the 
relevant Indian Standard and shall be so fitted and 
secured that they cannot work loose in service. 


IS 6547 : 2015 


8.3.5 Lubrication 


All hoist gearing shall be enclosed and either sealed 
life lubricated or provided with means for ample 
lubrication. 


8.4 Overload Clutch/Friction Clutch 


Overload slipping clutch mechanism (torque limiter) 
for limiting the torque may be provided in the gear 
train to safe guard the chain hoist against inadvertent 
overloading or over traveling of the hook. The load 
limiter shall be set between safe working load (SWL) 
and 125 percent of safe working load. 


8.5 Brakes 
8.5.1 General 


Every electric chain hoist shall be fitted with a magnetic 
cone brake/clutch brake. 


8.5.1.1 Provision shall be made to control with safety 
the lowering of any load up to and including the test 
load. 


8.5.1.2 Suitable provision shall be made for holding 
the load in the event of the stoppage of the motor or 
failure of the current power supply. 


8.5.1.3 The operating control arrangements shall be 
such that the brakes cannot be released accidentally or 
inadvertently. 


8.5.2 Capacity of Brakes 


The brake, when applied, shall arrest the motion and 
sustain any load up to and including the test load at 
any position of the lift. The brakes shall be capable of 
exerting a restraining torque 50 percent greater than 
the torque transmitted to the brake drum from the 
suspended test load, the friction in the transmission 
mechanics between the load and the brake not being 
taken into consideration. 


8.5.3 Brake Components 
8.5.3.1 Brake disk/Brake drums and shoes 


The wearing surface of all brake drums liner shall be 
machined. It shall be smooth and free from defects. 
Brake lining shall be effectively and permanently 
secured to the brake shoes during the effective life of 


the lining. It shall be protected from water, grease, oil 
or other adverse effects. Under service conditions, the 
temperature of the rubbing surfaces shall not exceed 
above 260°C with metal lining. 


8.5.3.2 Springs 


Springs for electro-mechanical brakes shall be of the 
compression type and shall not be stressed in excess 
of 80 percent of the torsional elastic limit of the 
material. 


8.5.3.3 Weights 


Brake weights, if provided, shall be securely bolted to 
their levers and locked. 


8.6 Ratchet Wheels and Pawls 


Manufacturer if provides hoist with ratchet wheel and 
pawl as an additional safety feature, the same shall be 
made of steel and be capable of sustaining a load 25 
percent above the maximum safe working load of the 
hoist. All ratchet teeth shall be sharp with sufficient 
under-cut to prevent inadvertent disengagement of the 
pawl. 


9 TROLLEYS 


9.1 Types 


Trolleys shall be push pull type, hand-operated type 
or motor operated type (see Fig. 3A). 


9.2 Gears 


Hand-operated trolley track wheels may have gears 
with cast, machined or pressed teeth. 


9.2.1 Hand chain of size 5 or 6 mm of minimum 30 
Grade, calibrated, similar to IS/ISO 3077 may be used. 


9.2.2 Hand chain wheel of hand geared trolley shall 
be guarded to prevent hand chain disengagement from 
the hand wheel. 


9.2.3 Hand chain shall withstand, without permanent 
distortion a force of three times the pull required to 
traverse the trolley with rated load. 


9.3 Brakes 


The electric driven trolley shall be provided with a 
brake. 


SECTION 3 ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS 


10 GENERAL 


It is necessary that the following precautions are 
observed in installation and operation of electrical 
equipment of the electric chain hoist so that safety in 
operation is ensured: 


a) The power voltage used on a hoist shall be 
within 415 V + 10 percent; 

b) All motors, controllers and switch frames shall 
be earthed; 

c) All electric equipment shall be thoroughly 
protected from dirt, grease and oil and, where 


exposed to the weather, shall be thoroughly 
protected against the weather; 

d) Guards for live parts shall be substantial and 
so located that the cannot be deformed so as 
to make contact with the live parts; 

e) Control voltage shall not exceed 110V a.c.; 
and 


f) Name plates shall be fixed in such a manner 
that it is difficult to remove them. 


11 MOTORS 


11.1 Rating and Enclosure 


The rating shall be such that, under the specified service 
condition, the temperature-rise does not exceed the 
limits specified in IS 325 for three-phase induction 
motors or other relevant Indian Standard. This shall 
not preclude the use of intermittent motors, if required. 


11.1.1 User shall specify the voltage, frequency and 
phase alongwith tolerance of the power supply 
available. 


11.1.2 The hoist manufacturer shall assume 40°C 
ambient temperature unless otherwise specified by the 
user. 


11.1.3 Rating of motor shall be selected (CDF) 
depending on the frequency of operation, the height 
of lift and application. 


11.1.4 Maximum speed of rotation of the motor shall 
be limited to 1 440 rpm. User approval shall be obtained 
for higher rpm of motor. 


11.1.5 The enclosure shall suit the specified working 
conditions and shall be stipulated with enquiry or order. 
It can be IP55. 


11.2 Torque 


The pull-out torque of any motor supplied at rated 
voltage should preferably be not less than 2.25 times 
the rated torque. 


11.3 Design and Construction 


Motors shall be of high starting torque, crane duty and 
suitable for frequent reversal, braking and acceleration. 


11.4 Mounting 


Motors shall be so located that the brush gear and 
terminals are accessible for inspection and 
maintenance, and do not restrict the normal ventilation. 


11.5 Limiting Speeds 


Limiting speeds for motors should not exceed those 


IS 6547 : 2015 


specified by the motor manufacturer. 


11.6 Terminals 


Motor leads shall be brought out from the motor frame 
to terminals in the terminal box fixed to the motor 
frame. 


12 PENDANT CONTROL SWITCH 


12.1 General 


Hoist shall be designated so that remote control may 
be affected by means of a push-button pendant switch 
and automatically causes the brakes to function. 
Pendant control switches shall be adequately protected 
to prevent accidental contact with live parts. 


12.2 Operation 


Push-button pendant control shall be electrically 
operated. Fully magnetic reversing type contactors 
shall be provided for the hoist and shall be operated 
by a momentary contact type push-button station. 
The push-buttons shall return to “off” position when 
pressure is released by the operator. A separate 
button or a single button providing steps for each 
speed of multispeed hoists shall be provided. The 
magnetic contactor shall be mechanically or 
electrically interlocked. The push buttons can 
control a VVF/Inverter drive directly without using 
contactors. 


12.3 Accessibility 


All controllers shall be so disposed that the contacts 
and terminal arrangements are readily accessible for 
inspection and maintenance purposes. 


12.4 Pendant Push-Button Control Switch 


The pendant switch shall be capable of withstanding 
rough handling without being damaged and the cover 
shall be effectively secured. 


12.5 Suspension of Pendant Switch 


The weight of the pendant shall be supported 
independent of the electric cable by means of chain or 
wire rope. If the pendant is of metal, it shall be 
effectively earthed. A chain or hook does not provide 
an effective earth connection and should not be relied 
upon for that purpose. 


12.6 The push-button station shall be clearly marked 
as follows to indicate the function of each button. Push- 
button control voltage shall be exceed 110 V for ac. 
Voltage of 250 V is permissible on d.c. or special 
applications. 


IS 6547 : 2015 


MOTION MARKING ON THE 
PUSH BUTTON 
uP 
DOWN X 
D 
Righi 


13 CONTROLS 


13.1 Control Circuits 


If the main supply is a.c. and the control circuits are 
supplied at reduced voltage, the supply to these circuits 
shall be from the secondary winding of an isolating 
transformer or an isolating transformer and rectifier. 
One pole of this supply shall be earthed and the 
contactor and relay coils shall he connected to this pole; 
or other equally effective means shall be adopted to 
prevent malfunctioning owing to sneak circuits or earth 
faults. 


13.2 Controls for d.c. Supply 


When a d.c. control circuit is so designed that the motor 
acts as generator in the lowering direction, the control 
shall be such that: 


a) with maximum load on the hook, the motor 
may not exceed predetermined maximum rev/ 
min; 

b) progressive degrees of braking are provided 
in the various steps of the controller; 

c) adequate light hook lowering speeds are 
provided; 

d) arrangements are made to prevent the brake 
from being released by the back emf of the 
motor when the power supply has been 
interrupted; and 

e) the electro-mechanical brake is automatically 
applied when the circuit-breaker of contactor 
attached to the hoist is opened. 


13.2.1 All controls of a hoist shall be so arranged that 
no motion is inadvertently started when the power is 
supplied for an interruption. 


14 BRAKING 


The braking may be electric (electro-dynamic), electro- 
hydraulic or electro-mechanical. Brake can be of shoe 
or disc type depending upon purchaser’s requirement. 


14.1 In addition to the specific requirements of this 
standard in regard to the provision of brakes and 
irrespective of the supply current, frictional clutch 
braking is permissible on all electric chain hoists. 


14.1.1 When electric braking is used provision shall 
be made to limit the current on reversal to a safe value. 
Effective means shall be provided for stopping the 
motion in the event of a power failure and in the case 
of an emergency. 


14.2 Electro-Hydraulic Braking 


Use of electro-hydraulic thrust operated brake is also 
permissible on special application on request from the 
user. 


14.3 Electro-Mechanical Braking 


The electro-mechanical brake(s) used, shall apply 
automatically when power supply fails or when the 
controller handle is brought to the ‘off’ position. 


14.4 Brake Magnets 


The terminals of brake magnets shall be protected from 
accidental contact and the connections and windings 
shall be effectively protected from mechanical damage. 
When necessary, magnets shall be provided with an 
efficient cushioning device. Two duties are recognized 
for both a.c. and d.c., namely: 


a) continuous or heavy duty; and 
b) normal intermittent duty. 


14.4.1 Since, with an a.c. brake magnet, the current in 
the coil is greater for the open position than when 
closed, the ratings for ac are slightly different from 
d.c. as shown in Table 2. 


14.4.2 The brake magnets shall operate, for both 
operations at the current and voltage given in Table 3. 


14.5 Brake Release 


Appropriate mechanical, electro-hydraulic or any other 
alternative brake releasing gears may be used instead 
of brake magnets, if desired on specific user request. 


15 LIMIT SWITCHES 


15.1 Limit switch shall be of shunt type and shall permit 
the motor to be operated in the reverse direction when 
the limit switch is opened. Those incorporating a spring 
to provide quick breaking of the contacts shall be so 
designed and constructed that failure of the spring does 
not affect positive opening of the contacts. 


Table 2 Brake Magnet Ratings 
(Clause 14.4.1) 


Sl Duty d.c. Magnet a.c. Magnets 
No. 
O 0 (3) (4) 
i) Heavy Suitable for being in Suitable for being in 
duty circuit not more than circuit continuously 
7.5 minutes out of where the brake coil 


ii) Normal 
duty 


every 15 min 
or 


240 operations per hour 


Suitable for 240 
operations per hour 
where the brake coil is 
in circuit is not more 
than 5 min out of every 
15 min 


operates infrequentl y 
or 


For 240 operations per 
hour where the brake 
coil is in circuit is not 
more than 5 min out of 
every 15 min 

Suitable for 120 
operation per hour 
where the brake coil is 
in circuit is not more 
than 5 min of every 
15 min 


Table 3 Brake Magnet Operating Current and 
Voltages 


(Clause 14.4.2) 


Winding 
(1) (2) (3) 


For series resistor Lift at 60 percent rated — 


d.c. Magnets a.c. Magnets 


control current 
Shunt Hold at 15 percent rated — 
current 


Lift” at 90 percent rated Lift at 90 percent 
voltage rated voltage 
Hold” at 50 percent rated Hold at 50 percent 
voltage rated voltage 


DThis is intended to apply with coils at temperature 
corresponding to the duty cycle at rated volts. The temperature- 
rise of the brake magnet shall not exceed that allowed for the 
control equipment fitted. 


NOTE — Arrangements shall be made, where necessary, to 
prevent the brake magnet from being energized by the back 
emf of the motor when the supply has been interrupted. 


15.1.1 Limit switches shall be of the series or shunt 
type and shall permit the motor to be operated in the 
reverse direction when the limit switch is opened. The 
limit switch after being tripped shall automatically reset 
itself within a reasonable distance travelled in the 
opposite direction. This does not prevent the use of 
the changeover type limit switches, where the resetting 
is achieved by striker when moving in the opposite 
direction. 


15.2 Hoist Limit Switch 


When the hook has risen to a predetermined level, this 
limit switch shall act and prevent over-hoisting and 
consequential damage arising there from to the hook 
or hook block, chain and mechanical equipment. The 


IS 6547 : 2015 


design and adjustment of over-hoisting limit switch 
shall be such that after opening of the switch under 
condition of maximum hoisting speed and no load: 


a) there shall be an over-run which measured in 
metres shall not be more than 1/40 of the 
maximum speed in m/min; and 

b) after cessation of motion, there shall be not 


less than 100 mm of available movement of 
the hook. 


15.3 Limit Switch for Lowering 
This shall be fitted to prevent over-lowering. 


15.4 Hoisting and lowering limit switches shall be 
automatically reset when the hook is returned to the 
normal operating zone. 


16 ELECTRICAL PROTECTIVE DEVICES 


16.1 Contactor Circuit-Breaker Operated 


As minimum equipment of protection, an electro- 
magnetically operated contactor with inherent under 
voltage protection together with overload devices shall 
be provided. 


16.1.1 The overload protection may be of the electro- 
magnetic type, with time delay or thermal overload 
relays in conjunction with high rupturing capacity 
fuses. 


16.1.2 The number of overload devices and their 
position shall normally be in accordance with one of 
the arrangements shown in Table 4 but if specified by 
the purchaser, other arrangements giving protection 
of not less than any of these shall be considered as 
complying with this standard. 


Table 4 Normal Requirements for Number of 
Protective Devices for Motor Circuits 


(Clause 16.1.2) 


Three-Phase a.c. supply 
One line earthed 


d.c. supply 
Neither line earthed 
One in each line Three lines shall be protected 


16.2 Phase Sequence Relay 


If applicable, phase sequence relay shall be provided 
in the control panel to prevent wrong connection. 


16.3 Over voltage, over current and earth leakage 
safety accessories shall be provided in the control 
panel. 


16.4 Remote Control/Pendant Control Station 


If emergency switch is pressed it should directly trip 
main line contractor, which should be essential part of 
hoist panel along with other usual switchgear items. 


IS 6547 : 2015 


17 CABLES AND CONDUCTORS 


17.1 Cables 


Rubber, PVC or varnished cambric insulated cables 
used for hoist wiring shall comply with the relevant 
Indian Standard. All cables shall be adequately 
protected against mechanical damage and from damage 
by weather. When metal conduits or flexible tubes are 
used, their ends shall be screwed adequately, to prevent 
ingress or moisture. 


17.2 Minimum Size of Cables 


Cables having conductors, complying with the relevant 
Indian Standard, smaller than 2.5 mm? nominal 
equivalent copper area of cross-section shall not be 
used for the power wiring to the motor. For control 
circuits and auxiliary wiring, cables having a sectional 
area smaller than 1.5 mm? nominal equivalent copper 
area shall not be used. 


17.3 Multicore Armoured Cables 


Multicore armoured power and control cables suitably 
clamped may be used to avoid conduits and troughings. 
Suitable clamping glands should be provided at both 
ends of each multicore cable. 


17.4 Outdoor Hoist Wiring 


For outdoor hoists, except where flexible unarmoured 
cables are essential, cables shall be either armoured or 
enclosed throughout their length in galvanized trunking 
or conduit, either flexible or rigid. A flexible metallic 
tube or duct may not form an effective earth connection 
and shall not be used for that purpose. Taped, braided 
or varnished-cambric insulated cables shall not be used 
for outdoor hoists. 


17.5 Current Rating 


Rating of the cables shall comply with the relevant 


Indian Standard. Where hoists are equipped with 1h 
rated motor, the cables shall be up-rated by a factor of 
1.4 above the ratings for continuous duty. Similarly, 
for hoists equipped with half-an-hour rated motors an 
up-rating factor of 1.7 may be used. Where the hoists 
are equipped with intermittent duty rated motors the 
factor for up-rating the cable is equal to 10/V(IDP), 
where IDF is the intermittent duty factor. 


17.5.1 Rotor or armature resistor circuit cables carry 
current during accelerating periods only and, therefore, 
may be still further up-rated. For 10 min and 5 min rated 
resistors, the uprating factors of 1.5 and 2 may be used. 


17.5.2 Consideration should be given to such factors 
as the ambient temperature, grouping and disposition 
of the cables, and to the limitation of voltage drop 
which influences selection of suitable cables. 


18 EARTHING 


18.1 The hoist structure, motor frames and metal cases 
of all electrical equipment, including metal conduit or 
cable guards, shall be effectively connected to earth. 


18.2 Where the hoist is connected to the supply by 
flexible cord or flexible cable, the hoist shall be 
connected to earth by means of an earthing conductor 
enclosed with the current carrying conductors within 
the flexible cord or flexible cable. 


19 GUARDS 


19.1 Where there is any possibility of any person 
coming in contact with an exposed part of an electrical 
circuit, other than one operating at extra low voltage, 
such part shall be effectively guarded. 


19.2 All reciprocating and moving parts which might 
constitute a hazard shall be guarded. 


19.3 All guards shall be securely fastened so that 
vibration shall not loosen them. 


SECTION 4 TESTS, CERTIFICATE OF TEST AND COMPLIANCE 


20 TESTS AT MANUFACTURER’S WORKS 


20.1 All electrical and mechanical equipment shall be 
tested in accordance with the appropriate Indian 
Standards at the hoist or equipment maker’s works. 


20.2 A functional test to determine how well the hoist 
works and tests on motors and control equipment to 
determine the operating characteristics shall be 
conducted. 


20.2.1 The hoist shall be tested at manufacturer’s works 
at no load, full load and 125 percent of the safe working 
load. 


10 


20.2.2 Brakes 


The brakes shall be capable of holding 50 percent in 
excess of safe working load when the load is suspended 
by the work. 


20.2.3 Safety Devices 


Test for the effectiveness of the automatic device to 
limit the upward and downward travel of the hook. 


20.3 Insulation Tests 


Before the hoist is connected to the supply, the 
insulation of the electrical equipment shall be tested 


by a suitable instrument and any defect revealed shall 
be rectified. 


20.3.1 The voltage required for the insulation resistance 
test shall be at d.c. voltage not less than twice the rated 
voltage. 


20.3.2 Any reading less than 0.5 MQ obtained with an 
insulation resistance tester of the unregulated type shall 
be disregarded and the wiring under test shall be sub- 
divided until a reading higher than 0.5 MQ is obtained. 
Failure to obtain a higher reading shows an 
unsatisfactory state of the insulation. 

NOTE — A reading below 0.5 MQ obtained with such a tester 


may indicate that unduly low proportion of the prescribed test 
voltage is in fact being applied. 


20.3.2.1 If an installation has been subdivided for test 
purposes, each sub-division shall meet the 
requirements. 


20.3.3 The insulation resistance of each wiring circuit, 
exclusive of connected apparatus, shall be not less 
than 2 MQ. If necessary, it shall be permissible to 
disconnect individual items of equipment while 
making this test. 


20.3.4 Tests for Operation 


After the supply has been connected, and before the 
hoist is put into commercial service, tests shall be 
carried out to prove the following: 


a) The satisfactory operation of each controller, 
switch, contactor, relay and other control 
devices and in particular the correct operation 
of all limit switches under the most 


unfavourable conditions; 


IS 6547 : 2015 


b) The correctness of all circuits and interlocks 
and sequence of operation; and 
c) The satisfactory operation of all protective 


safety devices. 


20.4 Overload Tests 


20.4.1 After tests but before the hoist is put into service, 
it shall be tested with overload relays appropriately 
set to lift and sustain a test load of 125 percent of the 
working load. 


20.4.2 During the overload test, the hoist shall sustain 
the load under full control. The specified speeds need 
not be attained but the hoist shall show itself capable 
of dealing with the overload without difficulty. 


NOTE — Test load and necessary lifting tackle shall be provided 
by the purchaser for load test at user site. 


20.5 Any test required by the purchaser beyond those 
called for in the appropriate Indian Standard shall be 
subjected to mutual agreement and shall be carried out 
at the purchaser’s expense. 


21 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 


21.1 Test Certificates 


A certified record of the test figures including the speed 
of the lift for safe working load shall be supplied to 
the purchaser and recorded on the test certificate which 
shall also indicate whether the electric chain hoist 
complies with the standard, if required by the 
purchaser. 

NOTE — The requirement that the contract speeds of lifting 


shall be attained is contingent on the voltage and frequency of 
the electricity supply to the motor being correctly maintained. 


SECTION 5 MARKING AND SUPPLY 


22 CONDITIONS 


Unless otherwise required by the purchaser, every hoist 
shall be given at least one priming and one finishing 
coat of paint. Prior to painting, the metal work shall be 
thoroughly cleaned, dried and shall be free from welding 
slag, rust, oil and grease. Metal surfaces bolted or riveted 
together shall be primed before assembly. Paint may be 
applied by spray gun or brush or by dipping. 


23 MARKING 


23.1 Capacity Marking 


The rated load of each hoist in kgs / tonnes shall be 
marked plainly on the hoist and load block, so as to be 
clearly legible from the floor below the hoist. 


23.2 A name plate containing the following 
information shall be provided on the hoist at a 


11 


prominent place: 


a) Manufacturer’s name, trade-mark or 
identification; 

b) Type or model number; serial number and 
year of manufacture; and 

c) SWL capacity. 


23.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The electric chain hoists may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


23.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


IS 6547 : 2015 


24 DATA TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE 
MANUFACTURER ALONGWITH THE HOIST 


24.1 Test Certificate 


A certified record of the test report shall be supplied 
to the purchaser with the hoist. 


24.2 Installation, Maintenance and Operational 
Instructions 


Each hoist shall be provided with instruction sheets 
containing full information on the method of 
installation, operation and electrical wiring of the hoist 
and components. Each hoist shall be provided with a 
manual containing maintenance instructions and 
information regarding ordering replacement parts. 


24.3 Wiring Diagram 


A wiring diagram of the hoist shall be supplied with 
each hoist. The technical document shall give the rating 
of the motor; the cable sizes and such other information 
as will tend to facilitate inspection and maintenance 
of the hoist. In case of contactor controlled hoists, a 
schematic diagram shall be supplied. 


25 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED WITH 
THE ENQUIRY OR ORDER 


25.1 Number of hoists required. 


25.2 A brief description of the work to be 
accomplished including the number of lifts per hour 
or day. 


25.3 Capacity in tonnes. 
25.4 Type of suspension: 


a) Lug; 

b) Hook; 

c) Manual push trolley; 

d) Manual geared trolley; 
e) Motor driven trolley; and 
f) Base mounted. 


25.5 Head Room 
Maximum head room dimension permissible. 


25.6 Maximum Lift in metres 


The distance between the upper and lower limits of 
travel of the load block. 


25.7 Desired hoisting and trolley travel speed in m/ 
min. 


25.8 Method of Operation 


Pendant push-button or pendant rope. 


12 


25.9 Speed Control 


a) Hoist — single speed, two speed or variable 
speed. 
b) Trolley — single speed, hand-operated or 


motor-operated. 


25.10 Type of Hook Required 


25.11 Operating Current 
a) 


a.c. — voltage, phases, cycles and number of 
wires. 


b) d.c. — voltage. 


25.12 Beam or rail size for trolley mounted hoists- 
height, width, weight per metre and minimum radius 
in track. 


25.13 Special condition to be explained (if any), like 
heat, dust, moisture, hazardous atmosphere, etc, explain 
fully. 


25.14 Statutory requirements applicable. 


25.15 Compliance with this standard. 


26 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY 
MANUFACTURER 


26.1 Description of unit. 
26.2 Type and class of hoist. 
26.3 Safe working load. 

26.4 Motor. ........ kW at 


min, rating. 
26.5 Operating power supply: 
a) 


a.c. — voltage, phases, cycles and number of 
wires. 


b) d.c. — voltage. 
26.6 Head room. 
26.7 Type of suspension. 
26.8 Maximum lift in metres 


26.9 Speed control — single speed, two speed, or 
variable speed. 


26.10 Hoisting speed: 


a) If trolley supplied — type of trolley: 
1) Hand operated. 
2) Motor operated. 

b) If motor operated — speed, m/min. 


26.11 Methods of Operation 


Pendant push-button or pendant rope. 


26.12 Number of brakes — types. 


26.13 Chain — size in mm, type — roller or link, 
grade, number of falls, and minimum breaking load. 


26.14 Beam or rail size for trolley mounted hoists and 
minimum radius of track 


26.15 Net weight. 


IS 6547 : 2015 
26.16 Statement to the effect that the hoist conforms 
to this standard. 
26.17 Tools and accessories supplied. 


26.18 Drawing of general arrangement, electrical 
circuit diagram and spare parts list. 


26.19 Any special features. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
325 : 1996 Specification for three-phase 2048 : 1983 Parallel keys and keyways (second 
induction motors (third revision) revision) 
800 : 2007 General construction in steel — Code 3938 : 1983 Specification for electric wire rope 
of practice (third revision) hoists (second revision) 
807 : 2006 Design, erection and testing 13834 (Part 1): Cranes — Classification : Part 1 
(structural portion) of cranes and 1994 / ISO General 
hoists — Code of practice (second 4301-1 : 1986 
revision) IS/1SO 3077: Short link chain for lifting purposes 
816: 1969 Code of practice for use of metal arc 2001 — Grade T (Types T, DAT and DT), 
welding for general construction in fine-tolerance hoist chain 
mild steel (first revision ) 4367 : 1991 Alloy steel forgings for general 
1024 : 1999 Code of practice for use of welding industrial use (first revision) 
in bridges and structures subject to 4460 (Parts 1 to Gears — Spur and helical gears — 
dynamic loading (second revision) 3) : 1995 Calculation of load capacity (first 
2004 : 1991 Carbon steel forgings for general revision) 
engineering purpose (third 5669 : 1987 / General plan of boundary 
revision) ISO 15: 1981 dimensions for radial rolling bearings 


13 


IS 6547 : 2015 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cranes Lifting Chains and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 14 


Organization 
BEML Limited, Kolar Gold Field 
ABB Limited, Bangalore 


Alstom Industrial Products Limited, Kolkata 


Anupam Industries Limited, Vitthal Udyognagar 


Armsel MHE Private Limited, Bangalore 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Bhopal 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Tiruchirapalli 


Brady and Morris Engineering Company Limited, Ahmedabad 


Central Building Research Institute, Ahmedabad 


Demelec Technical Con, Nasik 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour, 


Mumbai 


Electrosteel Integrated Limited, Kolkata 


Furnace and Foundry Equipment Company, Mumbai 


Heavy Engineering Corporation Limited, Ranchi 


Hercules Hoists Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Zinc Limited, Udaipur 


Indian Chain Private Limited, Kolkata 


IPSS Secretariat CET, Delhi 
M.N. Dastur and Company Limited, Kolkata 


Mecon Limited, Ranchi 


Mega Drives Private Limited, Thane 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Ahmednagar 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 
Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 


Monal Chains Limited, Mumbai 


Mukand Limited, Thane 


14 


Representative(s) 
Sarı RAMESH Desar (Chairman) 


SHRI PRAKASH Rao 
Suri M. S. Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SENGUPTA 
Suri Rasv RANJAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. JHa 
Suri S. K. Mirra (Alternate) 


Suri A. C. HERI 
Suri Preet H. Hert (Alternate) 


SHRI G. SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri Heera BHARANI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. NAINAR 
SHRI M. DHARMALINGAM (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GOWRISANKAR 
Suri J. B. Buatr (Alternate) 


Suri R. S. BisHT 
SHRI NARENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI DHRUBA MALLIK 
SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MALLIK (Alternate) 


Suri U. K. Das 
Suri H. CHATTOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SADHUKHAN 


SHRI SHYAM M. GURNANI 
Suri SANJOY J. MASAND (Alternate) 


SHRI MADAN JHA 
Suri M. M. Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI A. R. MASURKAR 
Suri M. S. SarGaL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHRIMALI 


SHRI P. CHITLANGIA 
Suri LaLir Monan (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 


SHRI DEBABRATA RAY 
SHRI ANSHUMAN BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. GHosH 


SHRI DEEPAK MAJUMDAR 
Suri S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Suri K. Sudhakaran 
SHRI RAGHUBIR SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. SHARMA 


Suri A. R. RAo 
Suri D. J. Basu (Alternate) 


Suri ANUJ RBs GUPTA 
Suri D. M. Jain (Alternate) 


Suri T. MURALIDHAR 
Suri G. V. PRABHU (Alternate) 


Organization 


Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 


SAIL, Bhilai 
Siemens Limited, Thane 


Tata Iron and Steel, Jamshedpur 


The Indian Link Chain Manufacturers Limited, Mumbai 
TIL Limited, Kolkata 


Unicon Tech International (Private) Limited, New Delhi 
Unique Industrial Handlers Private Limited, Mumbai 
WMI Cranes Limited, Mumbai 

In personnel capacity (42/D4 Kesava Nagar, 


Opposite Anna Stadium, Trichy) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 6547 : 2015 


Representative(s) 


Suri N. G. K. SATOSKAR 
Suri A. B. Upavant (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. Morrra 
SHRI BIKRAN CHAKRABORTY 


Suri S. K. SUMAN 
Suri S. Biswas (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. NEVATIA 


SHRI SRIMANTA DATTA 
SHRI A. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Suri R. S. NALWA 
Suri SACHIN NALWA (Alternate) 


SHRI G. L. MIRCHANDANI 
Suri S. E. BADLAWALA (Alternate) 


Suri S. M. MALANI 
Suri D. CHATTERN (Alternate) 


Suri K. MANICKAM 


Suri J. A SIDDIQUI, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri M. K. PARAMANIK 
Scientist C (MED), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ME 14 (1042). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


