HRA ATP IS 15201 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


sgg — Yan ear 


(GE GAU) 


Hydrogen — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.300, 71.100.20 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Had, 9 HEE. UE MH HPT, Ag facet - 110002 
Nt” ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 7 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 7 


FOREWORD 


‘This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Chemical 
Hazards Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council’. 


Hydrogen is used in the hydrogenation of edible and petroleum oils, in the synthesis of ammonia, methanol, 
hydrochloric acid, aluminium alkyls, higher alcohols and aldehydes, reduction of metal oxides (such as iron ore), 
welding, Hydrogen Fuel cells and also used as afuel. Liquid hydrogen is an important cryogenic liquid. 


Hydrogen is a highly flammable liquid or gas and has a dangerous fire and explosion hazard. Exposure to high 
levels of hydrogen gas concentration can cause suffocation for lack of oxygen. Contact with liquid hydrogen can 
cause frostbite. The elimination of accidents is vital to public interest. Accidents produce social and economic 
loss, and impair individual or group productivity. Realization of this loss has led the authorities to devote a good 
deal of attention to safety education. Apart from general precautions, some typical precautions are required to be 
taken during manufacture, storage, and handling of hydrogen. This code describes the properties of hydrogen and 
nature of hazards associated with it. The standard also prescribes safety measures for controlling hazards and 
essential information on symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and 
employee safety. This standard is intended to guide the users in the recognition of these hazards and in establishing 
safe handling procedures. 


This standard was first published in 2002. The Committee felt a need to revise the standard with a view to update 
the standard based on the experience of last two decades and on the currently available data. In this revision 
general properties, and modifications, measures for controlling hazards and essential information on symptoms 
of asphyxiation, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and employee safety have been 
incorporated. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian Standards on 
Code of safety of chemicals. 


There is no 1SO Standard on this subject. In the preparation of this Standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from the following publications: 


a) Sax’s Dangerous Properties of Industrial Materials, Volume No. 3, 12th edition,Wiley — Interscience 
Publication, John Wiley and Sons. Inc., 2012. 


b) Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods, 22"! revised edition,United Nations, Geneva, 
2021. 


c) Handbook of Toxic and Hazardous Chemicals and Carcinogens, Volume II, 7thedition, Marshall Sittig, 
Elsevier Publications, Park Ridge, New Jersey, USA, 2017. 


d) Chemical Safety Data Sheets, Flammable Chemicals, Volume 5, Royal Society ofChemistry, United 
Kingdom. 


e) Encyclopedia of Chemistry, S. P. Parker, McGraw Hill. 


The composition of committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 15201 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
HYDROGEN — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes physical and chemical 
properties of hydrogen gas, the nature of hazards 
associated with it. The standard also prescribes 
safety measures for controlling hazards and essential 
information on symptoms of asphyxiation, first-aid, 
medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling, fire- 
fighting and employee safety. 


1.2 This standard does not, however, deal with any 
specification for design of buildings, chemical 
engineering plants, method and ingredients used in 
the manufacture, equipment for waste disposal and 
operation control. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revisions, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. Title 


1260 (Part 1) :Pictorial marking for handling 
1973 and labelling of goods: Part 1 
Dangerous goods. 

3224 : 2021 Valve fittings for compressed 
gas cylinders excluding 
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
cylinders — Specification (fourth 

revision). 

4155 : 1966 Glossary of terms relating to 
chemical and radiation hazards 
and hazardous chemicals. 

4379 : 1981 Identification of contents of 
industrial gas cylinders (first 
revision). 


5572 : 2009 Classification of hazardous areas 


(Other Than Mines) having 
flammable gases and vapours for 
electrical installation (third 
revision). 


8519 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial 
safety equipment for body 
protection. 


8520 : 1977 Guide for selection of industrial 


safety equipment for eye, face 
andear protection. 


8807 : 1978 Guide for selection of industrial 


safety equipment for protection 
ofarms and hands. 


10667 : 1983 Guide for selection of industrial 


safety equipment for protection 
of foot and leg. 


15742 : 2007 Textiles — Requirements for 
clothing made of limited flame 
spread materials and material 
assemblies affording protection 
against heat and flame — 


Specification. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 4155 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 

4.1 General Information 

4.1.1 Chemical Name — Hydrogen. 
4.1.2 Common Name and Synonyms 


Liquid hydrogen, para hydrogen, hydrogen 
(compressed), di- hydrogen. 


4.1.3 Uses 


Hydrogen gas is generally used to produce 
fertilizers, methanol and intermediates such as 
cyclohexane for production of plastics and 
pharmaceuticals, to remove sulphur from fuels 
during the oil-refining process and as an 
intermediate in the production of bio-jet fuels. 


IS 15201 : 2022 


4.2 Identification 
4.2.1 Formula — H; 
4.2.2 CAS Number — 1 333-74-0 


4.2.3 UN Number — 1 049 for Gas (Hydrogen, 
Compressed), and 1 966 for Liquid (Refrigerated 
Liquid). 


4.2.4 UN Class 2 (Flammable Gas). 
4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2.1 Flammable Gas 
4.3 Physical Properties 


4.3.1 General — Hydrogen is a Gas at Room 
Temperature and is the Lightest of all the 
Gases in the Periodic Table. 


4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 2.015 94. 

4.3.3 Physical State — Gas 

4.3.4 Colour — Colourless 

4.3.5 Odour — Odourless 

4.3.6 Boiling Point — (—) 252.8 °C. 
4.3.7 Melting Point — (—) 259.2 °C. 


4.3.8 Relative Vapour Density of the Gas at 0 °C and 
1 atm (air =1) — 0.089 9 


4.3.9 Specific Gravity of the Gas at 21.1 °C and 1 
atm (air =1) — 0.069 6 


4.3.10 Viscosity of the Gas at 20 °C — 0.008 76 cP 
(centipoise) 


4.3.11 Vapour Pressure at -250 °C (Hg in mm) — 1 
570 


4.3.12 Heat of Combustion (Higher Value), Kcal/g 
— 33.9 


4.3.13 Refractive Index (at 0 °C and I atm), n — 
1.000 132 


4.3.14 Solubility in water at 20 °C — 1.6 mg/l 


4.3.15 Solubility in other solvents — Slightly Soluble 
in Alcohol and Ether. 


4.3.16 Light Sensitivity — Not Applicable 
4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


Hydrogen is stable under normal temperature and 
pressure. Violent reaction or ignition takes place 
with air in presence of catalyst like platinum and 
similar metals containing absorbed oxygen or 
hydrogen, bromine, iodine, di-oxane, and nickel, 
lithium, nitrogen tri-fluoride, nickel and oxygen, 
oxygen di-fluoride. 


4.4.2 Polymerization — Do not Occur 


4.4.3 Allotrope formation — Ortho-hydrogen and 


Para-hydrogen. 
4.4.4 Corrosion properties — Not corrosive 
4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 


4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — The Minimum 
Ignition Energy (MIE) of a Hydrogen Air Mixture is 
0.019 mJ. 


4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — 566 °C (105 1 
°F) 

4.5.3 Flammable Limits Percent Hydrogen by 
Volume in Air, Upper Explosive Limit - 74.2 


4.54 Flammable Limits Perecnt Hydrogen by 
Volume in Air, Lower Explosive Limit — 4 


4.5.5 Fire Risk — Flammable 


4.5.6 The Limits of Detonability of Hydrogen in Air 
— 18.3 Percent to 59 Percent by Volume. 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


Hydrogen is not toxic except that it may asphyxiate. 
It may displace the oxygen in a workplace 
atmosphere and thus act as an asphyxiant. 


5.2 Routes of Entry 

5.2.1 Contact of Liquid Hydrogen with Skin 

Direct contact of body tissue with liquid hydrogen 
can cause cold burns or frost bite. Exposure to 
large quantity of liquid hydrogen spill could result in 
hypothermia if proper precautions are not taken 
5.2.2 Asphyxiation 


Hydrogen displaces the oxygen in the workplace 
atmosphere and any person entering into such a 
workplace where hydrogen has displaced air, 
reducing oxygen level below 19.5 per cent will be 
exposed to asphyxiation hazard. 


5.2.3 Thermal Radiation Flux Exposure Level 


a) Flux of 0.47 W/cm? (1490 Btu/min/ft?) 
— Pain felt in 15 sec-30 sec. Skin burns 
in 30 sec. 

b) Flux of 0.95 W/cm? (2722 Btu/min/ft’) 

—Immediate skin reactions. 


5.3 Toxicity information 
Hydrogen is non-toxic and non-poisonous. 


a) Threshold Limit Value (TLV) (TWA) — 
Simple asphyxiant 


5.4 Antidote 


There is no antidote for hydrogen toxicity. 


5.5 Health Effects 
5.5.1 Signs and Symptoms 


a) Inhalation — At very high concentrations, 
can displace the normal air and cause 
suffocation from lack of oxygen. 


b) Ingestion — As this product is a gas, refer to 
the inhalation section. 


c) Skin contact — Rapidly expanding gas may 
cause burns or frostbite. 
d) Eye contact — Rapidly expanding gas may 
cause burns or frostbite. 


6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
6.1 Availability and Use 


Personal protective equipment is not an adequate 
substitute for good, safe working conditions, 
adequate ventilation and intelligent conduct on the 
part of the employees. One should keep firmly in 
mind that personal protective equipment protects 
only the person wearing it and other unprotected 
workers in the area may be exposed to danger. 


6.2 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1 Eye and Face Protection 


6.2.1.1 Chemical splash protection as per IS 8520 
category H-4. Use of goggles along with full face 
shield is recommended. Face shield should be of 
sufficient length to cover the neck portion. When 
working with liquid, full face-piece respiratory 
protection is worn for eye protection (see IS 8519). 


6.2.2 Head Protection 
Safety helmets for head protection shall be used. 
6.2.3 Foot and Leg Protection 


Boots or high top shoes for foot protection shall be 
used. (see IS 10667) 


6.2.4 Body, Skin and Hand Protection 


Where exposure to cold equipment, vapours, or 
liquid may occur, employees should wear special 
clothing designed to prevent the freezing of body 
tissues. All protective clothing (suits, shirts with 
long sleeves, insulated gloves) should be clean, 
available each day, confirming to IS 15742 and put 
on before work. Cuffless trousers should be worn 
outside boots or over high top shoes to shed spilled 
liquid (see IS 8807). 


6.3 Respiratory Equipment 


Hydrogen is a simple asphyxiant. It can replace 
oxygen and lead to suffocation. An approved self- 
contained breathing apparatus with a full face-piece 
operated in positive pressure mode should be used 
in oxygen deficient environments. 


IS 15201 : 2022 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORT 


7.1 General 


7.1.1 Gaseous hydrogen may be supplied in 
cylinders or in tubes that are designed and 
manufactured according to applicable codes and 
specifications for the pressures and temperatures 
involved. The pressure rating and internal volume of 
a container determines the quantity of hydrogen it 
can hold. Cylinders may be used individually or can 
be mani-folded together to allow for a larger gas 
storage volume. Tubes are mounted on truck-trailer 
chassis or in ISO frames for transportation and are 
referred to as tube trailers or tube modules, 
respectively. 


7.1.2 The storage containers shall be labelled or 
marked as following: 


(a) The contents of the container; 


(b) The name and address of the manufacturer 
or importer of the hazardous chemical; and 


(c) The physical, chemical and toxicological 
data as per the criteria given in the relevant 
Schedule of the Manufacture, Storage and 
Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules 1989. If 
transport of the hazardous chemical is involved 
it shall be carried out in accordance with the 
Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. While 
referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in 
the subsequent amendments of those statutes 
shall be taken into account. 


7.2 Storage 
7.2.1 General Precautions 


7.2.1.1 Hydrogen must be stored to avoid contact 
with heat, flames, sparks and oxygen. Sources of 
ignition such as smoking and open flames are 
prohibited where hydrogen is used, handled or 
stored. 


7.2.1.2 Metal containers involving transfer of large 
quantities of hydrogen should be grounded and 
bonded. Piping should be electrically bonded and 
grounded. 


7.2.1.3 Containers must be equipped with self- 
closing valves, pressure vacuum bungs and flame 
arrestors. 


7.2.1.4 Only non-sparking tools and equipment, 
especially when opening and closing containers of 
hydrogen should be used. 


7.2.1.5 Wherever hydrogen is used (handled, 
manufactured or stored), approved explosion- proof 


IS 15201 : 2022 


electrical equipment and fittings. 


7.2.1.6 Automatic or manual shutdown processes, 
sprinklers, gas and heat sensors with early warning 
audio-visual alarms, flooding, water spraying, 
extinguishing systems, explosion relief devices 
should be available in storage areas. 


7.2.1.7 The building shall have good low and high 
level natural ventilation. In areas where natural 
ventilation is not possible, forced ventilation 
equipments should be installed. 


7.2.1.8 Cylinder storage locations should be well 
protected, Well-ventilated, dry, and separated from 
combustible materials. Cylinders should never be 
allowed to reach a temperature exceeding 52 °C (125 
°E). 


7.2.1.9 Cylinders of hydrogen should be separated 
from oxygen cylinders or other oxidizers by a 
minimum distance of 6 m, Post "No Smoking or 
Open Flames" signs in the storage areas. There 
should be no sources of ignition. All electrical 
equipment should be explosion proof in the 
hydrogen cylinder storage and usage areas. Storage 
areas must meet national electric codes for class 1 
hazardous areas or as per normal industry practice 
to rate the storageas either Zone 1 or Zone 2, with 
reference to Indian standard (see IS 5572), 
classification of hazardous areas (other than mines) 
having flammable gases and vapors for electrical 
installation 


7.2.2 Indoor Storage 


7.2.2.1 Avoid mechanical damage or overheating of 
storage tanks and cylinders. 


7.2.2.2 The vents from the storage tanks, relief valve 
must be led to a safe location to avoid any explosions 
with suitable flame arrestors fitted in it. They should 
always be kept in vertical position with chain secure 
arrangement to prevent fall. 


7.2.3 Outdoor Storage 


7.2.3.1 Outside storage tanks may be located at least 
15 m away from building or adjacent to blank 
masonry building walls. The location should be 
away from any flammable liquid storage with 
adequate approved fire protection system. 


7.2.3.2 Cylinders must be protected from direct sun 
rays. Provision of shed should be donefor outdoor 
storage of cylinders. 


7.2.4 Bulk Storage (Non-Refrigerated) 
7.2.4.1 Hydrogen is lighter than air and any leak 


goes up the atmosphere readily. It shall be stored in 
gas tight containers either in atmospheric condition 
or under pressure. 


7.2.4.2 Storage area should be protected by fire 
hydrants and automatic sprinklers for extinguishing 
a fire. 


7.2.4.3 The storage tanks shall be designed as per 
standard code. 


7.2.4.4 Each storage tank shall be equipped with 
relief valves. Vent pipes from the valves should 
terminate upward and should have a flame arrestor. 
Suitable provision should be made to prevent 
anything from entering the vents. A drain should 
also be arranged at the bottom of the vent pipe. Any 
discharge through the relief valves should not enter 
work area or contact source of ignition. 


7.3 Handling 
7.3.1 General 


7.3.1 Hydrogen should be handled wearing an 
approved respirator, chemical resistantgloves and 
safety goggles and other protective clothing (see 6). 


7.3.2 Sources of ignition such as smoking and open 
flames are prohibited where hydrogenis handled. 


7.3.3 Safety recommendations and safe operating 
procedures should be strictly followed by the 
persons handling hydrogen. 


7.3.2 Handling of Cylinders 


7.3.2.1 Before filling the cylinder with hydrogen, 
check and confirm for its validity. It shall have valid 
test certificate from the concerned authorities. 
Cylinder must be hydraulically tested before filling 
hydrogen gas. Both seller and consumer must verify 
that the period of date of testing is still valid. 


7.3.2.2 Protect cylinders from physical damage. 


7.3.2.3 Cylinders should never be subjected to rough 
handling or to abnormal mechanical shock such as 
dropping, bumping, dragging or sliding. They 
should always be kept in verticalposition. 


7.3.2.5 Ropes, slings, hooks, tongs and similar 
handling devices which may produce sparks or 
static electricity should not be used during handling 
and use of hydrogen cylinder. 


7.3.2.6 A suitable hand truck, fork truck or similar 
device to which the cylinders can be firmly secured 
should be used for transporting the cylinders. 


7.3.2.7 While handling by crane or derrick, a 
suitable platform, cradle or boat should be used.Use 
rack or chain to hold cylinders in place when hooked 
up for discharging. 


7.3.2.8 Do not place or handle hydrogen cylinders 
where electrical circuit might form. 


7.3.2.9 Do not remove protection cap unless ready 
to withdraw hydrogen from the cylinder. 
Appropriate and standard valves must be used. 
Explosive gas check of valves and fittings should be 
done before usage. 

7.3.2.10 Do not "open" hydrogen cylinder valve 
before connecting to the process, since self- ignition 
may occur. Hydrogen leak should be checked with a 
suitable hydrogen sensor/detector. Hydrogen leak 
should never be tested with flame. 

7.3.2.11 Use only approved CGA connections/5 
LH/8 LH (Internal Thread) connection as per IS 
3224. DO NOT USE ADAPTERS. Never insert an 
Object (e.g., wrench, screwdriver, pry bar, etc.) into 
valve cap openings. Doing so may damage valve, 
causing a leakage to occur. 


7.3.2.12 Use only standard colour code (Red colour 
without any band) for hydrogen cylinders(see IS 
4379). 


7.3.2.13 Cylinders for hydrogen, whether full or 
empty should never be used as rollers for moving 
heavy or bulky articles. 


7.3.2.14 No one should tamper with numbers, 
markings, or test dates stamped on cylinders. 


7.3.2.15 When the cylinder is empty, disconnect it, 
insert the valve plug and replace the cylinder 
protective cap. 


7.3.2.16 Store empty cylinders separate from filled 
cylinders and fasten an ‘EMPTY’ tag on cylinders 
immediately upon emptying. Close valve, replace 
plug or nut on valve outlet and secure valve 
protecting cap snugly. 


7.4 Labelling 


7.4.1 Each container (including tankers) should 
carry an identifying label or stencil as depicted in IS 
1260 (Part 1). The storage containers shall be 
labelled or marked to identify as follows: 


a) Contents of the container; 

b) Name and address of the manufacturer or 
importer of the hazardous chemical; and 

c) Physical, chemical and toxicological data as 

per the criteria given in the relevant schedule of 

the Manufacture, Storage and Import of 

Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989. While 


IS 15201 : 2022 


referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in 
the subsequent amendments of those statutes 
shall be taken into account. Manufacturers name 
with label warnings required by regulations or 
ordinances form part of the label or placard. 


7.4.2 Label should be as per rules and regulations. 


7.4.3 Each cylinder must be labelled with 
‘FLAMMABLE GAS’ ‘CLASS 2’. 


7.5 Transportation 


7.5.1 Class Label — Class 2 labels must be 
displayed on the transport vehicle: 


a) Compressed gas: UN No. 1049, and 
b) Refrigerated liquid: UN No. 1966. 


7.5.2 Pre-departure checks for vehicles carrying 
hydrogen in cylinders in manifold systems mounted 
on trucks. 


7.5.2.1 Prior to and after loading, the drivers must 
take a complete inspection of the vehicle toensure 
that it meets all performance safety requirements 
and is roadworthy for transporting hydrogen. A few 
of the numerous items that are checked are the 
lights, tyres, suspensions andbrakes. 


7.5.2.2 The driver should maintain a log entry book 
during transit for critical parameters of the cylinder 
such as pressure. 


7.5.2.3 Ensure availability of fire extinguishers 
(Dry chemical powder (DCP)/carbon dioxide) on 
the vehicle. 


7.5.2.4 Ensure availability of emergency kit on the 
vehicle. 


7.5.2.5 Ensure availability of transport emergency 
(TREM) card and instruction manual during 
transportation on the vehicle. 


7.6 Precautions during Transportation 


7.6.1 Do not smoke in the cabin. All sources of 
ignition must be kept away from the truck during 
transportation. 


7.6.2 Driver should follow specified route only, 
maintain speed limit, never park the truck near 
residential areas, drive truck carefully and observe 
all rules and signals, avoid overtakingof moving 
vehicles and do not leave the truck without watch at 
any time. 


7.6.3 No repairs involving gas cutting, welding, etc. 
should be done during transportation period. If 
required at all, repairs should be done by authorized 
and competent personnel of maintenance 
department/plant who are deputed by 
manufacturer/supplier. 


IS 15201 : 2022 


7.6.4 The driver should physically inspect complete 
mounting periodically and immediately report any 
abnormality to the supplier. 


7.6.5 In case of emergency (for example leaks, fires, 
accident, etc.) follow the instructions mentioned in 
the ‘Instruction manual during transportation’ to 
control and mitigate an emergency. Immediately 
contact manufacturer/supplier, police, Regional 
Transport Office (RTO), fire brigade and other local 
authorities. 


7.7 Drivers Training 


7.7.1 The basics of any effective safety programme 
for transportation of hydrogen is adequate training. 


7.7.2 Each driver must be carefully selected and 
receive adequate amount of classroom training, 
audio-visual instructions and job training. The 
training must be done at certified regional training 
institutes. Management must personally qualify 
each driver before he is allowed to deliver hydrogen. 


7.7.3 Systematic training/retraining and reviews 
must be carried out to ensure that proficiency is 
maintained. Drivers must be trained in the 
following: 


a) Safe driving methods; 

b) Actions to be taken during emergency; 

C) Proper use of fire extinguishers, 
emergency kits, TREM cards, instruction 
manuals, etc; and 


d) Communication with 
manufacturer/supplier. 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is involved 
it shall be carried out in accordance with the Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989. While referring to the statutes, the 
stipulations given in the subsequent amendments of those 
statutes shall be taken into account. 
8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 General 


Hydrogen being odourless, colourless and 
tasteless gas, its leakage cannot be sensed by 
human beings. 


8.2 Spillage/Leakages 


8.2.1 Frequent inspections of equipment, containers 
and vessels containing hydrogen should be made to 
detect or prevent leakage. 


8.2.2 If spills or leaks of hydrogen occur, only 
properly protected personnel should remain in the 
area and entry to others should be restricted. 


8.2.3 Every organization handling hydrogen must 
form an emergency response team, which is 
available round the clock. Spills or leaks should be 
handled by the emergency response team specially 
trained to handle emergency situations. 


8.2.4 If spills or leaks develop, take measures to 
hasten its dissipation. 


8.2.5 In case of a major spill or equipment rupture, 
the exposed area should be evacuated and 
unprotected personnel must not re-enter the area 
unless declared safe. 


8.2.6 Proper respiratory protection should be 
provided for use by personnel entering the area for 
tests or to repair damaged equipment as high 
hydrogen concentration may exist. 


8.2.7 Stop flow of gas/shut off leak, if it can be 
done without risk. 


8.2.8 If source of a leak is a cylinder and the leak 
cannot be stopped in place, remove the leaking 
cylinder to a safe place in the open air, and repair 
leak or allow the cylinder to empty. 


8.2.9 In both gas, or liquid spills, remove all 
ignition sources. 


8.3 Evacuation 


8.3.1 If the release is not contained by an appropriate 
device or system, all personnel not appropriately 
protected must be evacuated from the contaminated 
space. Evacuation of additional areas should be 
considered as a precaution against the spread of the 
release or subsequent explosion or fire. 


8.3.2 Suitable hydrogen detectors with alarm should 
be provided in the hydrogen handling & storage 
areas to help evacuation of persons from the affected 
area. 


8.4 Waste Disposal 


To be burnt under control condition. 


NOTE — Check with the hazardous & other wastes 
(management and transboundary movement) rules, 
2016. 


9 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING 
9.1 General 


Hydrogen is highly flammable. Hydrogen flame is 
almost invisible and can cause severe explosions. It 
is easily ignited with many sources of energy, some 
of which are listed below: 


a) Open flames; 
b) Electrical equipments; 
C) Electrostatic sparks; 


d) Sparks from striking objects; 
e) Friction 

f) Thermite sparks; 

g) Air or oxygen, other oxidants; 
h) Hot surfaces; 


i) Hot hydrogen leaking into ambient air; 
and 


j) Catalytic surfaces. 
9.1.2 Flame Temperature in Air 


The flame temperature for 19.6 percent by volume 
hydrogen in air is 232 1 K (371 8 °F). 


9.1.3 Burning Velocity in Normal Temperature and 
Pressure (NTP) Air 


The burning velocity for hydrogen in NTP air is 
2.70 m/s to 3.50 m/s (8.86 ft/s to 11.48 ft/s). The 
high burning velocity of hydrogen indicates its high 
explosive potential and the difficulty of confining or 
arresting hydrogen flames and explosions. 


9.2 Fire Prevention 
9.2.1 Minimize all potential sources of leaks. 


9.2.2 Eliminate as far as possible all sources of 
ignition. 

9.2.3 Make provision for isolation of 
hydrogen, means of escape and methods of 
controllingany fire. 


9.2.4 Adequate means of detecting fire and giving 
early warning, alarms in the event of fireshall be 
provided. 


9.2.4.1 Water spray systems shall be provided 
for hydrogen storage containers, groupedpiping, 
and pumps where potential fire hazard exists. 


9.2.4.2 Hydrogen collects under roofs and 
overhangs, where it forms an explosion hazard; 
any building that contains a potential source of 
hydrogen should have good ventilation, strong 
ignition suppression systems for all electric 
devices, and preferably be designed to have aroof 
that can be safely blown away from the rest of the 
structure in an explosion. 


9.2.4.3 Hydrogen pipelines should be located above 
other pipes to prevent occurrence of explosive 
hazard. 


9.2.4.4 Hydrogen sensors allow for rapid detection 
of hydrogen leaks to ensure that the leaked hydrogen 
can be vented and the source of the leak tracked 
down. Hydrogen flames canbe hard to see with the 
naked eye, but they show up readily on Ultraviolet/ 


IS 15201 : 2022 


Infrared radiation (UV/IR) flame detectors. 
9.2.5 Emergency Response Procedures and Systems 


9.2.5.1 Full emergency procedures and systems 
shall be established and periodic mock drills should 
be carried out. 


9.2.5.2 The emergency response team must be well 
trained with respect to ‘Do’s’ and‘Don’ts’, standard 
operating procedures (SOP), mitigation systems and 
hazards of hydrogen handling. 


9.3 Fire Fighting 
9.3.1 For Spills Which have not Ignited 


If a spill has not ignited, use water spray to direct 
flammable gas-air mixtures away fromsources of 
ignition. 

9.3.2 For Spills Which have Ignited 


9.3.2.1 A hydrogen-air-oxygen flame is colorless 
and is almost invisible. Any visibility is caused by 
impurities. At reduced pressures a pale blue or 
purple flame may be present.Severe burns have 
been inflicted on persons exposed to hydrogen 
flames resulting from the ignition of hydrogen gas 
escaping from leaks. There fore proper care should 
be taken while approaching any flames for fire 
fighting 


9.3.2.2 Stop flow of the gas, if possible. 


9.3.2.3 Because of danger of re-ignition, hydrogen 
fires normally should not be extinguished until the 
supply of hydrogen has been shut off. Flashback 
along trail may occur. 


9.3.2.4 If the flow cannot be stopped, allow the 
contents of the cylinder to burn under control. 


9.3.2.5 If liquid hydrogen has ignited, use water to 
keep fire exposed containers cool and to protect men 
trying to stop the source of a spill. 


9.3.2.6 Care shall be exercised to prevent water from 
entering the vent openings when using water for 
hydrogen fire suppression involving liquid 
hydrogen storage systems 


9.3.2.7 Small hydrogen fires can be 
extinguished by dry chemical extinguishers or 
with carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and steam. 


10 TRAINING 
10.1 Training 


10.1.1 All personnel engaged in the operation, 
maintenance and attending emergency of hydrogen 
and related systems shall receive training suitable 
for the work on which they are engaged. 


IS 15201 : 2022 


10.1.2 Training shall be arranged to cover all the 
aspects and potential hazards that the particular 
operator is likely to encounter. Training shall cover 
the following areas: 


a) The potential hazards of hydrogen, 
b) Site safety regulations, 

c) Emergency response 
(leaks/spills/ evacuation), 

d) Use of firefighting equipment, 
e) Use of protective clothing/apparatus 
including breathing sets where required, 

f) First aid, and 

g) Rescue operations. 


procedures 


10.1.3 In addition, individuals shall receive specific 
training in the activities for which they are 
employed. Refresher courses should be arranged on 
a periodic basis. Older employees should be re- 
educated. 


10.1.4 Each employee should know the location and 
correct operation of gas and fire alarm systems, 
sprinklers, monitors and other firefighting 
equipment. They should know the location of safety 
showers, eye washes and first aid boxes. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 


Employees should take a bath daily after finishing 
work. Eating, drinking or storing of foodshould be 
prohibited near the place where hydrogen is handled. 


11.1.2 Physical Examination 


11.1.2.1 Pre-placement Physical Examinations 
Proper pre-placement medical examinations of a 


personnel should be carried out to determinethe, 
physical fitness before assigning the job. 


11.1.2.2 Periodic Examination 


Annual medical examination should be 
carried out as required by laws/regulations 


NOTE — The annual medical examination shall be carried 
out in accordance with the Occupational Safety Health and 
Working Conditions Code 2020. While referring to the 
statutes, the stipulations given in the subsequent 
amendments of those statutes shall be taken into account. 


11.2 First Aid and Medical Treatment 
11.2.1 General Principles 


First aid treatment should be started at once in all 
cases of contact with hydrogen in any form or injury 
may result. Refer all injured persons to a physician 
even when the injury appears to be slight. Give the 
physician a detailed account of the accident. 


11.3 First Aid Treatment 
11.3.1 Inhalation 


Inhalation of hydrogen gas causes asphyxiation. 
Remove the affected person from exposure/ 
contamination area. Place him in the recovery 
position as necessary. If breathing has stopped begin 
rescue breathing. If heart action has stopped begin 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). If medical 
oxygen and trained personnel are available, 
administer oxygen to the affected person. If 
unconscious, do not give anything to drink. If 
conscious make the affected person lie or sit down 
quietly. 


11.3.2 Skin Contact with Liquid Hydrogen 


Treat for frost bite. Soak the affected part in 
lukewarm water. Seek medical attention. 


11.3.3 Eyes 
Treat for frost bite. 
11.3.4 Antidote/Dosages 


No specific antidote is available. 


IS 15201 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Gol, Min Of Def 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Gol 


Department of Space(ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. DAs (Alternate) 


MISS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHALDR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
MIss LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


= 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 
PROF SANDIP ROY 


DR D. K. PATEL 


DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 15201 : 2022 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet and Natural 


Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association of 


India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Limited, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (1-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 

SHRI D. SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 

SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘ʻE’ AND HEAD 
(CHD) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex- 


officio)] 


Member Secretary 
MISS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 07 (17323). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 6001 13 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


