1s : 4756 - 1978 ( (Reaffirmed ) ) Reaffirmed1987 2002

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR TUNNELING WORK (

First Revision)

Second Reprint MAY 1992

UDC

624.191.2:614.8

@I Co&right 1978 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9

INDIAN
BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN.

NEW DELHI 1 loo02

Gr 6

September

1978

IS :4756 - 1978

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE F\OR TUNNELING (
Safety

WORK

First Revision )
Sectional
Chairman

in Construction

Committee,

BDC

45

S~ritr D. N. CHOFT~A A-9/33 Vasant Vihar New Delhi 110057 and Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Representing Members E N G I s 1: E n Ministry of Railways CHIEF DEPUTY ( BIUUGES ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. B. DESAI SHRI R. M. Vrnwa~s ( Alternate ) Irrigation and Power Department, Govcrnmcnt SHRI V. R. DI*;USKAX Maharashtra, Bombay
SUPIGRINTENDING ENGINEER

of

DIILEFTOH, CGPC DEPUTY DIRECTOI~, CGPC SHllI 13. N. C;UPTA

(Alternate)
( Central

Water

Commission,

New Drlhi
Srrvice Labour & &

ilbrnate )

Directorate

General of Factory Advice, Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Employment ), Cumbay

SHRI G. VAWYYXJ~TII.~N (Alternate) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI V. G. HEGDE SHRI J. P. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Bureau of Public Enterprises SHRI s. s. KAInIAL Cent~~or~;~lding Research Institute ( CSIR SHRI J. P. KAUSI~ISH

),

The Institution of Surveyors R. L. KUMAI~ Ministrv of Home Affairs Snnr P. N. ME~II~OTRA Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Dn H. C. PARi%rESWARAN SARI 0. P. BRATIA (Alternate) M. N. Dastur & Co (P) Ltd. SHRI c. B. PATEL SHXI P. K. SENGUPTA ( Alterntrte ) Directorate General of Mines SHRI S. S. PRASAD Labour ), Dhanbad SHRI R. L. ARORA ( Alternate )
SHRI

India,

New Delhi

Army `Headquarters Calcutta Safety ( Ministry of

( Continued on page 2

)

@ Copyright 1978
BUREAU OF INDtAN STANDARDS
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS: 4756 - 1978 ( Cor1tinued frompage 1 )
~fembcrr
BRIG S. N. PUHJ

National Projects Delhi

Construction

Corporation,

New

SHXI K. N. TANEJA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SHRI K. N. R~MAMURTHY SXI~I S. R. C. RAO ( Alternate) Gammon India Limited, Bombay SIIIZI S. A. REDDY Builders' Association of India, Bombay ~~~:PIIISSLNTATlVE: SIIICI J. M. OBEROI ( Alternate ) Hindustan Housing Factory Ltd, New Delhi SILXI K. G. SALVI Slrn~ K. C. AGAR~ALA ( Alternate 1 OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERINTENDINQ SUIEVEYOE WORliS ( NDZ ) SURVEYOR OF WORKSV( NDZ)
SIIRI &,%?&&AR PGOB

C. G. SWAMINATHAN

SHRI TII.AK RAJ TAKULIA SIXRI B. T. UNWALLA S!in~ I'. K. MEHT~ ( Alternote ) SHBI R. S. VzlzMa SHRI P. L. NARULA ( Alternafe ) SIIRI D. AJITI~A SIMHA,

National Buildings Construction Corporation, New Delhi Central Road Research Institute (CSIR ), New Delhi Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay Concrete Association of India, Bombay Geological Director Survey General, of India, Calcutta Member )

IS1 ( Ex-ojicio

Director

( Civ Engg

)
Secretary Deputy SJ~ILIJ. R. MIGHTA Director (Civ Engg), IS1

Panel

for l&vision

of Safety

Code for Tunneling

Work

Convener
SHRI D. N. CHOPI~A

A-9/33 Vasant Vihar New Delhi 110057 Members
SIIILI R. G. GANDHI SICRI H. N. GUPTA

SIIRI P. M. MANE SXRI S. S. PRASAD SH~I G. N. TANDON SHRI R. S. VERIXA

Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Directorate General of Factory Advice, Service & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour & Employment ), Bombay In personal capacity ( Cons&z& Engineer, Ramalayam, Peddar Road, Bombay 400026 ) Directorate General of Mines Safety ( Ministry of Labour ), Dhanbad Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh', Lucknow Geological Survey of India, Calcutta

2

IS : 4756- 1978

SAFETY CODE FOR TUNNELING WORK (

First Revision )
FOREWORD

0.

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 March 1978, after the draft finalized by the Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Tunneling work is widely carried out in the country in the construction of railway, road and hydel projects. The work involved is of a specialized and hazardous nature. Cramped working space in the heading, wet and slippery flooring, artificial lighting - all too often inadequate, difficult ventilation, obnoxious gases, unseen weaknesses in the rock, handling of explosives, leading and hauling muck, etc, might contribute to accidents. In order to avoid hazards, it is necessary to lay down the safety precautions for the use of machinery, electrical installations and labour in tunnels, during the construction period, and arrange for their compliance. This cede has, therefore, been formulate&to lay down the safety rules for tunneling in rocks and soft strata and underground excavations in rocks. This code does not cover tunnels made in connection with mining operations, gassy tunnels ( see 3.1.3 ), and also tunnels made in running ground .( see 2.3 ), where special methods like shield tunneling are adopted. 0.3 This standard was first published in 1968. In this revision, modifications have been made regarding warning signals, sanitation and drinking water facilities inside the tunnels and the concentration of various gases inside Modifications have also been made regarding the personal the tunnel. protective wear of persons entering the tunnel. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with

3

IS: 4756 - 1978
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1.

SCOPE
down the safety requirements in rocks and soft strata. for tunr,eling and

1.1 This standard lays underground excavations

1.2 This code does not cover tunnels made in connection with mining operations, gassy tunnels, and also tunnels made in running ground ( see 2.3 ), where special methods like shield tunneling are adopted.
NOTE - ` Gassy tunnel ' wherever used in this code shall mean a tunnel in any part of which flammable gas is present or is likely to occur including a tunnel which is adjacent to or is approaching any such place,

1.3 Safety operations 2.
2.0

precautions to be observed during blasting are covered separately in IS : 4081-1967t.

and

related

drilling

TERMINOLOGY
For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Soft Strata - It may be classified into three main categories, namely, firm ground, and running ground, as defined under 2.1.1 soft ground, to 2.1.3 [see also 3.1 of IS : 5878 (Part III )-1972$]. 2.1.1 Soft Ground - Ground where bridging period is so short that conventional supports cannot be installed. In some cases of this type it may be possible to increase the bridging time by methods like shotcreting. This type includes soft or squeezing clay, damp sand, certain some formation of decomposed and/or types of gravels or soft earth, treacherous rocks. 2.1.2 Firm Ground-Ground where reasonable bridging period is This type includes soft available for installing the conventional supports. and stratified rocks, such as sand stone, shales, cemented sand and gravel and hard clays. 2.1.3 Running Ground - This is the ground which requires ,special treatIt may be highly crushed rock, dry ment before excavation can be done. sand and gravel, water bearing sand or gravel, silts and muds.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revired). TSafety code for blasting and related drilling operations. $Code of practice for construction of tunnels: Part III soft strata.

Underground

excavation

in

4

IS : 4756 - 1478 3. SAFETY PROGRAMME

-All operations inside the tunnel or shaft shall be The carried out under the immediate charge of a competent foreman. foreman shall also be responsible for the safety arrangements of the work. In larger jobs these responsibilities and functions in respect of safety arrangements may be delegated to an independent qualified and competent A safety supervisor working under the overall control of the foreman. committee shall also be appointed in jobs where 100 or more persons are employed. It shall have at least three members - one each from workers, The com&ttee shall be responsible for supervisors and management. advising safety arrangements of the work and safety supervisor/foreman This committee shall conduct its shall assist in this committee's work. meeting at least once in 15 days and discuss safety problems on the work.

3.1 Safety Personnel

3.1.1 An effective and workable safety programme shall be planned in shall be thoroughly instructed in advance and adhered to. Workmen safety rules and shall be required to follow them at. all times. They shall be required to report immediately any unsafe conditions observed. 3.1.2 The foreman/supervisor appointed to look after the tunneling work may also take the guidance about the bad reaches eipectcd to be met in the tunnel from the geologists so that necessary safety measures could be adopted. 3.1.3 Where the geological data collected so warrants advance probe holes by percussion or core drilling, as required, shall be drilled ahcad of the tunnel faces to locate any gas, flowing mass of rock, nquiferous strata, of gases like methane is geological disturbances, etc. In case presence detected, fLrther tunneling work shall be stopped and the advice of Director General Mines Safety ( DGMS ) shall be sought about the superand additional safety precautions vising personnel to be entertained necessary. 3.1.3.1 Also, if the geological data collected and inl`ormation from other sources indicate presence or likelihood of` gases like mcthanr, aclvicc of DGMS shall be sought as rcfcrred to under 3.1.3. 3.2 Reporting of Accidents - The occurrence of any accident, involving personal injury or of any dangerous incident, such as serious break-down of or damage to any apparatus/equipment shall be reported to the supervisory staff/officers and adequate precautionary measures shall be taken by-the engineer-in-charge to prevent recurrence. An accurate record of such accidents shall be properly maintained. Probable reasons of accidents shall be invrsti:;otctl nlltl prccautionnry IIIC:ISIIKS Tallinn to avoid further recurrence. 5

1S : 4756 - 1978 3.2.1 Accidents occurring during the fortnight shall be discussed in the safety committee ( 3.1) meetings and adequate publicity shall be given to the causes of these accidents and their preventive measures.
4. MEDICAL 4.1 First-Aid AND OTHER Arrangements FACILITIES

4.1.1 Arrangements for rendering prompt and adequate first-aid to the injured persons shall be maintained at every work site under the guidance of a medical officer-in-charge of the project. Depending upon the magnitude of the work the availability of an ambulance at a very short notice ( at telephone call ) shall be ensured. 4.1.2 First-aid arrangements commensurate with the degree of hazard and with the number of workers employed shall be maintained in a readily accessible place throughout the whole of the working hours. At least one experienced first-aid attendant with his distinguishing badge shall be available on each shift to take care of injured pprsons. Arrangements shall be made available for calling the medical officer, when such a need may arise. It is recommended that foreman/assistant foreman/supervisor/ permanent workman who is normally present at each working face in each shift is given adequate trainin g on first-aid methods to avoid cmploymcnt of a separate attendant. 4.1.2.1 Stretchers and other equipment necessary persons shall be provided at every shift and portal. to remove injured

4.1.3 Where there are more than 50 persons working in a shift, effective artificial respiration arrangements shall be provided, with trained men capable of providing artificial respiration. 4.2 Protective Wear

the tunnel shaI1 be provided with 4.2.1 All the persons entering protcctivc wear, such as hclmcts, steel tot safety shot, gum boots or other In tllc CaSC of steeply inclined suitable type of protective foot wear. tunnels and in shafts, safety belts shall also bc provided. 4.2.2 Sign boards 1 x 1.5 m in size with the following erected at the access to these areas: wording shall be

` CONSTRUCTION
THIS POINT

AREA,

HELMET

REQUIRED shall 1~

BEYOND worn 1)~ the

'

4.2.3 No loos? ,~;nrnmcnts 01 rag~:ctl clotlring personrrcl cng;lgc*d ill tlic lunl~cling cqNXntions. 6

IS : 4756 - 1978 4.3 Sanitation and Drinking Water

4.3.1 Sanitation - Unless the worksite is within 500 m of the portal of the tunnel, sanitation facilities shall be provided closeby. Dry closets or water closets or closet cars shall be provided in the tunnel at the scale of one unit for each fifty men in the shift unless it is impracticable. In any case the entire tunnel shall be treated with disinfectants periodically to eliminate unhygienic conditions. Closets shall be effectively and regularly cleaned and disinfectants provided. WaterDrinking water, at least 5 litre per person 4.3.2 Drinkirq employed in the shift, shall he provided near the portal and also inside It shall be stored in a clean container provided with the longer tunnels. tight fitting lid. The use of salt tablets shall be encouraged. 4.3.3 LVashing near the portal. 4.4 Miscellaneous and cleaning facilities shall be provided for all workers

4.4.1 Only the materials required for work in progress shall be kept inside the tunnel. All other materials shall be removed from inside the tunnel and suflicient space of the formation shall be as even as possible and without any obstacles to enable the workers ro get out of the tunnel quickly in case there is any collapse orany other mishap inside the tunnel. 4.4.2 All storage handling and use of flammable liquids shall be under Flammable liquids shall not be stored the srtpervision of qualified persons. inside the tunnel. 4.4.3 All sources flammabie liquids' are and ` X0 SMOKING containing flammable permit free passage of of ignition shall be prohibited in areas where Suitable warning stored, handled and processed. ' signs shall be posted in all such places. Receptacles liquids shall be stacked in such a manner as to air between them.

4.4.4 All combustible materials like rubbish shall be continuously removed from such areas lvhere flammable liquids are stored, handled and processed. All spills of flammable liquids shall be cleared up immediately. Containers of flammable liquid shall be tightly capped. 4.4.5 Fire extinguishers and fire-buckets should be conveniently located and identified. 4.5 appropriate to the hazard

Telephone System - A\telephone system shall be pro:.ided to ensure of communication betlveen all control and quick method locations inside tunnel and portal of the tunnels when ion;-cr than 5c10 m and for sllafts xvhen longer than 50 m.

. . n pw~tlve

7

IS : 4756 - 1978 4.6 Warning Signals - Irrespective of length and bends in the tunnel, arrangements shall be made for transmitting ofwarning signals by any one of the following means:
a) By electrically operated bells, operated by battery/dry cells with the bell placed outside the tunnel and the position of the switch shifting with the progress of the tunneling work. The position of the operating switch although temporary shall be so chosen as to ensure proper accessibility and easy identification. b) By the use of two field ( magnet c) Any other suitable arrangement type ) telephone. like walkie talkie.

4.6.1 Up to 100 m length of the tunnel only one of the systems mentioned above shall be provided whereas in tunnels of length more than 100 m at least two systems shall be installed; the wires running along opposite sides of the tunnel, if practicable. 4.6.2 Red and green lights of adequate size and brightness shall be provided at suitable intervals on straight lengths and curves, cross over points, etc, to regulate the construction traffic. 4.6.3 In all the cases as above the system(s) shall be subject to daily The checks shall be carried out checks regarding proper serviceability. every day immediately prior to the commencement of the tunneling work under the supervision of a responsible person. 5. ELECTRICAL

INSTALLATIONS
Electricity

AND LIGHTING
to the

5.1 The entire electrical
existing 5.2 Indian General

installation shall be carried out according Rules as modified from-time to time.

Provisions
installation shall:

5.2.1 All parts of the electrical

a) have all conductors and contact areas of adequate current carrying capacity and characteristics for the work they may be called upon to do and all joints in conductors shall be properly soldered or otherwise efficiently made; b) be so constructed, installed and maintained as to prevent of fire, external exposition and electric shock; c) be of adequate mechanical tions underground; strength to withstand working danger condithermal

d) be not liable to be damaged by water, dust or electrical, or chemical action, to which they may be subjected;

8

fS : 4756- i97lj;
e) be &ciently insulated or have otherwise protected; and f) be installed at such a location come in contact with the same. not less than all bare that live parts enclosed or

dumpers shall

or wagons

do not in

5.2.2 A passageway front of switchboards.

60 cm wide

be maintained

5.2.3 Rubber mats shall be provided in front and in back of the switch No one shall be permitted at the back of switchboards when the boards. current is on. 5.2.4 In no case, space in front or back of a switchboard to be used as a change `room, locker or storage room. 5.2.5 All electric wires carrying voltage ground shall be in the form of insulated, effectively against abrasion and effectively shall be allowed

440 and above installed underlead covered cables, armoured grounded. bear the

equipment in use shail 5.3 Identification - Each electrical essential details of voltage, amperage and circuit diagrams, etc. 5.4 Protection Against Fire

5*4.1 As far as practicable, combustible material shall not be used in the construction of any room or recess containing electrical apparatus. 5.4.2 No flammable material shall be stored in rooms, recesses or compartments containing electrical apparatus other than telephone, lighting apparatus and `damp-proof apparatus. 5.4.3 Adequate fire extinguishing equipment suitable for use on live parts shall be kept ready for immedrate use in or near any room, recess or compartment containing such parts as will be readily accessible safely for use in case of emergency. These equipment shall be tested at least'once in a month. 5.4.4 On the occurrence of a fire caused by any electrical a fire liable to affect any electrical installation: a) the supply of electricity should be cut off from installation as soon as practicable, and b) the fire shall be attacked as soon as possible nearest available supervisor. 5.4.5 All waste and combustible from the tunnel. rubbish apparatus or or

such apparatus reported at least

and

to the daily

shall be removed

9

fS : 4756-

1978

5.5 Ventilation - All places where -electrical apparatus is installed shall be adequately ventilated in order to ensure proper cooling of the apparatus and dilution of flammable gases ( see also 1.2 ). 5.6 Lighting 5.6.1 Adequate lighting shall be provided at the face and at any other point where work is in progress, at equipment installations, such as pumps, fans and transformers. A minimum of 50 lux shall be provided at tunnel and shaft headings during drilling, mucking and scaling. When mucking is done by tipping wagons running on trolley tracks a minimum of 30 lux shall be provided for eficient and safe working. The lighting in general in any area inside the tunnel or outside an approach road, etc, shall not be less than 10 lux. 5.6.1.1 Emergency lights ( battery operated ) shall be installed at the working faces and at intervals along the tunnel to help escape of workmen in case of accidents. All supervisors and gang-mates shall be provided with cap lamps or hand torches. It shall be ensured that at least one cap lamp or hand torch is provided for every batch of 10 people. 5.6.2 Any obstruction, such as drill carriages, other jumbos and mucking zones in the tunnel shall be well lighted. and drilling

5.6.3 `Temporary LightingMost tunnels are wet or damp providing a perfect ground for short circuits. Electrocutions in tunnels are all too frequent. Steel forms and drill carriages sha.11, therefore, be properly grounded. The switches shall be located on a high ground and these shall be properly grounded. 5.6.4 b) 5.6.5 Use of Hand &amps Underground with strong dust and waterproof, The exterior and shall be non-metallic. portable tools shall be connected shall have proper earthing and Hand lamps shall be: material,` a) equipped c) equipped cover of glass or other transparent

with a strong and guard over the cover. of all lamp sockets

5.6.6 All electrical apparatus including only to an electrical supply system which grounding. 5.7 Notices 5.7.1 and Signs notices The following

shall be kept exhibited

at suitable

places:

a) A notice on the board of 45 x 30 cm prohibiting persons from entering electrical equipment rooms; b) A notice on the board of 45 x 30 cm prohibiting persons from handling or interfering with electrical

unauthorized unauthorized apparatus;

10

IS : 4956 - 197& c) A notice on the board of 60 x 90 cm containing the procedure in case of fire; directions as to

d) A notice on the board of 60 x 90 cm containing directions as to the rescue of persons in contact with live conductors and the restoration of persons suffering from electric shock; and e) A notice specifying the person to be notified in case of. electrical accident or dangerous occurrence, and indicating how to communicate with him. 5.7.2 Suitable warnings shall be placed at all places where contact or proximity to electric equipment can cause danger. with

5.7.3 Telephone lines shall be laid on the opposite of the electric side in the tunnels. No blasting line shall preferably be laid within 3 m of the light and power line; its distance from a telephone line being immaterial so long as insulation can be ensured. 5.7.4 Voltage for lighting in a tunnel should be 125 V between phases as specified for underground lighting in terms of Rule 118(c) of Indian Electricity Rules, 1956. 5.7.5 Adequate number of persons, including all supervisors and electricians shall be adequately trained in the manual application of artificial respiration to persons suffering from electric shock and in particular should be aware of the necessity for immediate and continued application. A board of instructions for artificial respiration shall be hung at a conspicuous place. 6. UNDERGROUND 6.1 Drilling Equipment Safe EXCAVATION

6.1.1 All drilling equipment shall be'kept in good working order. handling and proper lifting methods shall be used. 6.1.2 Only wet drilling shall be permitted.

6.1.3 Jumbos or other drill platforms shall be carefully designed, built The jumbo should be and maintained to provide safe working conditions. provided with a suitable railing around the top deck. - The drilling operations are given below: 6.2 DriIling Operations a) Drilling shall not be resumed after blasts have been fired until a thorough examination has been made by blasting foreman ( head blaster ) to make sure that there are no misfired charges which the drill may strike.

IS : 4756.1978

b) All
C>A

holes shall be of slightly greater of cartridges of explosives used.

diameter

than

the

diameter

drill, pick or bore shall not be inserted in butts of old holes even if examination fails to disclose explosives; separate holes shall be so drilled as to be nowhere less than 30 cm clear distance away from the previous hole. Charging of drilled holes and drilling simultaneously in the same area. shall not be carried out

4

The e> shall

air supply manifolds and the lines of supply to each drill be examined according to the numbers of drilling equipment.

62.1 All explosives are dangerous and shall be handled and used with . care either by or under the direction of competent*persons. It is obviously impossible to include warnings or approved methods for every conceivable situation. It is the responsibility of competent man-in-charge to know and to follow the Indian Explosive Act, 1884 and Explosive Rules, 1940.
6.2.1.1 Care shall be taken in storing, handling, use of explosive, etc, as specified in IS : 4081-1967*. 6.3 Underground Transportation alnd Storage be placed in separate insulated conveyed mechanically and an being conveyed mechanically on areas. For carrying explosives Inspector of Explosives shall be transporting and

6.3.1 Explosives and detonators shall carriers, whether carried by persons or attendant shall ride with the explosives slopes in shafts or in underground work mechanically, prior permission of Chief obtained.

6.3.2 Insulated containers, used for carrying explosives or detonators shall be constructed of finished wood not less than 5 cm thick or plastic not less than 6 mm thick or pressed fibre not less than 10 mm thick. There shall be no metal parts not even nails, screws, bolts, etc, and it shall The container shall be provided be waterproof and provided with lid. with suitable non-conductive carryin, u device, such as rubber, leather or canvas handle or a strap. For use of plastics in the containers for carrying explosives, prior permission of Chief Inspector of Explosives shall be obtained. 6.3.3 Explosives and detonators shall be transported in separate insulated containers, and in separate compartment where rope or locomotive haulage is used. Cars shall not have metal parts exposed on the inside. They shall have an open space of 45 cm between explosive and detonator compartments and nothing shall ever be carried in that space. The car
*Safety code for blasting and related drilling operations.

12

IS : 4756.1978 body and compartments shail bc made of plank not less than 5 cm thick. Doors for the explosive and detonator shall open on opposite sides of the Explosives or car and kept locked except when loading or unloading. detonators may be transported in ordinary cars, if they are placed in separate insulated carriers or compartments or containers. 6.3.4 Cars used for transportation of explosives shall not beyond their rated capacity and explosives shall be so secured shifting of load or dislodgement from car in transit. be loaded to prevent

All cars transporting explosives shall be marked or placarded on both sides and ends with word ` Explosives ' and provided with two red Cars transporting explosives flags and during night by two red lights. shall be equipped with at least two fire extinguishers. 6.3.5 Cars shall be pulled and not pushed when being moved by the locomotive and there shall be at least one empty car between locomotive and the car containing explosives. 6.3.6 Explosives and detonators shall be brought to the working places in separate, tight, well insulated containers, and kept in the containers If drill holes are not ready, until removed for placement, in drill holes. they shall be stored in locked box type magazines located at a safe distance of at least 170 m from the working space. 6.3.7 Wooden explosive cases shall be opened only with wooden mallets and wedges. Metal tools shall not be used. Scooping out or breakage of cartridges and spilling of their contents shall be avoided. 6.3.7.1 No person other than a shot firer shall carry any priming No such cartridges into a shaft, ip which the sinking is in progress. cartridge shall be so carried except in a thick felt bag or other container sufficient to protect it from shock. 6.4 Loading and Blasting

6.4.1 Electric firing shall be done by an approved method. A departure from this may be permitted only with the specific approval of the ehgineerin-charge. 6.4.2 All drilling equipment and shall be removed from the site before round shall be completed by the crew of round shall be the responsibility of personnel not engaged on loading loading of holes start, Loading of a starting the work of loading. Firing the blasting foremen ( head blaster). out

6.4.2.1 Just before loading is started each hole shall be blown with a high pressure air jet to remove loose cuttings and water. 13

IS : 4756- 1978
or stemming a hole, iron or stee 6.4.2.2 In the process of charging tool, scrapper or tamping rod shall not be used, nor shall undue force be Only wooden tamping employrd in pressing the explosive into the hole. Stemming and tamping of sticks shall IX used for tamping the charge. the charge may also be accomplishrd by the use of air jet. 6.4.2.3 No material other long shall be used for blinding same. than and clay sticks sealing the 25 mm dia and 10 cm holes after charging the shall be tested shot firing, the

6.4.2.4 Before use each and every electric detonator for a positive test with the help of an ohm-meter. Before circuit shall bc tested for insulation and for continuity.

6.4.2.5 Before a shot is fired in an underground working place due warning shall be given to persons witltin 330 m in all directions and every entrance to the place where a shot is about to be fired shall be guarded SO 3s to prcvcnt any person, not having received warning from placing himself in dangerous proximity to the shot. 6.4.3 For loading purposes permissible battery lamps. the employees shall be equipped with

6.4.4 Only such explosives as produce less than 4 530 ml of poisonous gas (carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulphide) per 3 s 20 cm cartridge shall be used for underground blasting work. 6.4.5 Approved Used r-or blasting. electrical detonators of known characteristics shall be

6.4.6 As far as possible, blasting shall be carried out using suitable Electric power from the main explotlcr with 25 percent excess capacity. shall bc used only when it is absolutely necessary. 6.4.7 In case electric power is used for blasting, a separate safety switch shall be used and the safety switch shall be kept in closed locked -4 fuse shall be box, the key of which shall be kept with the blaster. provided to be replaced every time a blasting is done. 6.4.8 In case the exploder is used the revolving handle of the exploder to prevent anybody else shall be-in the custody of the blastin g foreman firing the shot when the blasting foreman and other persons are inside. 6.4.9 Stray shall be taken currents may cause fatalities in removing all faults from while loading and electrical circuits. utmost care

6.4.10 Electric power, light and other 70 m of the loading points shall be slvitchcd and before the blasting operation starts. 14

circuits in the vicinity within off after charging the explosive Power supply is to be switched

IS : 4756 - 1978
on only after the blasted foreman for misfires. 6.4.11 All grounded. tracks, air area has been properly lines and vent pipes lighted inspected shall be by the kept blasting properly flood press-

6.4.12 The heading shall be properly lights before and after blasting. 6.4.13 Only one cartridge ed with tampering rod. 6.5 Inspection and Blasting

with the and

electric gently

shall be inserted

at a time

6.5.1 Immediately after a blast has been fired, the firing line shall disconnected from the blasting machine or other source of power.

be

6.5.2 When at least 5 minutes have passed after the blast was fired, a careful inspection of the face shall be made by the blaster to determine if Electric blasting misfires shall not be all charges have been exploded. Other persons examined for at least 15 minutes after failure to explode. shall not be allowed to return to the area of blast until an ` ALL CLEAR ' signal is given by the blasting foreman. 6.5.3 All wires exploded cartridge shall be carefully traced and search made for by the man-in-charge of the blasting operation. to clear any

6.5.4 Sufficient time shall be given for the fumes permitting the labour to work for mucking operations. 6.5.5 Loose pieces of rock and other the sides of the face of excavation proceeding with. the work. 6.6 Misfires

before

debris shall be scaled down from and the area made safe before

6.6.1 Misfired holes shall be dealt with by the blaster same person who had done the charging operations.

preferably

by the

6.6.2 If broken .wircs, faulty connections, or short-circuits are determined as the cause of a misfire, the proper repairs shall be made, the firing line reconnected and the charge fired. This shall be done, however, only after a careful inspection has been made of burdens remaining in such holes and no hole shall be fired when the burden has been dangerously weakened by other shots. 6.6.3 The charge of explosives bored or picked out. from'a misfired hole shall not be drilled, shall be detonated

6.6.4 Misfired charges, tamped with solid material, by the method given in 6.6.4.1, wllcre pr:lcticable.

15

IS : 4756 - 1978
6.6.4.1 The stemming shall be floated out by the use of water or air jet from hose until the hole has been opened to within 60 cm of the charge, and the water shall be pumped out or syphoned off and the new charge Whenever this method is not practicable, a new placed and detonated. hole shall be drilled not nearer than 60 cm and 30 cm shallower which shall then be loaded and det_onated. A careful search shall be made of the unexploded material in the debris of the second charge. In different situations, for example, in congested locations, holes may be drilled nearer provided it is ensured that nowhere the clear distance of the new hole from the misfired hole is less than 50 cm.
6.7

Shaft Excavation 6.7.1 Head Frame -

The head frame ( including hoists, cables, etc) shall be preferably of steel structure and properly designed with sufficient head room and strong enough for possible overload and impact due to sudden drops. 6.7.2 Hoisting Eqtlipment - It shall be thoroughly inspected at least once Suitable standby power a week and maintained in first class condition. supply arrangement or alternate means of working the hoist mechanically A limit switch and a non-failing ( see IS : 807-1963* ) shall be provided. automatic brake shall be provided on the hoist to control speed. 6.7.2.1 There shall be a fencing round the shaft opening at least 90 cm 15 cm high and it shall comprise two rail guards and also a toe board, high to prevent material from falling in. The gate, provided tl`pre, shall be closed except when used for entering or leavipg the shaft or emptying The gate should preferably be automatic. the buckets. 6.7.3 Access Through Shafts bucket use'd for mucking.
-

Persons

shall not be lcwered

or raised

in

6.7.3.1 A special cage or a bucket shall raising personnel during the sinking of a shaft. ladder made out of wire rope shall be provided After the shaft is sunk, a suitable arrangement made in the shaft for access to the shaft and the

be used for lowering or For emergency use strong on one side of the shaft. for the workmen shall be tunnel. as bells or of the shaft ex&bited

means of communication, such 6.7.4 Signals - Reliable whistles shall be maintained at all times between the bottom and the surface and telephone used, wherever possible. 6.7.4.1 Any code of signals used shall be kept conspicuously near workplace or entrance. 6.8

Water Handling -

The methods

given below shall be followed:

formations shall be made a) A study of borin, u data and geological to have an indication of locations, where water can be expected.
of cranes

*Code of practice for
and hoists.

design,

tnsnufacture,

erection

and testing

( structwal

portion

)

16

IS : 4756 - 1978 b) Water inflow may be reduced or even entirely stopped by grouting off the wet seams. A wet area covering more than a single seam shall be scaled off by installing a suitable section of concrete lining. c) In case of a steady flow of water from the roof or side of the tunnel the flow shall bc deflected down the sides to sumps by metal shields. d) The number of pumps provided at site shall be 50 percent more than the requirements calculated on the basis of the estimated pumping needs or at least one whichever is more. e) In case of steeply inclined quick exit in case of failure f) tunnels steps of haulage. shall be provided for

Gutters and sumps shall be kept clean. Suitable arrangement shall be made to indicate the position of sumps in case tunnel invert is flooded. and Mechanical Equipment

6.9 Machinery

6.9.1 The signalman shall be instructed in his duties and.. positioned so as to have a clear view of the rear of the truck, the operator and the operation. 6.9.2 All equipment having a drop type skip pan shall be provided with guards on both sides and open end of the skip pan area, to prevent persons from walking under the skip while it is in an elevated position. 6.9.3 Platforms, footwalks, steps, guardrails, shall be provided on machinery and equipment footing and access ways. 7. VENTILATION 7.1 Necessity - The purpose of ventilation in tunnels is to make the working space safe for workers by keeping the air fresh and respirable and by eliminating harmful and obnoxious dust, dynamite fumes and other gases ( see 1.2 ). 7.1.1 the air through 7.2 Mechanical ventilation shall be adopted where necessary to force in or exhaust the air out from the working face to the portal a pipe to achieve the safety as laid down in 7.2 and 7.3. Requirements handholds and toe-boards as necessary, to ensure safe

Purity

7.2.1 The ventilation is required to remove polluted air, gases and. smoke produced b$ explosives, dust formed by the disintegration of rock, exhaust gases from the diesel operated equipment like locomotives, 17

IS : 4756 - 1978 dumpers, trucks, shovels, etc, and also to ensure temperatures than 40�C dry and 29�C wet at the working place ( see I.2 ). of not more

702.2 The concentration of various by volume shall be as follows:
a) Oxygen b) Carbon
C) Carbon

gases in atmosphere

inside the tunnel

-

not less than -

19.5 percent. percent. 0.5 percent. the ).

monoxide dioxide fumes -

not more than 0.005

not more than

d) Nitrogen

not more than 0.000 5 percent.

e) Methane - not more than 0.5 percent at any place inside tunnel, for example, in a cavity in the roof, etc ( see also 3.1.3 f) .Hydrogen g) Aldehyde sulphide not more than O+OOl percent. not more than 0.000 2 percent. as formaldehyde

7.2.3 Z-e&g - The tests shall be carried out once every 24 hours but in any case after every blast or a major rock-fall. In case any of the gases mentioned in 7.2.2 are detected to have crossed the threshold value indicated therein, the wdrkmen shall be withdrawn immediately till the percentage is brought down well below the threshold value by improving the ventilation or by other effective measures. 7.2.3.1 Records for the tests of gases as also for temperature measurements and ventilation measurements shall be properly maintained. 7.3 Dust Control - Adequate steps shall be taken to prevent the liberation, accumulation and the propagation of air-borne dust. Only wet drilling shall be permitted inside the tunnel and other underground works. I3esides wet drilling, there shall be adequate ventilation `for dust control and periodidal medical check up of the workers, working in the tunnel Such check shall be at shall be done to check up their physical fitness. least once in three months and the results recorded in the registers provided for the purpose. 7.3.1 The air-borne dust concentration at the working face shall be tested once a month and if the air-borne concentration of total dust exceeds If required water 10 mg/m3 ventilation shall be adequately improved. spraying of- the air'-borne dust will be resorted to.

NOTE - It is assumed that the air-borne dust is mainly nuisance dust containing not more than 1 percent free Silica and also dors not contain other toxic impurities.

7.4 Volume

of Air Required

7.4.1 Ventilation and exhaust system for tunnel and shaft excavation shall be of suirlcient capacity to maintain an adequate supply of uncontaminated pure air at all points in the tunnel or shaft. The design of ventilation system shall provide for size and design of diesel engines to 18

IS : 4756 - 19%
be

used as well as for safe hygienic limits for exposure of employees multiple toxic and objectionable gases in the tunnel or shaft. 7.4.2 a) The volume Length of air required shall depend on the following: of heading, and amount of explosives used,

to the

b) Size of tunnel. c) Type d) Frequency of blasting, and e) Temperature and humidity: On tunnel work 4.25 ms of air/min/man is usually considered the In addition to this 2.00 1~13 of air/min shall be minimum requirement. supplied for such brake horse power of diesel locomotive or other diesel engine used in the tunnel. Where the temperature is high or heavy blasting is resorted to suitably augmented volume of air shall be provided. 8. SCALING

AND MUCKING

8.1 Scaling 8.1.1 After blasting inside a tunnel or a shaft scaling shall not commence unless the roof and walls of the tunnel and sides of the shaft are carefully inspected by a tunnel foreman.
8.1.2 Scaling shall be performed only by the the direct supervision of a competent supervisor. experienced crews under

8.1.3 If the structure of the rock is weak, poor or structurally defective it shall be adequately supported by providing either rock bolts or timber or steel supports with proper lagging and back filling and or by shot creting. Also, if the tunnel excavation is in clay, silt, sand or weak layers, the strata shall be supported by well designed members either of wood or steel immediately before further excavation is undertaken. The construction of concrete lining wherever provided for these purposes should follow There should not be a prolonged time closely the excavation operations. interval between the two operations as the risk of accidents increases with such delays. 8.1.3.1 For tunneling in soft strata, the provisions of IS : 5778 ( Part III )-1972* shall be followed in respect of quick supporting of such strata ( see also 2 ). 8.2 Periodical Inspections

8.2.1 More accidents in tunneling result from rock falls than from any Except for prematured explosions, rock falls are also perhaps other cause. the most serious of all tunnel accidents. *Code of practice for construction of tunnels: Part III Underground excavation in
soft strata.

19

1s : 4756 - 1978 8.2.2 Careful and frequent inspection of walls and roofs as well as of Thorough scaling of loose rocks at tunnel supports shall be carried out. all weak spots are the best preventives against the rock falls. Periodic inspection of untimbered sections of the tunnel from a travelling scaling Supported sections platform shall be carried out for locating weak spots. shall also be inspected regularly -to make sure that the weakness of the Lposened rock shall be formation has not spread beyond the supports. All supports shall be checked occasionally supported/removed forthwith. to make sure that there is no member under distress. All scaling platforms shall be equipped with safe ladders. 8.3 Mucking

8.3.1 The loading zones shall be well lighted `and workmen shall be kept away from the vicinity of the cars being loaded to prevent injury due to rock falling off the car. 8.3.2 Loading of muck into either cars or dumpers shall be done evenly, and the muck shall not be piled dangerously high above the sides. 8.4 Rolling Stock Track

8.4.1 As far as possible, electric power shall preferably be used. Whenever diesel engines are used, they shall be provided with suitable filters, scrubbers, etc, to remove all carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen, etc. Petrol engines shall not be used. 8.4.2 Use of rolling equipment with link couplers shall not bc permitted. Rocker or cradle type dump cars shall be provided with a positive type lock to prevent accidental dumping in mucking yards, 8.4.3 The trolley tracks shall be properly junctions and adequately maintained. 8.4.4 At each provided. 8.4.5 Deadman to check accidents end of the track suitable laid with points, blocks or crossings shall and be

buffers

switches or other installation necessary occurring due to runway muck cars.

shall be provided

8.4.6 Trains shall be operated with care and at a speed under control If the locomotive is pushing a string of cars, a of the operator at all times. man shall ride in the front equipped with a whistle and a hash light for warning men along the track and for signalling the locomotive operator. It shall 8.4.7 Every locomotive shall have a head light on each end. be equipped with a whistle or horn with a tone of sufficient volume to be heard by men along the track when the air drills are working. 20

IS : 4756 - 1978 8.4.8 The crew, working tip wagons on trolley tracks shall be given whistles so that they can announce the movement of tip wagons by blowing the whistles. 8.4.9 A shovel shall never be left unattended brakes not set. When it is necessary to park shall be securely blocked. The operator while remove ignition key and keep with him or hand person so that the machine cannot be operated with engine running and it on a sloping ground, it leaving the machine shall it over to some responsible by unauthorized persons.

8.5 Transport of Material - Cars carrying pipe, rail and timber shall be properly loaded for safe passage through the tunnel. The load shall be kept within the side limits for the car. Loads projecting over the sides are dangerous to men working in the tunnel. If wide' loads are transported, a special care shall be ensured in the operation of the train with ample warning to the workmen along the track to ensure a safe journey. to ride on 8.6 Transport of Employees - No one shall be allowed front steps of a loco or on a coupling. None other than trainmen shall ride the dump cars in going to and from work at change of shift or at any other time. A safe and smooth walkway system shall be provided for pedestrians. 8.7

Concreting, Grouting and Guniting

.

8.7.1 Usual safety precautions that are taken for concreting in open shall be applicable for the concreting of tunnels, shafts and other underground works also.
8.7.2 In addition, the following precautions pumpcrete or pneumatic placer is used: shall be taken where the

4

The scaffolding supporting the pipe shall be designed to carry the pipe when filled with concrete plus 100 percent overload plus the estimated weight of the maximum number of workmen that may work on the pipes while the pump is operating. A factor of safety of 4 shall then be used. T.he pipe line shall be anchored at all curves and near the end. The toggle and flange connections shall be inspected before each placement to ensure tight joints. Air-release valves shall be installed at high points to release entrapped air. The use of these valves will assist in preventing line plugging and in turn reduce accident possibilities. Pipes and hose used to convey grout shall be of proper size and strength to safely withstand the maximum operating pressures. Pumps shall not be operated at pressures above their rated capacity. 21

b)

cl

IS : 4756 - 1978 d) Cleaning of pipe line shall be carefully done. or guniting operations for all

e) All workmen in the vicinity of sand blasting shall wear goggles and respirators. f)

Adequate lighting and ventilation shall be provided galleries and shafts where grouting is in progress.

8.8

Pathways In large tunnels the walk ways shall be placed shall to the side of at

8.8.1 track. 8.8.2 suitable

In long tunnels, intervals during

shelter places for workmen hauling operations.

be provided

8.9 Public Safety - Shaft sinking and tunneling fascinate the public. -4uthorized visitors shall be equipped with safety hats and shall be accompanied by a guide competent to keep the visitors out of dangerous situations,

22

BUREAU
Headquarters

OF :

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bl~avan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams Telephones : 331 01 31 Regional Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branch 331 13 75 Offices : (Common

: Manaksansths
to all Offices) Telephone 331 01 3! I 331 13 75 37 86 62 21843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: Manak Bhavan, 9. Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg
NEW DELHI 110002 - 1114 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. ' V.I.P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol. Andheri (East). BOMBAY 400093 Offices : 380001

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD Peenya industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road. BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003

2 63 48 39 49 55 55 40 21 5 36 27 2 67 05 E-71 19 96 3 31 77 231083 6 34 71 21 68 76 5 55 07 6 23 05 6 21 04

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 Kalai Kathir Building, 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking Centre, N.H, IV, N.I.T,, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, ( Nampally Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 RI4 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Nagar, Kanpur Rosa. Plot No. A-9, House LUCKNOW 226005 Patliputra Industrial No. 561/63. Estate, PATNA Sindhu 800013 Bagh-e-Ali Maidan.

District Industries Centre Complex, SRINAGAR 190011 T. C. No. 14/1421, University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM /nspection Offices (With

P. 0.. Palayam. 695034

Sale Point)

:
52 51 71 5 24 35

Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Naaar Sauare. NAGPUR 440010 Institution of IEngineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411006

-

`Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowrinahee P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t Sales Office is at 1 Sales Office BANGALORE is at Uniw Building,

Aooroach. " Square.

27 68 00 89 65 28 22 39 71

Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY
Narasimharaja

Reprography

Unit,

BIS,

New Delhi,

India

