**************** 



* tOT£ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 8765 (1978) : Ceramic insulating materials for electrical 
purposes [ETD 6: Electrical Insulators and Accessories] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




5fR TT^ ^TT <sMHI | *ft ^fft ^TRT ^ff ^TT ^T^fT )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<*i *3f», 




*?W!& 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 87*5- 1978 

Indian St and an i < Re**™* 2004 » 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

■RRAMfC INSULATING MATERIALS FOR 

ELECTRICAL PURPOSES 



Firu Rcprtnt JULY IW 



UPC 62T3t5 6t2 




© Capyright 1983 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK &HAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFA.R MARC1 

MBW DELHI 1 10002 

€t 6 Stpsembtr 1978 



«t 8765 -1*78 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

CERAMIC INSULATING MATERIALS FOR 

ELECTRICAL PURPOSES. 

Electrical Insulators and Accessories Sectional Committee, ETDG 3 

Chairman Representing 

Shri L. C. jArN Ministry of Energy 

Members 
Sum V. R. Amanthaharayanan B««gal Potteries Limited, Calcutta 

Sum Ghandar Pabkash ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. Bhaduri Narionai Test House, Calcutta 

■Shri S K Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri 3. N. Bhaoat All India Pottery Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri B. C Daw ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chabhal Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. T. Chari Tag Corporation, Madras 

Shri A. K. Chopra Punjab State Electricity Board. PatiaLa 

Shri NirvairSimoh ' Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Dsb Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta 

Shri A C Bose {Alternate) 
Director ov Research Maharashtra Slate Electricity Board, Bombay 

Director ( Traction and Ins- Research, Designs Sl Standards Organization 
tailatiok) ( Ministry of Railways), Lucknow 

Joint Director 1 Standards, T-l 
( Alternate ) 
Director ( Transmission ) Central Electricity Authority, N«-w Delhi 

Deputy Director ( Transmission ) 
( Alternate ) 
General Manager (T), Posts S. Directorate General of PoJts & Telegraphs ( Depart- 
Tf.leoraphs, Jabalpur ment of Communications ), New Delhi 

Director of Telegraphs (L) 

( Alternate ) 
Divisional Emhneek, 1eis.oaa.vw (C) 
( Alternate ) 
Shri B. N. Ghosh Bharat Heavy Electrical* Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri R. D. Jajn Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 



Shri P. Rao ( AlutnaU ) 



( Continued on page 2 } 



9 Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Thit publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or id part by any moans except with written permission of the 
publisher thall be deemed to be to infringement of copyright under the laid Act* 



( Cmtimud/nm pagi 1 ) 

Mrmbtrs Hiprtsntiag 

Shri H, M. S. Linoaiah Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 

Shri G. S. Mahaqaonkar Mysore Porcelains Ltd, Bangalore 

Dh G. M. Phadu Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, 

Bombay 
Sbii C. R. Varum (AlUncU) 
Smi P. S. Raman NGEF Ltd, Bangalore 

Shu E. P. Wojkrrd ( Altsrnatt ) 
Shu T. V. Ramdom Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madrat 

Shu V. K. Asluituoam ( Alttrnatt ) 
Skri M. SAtncASAUNOAif Directorate General of Supplies and Diipoiali 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Skri N. 3. Seethukamon W. S. Insulators of India Ltd, Madras. 

Shiu V. Srmvaiam ( Alttrnatt } 
Smu Surrhdra Singh U. P. Government Pottery Development Centre, 

Khurja 
Smu T. B. L. Srivabtava ( Alttrnatt) 
Da V. S. Sinoh High Tension Insulator Factory, Ranchi 

Shri A. D. Dua ( AlttmaU * 
Shri L. VfiNXATASUBBif Seihanyee Industries Ltd, South Arcot District 

\ Shw R. V. Acwthan ( Alttrnatt ) 

Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI J Ex-sjjicio Mtmbtt ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Surekny 

Shri R. C. Jain 

Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 

Panel for Ceramic Materials for General Electrical Purposes, 
ETDG 3 : P6 

Cononur 
Shri M. L. Mittai. Bharat Heavy Electrical* Ltd, Bhopa 1 

Mtmbtrt 

Shri S. P. Sinoh ( Alttrnatt to 
Shri M. L. Mittai ) 
Shri G. Kudhnaffa Mysore Porcelains Ltd, Bangalore 

Dr U. S. Sinoh High Tension Insulator Factory, Ranchi 

Shri A. D. Dua ( ASttmaU ) 
Shri E. Thompson W. S. Insulators of India Ltd, Madras 



IS 1 8765 -Wt 

Indian Standard 

SPECIHCATION FOR 

CERAMIC INSULATING MATERIALS FOR 

ELECTRICAL PURPOSES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standard! 
Institution on 21 February 1978, after the draft finalized by the Electrical 
Insulators and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the 

Electro technical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended mainly for designers of electrical equipment 
like insulators and bushings except for equipment required for telecom* 
mumcation and allied purposes for which a separate Indian Standard 
( IS : 6659-1971* ) is available. It provides, as far as possible, methods of 
test to permit comparison of technical data of ceramic materials used for 
the manufacture of insulators and bushings. Specialized capacitor 
materials are not covered. This standard does not provide all the testa 
appropriate to materials intended for refractories and gas-tight envelopes. 

0.3 It is important to recognize that the values for physical properties 
given as qualifying limits in the standard are specific for the test specimens 
employed when tested by the methods described. It should not bo as- 
sumed that any test condition represents a safe working condition. 

0.4 This standard is based on the properties of good quality materials 
which are commercially available. It is not always possible to manufac- 
ture every material specified in this standard in all shapes and sizes, and 
the characteristics of a particular component m<«le of a ceramic material 
depends on whether it is made by pressing a granulated material ( pressed 
material) or by shaping a plastic material ( plastic material). Such limit- 
ations should be discussed with the manufacturers of ceramic materials at 
the time of enquiry. 

£ It has been considered unnecessary to specify methods of test for some 
inherent characteristics of ceramic materials, but the following may be of 
interest to some users of these materials. 

0.5.1 Ceramic materials are resistant to deterioration from electric arc 
unless the heat generated is so intense that it causes fusion of the material 

* Specification for ceramic insulating material- for telecommunication and «1ii»»i 
purpoKS. 



IS 1 8765 -1978 

or thermal spalling. Tests devised for organic materials, such as plasto- 
meri and elastomers, do not apply to ceramic materials. Ceramic material] 
are non-tracking, as a result of their inorganic composition and refractory 
nature. 

0.5.2 All ceramic materials within the scope of this standard are resis- 
tant ta hydrolysis and they are generally resistant to attack by chemicals 
(with the exception of hydrofluoric acid). It is commonly arranged 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser that ceramic materials, 
required to be physically and chemically stable, shall not show obvious 
signs of deterioration when maintained under agreed conditions, designed 
to simulate service conditions. 

0.5.3 The materials covered by this standard are highly resistant to 
abrasion and have a hardness of 7 to 9, measured on Moh's scale. 

0.5.4 These materials are normally of excellent dimensional stability, 
but a few rare caws arc known where there has been a definite dimensional 
change or obvious sign of deterioration over a considerable period of time. 
It is not at present practicable to specify a test for checking this. 

0.6 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
BS 1598: 1964 ' Specification for ceramic insulating materials for general 
electrical purposes', issued by the British Standards Institution. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test, shall be rounded orTin accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers ceramic materials, either moulded, cast or 
extruded, to be used in the manufacture of bushings and insulators. It 
orovides a classification of these materials based on their electrical 
characteristics. 

It specifies limits and methods of test for electrical, mechanical, 
thermal and other general properties of the materials. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 
•Rula for rounding off numerical vaJua ( rteistd ) . 

4 



18 > 8765 - 1978 

2.1 Ceramic Material* — Inorganic materials which are consolidated 
into the final vitreous state (ra26) by application of heat while subs- 
tantially retaining their unfired shape. 

2.2 Pressed Process — A process of shaping ceramic materials by means 
of pressing the material, in granulated or powder form, in a die. 

2.3 Plaatic Process — A process of shaping ceramic materials by means 
of extrusion, jelleying or casting followed, when necessary, by turning. 

2.4 Dielectric Dissipation Factor — It is the tangent of the loss angle 
( tan S). 

2.5 Temperature Coefficient of Capacitance — The temperature 
coefficient of capacitance, over a range of T\G to T^G is equal to 

>,* , y — parts per million per °C 
t«i \ 'x—ii ) 

where 

Cx — the capacitance of sample at T\C, and 
Cj ™ is the capacitance of sample at Tg'C. 

Nor* — The temperature coefficient of capacitance of the materia) ii identical with 
that of a capacitor, having the material at dielectric, and constructed in such a manner 
that change of capacitance with temperature u solely determined by the properties of 
the dielectric and not by the electrode*. This implies that the electrodes should 
consist of thin continuous rectal films firmly attached to (he surface of material to 
that thermal expansion of the electrodes is controlled by the dielectric. 

2.6 Vitreous — Ceramic materials are termed vitreous if they show an 
increase in weight of less than 0'5 percent when subjected to water absorp- 
tion test as described in Appendix M. 

Non 1 — Materials with zero apparent porosity are impermeable. 

Notk 2 — The term 'vitreous' is Dot strictly accurate, but it is convenient for the 
purpose of this specification. 

2.7 Standard Deviation — The square root of the quotient obtained by 
dividing the sum of square of deviation of the observation from their mean 
by the number of observations. 

If jf 1( jf t x B are then observations with mean *, then standard 

deviation is calculated as : 



V" 



<*—*)■ 



ZA Coefficient off Variation — The ratio of the standard deviation to 
the absolute value of the arithmetic mean. 

Note; — This ratio may be expressed as a percentage. 

5 



IB 1 87*5-19711 

2& Mean ( Arithmetic Mean ) — Sum of the values of the observations 
divided by the number of observations. 

If xj, *£ .<*n are n values, then the arithmetic mean is 

calculated as : 

_ ^ x t +* a + x a 

n 

2.10 Geometric Mean — The positive nth root of the product of n 
observations. 

If x\, *a .x B are n values, the geometric mean is calculated 

at: 

l^ 

GM = ( »t X *j X X| Xn) " = A / Xi X x» ..- *, 



•-tf 



3. CLASSIFICATION 



3.1 The materials covered by this standard are classified according to the 
characteristics specified in Table 1. 

4- TEST REQUIREMENTS 

1.1 The material shall meet the requirements of the following tesn: 

a) Dielectric dissipation factor and permittivity («« 5.1 ), 

b) Power frequency electric withstand strength ( set 5.3 ), 

c) Surface resistivity ( set 5.4 ), 

d) Volume resistivity ( set 5.5), 

e) Cross-breaking strength { us 6.1 ), 

f ) Coefficient of linear expansion ( st* 7.1 ) , and 

g) Porosity ( st* 8.1 ). 

4.2 The test values of ceramic materials arc dependant to some extent on 
the preparation of test specimens used. The test specimens used shall 
therefore be prepared by process similar to that to be used in production 
( that is, by pressing or plastic methods as applicable ). The specimens, 
however, shall not be glazed. 

4.3 The preparation and conditioning of test pieces shall be done in 
accordance with Appendix A. 



■ 

3 

S 

8 



HI 

i 



« E « « 

' a— s 



! 



13 -= 



fa 
3 



s 



I 



3 






I I K 



Jse~e 



3°3c ft 



a 

e 



SS 38 S3 ££ 



SS 



Hi* 

pi,? 

£ ■ R _E 



a 
2 



a 



ills. I 



1 

> 






E 5 < s t» I 

s 1 3 l#i 

9 - o 






Mb* irt in 



US' 



6* 







so 
8& 




£2 


PICO 
QOQO 


3 a 

J* 

fia. 


£E 


el 


"§3 

O.P. 


sua. 


11 

S.0, 






I s 



s 

i-l 



c3 

o 

• I— I 



tZ3 

■ i— i 

cd 
Oh 



T3 

C/3 
'cd 

a 

• i-H 

bo 

• i— i 

S-i 

O 






£5:8765-1978 

5. ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES 

5.1 Dielectric Dissipation Factor and Permittivity — The material 
shall be tested at a frequency of 1 MHz by the method described in 
Appendix B. 

The results shall be stated as the mean value of (a) permittivity, and 
(b) dielectric dissipation factor, and shall meet the requirements given 
in Table 1 ■ 

Nore — The tut may alio be used for other frequencies, between 50 Hz and 
10 kHa by the methods described for audio frequencies, or between 10 kHz and 30 
MHz by the methods described for radio frequencies, la such cases suitable limits 
should be agreed between the supplier and the purchaser. 

5.2 Temperature Coefficient of Capacitance of a Material Over a 
Given Temperature Range 

3.2.1 When required by the purchaser, the material shall be tested by 
the method described in Appendix C. The results shall be stated as the 
temperature coefficients of capacitance of the three specimens over the 
range 20 — 85°C. Other temperature ranges may be specified by agreement 
between the purchaser and the supplier. With repeated temperature 
cycles the above measurements may disclose non-cyclic variations of capa- 
citance with temperature. If necessary, agreement on this point should be 
reached between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

5.2.2 Where the temperature coefficient of permittivity i<s required, this 
may be obtained from the following relationship: 

Temperature coefficient 1 Temperature coefficient of capacitance 

of permittivity J — coefficient of thermal expansion 

5 J Power Frequency Electric Withstand Strength — The material 
shall'be tested by the method described in Appendix D, and shall with- 
stand the voltage given in Table 1 . 

5.4 Surface Resistivity — The material shall be tested by the methods 
described in Appendix £. The results shall be stated as mean surface 
resistivity in megohms, and shall meet the requirements given in Table 1. 

5.5 Volume Resistivity — The material shall be tested by the methods 
described in Appendix F, and unless otherwise agreed the test shall be 
made only at 27'C. The results shall be stated as mean volume resistivity, 
in magohm-centimetres, together with the temperature of test, and shall 
meet the requirements given in Table 1. 

C. MECHANICAL PROPERTIES 

C.l Cross-Breaking Strength — The material shall be tested by the 
method described in Appendix G- The results shall be stated as mean 
cross-breaking strength in N/mm*, together with the coefficient of variation, 
and shall meet the requirements, given in Table 1 . 



IS 1 8765 -1978 

6.2 Compreaaive Strength — When required by the purchaser the 
materials shall be tested by the method described in Appendix H. The 
results shall be stated as ' mean compressive strength*, in N/imn , J together 
with the coefficient of variation, and shall meet the requirements given in 
Table 1. 

7. THERMAL PROPERTIES 

7.1 Coefficient of Linear Expansion — The material shall be tested by 
the method described in Appendix J. The results shall be stated as mean 
coefficient of linear expansion over the temperature range, X 10 € per *C, 
and shall meet the requirements given in Table 1. 

7.2 Maiimom Thermal Shock Temperature — When required by 
the purchaser the materials shall be tested by the method described in 
Appendix K. The results shall be stated as maximum thermal shock 
temperature in °C and the limits shall be agreed between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer. 

8. GENERAL PROPERTIES 

8*1 Porosity — The materials shall be tested in accordance with the 
method described in Appendix L or M as applicable, and shall meet the 
requirements given in Table 1. 

The results shall be stated as-' 

a) Penetration in fuchsin dye test, or 

b) Water absorption. 

9. GUIDANCE FOR SELECTION OF CLASSES OF MATERIALS 
AND PROCESSES 

9.1 The guidance for selection of classes of material and process for 
different application is given in Table 2. 

TABLE 2 SELECTION OF CLAMBft OF MATERIAL AMD PROCESS 

Type or Equipment Clajs or Matuuai. Tvtb or Pjuxso 

(1) (2) (3) 

High voltage insulator- ClaaKf 3, 4, 5 and 6 Plaitic methods 

(glazad) 

Low voltage insulators Clasw* 1 to 6 Die prating 

(glazed or unglaxed ) 

10 



Q 1 8765-1*78 

APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 4.3, B-3, D-3, E-3 and F-3 ) 

PREPARATION AND CONDITIONING OP TEST PIECES 

A-l. CLE AMINO 

A-l .1 Before conditioning, clean the test pieces free from surface duit and 
grease. 

A-2. GONDITIONINO 

A-2.0 The teat pieces shall be conditioned as follows. 

A-2.1 Dry C*s*dlti*Muasr — Unless otherwise specified, condition the test 
pieces for 18 to 24 hours in an atmosphere at 27 ± 5°C and 65 ± 5 per- 
cent relative humidity. 

A-2.2 Wet CvssslitiamJng — Immerse the test piece in distilled water at 
a temperature of 23 ± 5°G for 18 Go 24 hours. Remove the test piece, 
wipe its surface dry and commence die test after the test piece has been 
exposed to room conditions for 10 minutes. 

A-2.3 Hot CosMUtsoudag — Heat the test piece in an oven or furnace in 
air to the specified temperature, the time of heating being sufficient to 
ensure that the whole test piece has reached that temperature. Carry out 
the test in the oven or furnace at the specified temperature. 
A-2.4 Groand Conditioning — When it is desired to measure the 
characteristics of a ceramic material with a ground surface, grind the test 
piece on the relevant portions to a state of finish as nearly as possible 
similar to that which would be used in practice. 

After grinding, clean the test piece by washing in water and a 
suitable solvent and then heat to a temperature of at least 500°C. Subject 
the test piece to the appropriate conditioning before testing. 

Norm — When the application of a ceramic material makd it necessary to li Insalin 
the propcrtiei under condition* other than the standard condition, itate this at the time 
of enquiry. 

APPEND IX B 

( Table 1, and Clause 5.1 ) 

DETERMINATION OP DIELECTRIC DISSIPATION FACTOR 
AND PERMITTIVITY 

B-l. Test Pieces — The test piece is a flat disc having dimensions giving 
a suitable capacitance for the apparatus used. 

For the measurement of permittivity, grind the disc to bring the 
opposite faces flat and parallel. 

II 



It 18765-1978 

B-2. Electrodes — The electrodes are of one of the following; forms: 

a) Fired-on silver films of adequate thickness, of the type commonly 
applied to ceramic materials; 

b) Metal films of adequate thickness deposited in vacuo either by 
sputtering or volatilization; 

Not* — These films should be non-oxidizable and of high conductivity. 

c) Mercury; and 

d) Tinfoil, applied using the smallest possible amount of petroleum 
jelly or silicons grease as adhesive. 

B-3. Conditioning of Test Pieces — Condition the test piece in 
accordance with Appendix A. 

B-4. Test Conditions — Carry out the test at room temperature and in 
a dry atmosphere. 

B-5. Frequency — Make the measurement at a frequency of I MHz or at 
audio frequencies if so required. 

B-6. Apparatus and Method of Measurement — - For tests at audio and 
radio frequencies use the apparatus and method specified in IS : 4486-1967 • 
or any other method which may be shown to give the same results. 

B-7. Number of Test Pieces — Three test pieces shall be tested. 

B4J. Results — State the mean of the three results for the requirements 
of 5.1 and also the temperature at the time of the test. 

APPENDIX C 

( Table 1, and Clause 5.2.1 ) 

DETERMINATION OF TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT OF 
CAPACITANCE OF THE MATERIAL 

C-l. Test Pieces — The test pieces are of dimensions giving a suitable 
capacitance for the apparatus used. 

C-2. Electrodes — The electrodes are of one of the following forms: 

a) Thin continuous films of fired-on silver of adequate thickness, of 
the type commonly applied to ceramic materials, or 

b) Metal films of adequate thickness deposited in vacuo either by 
sputtering or volatilization. 

The electrodes completely cover the appropriate surfaces of the test 
piece. 

* Recommended methods for the determination of the permittivity and dielectric 
dissipation factor of electrical insulating materials at power, audio and radio frequencies 
including metres wavelengths. 

12 



IS 1 8765. 1»78 

C-3. Conditioalns; of Test Pieces — Condition the test piece in a tempe- 
rature of 105 ± 20°G for at least 2 hours. 

C-4. Frequency — Make the measurement at a frequency of approxi- 
mately 1 MHz. 

C-5. Test Condition — Make the measurement in conditions of low 
relative humidity at temperatures of 27 ± 5°C, 85 ± 5°C and then again at 
27 ± 5°C or at a series of temperatures agreed between the manufacturer 
and the purchaser. 

C-6. Method of Measurement — Use any method and apparatus 
having the requisite stability and sensitivity for measuring small capaci- 
tance change. 

If the measurement is made by connecting the test piece in the 
tuning circuit of an oscillator, ensure that the driving circuit of the cecil- 
lator is such that the frequency of oscillation is independent of the power 
factor of the capacitors in the tuning circuit. No well-known oscillator 
meets this condition exactly, hut the transitron meets it nearly enough for 
most purposes. Take precautions to prevent the deposition of moisture in 
the heating and cooling process and Co keep the apparatus free from 
draught. 

C-7. Number of Test Pieces — Three test pieces shall be tested. 

C-8. Results — State the temperature coefficients of the three test pieces. 



APPENDIX D 

( Table 1, and Clause 5.3 ) 

ELECTRIC WITHSTAND STRENGTH AT POWER 
FREQUENCY 

D-I, Test Pieces* - — The test piece is as shown in Fig. 1. 

D-2. Electrodes — The electrodes are one of the following: 

a) Thin continuous films of fircd-on silver of adequate thickness on 
the areas indicated in Fig. 1, or 

b) Metal films of adequate thickness deposited in vacuo either by 
sputtering or volatilization. 

D-3. Condition of Teat Pieces — Condition the test pieces in accordance 
with Appendix A. 

*The tot piece or the unmenion medium may not necesunly be suitable for a te»t 
to determine the breakdown f (length of the material. 

13 



»itMS.197S 



$H.VEREP ARE* 



Vfih 



__ 26 



1A Small Six* Ttrt Pl«c. 




3)Ufi1ttt A^A 



1B Bi9t*r3li«TMtrtM» 
All dinMDiionf in i 



Fto. 1 Form of Tut Piece and Euemmt for DmrnMnumoM 
of Power Frequency Electric Strrhoth 

D-4. I»tiwrsion Medina** — Carry out the tot with the test pieces im- 
mersed in transformer oil conforming to the requirement! of IS : 335-1972f. 

•The te»t piece or the immenwa medium may not ncceuarily be luiiable for ■ teit to 
determine the breakdown itrength of the material. 

tSpccification for new iniuUling oili Tor transformeri and iwitchgetr ( atmtd rtritim ) . 



14 



Ilit7t3-Ii7t 

D-5. Method of ||MrarMU*t-The test voltage m alternating and of 
a frequency in the range 48 Ha to 62 Ha. It if of approximately one 
wave form and the ratio of the peak value to the ran value h within the 
limits of 

V2~ ( 1 ± 005 ) that ii 1*33 to 1'49 

The test voltage is expressed at its peak value divided by vT* * D ^ *• 
determined by means of a peak or. other type of voltmeter connected acfoai 
the output winding of the transformer. Alternatively it may be measured 
by means of a voltmeter connected across the input winding or across a 
portion of the output winding or across a special voltage winding. 
Whichever method u adopted, check the voltage measuring equipment, if 
necessary, against a sphere gap connected to the output of the testing 
transformer. For details of this method make reference to IS : 1876-1961*. 

Apply the voltage between the electrodes and raise to the rull test 
voltage given in Table 1 at rapidly as is consistent with its value being 
observed within the limits of accuracy and without any transient cver- 
voftage. Maintain the test voltage for 1 minute. 

D-4. Number of Teat Place* — Six tost pieces shall be tested. 

D-7. lteaulta — All six test pieces shall withstand this test. 

APPENDIX E 
( Table 1 , and Clause 5.4 > 

DETERMINATION OF SURFACE RESISTIVITY 

E-l. Teat Piecea — The test pieces are discs as shown in Fig. 2. 

E-3. Elec ti ' odea — The electrodes are thin continuous films of fired-on 
silver covering the areas shown in Fig. 2. When it is desired to avoid 
heating the test piece, use graphite electrodes and state this in reporting 
the results. 

E-3. Conditioning of Teat FUeesi — Condition"* the test pieces in 
accordance with Appendix A. 

E-4. Teat Condldoaa — Garry out the test at 27 ± 5°C and relative 
humidity of 65 ± 5 percent. 

E-9. Apparmtna and Method of MMSsrwinst — Measure the 
resistance between the 30 mm disc electrode and the ring electrode 
1 minute after the application of a steady dc voltage of 500 vote, using the 
large ring electrode as a guard. - 



'Method far voltayc mauuremett by nous of ijilw f% g«f ( one apacn mnktd ). 

15 



IS 1 8765- 1978 




20*05 



0SO 



,. <»t5 






ELECTRODES 



♦ 52 



Fio. 2 



All dimen»ioni in millimetres. 

Test Piece and Electrodes for Determination op Surface 
Resistivity and Volume Resistivity 



Use any apparatus which provides a guarded resistance measurement 
under the above conditions. 

With the test pieces shown in Fig. 2 the surface resistivity, in 
megohms, is the measured resistance in megohms X 15' 5. 

E-6. Number of Test Pi«ces — Six test pieces shall be tested. 

E-7. Results — State the geometric mean of the results in megohms. 

E-8. Where required, this test may be carried out in accordance with 
IS: 3396-1965*. 

APPENDIX F 

. ( Table 1, and Clause 5.5 ) 

DETERMINATION OF VOLUME RESISTIVITY 

F-l. Teat Pieces — The test pieces are discs of the material, as shown in 
Fig. 2. 

1-2. Electrodes — The electrodes are thin continuous films of fired-on 
silver as indicated in Fig. 2. For temperatures above 600°C sprayed 
nickel electrodes are recommended. 



^Method* or teat for volume and surface resittivitia of electrical uuulatincgkatefuli. 



16 



IS t 8765 - 1S78 

F-3. Conditioning of Teat Pieces — Condition the test pieces in accor- 
dance with Appendix A. 

F-4. Apparatus and Method of Measurement — Measure the resis- 
tance between the two disc electrodes using a steady dc voltage of 500 volts 
for tests at a temperature oT27 C, or 50 volts at temperature of 300°C or 
600 C G. Connect the ring electrode as a guard. 

For tests at 27°C or 300°C, make the measurement 1 minute after the 
application of the voltage. For tests at 600°C, make the measurement 
1 minute after the application of the dc voltage, reverse the polarity of the 
voltage and make a second measurement 1 minute after the reversal; take 
the mean of these two measurements as the measured resistance. 

Use any apparatus which provides a guarded resistance measurement 
under the above conditions. 

With the test pieces shown in Fig. 2 the vdtnme resistivity is given by: 
Measured resistance in megohms X 7'1 
Actual thickness of the teat piece in cm 

The units being megohm-centimetres. 

F-3. Number of Test Pieces — Six test pieces shall be tested. 

F-6. Result* — State the mean of the six results. Take the geometric 
mean of the readings for the calculation of the resistivity of the pieces. 

F-7. Where required, the test may be earned out in accordance with 
15:3396-1965*. 



APPENDIX G 

( Table 1 . and Clause 6. 1 ) 

DETERMINATION OF CROSS-BREAKING STRENGTH 

G-l. Test Pieces — When the materials are to be processed in the plastic 
condition, extrude a sample into a solid rod of circular cross-section of 
diameter 10 ± 2 mm, and a minimum length of 120 mm (fired 
dimensions ). 

When the materials are to be processed by pressing in steel dies, 
sample shall be pressed to give a fired test piece having a minimum length 
of 120 mm and the approximate square cross section of side 10 ± 2 mm. 

G>2. Condition* of Test — Carry out the test under room conditions. 

'Methods of tot for volume and surface fcsiitivitics of electrical insulating materials. 

17 



IS i 8765 -1978 

G-3. Method of Te»t — Support the test piece horizontally on two 
supports, of a ctrculai cross section of 5 mm radius, the lines of support 
being 100 mm apart. Apply the load by means of a stirrup, or its equi- 
valent, midway betv»e«n the supports; round the contacting edge of the 
•tirrup or other means to A radius of 5 mm. The lines of support and the 
edge of the stirrup, or equivalent, are at right angles to the length of the 
test piece. 

Apply the load at the rate of not more than 3 percent of the expected 
breaking load per second, jnd pioeccd until rupture occurs. Record the 
load in N on rupiinc and the diameter ( or sides) of the test piece. 

Calculate the cross brc»kifig strength according to whichever of the 
following formulae applies 

ao p 



Circular cross-section 



itrf" 



., 15P 

Near square cross-section — 

where 

P ■■ maximum load in N, 
d = diameter of circular test pieces in mm, 
ai =a side of near square cross section at right angles to the 

direction of the applied load in mm, and 
a, = side of near square cross section in the direction of the 
applied load in mm. 

G-4. Number of Teat Pieces — Six test pieces snail be tested. 

G-5. Results — Calculate the mean of the six results and the coefficient 
of variation. Include in the statement of the results the nominal diameter 
of side of the square of test piece. 

APPENDIX H 

( Table 1, and Clause 6.2 ) 

DETERMINATION OF COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH 

H-l. Test Piece — The test piece is a solid cylinder, preferably 10 ± 
2 mm in. diameter and 10 ± 2 mm long. 

Alternatively a test piece 20 ± 2 mm in diameter and 20 ± 2 mm 
long may be used. 

The flat faces are ground plane and parallel. 

18 



IS: 8765 -1978 

H-2. Conditions of Test — Carry out the test undci' I'oom conditions. 

H-3. Method of Test — Perform the test in a normal compression-testing 
apparatus, preferably with self-aligning loading surfaces. 

Place sufficient resilient material to avoid local stress concentration 
between the plane ends of the test pieces and the metal plates. 

Note — Stiff cardboard approximately 3 mm thick has been found to be a niitable 
resilient material. 

Apply the load at a rate not greater than 3 percent ot the expected 
breaking load per second. 

p 
Calculate the compressive strength as — j- 

where 

P *= the load in N at rupture, and 

A «■ the area of cross-section of the specimen in mm*. 

The nominal diameter is stated. 

H-4. Number of Test Pieces — Six test pieces shall be tested. 

H-5. Results — State the mean maximum load in N/mm*. State also 
the nominal diameter of the* test pieces, and the thickness and type of 
resilient material used. 

APPENDIX J 

( Table 1, and Clause 7.1 ) 

DETERMINATION OF COEFFICIENT OF LINEAR EXPANSION 

J-l. Test Piece — The test piece is in the form of a rod approximately 
100 mm long and 10 to 20 mm diameter, or other suitable size. 

Grind the two end surfaces so that they are plane and at right angles 
to the axis of the rod. 

J-2. Method of Test — The form of apparatus is shown in Fig, 3, and is 
suitable for general use up to 1 000°C. 

With a rate of temperature-rise of 5°C per minute, record the 
temperature and dial gauge readings at intervals of 2 minutes until the 
desired maximum temperature has been attained. 

Correct the expansion figures by adding the expansion due to an 
equivalent length rod of fused silica to the expansion recorded. The co- 
efficient of linear expansion for fused silica is 0*50 X 10~* for the range 20*C 
to 100°C and 055 x 10"« for the range 100°C to 500°C. 

19 



IS. 8765-1978 




A = Tot piece. 

B — Fused silica tube. 

C — Fused silica rod. 

D — Refractory centralizing washer. 

E =- Water-cooled jacket and gauge rapport. 

F •» Calibrated dial gauge. 

G — Refractory jupport. 

H — Thermometer. 

J •- Thermocouple. 

JT — Refractory furnace tube. 

Fiu. 3 Apparatus for Determination of Coefficient of Expansion 



20 



IS: 8765 -1978 

Other methods of measurement may be used, for example, micrometer, 
microscope or interferometer having least count equal to O^DOl mm. 

J-3. Rcsnlta — Make not less than three determinations, plot a curve and 
calculate the mean coefficient of linear expansion. 

APPENDIX K 

( Clause 7.2 ) 

DETERMINATION OF MAXIMUM THERMAL SHOCK 
TEMPERATURE 

K-l. Test Piece — The test piece is in the form of a solid cylinder 
20 ± 1 mm diameter and 20 ± I mm long, and is prepared by the same 
process as for production articles. 

K-2. Method of Test — Heat six test pieces to the first test temperature, 
and maintain at that temperature for at least 30 minutes. Arrange the 
furnace so that the test pieces can fall freely into a bath of cold running 
water at I0-20°C. Quench the test pieces in this manner for at least 5 
minutes and then examine for cracks with the aid of a dye; if there are no 
visible signs of failure replace the test pieces in the furnace and repeat the 
cycle at a temperature 10°C higher. Repeat this process and state the 
lowest temperature at which two or more failures occur as the maximum 
thermal shock temperature. Commence the test at a temperature which 
all test pieces will satisfactorily withstand. When the maximum thermal 
shock temperature exceeds 200°G make the temperature increments 25°C. 

APPENDIX L 

( Table 1, and Clause 8.1 ) 
TEST FOR POROSITY BY FUCHSIN DYE PENETRATION 

L-l. Porcelain fragments from the insulators or, by agreement, from 
representative pieces of porcelain fired adjacent to them shall be immersed 
in a 1 percent alcohol solution of fuchsin ( 1 g fuchsin in 100 g denatured 
spirit) under a pressure of not less than 15 X 10* N/m 1 for a time such 
that the products of the test duration in hours and the test pressure in 
N/m« is not less than 180 X 10*. 

L-2. The fragments shall then be removed from the solution, washed, 
dried and again broken. 

L-3. Examination with the naked eye of the freshly broken surfaces shall 
not reveal any dye penetration. Penetration into small cracks formed 
during the initial breaking shall be neglected. 

21 



IS : 8765 • 1978 

APPENDIX M 

{Table 1, and Clause 8.1 ) 

TEST FOR POROSITY BY WATER ABSORPTION 

M-l. Test Pieces — The test pieces are at least six in number and their 
total mass h between 80 g and LOO g. They arc clean at the start of the 

test. 

M-2. Conditioning of Test Piece* — Heat the test pieces to II0°C in a 
dry atmosphere for at lsast 2 hours and cool in a desiccator. 

M-3. Metltod of Test — Weigh the conditioned test pieces and then 
immerse completely in distilled water, which is brought to the boiling point 
and kept boding for not ies>» than 30 minutes. 

Allow the test pieces, still immersed completely in the water, to cool 
to normal temperature over a period of not less than 6 hours. Take the 
test pieces from the water and wipe the surfaces with a cloth which has 
been soaked in water and well wrung; support them in still air at normal 
temperature. After 5 minutes, and before 10 minutes from the time of 
i em oval from the water, re-weigh the test pieces. Take the weighing to 
the nearest milligram. 

M-4. Results — Calculate the percentage of water absorption as: 

Weight of moistur e a bsorbed x 100 
Initial weight of conditioned test pieces 



22 



