**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8886-21 (1980): Ship's Ordinary Rectangular Windows, 
Part XXI: Details of Hinge Pin [TED 17: Shipbuilding] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629*12 011f 3 



IS: 8886 ( Part XXI )- 1980 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
SHIPS' ORDINARY RECTANGULAR WINDOWS 

PART XXi DETAILS OF HINGE PIN 



CO 



< 

C 
CO 

_o 



Q 

a. 
o 



1. Scope — Specifies the dimensions of hinge pin for heavy and light type windows except non- 
opening windows. 

2. Terminology —For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS : 8886 
( Part i )-1978 ' Specification for ships' ordinary rectangular windows: Pari i Types and dimensions ' 
shall apply. 

3. Material --The material used for the construction of hinge pin shall be according to IS : 8886 
( Part II )-1978 ' Specification for ships' ordinary rectangular windows: Part II General 

requirements '. 

4. Dimensions — The dimensions of frame shall be as given in Fig. 1. For main dimensions of 

windows, see IS : 8836 ( Part l')-1978. 

5. Tolerances — The tolerances on dimensions shall conform to coarse series of IS: 2102-1969 
' Ailowsb'e deviations for dimensions without specified tolerances ( first revision ) ' except on those 
dimensions indicated in Fig. 1. 



R1.0 *!«*" 

\ 

n 



w 



I 



-W? 



74.5 




WASHER 



HOL E 70 SUIT 
SPLIT PIN 4x25 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 DIMENSIONS OF HINGE PIN 



6. Workmanship — All axle pins shall have a good finish and shall be free from tool marks. 



Adopted 29 February 1980 



© June 1980, !SI 



Price Rs 5"°° 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 8886 (Part XXI)- 1980 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on ships' rectangular windows. Other 
standards in tiie series are: 

Part \ Types and dimensions 

Part II General requirements 

Part IN Positioning 

Part IV Details; of position of lugs for hinges and swing bolts and securing holes on the frame 

Part V Details of frame, inward opening, side hinged, heavy type bolted windows 

Part VI Details of frame, inward opening, side hinged, light type bolted windows 

Part VII Details of frame, inward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type welded windows 

Part VIII Details of frame, inward opening, top hinged, heavy type bolted windows 

Part IX Details of frame, inward opening, top hinged, light type bolted windows 

Part X Datails of frame, inward opening, top hinged, heavy and light type welded windows 

Part XI Details of frame, non-opening, heavy type bolted windows 

Part X!i Details of frame, non-opening, light type bolted windows 

Part XII! Details of frame, non-opening, heavy type welded windows 

Part XIV Details of frame, non-opening, Sight type welded windows 

Part XV Details of frame, outward opening, side hinged, heavy type boited windows 

Part XV! Deta Is of frame, outward opening, side hinged, light type bolted windows 

Part XVII Details of frame, outward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type welded 

windows 
PartXViil Details of glass holder, inward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type bolted 

and welded windows 
Part XIX Details of glass holder, outward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type bolted 

and welded windows 
Part XX Details of glass holder, top hinged, heavy and light type bolted and welded windows 
Part XXI Details of hinge pin 
Part XXI! Details of swing bolts and wing nuts 

!n the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from the following: 

ISO 3903-1977 Shipbuilding — Ships' ordinary rectangular windows, International Organiza- 
tion for Standardization ( ISO ) 

DIN 81650-1967 Rectangular windows for ships, directives for construction. Deutsches Institut 
fur Normung. 



$ - 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



