Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


piae — af sik anrart 
gata & far ate wre — 
faforfte 


Agro Textiles — Insect Nets for 
Agriculture and Horticulture 
Purposes — Specification 


ICS 59.080.70; 65.020.20 


© BIS 2016 


Rds AH Bt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM gei, 9 geigugig oi art, ae Seet 11000? 
Vesely MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2016 Price Group 4 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Technical 
Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Insect nets are used in various agriculture and horticulture applications mainly to protect vegetables and fruits 
from those crop insects that are small in stature but cause severe damage to vegetables and fruit on a large scale. 
These nets provide protection from insect such as aphids, whitefly, carrot fly, cabbage root fly and caterpillars etc, 
and also allow adequate vital sunlight, air and water for plants to grow. 


The guidelines for installation of insect nets is given in Annex D for information only. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16513 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


AGRO TEXTILES — INSECT NETS FOR AGRICULTURE 
AND HORTICULTURE PURPOSES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes constructional and other 
requirements for insect nets for agriculture and 
horticulture purposes in protecting crop from insects 
such as aphids, whitefly, carrot fly, cabbage root fly 
and caterpillars etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 16366 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Cover Factor — It is the area of insect nets covered 
by the yarn of the structure. 


3.2 Mesh — The number of openings per inch in 
longitudnal direction. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 HDPE Monofilament Yarn 


Monofilament yarn shall be manufactured from HDPE 
granules, which shall be UV stabilized by adding 
suitable UV stabilizer. Linear density of the 
monofilament yarn shall be 42.2 Tex (380 denier). As 
agreed to between the buyer and the seller, coloured 
monofilament yarn shall be manufactured using colour 
master batch. The denier of HDPE monofilament yarn 
used in the manufacture of insect nets shall be subjected 
to the following tolerances: 


a) 10 percent on individual value; and 
b) 5 percent on average. 


4.1.1 The heat shrinkage of the monofilament yarn at 
60°C shall not exceed 5 percent when subjected to the 
specified temperature for a period of 10 min in an air 
circulating oven. The heat shrinkage of the 
monofilament yarn at 95°C shall not exceed 10 percent 
when subjected to the specified temperature for a period 


of 10 min in hot water bath. 


4.2 Netting Fabric 


The fabric used in the manufacture of insect nets shall 
be woven on shuttle less weaving machine and shall 
have a minimum width of 2 m. The fabric shall have 
tucked in type selvages and width of selvages shall be 
minimum 10 mm. A tape of 1.70 + 0.1 mm width having 
the name of manufacturer shall be provided at the end 
which shall run through the complete length of the roll 
for identification of manufacture. 


4.3 Colour 


The colour of the fabric shall preferably be natural white 
or milky white. However any other colour or a mixture 
of colour may be supplied as per the agreement between 
the buyer and the seller. The colour/shade shall be as 
specified in the contract or order. In case a sample has 
been agreed upon and sealed, the supply shall be made 
in conformity with the sample in such respects. 


5 TYPES 


Based on the mesh, the insect nets are classified as 
follows: 


a) Type I— having mesh of 30; 
b) Type II — having mesh of 40; and 
c) Type III — having mesh of 50. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Dimensions and Mass 


The insect nets shall be made to the colour and 
dimensions as specified in the contract or order. The 
dimensions shall be determined by the method 
prescribed in IS 1954. The following tolerance shall 
be permissible for length, width and mass (g/m7); 


Dimension Tolerance, percent 
+1 
Length Bo 
o +1 
Width —0 
Mass, g/m? +5 


6.2 The insect net fabric shall confirm to the 
requirements specified in Table 1. 


IS 16513 : 2016 


Table 1 Requirements of Insect Nets 


(Clause 6.2) 
SI Characteristic(s) Requirements Tolerance Method of Test, 
No. Ref to 
Type I Type II Type III 
30mesh 40 mesh 50 mesh 
UI (2) OI (4) 6) (6) OI 
i) Mass, g/m? 90 105 125 +5 percent IS 1964 
ii) a) Ends per inch 30 40 50 +2 IS 1963 
b) Picks per inch 24 24 24 +2 
iii) Cover factor, percent, Min 30 40 50 — Annex B 
iv) Breaking strength of insect nets fabric before UV exposure — IS 1969 (Part 1) 
(ravelled strip method 325 mm x 70 mm)”, kg, Min 
a) Warpway 80 120 140 
b) Weftway 50 65 70 


v) Retention in breaking strength after UV exposure, kg, Min 
vi) Bursting strength, kg/cm’, Min 


vii) Air permeability in mm/s at 50 pascal water head pressure, Min 


D Width after raveling = 50 mm, Gauge length = 200 mm. 


7 PACKING AND MARKING 
7.1 Packing 


The insect nets shall be packed in roll form in length of 
100 m or in bundle form or as agreed to between the 
buyer and the seller. 


7.2 Marking 


7.2.1 Each fabric roll/bundle shall be marked legibly 
by affixing a label with the following information: 


a) Indication of the source of manufacture; 

b) Type and mesh size; 

c) Declared length and width of the insect nets; 
d) Mass per square meter of the insect nets; 

e) Batch No. and date of manufacture; and 

f) Any other information desired by the buyer. 


7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The insect nets may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


7.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of the conditions under which a license for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


8 SAMPLING 


8.1 Lot 


All insect nets rolls/bundles of same construction and 
type dispatched to a buyer against one dispatch note 
shall constitute a lot. 


Annex C and 
IS 1969 (Part 1) 


< 85 percent of original actual = 
value of fabric > 


10 18 20 — 18 1966 (Part 1) or 
IS 1966 (Part 2) 
6500 5000 3000 — 18 11056 


8.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller, the number of insect nets rolls/bundles to be 


selected at random from a lot shall be as given in col 3 
of Table 2. 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 
(Clause 8.2) 


SI No.of Rollsin Sample Sub- Permissible No. 
No. Lot Size sample of Defective 
Size Rolls 

UI (2) (3) (4) 6) 

i) Up to 50 3 2 0 

ii) 51 to 150 5 2 

iii) 151 to 300 8 3 1 

iv) 301 to 500 13 5 2 

v) 501 and above 20 5 3 


9 NUMBER OF TEST SPECIMENS AND 
CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


Number of test specimens and criteria for conformity 
shall be as given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Number of Test Specimens and Criteria 
for Conformity 


(Clause 9) 
SI Characteristic No. of Rolls/ Criteria for 
No. Test Conformity 
Specimens 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 


i) Length, width, ends 
per inch, picks per 


According to The defective rolls do 
col 3 of Table 2 not exceed the 


inch, mass, breaking corresponding 
strength before UV number given in col 
exposure and material 5 of Table 2 


ii) All other requirements According to All the test specimens 
col 4 of Table 2 shall pass the tests 


IS 16513 : 2016 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1954 : 1990 Determination of length and width of strength and bursting distension: 


woven fabrics — Methods (second 
revision) 


(Part 1) : 2009 
(Part 2) : 2009 


Hydraulic method (second revision) 
Pneumatic method (second revision) 


1963 : 1981 Methods for determination of threads 1969 (Part 1): Textiles — Tensile properties of 
per unit length in woven fabrics 2009 fabric — Determination of maximum 
(second revision) force and elongation at maximum 
1964 : 2001 Methods for determination of mass force: Part 1 Strip method (third 
per unit length and mass per unit area revision) 
of fabrics (second revision) 11056 : 2013 Textiles — Determination of the 
1966 Textiles — Bursting properties of permeability of fabrics to air 
fabrics — Determination of bursting 16366 : 2015 Glossary of terms used in agrotextile 
ANNEX B 


[Table 1, SI No. (iii)] 
DETERMINATION OF COVER FACTOR 


B-1 This method prescribes determination of cover 
factor of insect nets. 


B-2 APPRATUS 


B-2.1 Thread Counter — A thread counter, equipped 
with a low power microscope of suitable magnification 
and a pointer which traverses along a graduated base. 
In the absence of such a thread counter, an ordinary 
counting glass with an aperture of 50 mm may be used. 


B-2.2 Dial Thickness Gauge or Micrometer 


B-2.3 Table, having smooth flat surface of sufficient 
length and width to accommodate test specimen. 


B-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


B-3.1 Take 5 test specimens from each of the warp and 
the weft directions from the test pieces. 


B-3.2 Specimens shall not contain dirt, irregular spots, 
creases, holes or other visible faults. 


B-3.3 Any two specimens shall not contain the same 
warp or weft threads. Test specimen shall be taken at 
least 50 mm from the selvages. 


B-4 CONDITIONING 
B-4.1 Conditioning 


Condition the test specimen at 27 + 2°C and 65 + 5 
percent relative humidity for not less than 24 h prior to 
test. 


B-4.2 Test Conditions 


Conduct test in the standard laboratory atmosphere of 
27+2°C and 65 + 5 percent relative humidity. 


B-5 TEST PROCEDURE 


B-5.1 Determination of Number of Warp and Weft 
Threads Per Inch or Mesh 


Lay on a flat table a portion of one of the pieces 
constituting the test sample and smoothen it out. Place 
the counting glass with the pointer at zero on the piece 
in such a way that (a) on turning the screw the pointer 
moves in a direction parallel or perpendicular to warp 
threads, depending upon which set of threads (warp or 
weft ) is being counted, and (b) the pointer shall coincide 
either with the right hand or the left-hand edge of a 
thread, depending on whether the counting is started 
from right to left or from left to right direction. Find the 


IS 16513 : 2016 


number of warp or weft threads by counting the number 
of units comprising one thread and one space. Calculate 
the number of threads per inch in warp and weft direction. 
Take the average of five reading both in warp and weft 
direction. 


B-5.2 Measure the diameter of mono filament yarn by 
dial thickness gauge or micrometer in mm in yarn 
flattened state and convert it to inch. Take at least 10 
number of readings each in warp and weft direction and 
calculate the average diameter in warp and weft direction. 


B-6 CALCULATIONS 


B-6.1 Determine the open area by following formula: 


Open Area, ` [100(1-EPIxd,) 
(OA) percent x (I- PPI xd,)] 
where 


EPI = ends per inch; 
PPI = picks per inch; 


d, = average diameter of the warp threads, in 
inches; 

d, = average diameter of the weft threads, in 
inches; and 


OL = multiplication factor for overlapping of warp 
and weft threads, taken as 1.03. 


B-6.2 Determine the cover factor by following formula: 


Cover Factor = 100 — Open Area, (OA) 


ANNEX C 
[Table 1, SI No. (v)] 
ULTRA VIOLET RESISTANCE TEST 


C-1 TEST SPECIMENS 

The test specimens for breaking strength shall be cut 
from the sample as specified in IS 1969 (Part 1). 

C-2 TEST CONDITIONS 


C-2.1 The test shall be carried out with fluorescent 
UV-B lamp (313 nanometer or its equivalent). 


C-2.2 The duration of the test shall be 144 h (that is 
6 days). 


C-2.3 The test cycle shall be 8 h at 60 + 3°C with UV 
radiation alternating after 4 h at 50 + 3°C with 
condensation. 


C-2.4 Irradiation level throughout the test shall be 


maintained at 0.63 E Wim, 


C-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


C-3.1 Determine the original average breaking strength 
of insect nets specimens separately as per the test 
specified in IS 1969 (Part 1). 


C-3.2 Expose the specimens alternately to ultraviolet 
light alone and to condensation in one respective cycle. 


C-3.2.1 The type of fluorescent UV lamp, the timing of 
the UV exposure and the temperature of condensation 
shall be as specified in C-2. 


C-3.3 Determine the average breaking strength of the 
specimens separately after UV exposure as mentioned 
above. 


C-3.4 Determine the percent retention of original 
strength as follows: 


b 
Percent retention of original breaking strength = F x 100 


where 


a = average breaking strength before UV exposure 
as obtained in C-3.1; and 


b = average breaking strength after UV exposure 
as obtained in C-3.3. 

NOTES 

1 The UV source is an array of fluorescent lamps (with 

lamp emission concentrated in the UV range). 

2 Condensation is produced by exposing the test surface to 

a heated, saturated mixture of air and water vapour, while 

the reverse side of the test specimen is exposed to the 

cooling influence of ambient room air. 


IS 16513 : 2016 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
GUIDELINES FOR INSTALLATION OF INSECT NETS 


D-1 PREAMBLE 


D-1.1 The primary function of insect nets applied in 
agriculture applications is protection of crop from 
insects. It can be used in polyhouse and shadenets 
house. The durability of insect nets is based on a good 
quality material and proper installation technique. 


D-1.2 To improve the service life of insect nets, it is 
essential that the insect nets are placed on suitable 
structures according to the dimensions. To achieve this 
proper onsite laying, joining and fixing of insect nets 
is imperative. 


D-2 LOGISTICS 


Insect nets are packed in roll form/bundle form with 
suitable packing material and transported by 
appropriate means to protect the insect nets and avoid 
any type of damage. Rolls of insect nets are loaded 
manually/with forklift and can be unloaded in a similar 
manner at the destination. Use of hooks shall be avoided 
for loading and unloading of the rolls of insect nets at 
site. 


D-3 STORAGE AT SITE 


D-3.1 The insect nets shall be stored so as to protect 
them from damage, dirt, grease, water, moisture, mud, 
mechanical abrasions, excessive heat or any other 
damage. The rolls/bundles shall be stored on a prepared 
surface and to be stacked not more than three rolls/ 
bundles. 


D-3.2 The owner of the site where the insect nets is to 
be installed shall provide storage space in a location 
sufficiently near the insect nets structure to minimize 
any additional handling. 


D-3.3 The storage area shall be protected from theft, 
vandalism, vehicular traffic and any other source which 
could create potential damage to the insect nets. 


D-4 PLANNING FOR INSECTNETS HOUSE 


D-4.1 The insectnets house structure shall be planned 
taking into consideration the type of crop to be grown, 
locally available materials and the finance budget and 
local climatic conditions. The provision should be there 
for future expansion. 


D-4.2 Several designs are available with local branches 
of National Horticultural Mission. One can choose the 
design based on criteria listed above. 


D-5 SITE CONSIDERATIONS 


Insectnets house should be located in such a way that it 
is well connected with market for input supplies and 
sale of its produces. Structure shall be constructed away 
from buildings, trees, industrial and vehicular 
pollutants; means location shall be fairly shadow free. 
Construction site shall be at higher elevation than 
surrounding land with adequate drainage facility. There 
should be provision of electricity and good quality 
water. However, wind breakers may be located 30 m 
away from the structure. 


D-6 STRUCTURAL MATERIALS 


D-6.1 Insectnets house structure composed of two basic 
components that is frame and cladding material. The 
insectnets house frame provides support for cladding 
material and designed to protect against wind, rain and 
crop load. 


D-6.2 Depending on the costs involved in the 
construction, there are following three types of 
insectnets houses. 


a) Low cost — The low cost insectnets house is 
made of a supporting structure of bamboo/ 
wood/local available materials. It does not 
have any climate control system. 


b) Medium cost — The medium cost insectnets 
house is made of a supporting structure of G.I. 
pipes, profile springs and wires. 

c) High cost— The high cost insectnets house is 
made of supporting structure of steel tubes and 
has many facilities like auto control mechanism, 
heating, cooling and humidification system, 
micro irrigation system etc. 


D-6.3 The structure has to carry the following loads 
and is to be designed accordingly. 


a) Dead load — Weight of all permanent 
construction, cladding, heating and cooling 
equipment, water pipes and all fixed service 
equipments to the frame. 

b) Live load — Weights superimposed by use 
(include hanging baskets, shelves and persons 
working on roof). The insectnets house shall 
be designed for a maximum of 15 kg/m? live 
load. Each member of roof shall be capable 
of supporting 45 kg of concentrated load when 
applied at its centre. 


IS 16513 : 2016 


c) Wind load — The structure shall be able to 
withstand winds of 120 km/h and at least 
50 kg/m? of wind pressure. 

d) Snow load — These are to be taken as per the 
average snowfall of the location. The 
insectnets house shall be able to take dead load 
plus live load or dead load plus wind load plus 
half the live load. 


D-7 COMMENCEMENT OF INSECT NETS 
INSTALLATION WORK 


a) Before starting the insect nets installation, the 
contractor shall issue a certificate of stability 
of erected insect nets structure, to enable to 
commence insect nets installation work. 

b) Chain linked fencing shall be put around the 
insectnets house to prevent stray entry of men 
and animals to protect any damage to the 
insect nets. 


D-8 INSECT NETS LAYING OPERATIONS 


a) While laying the insect nets, precaution shall 
be taken to avoid any damage to it. 

b) The insectnets house area shall be declared 
as a ‘NO SMOKING ZONE’. 


D-9 INSECT 
OPERATION 


NETS INSTALLATION 


a) Measure out about 25 percent more insect nets 
fabric than needed to cover the entire structure. 
Unroll the insect nets fabric across the 
structure, leaving at least one foot of nets 
fabric overhanging on all sides. Pull the nets 
fabric into position, straightening as needed. 

b) Start with the longest side one will be covering 
and affix the nets fabric with staples every 
12 inches across the structure. Staple near the 
inner side of the board so that they will not 
interfere while cutting the edges off the fabric. 
Keep the fabric tight and the lines on the 
knitting straight while working across the 
length of the structure. 

c) Begin stapling on the closest short side, 
keeping the insect nets fabric evenly lined up 
while heading in the direction away from the 


home. Always continue in the same clockwise 
or counter clockwise motion one began with. 
When attaching the nets fabric, never start 
stapling from an unattached side. 

d) After finishing the last edge, try to avoid any 
overlap in the fabric. Affix the nets fabric to 
rafters and centre supports of the structure as 
needed. 


D-10 POST INSTALLATION PRECAUTIONS 


D-10.1 Insectnets house and systems, since they are 
in constant operation, requires proper maintenance 
regularly. The frequency of services/examinations shall 
be in accordance to the extent of exposition of the 
insectnets house to hazardous conditions. 


D-10.2 During the first two months of cladding of 
insect nets, it is very important to tighten them, 
whenever they become loose and to maintain a tight 
stretch of the nets. After the first two months, the natural 
spread of the nets is significantly reduced and stretching 
is required only once a year, or after harsh storms. This 
measure keeps the nets tight at a high level. This helps 
to prevent damage to the nets and extends its life span. 


D-10.3 If no unusual events take place during the first 
year following completion of construction, it is necessary 
to conduct an examination of insectnets structure once a 
year. This examination shall be conducted prior to the 
season of strong winds and rain, as follows: 


a) Verify the exposure of the columns from 
ground soil, if any. Conduct a random 
examination of the foundations; verify that 
they are intact. If there are cracks or damages, 
pour new foundations. 


b) Verify that there are no tears or holes in the 
insect nets covering. Repair and fasten, if 
required. 

c) Verify that there is no threat of flooding of 
the insectnets house as a result of any new 
groundwork conducted in the surrounding area 
adjacent to the structure. 

d) Clean the insectnets house area from any 
debris that is likely to blow away and damage 
the structure of the insect nets covering. Verify 
that the insect nets is securely sewn in place. 


IS 16513 : 2016 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


Organization 
The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Co-ordination House Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Central Agricultural University, Imphal 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, Mumbai 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET), 


Chennai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET), 
Bhopal 


Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kanpur 
CTM Technical Textiles Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies & Disposal, New Delhi 


Garware Wall Ropes Limited, Satara 


Gujarat Green Revolution Company Limited, Vadodara 


Horticulture Training Centre, Pune 


Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Lamifab & Paper (P) Ltd, Aurangabad 


Maharashtra State Horticulture & Medicinal Plant Board, Pune 


MAHA Seedsmen Association, Jalna 


National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai 


National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in Agriculture 
& Horticulture, New Delhi 
National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari 


Neo Corp International Limited, Pithampur 


Representative(s) 
Dr U. K. Gancorapuyay (Chairman) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
Surimati Ritika Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MAMONI PROBHA BORAH 


Dr S. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Dr R. GururrasaD (Alternate) 


DR ABDUL KADER 
Suri Rajiv KUMAR LILHARE (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. SAHOO 
Dr Asay Kumar NEEMA (Alternate) 


Dr AsHoK KUMAR 
Dr JireNDRA Yapav (Alternate) 


SHRI Amit AGARWAL 
Surimati Jyoti AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr Swapan KuMAR GHOSH 
ProF S. C. Ray (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


SHRI SANJAY RAUT 
Suri S. G. PALUSKAR (Alternate) 


Dr Y. P. SINGH 
Suri P. D. Korak (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA DESHMUKH 
Suri Sampat Yapay (Alternate) 


Dr T. V. S. RAJPUT 
Dr NEELAM Parel (Alternate) 


Dr SANJAY CHATTOPADHYA 
Dr TANWEER ALAM (Alternate) 


Dr Manuya GHOsH 
Suri D. K. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SHASHI SINGH 
Ms PrIvANKA Dpaiapan (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMLEISH DHOOT 
Suri Kishor: LaL Duoor (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Proyect MANAGER (PC & FP) (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYANARAYAN B. RATHI 
Suri UDDHAV MANIKRAO SHIRSATH (Alternate) 


Suri R. ANAND 
Suri B. K. Sincuat (Alternate) 


Suri KRISH S [YENGAR 
Suri K. K. KausnaL (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPOBRATA SANYAL 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Kuastaair (Alternate) 


Dr B. G. SALANKI 
Dr V. P. Uspapia (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI Asnok Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


IS 16513 : 2016 


Organization Representative(s) 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai Suri AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 
Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi Suri M. S. VERMA 


SHRI SHRICHAND SANTANI (Alternate) 


Shri Ambica Polymer Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad SHRIMATI JyoTIKA NAGRI 
Suri Party NAGRI (Alternate) 


Texel Industries Limited, Kalol Suri SHAILESH R MEHTA 
SHRI SusHIL PacuisiA (Alternate) 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai Suri K. V. Rao 
Suri R. CHANDRAN (Alternate) 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai Suri V. K. PATIL 
Suri RAVIKANT (Alternate) 


The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai Dr ManisHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI AsHWINI SuDAM (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 35 (1318). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : CUT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


