UDC

621'642'1?`02

: 661'722'21 - 403'3 : 620'111*1~006~76

IS : 8433- 1984 Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

1 EJ

I

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR VISUAL INSPECTION DISSOLVED ACETYLENE GAS CYLINDERS ( First Re vision )

OF

I.

Scope-This standard covers the measurement of various external and internal defects by visual inspection and the limiting criteria for the acceptance of dissolved acetylene gas cylinders n use, on the basis of extent of defects revealed by visual inspection. or high pressure inspection inspection to cylinders gas cylinders of low of high already pressure pressure in use. ,which are covered by

I.1 This standard does not cover low pressure :he following standards: IS : 5845-1984 IS :8451-1984 Code of practice revision ) Code of practice revision )

for visual for visual only

gas cylinders gas cylinders They

(first (first to

1.2 The limits specified in this code apply newly manufactured cylinders. 2. Preparation for Inspection

do not apply

. 2.1 Rust, scale, caked paint, etc, shall be removed from the exterior surface so that the surface can be adequately observed. Facilities shall be provided for inverting the cylinder to facilitate inspection of the bottom. This is important because experience has shown this area to be the most susceptible to corrosion. 3. Damages 3.0 Damage usually met with may be classified a) Dents; b) Cuts, gouges or digs; c) Dents and cuts;
(

under the following

heads:

d) Dents and line marks; e) Bulges; f ) Stab marks; g) Fusion marks and fire damage; hj Corrosion or pitting;
j )

:
(

Neck defects;

and

1

k) General 3.1 Dent

distortion.

3.1.1 Definition-This is an area of damage which has produced a deflection 0 f the walls over a given area. Such deformations are caused on the cylinder by its coming into contact with a blunt An indentation, which object in such a way that the thickness of metal is not materially impaired. has a smooth and shallow deflection of the walls in no way affects the suitability of the cylinder for use, Indentations are of concern only where the metal deformation is sharp and confined particularly of the dent should to over those areas measuring less than 50 mm x 50 mm. The appearance provide a reasonable limiting factor apart from the limits specified. 3.1.2 Limit includes 3.1.2.1 Dents away from weld-When denting occurs so that no part of deformation a weld, the cylinder shall be condemned when the depth of a dent is greater than one-tenth of the mean diameter of the dent or the mean diameter of the dentis greater than one-quarter of the diameter of the cylinder. 3.1.2.2 Dents at welds-where weld, the permissible limits shall denting occurs so that any part of the deformation be reduced to half of that in 3.1.2.1. includes a

Adopted

4 September

1984

@December

1984, ISI I

Gr 2

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS:8433-1984
rigid straight edge of sufficient length is placed over the defect and a 3.1.3 Measurement -A scale or depth gauge to measure the distance from the bottom of the straight edge to the bottom of the defect. Also the length and width are determined at the point where the walls return to their original contour and diameter. 3.2 Cuf, Gouge or Dig 3.2.1 DefinifionThese are deformations caused by contact with a sharp object in such a way The as to cut into or upset the metal of the cylinder, decreasing the wall thickness at that point, metal is displaced by a gouging action. 3.2.2 Limits 3.2.2.1 When the original wall thickness at manufacture is not known and the actual wall thickness cannot be measured, a cylinder shall be rejected if the cut, gouge or dig decreases the wall thickness at that point in excess of 10 percent of the minimum allowable wall thickness calculated according to the specification to which the cylinder has been manufactured. On the crown, above a distance of 50 mm from the base run, the thickness of the walls generally increases and hence a larger margin may possibly be allowed in these areas, consistent with the construction of the shell. 3.2.2.2 When the original wall thickness at manufacture is known or the actual wall thickness measured, a cylinder shall be rejected if the original wall thickness minus depth of defect is less than 90 percent of the minimum allowable wall thickness. 3.2.2.3 If the length of the and 3.2.2.2 above shall be reduced defect is 75 mm or more the to 50 percent. limit of rejection set at 3.2.2.1

3.2.3 MeasurementsWhen measuring cuts by scale and depth gauge, the upset metal should be removed or compensated for, so that only actual depth of metal removed from the cylinder wall is measured. 3.3 Dent and Cut 3.3.1 Definition - As suggested by the name, this is a combination of indentation frequently cylinders are damaged by an indentation contained in which is a cut. 3.3.2 LimitsIn accordance with 3.1.2 and 3.2.2. with 3.1.3 and 3.2.3. and cut. Quite

3.3.3 Measuremenfs 3.4 Dent and Line Mark

In accordance

3.4.1 Definition - This form of damage results from the cylinder striking a comparatively sharp angle, such as an angle iron, which produces a line mark usually extending diametrically across the indentation. 3.4.2 Ljmjts -The line marks are usually generally be as prescribed in 3.1.2. 3.4.3 Measurements 3.6 Bulges 3.5.1 Definition Swelling of the cylinder walls. with a symmetrical space. Cylinders with distinct In accordance with no more than 0'4 mm deep. 3.1.3 and 3.2.3. The limit, therefore, should

3.5.2 Ljmjt - Cylinders are normally visible bulge shall be condemned. -This is done 3.5.3 Measurement measuring the height of a bulge with areas not bulged. 3.6 Stab Mark

produced

by comparing a series of circumferential measurements, a scale, comparing templates of bulged areas with similar

3.6.1 Definition-This type of damage is normally caused by the dropping of the cylinder or The damage alternatively the cylinder riding during a rail or road journey on a bolt or rivet head. produces a depression into the walls, sometimes without the formation of an indentation, but there are instances where there is an indentation and in the centre of this is the stab mark. In assessing such damage two factors have to be considered: a) Depth of depression, and b) Angle at circumference of depression and cylinder 2 wall.

IS:8433-1984 3.6.1.1 It will the circumference,
be appreciated that a deep and sharp punch mark produces a shearing and it is with this in view that the limits are specified for such damage. action at

marks, usually over areas of 9'5 mm x 16 mm having a depression greater 3.6.2 Limit -Stab than l-6 mm will produce a comparatively sharp shearing effect at the circumference of damage. Such cylinders should be considered unfit for use. In thicker metal at base rim, etc, this limit may be proportionately increased. 3.6.3 Measurement-The upset metal should be removed and the depth by depth gauge. The damaged area may be measured by scale. 3.7 Fusion Mark and Fire Damage 3.7.1 Definition -Damage to the cylinder as a result of a fire from a lighted blowpipe on to the walls of the cylinder, or fusion of metal due to an electric arc, Common evidence of exposure to fire are: a) charring b) burning c) distortion d) melting e) melted or burning or sintering of the paint of metal, or other protective coats, of stab mark measured

of the cylinder, or burning of the valve, plugs. which have been damaged by fire shall be condemned, and

out fusible

3.7.2 Limit-Cylinders

3.7.3 Measurement - Defect is normally determined by visual examination with particular emphasis to the condition of the protective coating. If the protective coating has been burnt off or distorted it is assumed that the cylinder has been overheated. If, however, the protective coating is only mildly blistered or dirtied from smoke or debris and is found, by examination, to be intact underneath, the cylinder shall not be considered affected. 3.6 Corrosion or Pitting the loss of wall thickness by corrosive media. Different kinds of

3.6.1 Definition - This involves corrosion to be considered are:

do not effectively weaken the cylinder a) Isolated pitting - Isolated pits of small cross-section wall but are indicative of possible penetration and leakage. Since the pitting is isolated the original wall is essentially intact. If the penetration is deep it should be viewed seriously and possible increase in stress at the damaged portion should be considered. pits are not isolated but are connected or nearly connected to others b) Line corrosion -When in a narrow band or line, such a pattern is termed as line corrosion. This condition is more Line corrosion frequently occurs in the area of intersection serious than isolated pitting. of the footring and bottom of a cylinder. c) General corrosion - General corrosion is that which covers considerable surface areas of the cylinder. It reduces the structural strength. It is often difftcult to measure or estimate the depth of general corrosion because direct comparison with the original wall cannot always be made. General corrosion is often accompanied by pitting. 3.8.2 Limit 3.6.2.1 A cylinder shall be rejected if the remaining wall in an area having only is less than 90 percent of the minimum allowable wall thickness. isolated pitting

3.8.2.2 A cylinder shall be rejected when line corrosion on cylinder is 76 mm in length or over and the remaining wall is less than 90 percent of the minimum allowable wall thickness, or when line corrosion is less than 90 percent of the minimum allowable wall thickness. 3.8.2.3 A cylinder shall be rejected when the remaining wall corrosion is less than 90 percent of the minimum wall thickness. 3.8.3 Measurements 3.8.3.1 The surface which has been corroded should and by slight filing, if necessary, to ensure that any raised pitted be thoroughly cleaned lip of metal is removed. by wire brushing thickness in an area of general

3.8.3.2 Pitted depth may be measured by placing a straight edge across high points in the area and measuring the distance from the bottom of the straight edge to the bottom of the pit. 3

IS : 8433 - 1904
3.8.3.3 There are certain areas of the cylinder where the pit depth procedure may be difficult to apply due to the proximity of the corroded areas to footrings and other appurtenances. In this event, special curved measuring devices may be devised, or if necessary, putty casts may be made for establishing criteria for acceptance or rejection. 3.9 Neck Defects 3.9.1 Definition - Defects in the cylinder neck, such as serious cracks, folds and flaws, or damage to neck threads due to worn or corroded crests, broken threads, nicked or cut threads. 3.9.2 Limits-At manufacture, cylinders have a specified number of full threads of proper form Cylinders shall be rejected if the required number of as required in applicable thread standards. effective threads are materially reduced, or if a gas tight seal cannot be obtained by reasonable valving methods. 3.9.3 Measurements with a soap solution. 3.10 General Distortion 3.10.1 Definition 3.10.2 Limits Appearance tilting of the cylinder of the valve, from visual which warrants its rejection. etc. by testing - Neck cracks are determined Gauges are used to measure the number the neck during charging of effective threads. operation

Noticeable -

loss of stability, appearance.

3.10.3 Measurements 4. Inspection of Porous

Judgement
Mass

4.1 Porous mass is no longer usable when it gets contaminated with water, oil or when it develops voids, cracks that may allow concentration of acetylene in a free state. If water or oil has contaminated the porous mass, the absorption capacity of the cylinder is considerably reduced. If the absorption capacity has been reduced by over 30 percent and the cylinder mass, after blowing to atmospheric pressure, is found to be more than the tare mass, the cylinder shall be condemned. 4.2 The porous mass should be visually examined after removal of the valve for any sagging, cracks If any cracks or voids adjacent to the valve opening are found, the cylinder shall be or voids. If any sagging is noticed, a bent wire of 3'15 mm dia should be inserted in the space condemned. between the top of the porous mass and the shell. If this test shows that there is-a space of 3.15 mm or more, the cylinder shall be condemned.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

The Gas Cylinders Rules, 1981 and the Indian Standard Specifications relating to compressed gas cylinders require that a cylinder be condemned when it leaks, or when internal or external corrosion, denting, bulging, or evidence of rough usage exists to the extent that the cylinder is likely to be weakened appreciably. This standard has been prepared as a guide to cylinder users and fillers for establishing their own cylinder inspection procedures and standards. It is, of necessity, general in nature although some It should be distinctly understood that it will not cover all specific limits are recommended. circumstances for each individual cylinder type. Each cylinder user must expect to modify them to suit his own cylinder design or the conditions of use that may exist in his own service. Rejection or acceptance for continued use in accordance with these limits, does not imply that these cylinders are, or are not, dangerous, or subject to impending failure, but represents practice which has been satisfactory to a cross-section of the industry. The personal experience of the examiner in the inspection of cylinders is as important factor in determining the acceptability of a given cylinder for continued service. Users lacking this experience and having doubtful cylinders should return them to a manufacturer of the same type of cylinders for re-inspection. In determining the condition of the cylinder the examiner should take into consideration minimum wall thickness required by the specification to which the cylinder was made, In fixing limits of acceptance it is additionally recognized that cylinder have changed over the years and cylinder wall thicknesses have varied with ments and the use of new materials such as alloys steels, the

design requirements these design require-

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from CGA - C6 - 1955 ` Visual inspection of compressed gas cylinders ' issued by Compressed Gas Association, USA. 4
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuria. India

