( Reaffirmed 2006 )

METHODS OF TEST FOR PETROLEUM AND I_TS PRODUCTS
1P:861
DETERMINATION OF TOTAL BASE NUMBER POTENTIOMETRIC PERCHLORIC ACID TITRATION METHOD (.First Reprint UDC APRIL 1988) 665.617 : 543.257.1 BY

Adapttd, with pirmission, from the jointpublication 1. SCOPE

ASTM

D 2896-73/1P 276175

1.1 This method covers the determination of basic constituents in petroleum products by potentiometric titration with perchloric acid in glacial acetic acid. 1.2 For many materials the results obtained by this method will be similar to those obtained by IS : 1448 [ P : 1 I-1971 *. With certain compounds such as strongly overbased oil additives and nitrogenous polymeric compounds, higher results may be obtained. 1.3 The constituents that may be considered to have basic characteristics include organic and inorganic bases; amino compounds; salts of weak acids, for example, soaps; basic salts of polyacidic bases; and salts of heavy metals.

2. SUMMARY

OF METHOD

2.1 The sample is dissolved in an essentially anhvdrous mixture of chlorobenzene and glacial acetic acid and titrated with a solution of perchloric acid in glacial acetic acid with a potentiometric titrimeter. A glass indicating electrode and a calomel reference electrode are used, the
*Methods potcntiomctric of test for petroleum and its products: titration (jrsf revision ). f P: 11 h`eutraiization

npmba

by

@ Copyright 1976

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 1lOOOZ Augwt ZAFAR MAR0

BHAVAN,

Gr 3

NEW

1978

latter being connected with the sample solution by means of a salt bridge. The meter readings are plotted against the respective volumes of titrating solution, and the end point is taken at the inflection in the resulting curve. 2.2 Occasionally, certain used oils give no inflection in the standard titration, in which case a back titration modification with sodium acetate titrant is employed. 3. DEFINITION 3.1 Total Base Number -The quantity of perchloric acid expressed in terms of the equivalent number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide that is required to neutralize all basic constituents present in 1 g of sample. 4. APPARATUS 4.1 Potentiometric 4.2 Glass Electrode Titrimeter either automatic recording or manual. - pH 0 to 11, general purpose type.

4.3 Reference Electrode - sleeve-type saturated calomel electrode with nonaqueous salt bridge as described in 7 ( se8 Note ).
rcfcrcnce electrodes with frittcd or fibre diaphragms and somk combined NOTE -Some glass plus reference electrode systems arc commercially available, such as the single-rod glass plus silver/silver chloride electrode assembly. During tbc devclopmcnt of this method, the use of electrodes of these types gave problems in some laboratories, but not in others. Accordingly, these electrodes are permitted in this merhod provided that the sodium perchlorate bridge is used; however, if stability or other prdblcms arise with their use, the sleeve-type electrode should be UW+~.

mechanical or electrical, with variable speeds and 4.4 Stirrer -either with propeller or paddle of chemically inert material. If an electrical stirrer is used, it shall be grounded so that disconnecting or connecting the power to the motor will not produce a permanent change in meter reading during the course of titration. A magnetic stirrer with stirring bar may be used provided it meets the above conditions. lo- or 20-ml capacity, graduated in 0.05 ml divisions and 4.5 Btwettecalibrated with an accuracy of f 0.02 ml, or an automatic burette of similar accuracy. - of 250- or 300-ml capacity, made of borosilicate 4.6 Titration Be&a glass. The tall form beaker is particularly suitable. 4.7 Titration Stand - a suitable stand to support the beaker, electrodes, stirrer, and burette. An arrangement that allows for the removal of the beaker without disturbing the electrodes, burette and stirrer is desirable ( see Note ). h'om --Some apparatus may be sensitive to interference by static electricity, shown
by erratic movcmcnts of recorder pen or meter indicator, when the titration assembly ( beaker and electrodes ) is approached by the operator. In this ca~c #mound the beaker closely with a cyliDdu of eoppa gauze which is electrical.ly grounded ( earthed ).

2

IS: 1448 [P:86)-1977 5. QUALITY
5.1 Unless OF REAGENTS

specified otherwise, pure chemicals IS : 1070-1977* ) shall be used in tests. h'on -I Pure chemicals affect the results of analysis. 5.2 Acetic Acid -

and distilled water

( scc
which

' ahall mean chemicals that do not contain impuriticr

glacial ( see Note ).
acetic anhgdridr, and chlorobcnzcne are toxic and involviog the use of these material in a well-ventilated

Nore - Cor&n: Acetic acid, irritant. Carry out all operations area, preferably under a hood.

5.3 Acetic Amhydride 5.4 Chlorobeazeae -

-

See Note under 5.2.

See Note under 5.2.

5.5 Perchloric Acid - standard acetous solution ( 0.1 N ). Mix 8.5 ml of 70 to 72 percent perchloric, acid (or 10.2 ml of 60 to 62 percent perchloric acid ) with 500 ml of glacial acetic acid and 30 ml (or 38 ml if the GO to 62 percent perchloric acid is used) of acetic anhydride ( see Note 1 ). Dilute to 1 litre with glacial acetic acid (see Note 2). Allow the solution to stand for 24 hours before standardization.
primary

NOTE 1 -Excrss

or secondary

acetic anhydride shall be avoided aminca which may be present.

to prevent

acctylation

of any

Non 2 - Cuufi~n: This pcrchloric acid solution is not hazardous under the conditions 01 this test. However, concentrated pcrchloric acid is a powerful oxidizing agent when heated and forms explosive mixtures when heated with organic matter. Great care should be taken to avoid contact with organic matter under conditiona that may result in subsequent drying or hcaung, and spills should be washed immediately and thoroughly with water.

5.5.1 Stcndardization of Prrchloric Acid-Heat a quantity of potassium hydrogen phthalate in an oven at 120�C for 2 hours and allow it to cool. Take 0.1 to 0.2 g of the potassium hydrogen phthalate weighed to the nearest 0-l mg and dissolve it in 40 ml of warm glacial acetic acid. Add 80 ml of chlorobcnzcne, cool, and titrate with 0.1 N perchloric acid, using the electrode system and procedures given in 7.1 to 7.4 and 8.4 to 8.7. Detect the end point by the same procedure as will be used for base number determination ! see 9.2 ). Carry out a blank titration on 40 ml of glacial acetic acid plus 80 ml of chlorobenzene ( see 8.8 ). Calculate the normality ( N) of the perchloric acid as follows: N= 1OoOM 204'23 ( V, V, )

`Specification for water for general I&oratory 3

use ( ucondrrtiMI).

(S:l48[P:86]-1977
where

M = mass in g of potassium hydrogen phthalate,
V, = volume in ml of perchloric acid used, and Vo .= volume in ml of perchloric acid corresponding the blank titration. to VI for

large coefficient of cubic expansion of organic NOTE - Because of the relatively liquids, the acetous pcrchloric acid solution should be used within f5OC of the temperature at which it was standardized. If used at a temperature more than 5 degrees higher, multiply the valumc used by the factor 1 - 0001 t. If used at a temperature more than 5 degrees lower, multiply by the factor 1 _t 0.001 t ( where t is the difference in degrees Celsius between temperatures of standardization and use, and is always positive). 5.6

Potassium

Hydrogen Phthalatc

5.7 sodium Perchlorate EltctroZytePrepare a saturated solution of sodium perchlorate ( see Note ) in glacial acetic acid. An excess of undissolved sodium perchloratc should always be present at the bottom of the solution.
It is also a powerful NOTE - Caution:Sodium perchlorate is toxic and irritant. oxidizing agent when heated. Great care should be taken to avoid contact with organic matter under conditions that may result in subsequent drying or heating, and spills should be washed immediately and thoroughly with water. 5.8

Titration Solvent - Add 1 volume of glacial acetic acid to 2 volumes of chlorobenzene ( see Note under 5.2 ). anhydrous.

5.9 Sodium Carbonate -

5.10 Sodikm Acetate Solution - 0.1 N acetous ( for back titration see 11). Dissolve 5.3 g of anhydrous sodium carbonate in 300 ml of acetic acid. Dilute to 1 litre with acetic acid after solution is complete. Standardization of Sodium Acetate Solution - Use the required of titration solvent and 8.00 ml of O-1 N acetous perchloric acid. Titrate with 0.1 N sodium acetate, using the electrode system and procedure given in 7.1 to 7.4 and 8.4 to 8.7. Detect the end point by the same procedure as will be used ior base number determination ( see 9.2 ). Calculate the normality ( .& ) of the sodium acetate solution by the following formula: 5.10.1
volumes

jVr = where

(8*00-

-- V,,)N v, and used in

V, and N are as defined in 5.5.1,

V, = volume in ml of standard acetous sodium acetate the standardization. 4

IS: 1448[ Pt861-1977
6. PREPARATION OF SAMPLE

6.1 It is essential to ensure that the sample is sediment may be acidic or basic or have adsorbed from the liquid phase. If necessary, samples mixing. Used oils should be vigorously shaken before preparing the test sample.

representative since any acidic or basic material may be warmed to aid to ensure homogeneity

7. PREPARATION
7.1 Preparation

OF ELECTRODE

SYSTEM

of Electrodes - If the calomei electrode is to be changed from aqueous bridge to nonaqueous, drain out the aqueous solution, wash out all crystals of potassium chloride with water, then rinse the outer jacket (salt bridge ) several times with sodium perchlorate electrolyte. Finally fill the outer jacket with sodium perchlorate electrolyte up to the filling hole. When using the sleeve-type electrode, carefully remove the groundglass sleeve and thoroughly wipe both ground surfaces. Replace the sleeve loosely and allow a few drops of electrolyte to drain through to flush the groundglass joint and to wet the ground surfaces thoroughly with electrolyte. Set the sleeve firmly in place, refill the outer jacket with the sodium perchlorate electrolyte, and rinse the electrode with chlorobenzene. When in use, the electrolyte level in the calomel electrode should be kept above that of the liquid in the titration beaker to prevent entry of contaminants into the salt bridge. When not in use, fill the calomel electrode with sodium perchlorate electrolyte solution, leave the bung in the filling orifice, and immerse both electrodes in distilled water, keeping the level of the electrolyte above that of the distilled water.

7.2 Testing of Electrodes - Test the titrimeter-electrode combination when first put into use or when new electrodes are installed and retest at intervals thereafter as follows: Dip the electrodes into a well-stirred mixture of 100 ml of glacial acetic acid plus O-2 g of potasGum hydrogen phthalate and record the titrimeter reading. Rinse the electrode with chlorobenzene and immerse in 100 ml of glacial acetic acid plus 1.5 ml ofU.1 N perchloric acid. The difference between readings should be at least O-30 V. 7.3 Cleaning of Electrodes -Following a titration, first wash the electrodes with chlorobenzene-acetic acid solvent to remove any adhering oily material from the previous titration, then with water, to dissolve any sodium perchlorate that may have formed around the sleeve of the calomel electrode and to restore the aqueous gel layer of the glass electrode. Rinse Before starting a series of sample titrations, again with titration solvent. follow this rinsing procedure, then run one or two blank titrations on the solvent to condition the electrodes. Repeat the blank titrations, if 5

necessary.

7.4 Maintenance of Electrodes - If there is reason to -believe that the glass electrode has become contaminated, it may be cleaned by immersing in cold chromic acid cleaning solution for five minutes, followed by thorough water washing. After this cleaning treatment, test the electrode as described in 7.2. The calomel electrode can be cleaned by draining and Maintain the electrolyte refilling with fresh sodium perchlorate solution. level in the calomel electrode above that of the liquid in the titration beaker at all times. Do not allow the electrodes to remain immersed in titration solvent for any appreciable period of time between titrations. While the electrodes are not extremely fragile, handle them carefully at all times and particularly avoid scratching the glass electrode. 8. PROCEDURE 8.1 Calculate the quantity of sample required from its expected Base Number ( TBN) from the following formula: Approximate
NOTE -

Total

mass of sample in g = 28/expected TBN

For a possible exception, S.S Note under 11.2.

8.1.1 Weigh the sample into the titration beaker, applying the limits shown as follows. A maximum of 20 g should be taken for analysis: Mass of Sample Et 10 5 1 0.1 to 20 to 10 to 5 l-0 O-25 solvent. stand and stir the solution until to Precision of Weighing g 0.05 0.02 O-005 0801 0~000 5

0.25 to

8.2 Add 120 ml of titration

8.3 Place the beaker on the titration the sample has dissolved ( see Note ).

SOTE -If solution of the sample prover difficult, dissolve in 80 ml of chlorobcnzcnc in the titration beaker, then add 40 ml of glacial acetic acid. hlany wrd 011s contain home solid material which will not dissolve. The prescncc of this undissolved material will not affect the test rault.

8.4 Prepare the electrodes as described in 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3. Position the electrodes in the solution so that they are immersed as far as possible. Continue the stirring throughout the determination at a rate sufficient to produce vigorous agitation without spattering and without stirring air into the solution. Adjust the titrimeter so that it reads in the upper part of the millivolt scale; for example, 700 mV. For simple titrimeters without 6

IS:

1448 [ P:86]-

1977

this adjustment, it may be necessary to incorporate a source of potential in series with the electrode. A 1.5-V dry cell and potential divider is suitable. 8.5 Fill the burette with 0.1 N perchloric acid solution and place the burette in position in the titration assembly, taking care that the tip is immersed below the level of the surface of the liquid in the beaker. Record the initial burette and titrimeter ( cell potential ) readings. 8.6 Titrations 8.6.1 Manual Titration - Add suitable small portions of titrant and after waiting until a constant potential has been established ( see Note), record At the start of the titration and in the burette and titrimeter readings. any subsequent regions ( ingections 1 where 0'1 ml of titrant consistently produces a total change of more than O-03 V ( corresponding to 0.5 pH scale unit ) in the cell potential, add 0.05~ml portions. In the intermediate regions ( plateaux ) where O*l-ml increments change the potential by less than O-03 V, add large portions sufficient to produce a total potential change approximately equal to, but not greater than 0.03 V. Titrate in this manner until the potential changes less than 0.005 V ( corresponding to 0-J pH scale unit ) per 0-J ml.
NOTE-Consider minutcr. the cdl potential constant when it changa less than 0905 V/

8.6.2 Aufomatic Recording Titration - Adjust the instrument in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and set the titration speed at 1.0 ml/ minute, Max. 8.7 On completion of the titration, remove the beaker and rinse the electrodes and burette tip with chlorobenzene-acetic acid titration solvent, then with water, then again with solvent ( see 7.3 ). Store in water when not in use ( see 7.1 ). 8.8 For each set of samples make a blank titration on 120 ml solvent. For a manual titration add 0.1 N perchloric acid increments, waiting between each addition until a constant cell established. Record titrimeter and burette readings after each Follow the procedure in 8.6.2 for an automatic titration. 9. CALCULATION 9.1 For a manual titration, plot the volumes of the acid added against the corresponding titrimeter readings. 9.2 Interpret the end point from the graph obtained from. the manual or automatic titration. The end point is the midpoint of the inflection, that point at which the curve changes from concave to convex. A useful but not mandatory guide is that the end point should be preceded and followed by a deflection of at least 50 mV/ml of titrant. 7 of titration. in 0'05-ml potential is increment.

IS: 1448[ P:86]-

I977

9.3 When there is no inflection point or only a very poor one, proceed to ` back titration ' method prescribed in 11. The inflection obtained during back titration preferably should meet the criteria described in 9.2. 9.4 Calculate the total base number ( TBN ) as follows: Total base number (TBN ), mg.KOH/g where V, = volume in ml of perchloric acid used to titrate the sample to the inflection point on the titration curve, V, = voIume in ml of perchIoric acid used corresponding for blank titration at same potential as sample, jV = normality of perchloric acid solution, and M = mass in g of the sample. 10. REPORT 10.1 Report the result as the total [ P : 86 I-1977. 11. BACK TITRATION base number ( TBN) by IS : 1448 to V, = (V.-V,) xXx56.1
M

II.1 Some used oils give no inflection point or only a very poor one with the method as described above. When this situation is encountered, the following modified method may be used. In this modified method, excess standard p&chloric acid solution is added to the sample, then the excess perchioric acid is back titrated with standard sodium acetate solution. 11.2 Weigh accurately the amount ( see Note) into the titration beaker. of sample specified in 8.1 and 8.1.1

-The sample size for the back titration modification should not cxcccd 5 g. NOTI! If, with a 5-g sample, no inflection point is found, reduce the sample size to 3 g and repeat the analysis. Reducing the sample size gcncrally improves the ciarity of the inflection point. However, it shall be noted that the cooperative work which led to the precision statement {see 12.1.1 and 12.1.2) employed a sample sire of 5 g maximum.

11.3 Dissolve the sample in 80 ml of chlorobenzene and add 40 ml of acetic acid. 11.4 Use a volumetric burette or pipette standard 0.1 N acetous perchioric acid standard perchloric acid solution shall be more than 8.00 ml and correct accordingly 11.5

( see Note under 8.3 )

to add accurately 8.00 ml of solution to the beaker. [The in excess. If necessary, add ( see Ii.7 ) 1.

Stir the contents of the beaker for 2 minutes. 8

IS:l446[P:66]-1977 11.6 Titrate the unneutralized perchloric acid with standard 0.1 N acetous sodium acetate solution. Carry out the titration in the same manner as described in 8. For the back titration, the starting point will be in the range of O-100 mV. 11.7 Instead of weighing out a separate sample and proceeding through 11.6, the back titration procedure can be used on a sample being titrated as in 8.1 to 8.6.2, provided that the sample size did not exceed .5 g ( see Note under 11.2 ). When it is apparent from the forward titration that a satisfactory inflection is not present, note the volume of standard perchloric acid used, then proceed with 11.6. The standardization ( set 5.10.1) should be modified to coincide with the volume of standard perchloric acid used. 11.6 Calculate the total base number ( TBN) from the following formula: l',)&x56*1 M

Total base number ( TBN ), mg KOH/g = ( P' where V, and .N, are as defined in 5.10.1, V, = volume in ml of standard the sample titration, M = mass in g of the sample. 11.9 Report Modification

acetous sodium acetate

used in

the results as Total Base Number ( TBN ) by Back Titration of IS : 1448 [ P: 861-1977.

12. PRFEISION 12.1 The following criteria should be used for judging the acceptability results ( 95 percent confidence ). of

12.1.l Repeatability- Duplicate results by the same operator should be considered suspect if they differ by more than the following percentage of mean total base number: Percent Fresh oils and additive concentrates: Total base number to 59.9 Total base number greater than 59.9 Used oils on which are employed the forward titration Used oils which require the back titration 9 5 3 5 24

IS:f448IP:86]-1977 12.1.2 Reproducibility- Results submitted by two laboratories should not be considered suspect unless they differ by more than the following percentages of mean total base.number:

Percent Fr&
oils and additive concentrates: 6 4 15 32
precision

Total base number to 59.9 Total base number greater than 59.9 Used oils on which are employed the forward titration Used oils which require the back titration

Nora -The ranges of total base number values far which the ahovc values were established are given in Appendix A.

APPENDIX (Clause 12.1.2)
TEST COVERAGE

A

A-1. During the development of this method, co-operative testing was done on samples covering a wide range of types of oils, of additive concentrates which are used to prepare these oils, an& of services for the oils. Even ~0, bowever, it was not possible to cover the complete range of total base numbers. It is believed that reasonable interpolation and extrapolation' from the ranges used will not introduce serious errors in the precision. The ranges used were: Fresh oils Additive concentrates Used oils on which were employed the forward titration Used oils which required the back titration Total base number of 55- 13-5 Total base number of 60-99 Total base numbers of 36-l 1.0

Total base number of 2.9-4'4

10 Reprography Unit, BIS, l!kw Delhi, In&a !

