( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY
PART
Reliability

OF EQUIPMENT
VERIFICATION

6

MAiNTAINAB-ILITY

of Electronic and Electrical Sectional Committee,
Chairman

Components LTDC 3

and Equipment

PROF. S. SAMPATH Indian Institute of Technology, Members

Kanpur Representing

ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR, STAN- Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DARDS ( S & T ), RDSO JOINT DIRECTOR. STANDARDS ( S & T)-III, RDSO ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR K. CHANDRA Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad SARI CRARANJIT SIN~H SQN LDR I. M. GANDOTRA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) CONTROLLER, CIL LT-COL V. K. KHANNA ( Alternate ) Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay DR P. K. DUTTA SHRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P GHOSH SHRI B. C. MURHERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI A. P. GUPTA Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRI I. S. SULARR ( Alternate ) The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' SHRI S. P. KULKARNI Association, Bombay SHRI S. M. KHTJRSALE ( Alternate ) SHRI H. C. MATRUR Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHR~ U. R. G. ACEARYA ( Alternate ) SHRI D. C. MEHTA Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SRRI R. V. ISRANI (Alternate ) SHRI S. R. MEHTA Indian Electrical Manufacturers' .4ssociation, Bombay SHRI T. C. GOSALIA (Alternate ) DR K. B. MISRA In personal capacity ( Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur ) SHRI E. G. NAQARAJAN Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI K.R. ANANDAKUMARAN NAIR Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SHRI C. RAN~ANATHAN ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1984 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:9692(Part6)-1983 ( Continuedfrom
fiage 1 ) RePresenting Bhabha Atomic Bombay Research Centre, Trombay,

Members
SHRI D. V. PETKAR

SHRI A. K. BABAR ( Alternate )
SHRI V. B. PRADEAN

All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI N. J. NAIR ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD SHRI K. RAM~OPAL ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC: ), Bangalore SHRI SIHARAN DE ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SRRI K. S. PRAKASA RAO SHRI S. S. SONWALKAR ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development and SHRI R. SOMASUNDARAM Production ( AIR ), Ministry of Defence SHRI R. N. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Ministrv of Defcnce f R & D 1 COL T. VARUHESE ' _ SHR;P. K. SHUKLA ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI B. VIRESALINUAM SHRI V. MUTHAIAH (Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-Q&O Member ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) ( Secretary )

Study of Statistical Problems of Reliability of Electronic Electrical Items Subcommittee, LTDC 3 : 1
Convener DRP.K.DuTTA Members Peico Electronics & Electricals

and

Ltd, Bombay

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COLV.K.KHANNA MAJ S. P. MURGAI (Alternate ) Ind an Statistical Institute, Hyderabad SHRIV.NARAYANA Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P.S.K.PRASAD ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore &RI K.RAMUOPAL National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DRY.V.SOMAYAJULU SHRI V. N. SHARYA (Alternate) Ministry of Defecce ( R & D ) COLJ.VARQHESE SHRI P.K. SHUKLA (Alternate)

2

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON MAINTAINABILITY
PART 6 MAINTAINABILITY

OF EQUIPMENT

VERIFICATION

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 6 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 July 1983, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 Maintainability, a characteristic of design and installation, and affected by various personnel and logistic factors is one of the many system requirements which shall be considered during the system engineering effort. The degree of maintainability achieved depends upon the requirements imposed and the emphasis of management of maintainability. This standard defines a planned programme to be implemented for verification, demonstration and evaluation of maintainability. 0.3 This standard is Part 6 of the Guide on Maintainability of Equipment. Final publication of the complete series is expected to take some time but since each Part is able to make a contribution to the needs of other IS1 Technical Committees it has been decided to publish each part separately. The other parts of this standard are as follows: Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 Part 7 Introduction to maintainability requirements programme studies during the design phase and presentation of data related to in specifications and contracts Maintainability Maintainability Maintainability

Test and diagnosis procedures Collection, analysis maintainability

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from MIL-STD-471A ( 1973 ) ` Maintainability Verification/Demonstration/ Evaluation ' issued by-* the Department of Defence, United States of America ( USA). 3

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on reliability of electronic and electrical components and equipment. A list of standards published so far in this series is given on page 74.

1. SCOPE
standard ( Part 6 ) deals with the procedures and test methods for verification, demonstration and evaluation of qualitative and quantitative maintainability requirements. It also provides for qualitative assessment of various integrated logistic support factors related to and aiming at the achievement of maintainability parameters and equipment down time, for example, technical manuals, personnel, tools and test equipment, maintenance concepts and provisioning.
NOTE - This standard is intended for use when verification, demonstration and evaluation of maintainability requirements for electronic and electrical equipments and parts procurement is required. The verification, demonstration and evaluation of achievement of maintainability requirements shall normally be conducted in 3 ( three ) phases as described in 4.1.2 and also in conjunction with verification, demonstration and evaluation of the requirements for total integrated logistic support unless otherwise stipulated in procurement standards.

1.1 This

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions specified in IS : 1885 ( Part 39 )-1979* in addition to the following, shall apply.
2.1.1 Maintenance Task - The maintenance effort necessary for retaining an item in, changing to, or restoring it to a specified condition.
agency will provide to the maintenance agency any NOTE - The procurement terms that will be considered synonomous with the term `task' and will provide definitive criteria for determining different types of maintenance tasks and the timing of the tasks during verification/demonstration or evaluation.

2.1.2 Maintainability Model - A quantifiable representation of a test or specific process, the purpose of which is to analyse results to determine relationships of a set of quantifiable maintainability parameters.
from the date of 2.1.3 Verzjication - The effort of the manufacturer, accepting the supply order through hardware development up to the configuration item ( CI ).
NOTE - This effort includes determination of the accuracy of the analytical data ( predicted data ) obtained from the maintainability engineering analysis and its constant updatement, identifying maintainability design deficiencies and gaining progressive assurance that the maintainability of the item can be achieved and demonstrated in subsequent phases. *Electrotechnical (Jirst revision ). vocabulary: Part

39

Reliability

of electronic

and electrical

items

4

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 2.1.4 Demonstration - The joint effort of the manufacturer procurement agency to determine whether the specified contractual ments of maintainability have been achieved.
and the require-

2.1,5 Evaluation - The effort of the procurement agency in determining, at all levels of maintenance, the impact of the operational, maintenance and support environment on the maintainability parameters of the item and to demonstrate various levels of maintenance tasks. 2.1.6 Develobment Test and Evaluation ( D T and E ) - Test and evaluation which focuses on the technological and engineering aspects of the systems, sub-system or equipment. 2.1.7 Operational Test and Evaluation ( OT and E ) - Test and evaluation which focuses on the development of optimum tactics, tachniques, procedures and concepts for systems and equipment, evaluation of reliability, maintainability and operational effectiveness and suitability of systems and equipment under realistic operational conditions. 2.1.8 Maintenance Concept - A description of the planned general scheme for maintenance and support of an item in the operational environment. 2.1.9 Maintenance Environment - The climatic, geographical, physical and operational conditions ( for example, combat, mobile ) under which an item will be maintained. 3. OBJECT

3.X The

object of this standard is to establish uniform procedures, test methods and requirements for verification, demonstration and evaluation of the achievement of specified maintainability requirements and to assess the impact of planned logistic support. 4. REQUIREMENTS

4.1 General 4.1.1 Maintainability verification, demonstration and evaluation shall be performed in accordance with the maintainability verification/demonstration/evaluation test plans given under 5, which shall be prepared by the manufacturer and approved by the procurement agency.
4.1.2 The test plan when applied to the system level shall include the three phases, namely, verification ( Phase I ), demonstration ( Phase II ) and evaluation ( Phase III ). When the test plan is applied to less than a system level, the procurement agency shall specify the applicable phases. Figure 1 gives a general time phase relationship of the three phases which may differ for individual requirements. The procurement agency will provide guidance to the manufacturer as to the relationship between system

5

IS:9692(Part6)-1983
life cycle phase and the verification/demonstration/evaluation phases. For the complete accomplishment of the procedures contained in this standard the detailed information given in the manufacturer's maintainability analysis should be utilised [ see IS : 9692 ( Part 3 )-I981 * 1.
LIFE CYCLE TEST AND EVALUATION

CONCEPTUAL

DEVELOPMENT DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION TEST

PRODUCTION

DEPLOYMENT

OPERATIONAL

TEST

PROTOTYPE AVAILABLE I PHASE I PHASE II (DEMONSTRATION

FIRST UNIT OEPLOVEO I PHASE 111 ( EVALUATION

(VERIFICATION1

1

I

FIG.

1

TIME PHASED CHART FOR MAINTAINABILITY VERIFICATION/ DEMONSTRATION/EVALUATION

4.1.3 The maintainability analysis of the manufacturer shall contain a comprehensive description of the predicted maintenance tasks which shall include the following:

a) b)

Failure mode or symptom would initiate the corrective Frequency of occurrence every maintenance task; maintenance `action task;

and `how malfunction maintenance task; of each failure and mode unit

code'

which of

and symptom codes' time;

C>Appropriate 4 e)
Predicted

taken codes'

`work

for each

times for each element of people

of maintenance required

Skill levels and number task;

for each maintenance

f-1 Support equipment and tools required for each maintenance task; 8) Technical order interface for each maintenance task; h) Identification of preventive maintenance tasks; and j> Identification of those maintenance tasks which are not normally

or under any circumstances permitted to be performed concurrently with other maintenance tasks. It is assumed that all other maintenance tasks can be performed unrestricted by the performance of on going maintenance. of equipment: Part 3 Maintainability programme.

*Guide on maintainability

6

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 4.2 Verification ( Phase I )

4.2.1 During Phase I, the manufacturer shall conduct an incremental verification effort, commencing with initial design and continuing through hardware development from components and materials to the configuration item. The basic objectives of this phase are: a) Verification model; and updatement of the manufacturer's maintainability

b) Economical correction of design deficiencies and providing assurance that maintainability requirements will be achieved and demonstrated, by performing early in the design process maintainability verifications such as limited low confidence maintainability tests, time motion; measurements or such other tests as may be proposed by the manufacturer subject to the approval of the procurement agency; and c) Provision of progressive assurance that the maintainability requirements can be achieved and demonstrated and that elements of the integrated support plans directly related to maintainability are valid. 4.2.2 Maximum use shall be made of the data resulting from maintenance performed in conjunction with such tests as development, prototype, When the procurement stanmock-up, qualification and reliability tests. dards specify that the maintainability demonstration shall be part of Pha.se I, the maintainability demonstration and requirements of demonstration ( Phase II ) shall apply. 4.3 Demonstration ( Phase II )

4.3.1 The object of demonstration ( Phase II ) is to determine during development test and evaluation ( DT and E ) whether all specified maintainability contractional requirements, except as noted under evaluation ( Phase III ) have been achieved. During this phase, the procurement agency will manage and conduct a maintainability demonstration For those procurements which as part of the total system demonstration. do not require a total system demonstration, the maintainability demonstration to be conducted in this phase shall be an extension of Phase I. To assure acceptability of recorded data and resultant analysis, the manufacturer shall participate in this effort to the extent provided under 7. The following requirements ( see 4.3.1.1 to 4.3.1.12 ) shall apply to all maintainability demonstrations. Additional requirements or changes may be imposed on individual needs. 4.3.1.1 environment maintenance The maintainability demonstration shall be conducted in an which simulates, as closely as practicable, the operational and environment planned for the item. This environment shall be 7

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
representative of the working conditions, facilities and technical publications that tional service use at the maintenance maintenance plan. tools, support equipment, spares, would be required during operalevel defined in the approved

4.3.1.2 The personnel of the inspection authority named in the contract and assigned to the test organization shall operate and maintain the demonstration items ( see 5.2.3 and 7.2 ). When demonstration is conducted as an extension of Phase I, the procurement authority shall specify the personnel ( pertaining to the inspection authority named in the contract or the manufacturer ) who will operate and maintain the items. 4.3.1.3 In conjunction with the maintainability demonstration, the approved integrated support plan, when required and established by the manufacturer, sealed to the number of test items employed in the demonstration, shall be implemented by the test team to identify the logistic support provided during this phase. 4.3.1.4 and reported All maintenance data including depot level, shall be recorded to the test team as specified by the procurement agency.

4.3.1.5 Unless otherwise approved by the procurement agency, the configuration of the items of the system selected for maintainability demonstration shall be documented and certified by a physical configuration audit (PCA). 4.3.1.6 Unless otherwise support equipment used during approved by the procurement agency, all the demonstration shall be certified by PCA.

4.3.1.7 Maintenance task which may require fault simulation ( see 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 ) shall require that the item be checked for normal operation prior to failure simulation and after completion of the specified maintenance task. When a failure is simulated, it will be the responsibility of the test team to select the maintenance task, the failure to be simulated and the failure mode and to verify that the degree of fai!ure is representaThe work area in which tive of the maintenance task to be demonstrated. parts degradation or failure has been simulated shall contain no obvious evidence other than that normally resulting from the simulated mode of The appearance of the defective parts that are substituted for failure. The technicians serviceable parts shall be that of a normally failed part. shall not witness any fault insertions. Simulation of failures by introduction of faulty parts will not be used when the normal procedures could result in Each defective part is to be extensive damage to the item being tested. installed in the equipment in the same manner as the original part.

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 4.3.1.8 For maintenance presence of necessary spares, publications shall not assist the work to be done. Such sight from the technician. made available, if applicable.
tasks, whose faults have been simulated, the tools, test and support equipment or technical in faulty isolation of prematurely identifying items shall be covered or otherwise kept out of However, simulated discrepency data shall be

4.3.1.9 Maintenance personnel performing maintenance tasks for the demonstration shall be those named in the contract by the procurement agency with the exception that the manufacturer's personnel will perform those tasks specified to be performed by them during the operational service shall have received the training and be of use ( see 4.3.1.2 ). Technicians the equivalent skill level as specified in the standard personnel resource Exception to the documentation for the specified level of maintenance. training and skill level requirements may be made for specified tasks which will be performed by the manufacturer's personnel during operational service use. 4.3.1.10 Each maintenance task will be documented by personnel The total time measured for a technician to designated by the test team. perform each maintenance task shall be recorded and will include the time to perform each element of maintenance time. Each element will be documented separately. The total delay time for each maintenance task shall be documented. The test plan and procedures shall include delay time rules. 4.3.1.11 The time required to obtain support items ( appropriate test and support equipment, tools, spare parts, technical publications, etc ) from the defined work centre area shall be recorded. This time shall not, however, be chargeable as maintenance task time for the item being demonstrated unless this time is controlled or influenced by the design of the item being demonstrated. 4.3.1.12 Items to be furnished by the manufacturer shall be provided in the type, quality and quantity required for planned operation requirements scaled to the demonstration and evaluation requirements prior to the Items to be furnished by the procurestart of the phase being performed. ment agency shall be identified and requested by the manufacturer in time to be available prior to the start of the phase being performed.
4.4 Evaluation

( Phase III )

4.4.1 The object of evaluation ( Phase III ) is to evaluate the impact of the actual operational, maintenance and support environment on the maintainability parameters of the system and correction of deficiencies exhibited 9

IS : 9692 ( Part

6 ) - 1983

during Phase II and to demonstrate depot level maintenance tasks when applicable. A maintainability evaluation will be managed and conducted by the procurement agency during operational test and evaluation ( OT and To assure acceptability of recorE ) as part of the total system evaluation. ded data and resultant analysis, the manufacturer shall participate in Phase III to the extent described in 7 or as otherwise provided. The same conditions as outlined for Phase II ( see 4.3 ) shall apply except as given in 4.4.1.1 to 4.4.1.5. 4.4.1.1 All evaluation valent models. items shall be production or production equi-

4.4.1.2 The evaluation shall be conducted and maintenance environment unless otherwise ment agency.

in the actual operational directed by the procure-

4.4.1.3 All maintenance tasks will be accomplished by personnel of the inspection authority stated in the contract by the procurement agency except that the personnel of the manufacturer will perform those tasks specified to be performed by them during operational service use. 4.4.1.4 Depot level maintenance tasks shall be demonstrated and the data collected applied to the maintainability demonstration and evaluation. 4.4.1.5 Maintenance tasks to be evaluated shall be those resulting These directly from the incidental to actual operation and maintenance. tasks shall be supplemented by fault simulation only to evaluate specific tasks or special tasks ( see 6.2.3 ) that do not occur by chance during the evaluation phase.

5. MAINTAINABILITY VERIFICATION/DEMONSTRATION/ EVALUATION PLAN 5.1 The maintainability
verification/demonstration/evaluation plan which is designated as maintainability test plan hereafter shall form a part of the integrated support plan when an integrated support plan is required. The maintainability test plan shall be prepared and submitted as part of the manufacturer's proposal and progressively updated as design, develop It shall be available for in process review ment and fabrication proceed. Those portions of the total maintainability by the procurement agency. test plan applicable to specific phases ( verification, demonstration and evaluation ) shall be submitted to the procurement agency for approval prior to its implementation and not later than the date specified by the The plan shall be totally responsive to the qualitative and contract. quantitative requirements and supplemental information contained in the procurement documents and to the maintainability programme plan required

10

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1%3 by IS : 9692 ( Part 3 )-1981*.
The supplemental information shall include, but not to be limited to, maintenance concept, maintenance environment, skill levels of personnel, level( s ) of maintenance to be demonstrated and modes of operation of the test including configuration and omissions. Coordination of the maintainability verification, demonstration and evaluation with other required demonstrations shall be accomplished whenever The environment and possible to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. procedures shall represent, as closely as possible, those which can be expected in the intended operational use of the item. 5.2 The maintainability test plan prepared by the manufacturer in accordance with the Contract Data Requirement List ( CDRL ) shall include the following sections, as a minimum, identified with each of the three phases Certain sections cover material subject to other, unless otherwise specified. more specific, contractual requirements and may be included in the mainThey are tainability test plan as they are prepared in response thereto. included to ensure adequate attention and continuity. 5.2.1 Background following: Information This shall include a description requirements, of the

4 Quantitative and qualitative b) Maintenance concept, 4 Maintenance environment, 4 Level( s ) of maintenance, e) Sites, f 1 Facilities' requirement, 69 Participating agencies, h) Mode( s ) of operation of
mission Items requirements,

maintainability

the

items

including

configuration

and and

3 k)

subject

to verification,

demonstration for completion

and evaluation, `of the

Contractual data required demonstration/evaluation.

verification/

or _.. - inadequacies _ . of _ 5.2.2 Item Interfaces - A description of the adequacy the item support elements and an estimate of their effect on the. item maintainability. These elements shall include the following: a) Maintenance b) Support planning; and test equipment;

c) Supply support;
*Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 3 Maintainability programme.

11

1s : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

4 d f) d
5.2.3 a)

Transportation, Techincal Facilities; data; and

handling and storage;

Personnel and training.
Test Team -

This shall include a description of the following:

Organization; b) Degree of manufacturer and procurement agency participation including managerial, technical, maintenance and operation personnel; cl Assignment of specific responsibilities; and quantity, sources, training and indoctrination d) Qualifications, requirements for the test team personnel.
5.2.4 a) b) Su@bort Material -

This shall include a description of the following:

Support equipment, Tools and test equipment, manuals,

c> Technical

d) Spares and consumables, e) Safety equipment, and f) Calibration equipment.

5.2.5 Preparation for the following:

Stage -

This shall include a description of and schedule

a) Organization and assembly of the test team; b) Training of personnel; c) Preparation of facilities; and d) Availability, assembly, checkout support material. 5.2.6 Verijcation/Demonstration/Evaluation description of the following: a) Test objectives; b) Schedule of tests; c) Procedure for selection simulated ( see 6.2.2 ); of maintenance tasks when faults are and preliminary
Stage -

validation include

of a

This

shall

d) Identification of special maintenance tasks ( see 6.2.3 ); e) Test method including accept/reject decision criteria, risk, etc;
12

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

f 1 Data acquisition

method; and procedures;

gj

Data analysis Specific Units

methods

h)
3 k) 4 n)

data elements; of reports;

of measurements;

Type and schedule

Schedule of maintenance task accomplishment such as time change lubrication and turn around tasks; compliance tasks, inspection, and The maintenance tasks other than those listed in 5.2.6(m) to be verified, demonstrated and evaluated. These tasks may be prepared and submitted in a reference document.

5.2.7 Retest Stage - A provisional schedule for special or repeat tests to Deficiencies shall be corrected in investigate deficiencies or trouble areas. any item which has failed to meet the acceptance criteria. The corrected portions of the item and any other portions of the item affected by the correction shall be retested during this stage. The maintenance tasks to be demonstrated shall be as designated by the procurement agency. 6. TEST PROCEDURES

6.1 General - In designing the maintainability test procedures, both qualitative and quantitative requirements shall be verified, demonstrated and evaluated. Unless otherwise specified in the contract, qualitative maintainability requirements shall be verified, demonstrated and evaluated using the check lists prepared by the manufacturer. These check lists, to be approved by the procurement agency, will permit observations, analysis and identification of maintainability characteristics incorporated or omitted. Quantitative requirements shall be verified, demonstrated and evaluated by actual demonstration of maintenance tasks. 6.2 Maintenance Task Generation - All maintenance tasks shall be performed at the maintenance level approved by the procurement agency and in accordance with the approved maintenance plan. Maintenance tasks, both corrective and preventive, shall be generated by the following methods as identified in the final approved maintainability verification, demonstration and evaluation plan. 6.2.1 Actual operation of the item in the specified test, operational and maintenance environment. This method is preferred, provided that assurance can be given that sufficient number of maintenance tasks will occur during the test period to satisfy the minimum sample requirements of the test methods employed ( see Appendix A ). 13

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 6.2.2 Fault simulation by introduction of faulty parts, deliberate misalignment, open leads, shorted paths, etc. A maintenance task sampling plan shall be prepared by the manufacturer in accordance with the procedure described in Appendix B or as directed by the procurement agency for approval by the latter. The actual task selection, by the test team, shall not be ticcomplished until immediately prior to the demonstration.

6.2.3 ` Special ' maintenance tasks which require unique skills, equip The ment, test method, etc, will be selected by the procurement agency. method of demonstrating these tasks will be specified by the procurement agency. 6.3 Turnaround Tasks - Tasks comprising turnaround shall be demonstrated. These tasks shall be determined from the :planned operational use of the item. 6.4 Test Method - Statistical test methods and criteria for deciding whether specified maintainability requirements have been met are described in Appendix A. Guidance and selection and application of test methods is included with each selection of the test method shall be from Appendix A subject to procurement agency approval or as otherwise specified. 7. ADMINISTRATI0.N
7.1 General - The following procedures shall be followed in the administration of the verification, demonstration and evaluation of the maintainability of the item. - The procurement agency'slmanufac7.2 Test Team Responsibility turer's verification, demonstration and evaluation team(s) for each of the three applicable phases shall be empowered to make decisions for their respective organizations. Each member of the team may have advisers from his organization who are knowledgeable in the various aspects of the demonstration and the requirements of the verification/demonstration/ evaluation plan. The responsibilities of the team are in accordance with the manufacturer's approved maintainability verification/demonstration/ evaluation plan and shall include, but not limited to the following:

To maintain surveillance over maintenance and inspection operation. Any apparent discrepencies in maintenance task accomplishment and documentation observed by any member of the team will be brought to the attention of the remaining test team members within one working day of their occurrence for appropriate action.

b) To evaluate and validate maintenance

and operational data to determine applicable man hours, flying hours, operating time, maintenance time, down time, item status, etc. 14

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1963 c) To assure that the demonstration
item selected has been adequately prepared in accordance with applicable technical manuals and that no maintenance has been deferred that will compromise the successful completion of the next scheduled operation or mission prior to being placed in an operational ready status. maintenance time, elapsed down etc, should be chargeable in cases crew error has been committed. demonstra-

d) To decide if resulting failures, tirne, maintenance man hours, where operator or maintenance

e) To rule on questions of whether or not the verification, tion and evaluation plan has been adhered to. f)

To rule on controversial points which may arise that are not specifically covered by applicable specifications or other pertinent documentation. To determine those matters which require contractual interpretation or resolution by the appropriate decision making authority of the procurement agency and by the manufacturer's organization. For these matters, the test team majority and minority statements shall be submitted to the procurement agency and manufacturer's representative for resolution. status reports to the

g) To prepare and submit demonstration procurement agency and the manufacturer. h) To analyse data and determine the extent fied maintainability requirements. j)

of achievement

of speci-

To prepare and submit final results of each of the phases to the procurement agency and the manufacturer within the time period indicated in the approved test plan.

k) To assure that the following conditions have been fulfilled prior to the start of Phase II and Phase III and that a letter has been sent to the procurement agency, which, so attests: i) Each test item complies with the established configuration or that all deviations reported have been accepted by the procurement agency. It shall be the responsibility of the manufacturer to report all deviations from the approved configuration. ii) All required iii) technical manuals have been updated as necessary. The support resources are available in the type and quantity specified in the verification, demonstration and evaluation plan. properly

iv) All operator or maintenance crew personnel are trained and meet established skill level requirements.

v) All records of approved changes in personnel requirements, operating and maintenance manuals, data handling procedures and analysis techniques have been incorporated in the final revision of the verification, demonstration and evaluation plan. 15

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 7.3 Test Director - An individual, designated by the procurement agency as test director, shall decide in all cases of deadlock between the members of the team ( subject to contract negotiations where contractual obligations are in question ). 7.4 Instrumentation Failures - Any failures of test instrumentation used to measure the demonstration item for test purposes or failures induced by such test instrumentation installation or operation and all associated maintenance shall not be chargeable. 7.5 Maintenance Due to Secondary Failures - If any secondary failures result from a chargeable primary failure, the total resultant maintenance time to restore the items shall be chargeable as a single maintenance task, except when the secondary failure results from the method used to If the reason for the simulate a fault rather than from the fault itself. secondary failure is removed ( corrected ), the time charge for the secondary failure shall be deleted. 7.6 Inadequate Technical Manuals or Support Equipment - If in the accomplishment of a maintenance task, a technician finds the applicable technical manuals or support equipment to be inadequate, these instances shall be brought to the attention of the test team and, if the inadequacy is verified, this portion of the demonstration shall be terminated and times measured shall not be chargeable. Action shall be taken to correct the inadequacies of the technical manuals or support equipment, after which the same maintenance task shall be repeated. 7.7 Cautions - If an item is damaged or maintenance errors are induced by the item design complexity, by poor design practice or by following improper procedures that allow improper maintenance ( for example, interchangeability of connectors ) without proper cautions in the technical manuals, the failure and resultant maintenance times shall be chargeable. Action shall be taken to correct the improper procedures or deficiencies and the corrective action verified. When this action is completed, the maintenance time saved shall be deleted. 7.8 Personnel Number and Skill - Each task shall be performed by the prescribed number of personnel with the prescribed speciality codes and skills. If personnel are required on an intermittent or sequenced basis, the man hours assessed against the maintenance task will include the required standby time only if the standby time is of a type or duration which prevents standby personnel from performing other productive tasks. 7.9 Cannibalisation - The maintenance associated with the removal or reinstallation of the item or support equipment assemblies and/or components for cannibalisation purposes shall not be chargeable unless the deficiency can be directly related to lack of manufacturer recommendations 16

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
for proper level of support spares or expendables. action to correct the deficiency, the time charged If the manufacturer shall be deleted. takes

7.10 Availability - An item shall be considered in an operationally available or operationally ready status ( for aircraft ) if it is capable of performing in accordance with the item's specification or capable of performing the next scheduled assigned mission. 7.11 Maintenance Inspection - The look portion of any inspection such as pre-flight, post-flight, or phase of a phased inspection shall be considered a separate preventive maintenance task. Each fix of the portion of an inspection shall be considered a separate corrective maintenance task. 8. GFE/GFAE ITEMS Government Furnished Equipment ( GFE ) and Government Furnished Aeronautical Equipment ( GFAE ) items, the manufacturer is responsible for determining the GFE/GFAE maintainability characteristics and values required for his Configuration Item ( CI ) and for assuring that the GFE/GFAE maintainability characteristics and values are not degraded unless compensated for by the demonstrated characteristics and values for other Manufacturer Furnished Equipment ( MFE ) or GFE/GFAE. The Government will furnish data on known or estimated values of GFE/GFAE reliability and maintainability which shall be used, as applicable, in manufacturer's judgement. The manufacturer is responsible for estimating and demonstrating the maintainability requirements of the entire CI.

8.1 For

9. DATA COLLECTION
system used in Phase I and data elements collected shall meet the needs of the objectives of Phase I. In addition, the data system and data elements shall be compatible with the data system used and data elements collected in Phase II and III. During Phase II and Phase III, the test team shall establish and operate a data centre. All data recorded by the test team shall be made available to the manufacturer through the data centre. The test team shall utilise the data system specified by the procurement agency to record all mission debriefing, failure and maintenance data. The manufacturer shall describe maintenance tasks in a manner which will allow proper identification within the services maintenance data collection system that a particular task has occurred, for example, when using the System Effectiveness Data System ( SEDS ), a maintenance task description shall contain a work unit code. How Malfunctioned and Action Taken Code which uniquely identify that task. Supplementary data collection may be incorpomted if approved by the procurement agency. For those items for which the manufacturer has depot level repair responsibilities, he shall be responsible for preparation, accuracy and feedback of the depot level verification, demonstration and evaluation

9.1 The data collection

17

IS ? 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
maintenance data for all depot repairables generated. All depot level data elements collected shall be compatible with the data elements collected and recorded at the organisational and intermediate maintenance levels. All direct maintenance down time or man hours, as applicable, which is not specifically determined to be non-chargeable shall be included in the demonstration data and in the calculated quantitative value which determines compliance or non-compliance. Maintenance which might not be chargeable could result from such causes as follows: Maintenance and operational errors not a> manuals, manufacturer furnished training chargeable to technical or faulty design.

b) 4 4

Miscellaneous tasks such as keeping of records, taxiing and towing of aircraft to or from an area other than assigned work centre area. Repair of accident damage. ) which

Documented delay down time ( supply or administrative is clearly outside the responsibility of the manufacturer. tasks. of test instrumentation exclusive of normal

e) Modification f) Maintenance
guration.

confiinstallamainte-

9)

Maintenance time accountable to test instrumentation tions ( other than normal configuration ) accrued during nance task performance.

10. MAINTAINABILITY

PARAMETER

CALCULATIONS
demonstration The following in the specifi-

10.1 All data acceptable to the team and generated by the shall be used in calculating the maintainability parameters. are typical maintainability parameters which may be stated cations:
a) Mean-time-to-repair b) Manhour rate, maintenance time or manhours, and ( MTTR ),

c) Critical

d) Critical percentile and chargeable maintenance parameter for demonstration of availability ).

down

time

(a

Appendix A provides methods for calculating these values and the criteria for determining whether the requirements have been achieved. Other methods of calculation tailored to a specific procurement may be provided/approved by the procurement agency. 18

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 11. MAINTAINABILITY VERIFICATION/DEMONSTRATION/ EVALUATION REPORTS 11.1 A final report shall be submitted by the test team, after each phase, to the procurement agency in accordance with the schedule incorporated in the verification/demonstration/evaluation plan and the data requireThe procurement ments as per Manufacturer Data Requirements List. agency may require interim reports where additional detail or extended The final report shall include, as a test durations may be involved. minimum, the following:

b) Factors 4 Analysis 4 Results 4

Summary a>

of a data collected which influence of the data;

and location

of data file;

the data; objectives

of the phase and certification that the specified and requirements have or have not been met;

Assessment of the integrated logistic support factors, such as technical manuals, personnel, tools and test equipments, support equipment, maintenance concept and provisioning for their effect on quantitative and qualitative demonstration maintainability parameters; to and ) to be submitted as a supplement correct deficiencies and for suggested

f 1 Deficiencies; 9) Recommendations
improvements;

W

Results of retest ( if applicable to the final report.

12. ORDERING

DATA

12.1 The selected data requirements in support of this standard shall be reflected in the Manufacturer Data Requirements List attached to the Invitation for Bid or the Contract, as appropriate. request for Proposal, The following information shall be included in the applicable contractual documents:
a) Phases applicable to the procurement; of the test plan and test procedures for each b) Dates for submission phase; c) Tvne of nersonnel ratk and'maintain

( Government or manufacturer who will onethe item for maintainability demonstration 1; interim and supplemental

4

Dates for submission of the final, ( if required ) reports for each phase;

e) Data collection system; and f 1 Specification requirements and
19

test methods

( see Appendix

A ).

IS I 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

APPENDIX

A

[ CZauses 6.2.1, 6.4, 10.1, 12,1(f), B-3.1 and B-4.2.10 ]
TEST METHODS A-l. OBJECT
of this appendix the achievement is to describe of specified test methods and criteria quantitative maintainabi-

AND DATA

ANALYSIS

A-l.1 The object for demonstrating lity requirements.
A-2. APPLICATION

A-2.1 The various methods specified in this appendix are tabulated in characteristics of each test Table 1. This table summarises the major method and the quantitative requirements which shall be specified for each test method. The data analysis method included with each test method provides the decision criteria for acceptance or rejection of the item being demonstrated.
TABLE TEST METHOD (1) 1-A Mean TEST INDEX (2) 1 TEST METHODS SAMPLE SPECIFICATION SELECTION REQUIR-ENT (5) Natural occurring failures or Appendix B ,9 (6) Ho, HI, a, e

ASSUMED DISTRIBUTION (3) Log normal. Prior knowledge of variance None. Prior knowledge of variance normal. Log Prior knowledge of variance None

SAMPLE

SIZE (4) See Test Method

I-B

9,

29

2.

Critical percentile

,I

,*

9,

3.

Critical maintenance time or manhours Median

,,
20

,,

,,
ERT

4.

A specific variable log normal

>,

( Continued)

20

1s : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
TABLE TEST METHOD (1) 5. TEST INDEX (2) Chargeable maintenance down-time/ flight? None 1 TEST METHODS Contd SAMPLE SPECIFICATI~E SELECTION REQUIREMENT (5) (6) Natural occORR or A urring fail- NCMDT, NOF ures NOF DDT -NTF .a, B* Manhour rate, AMR
>,

ASSU~XED DISTRIBUTION (3)

SAMPLE SIZE (4) See Test Method

6. 7.

Manhour Manhour

ratef rateg

None None Natural occurring failures or Appendix B Natural occurring or simple random sampling

pEn,a*

a.

a) Mean and percentile

a) Log normal

1,

a) Mean, Mmax

b) Dual centile 9.

per-

b) None None 30 Min Natural cccurring or Appendix B

b) Dual percentile a) PC, ppm up/C*

a) Mean ( carrective task time, preventive maint enance time, dotin-time ) b) Mmax (90 or 95 percentile )

b) Mmax,

N

N

10.

a) Median (carrective task time, preventive maintenance task time)

None

50 Min

Natural occurring or Appendix B

a) Met, Mat*

b) Mmax (95

percentile ) corrective maintenance task time preventive maintenance task time

b) Mm=c,
M maxpm

CContinued )

21

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
TABLE TEST METHOD (1) 11. TEST INDEX (2) a) Mean ( pre- None ventive maintenance task time ) b) Mmax ( prev entive maintenance task time, at any percentile )

1 TEST METHODS
ASSUMED DISTRIBUTION (3)

-

Con6d

SAMPLE SIZE (4) All possible tasks

SABLE SPECIFICATION SELECTION REQUIREMENT (5) All (6) a) Irpm*

b) Mmaxpm

*See A-6, for definitions of the symbols. *Test Method 5 is an indirect method for demonstrating Operational Ready Rate ( ORR ) or Availability ( A ). $Test Method 6 is intended for use with aeronautical systems and sub-systems. �Test Method 7 is intended for use with ground electronic systems where it may be necessary to simulate faults.

A-3.

SAMPLE

SIZE

A-3.1 Each of the test p!ans contained in this appendix includes an equation or other directions for determining a minimum sample size of maintenance tasks. Any departure from the minimum sample size requireSome of the ment can affect the statistical validity of the test procedures. test plans in the appendix require a prior estimate of the variance of the distribution of interest for the calculation of sample size. Such prior estimates, subject to the approval of the procurement authority, can be obtained from data on similar equipment provided similarities in maint.ainability design, skill levels of maintenance personnel, test equipment, manuals and the maintenance environment are considered in the estimation process. Equations for predicting the variance, when prior estimates are not available, should be obtained from appropriate ` Maintainability Prediction and Demonstration Techniques ' manuals, which can be used, provided the information needed for the production is available. The 85th-95th upper confidence bound on the predicted or estimated variAverage ance shall be used to ensure Dreservation of desired risk values. observed values of the variance have ranged from us = 0.5 to 02 = 1.3. 1

A-4.

TASK

SELECTION

A-4.1 Selection of tasks to be sampled when employing fault simulation with Appendix B of this standard. The will be made in accordance over and/or Procuring Agency shall have the option of surveillance 22

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1989
participating in the random selection of tasks comprising the demonstration population ( co1 11 of Table 3 ) down to and including the specific faults This shall occur at a specific conference at a time estabto be simulated. lished by the manufacturer, consistent with the Maintainability Programme In the event that tasks so chosen can result in events Plan schedule. detrimenta to safety of personnel or property, appropriate redesign action shall take place; in the event that secondary failures result, they will be `documented and their impact on item maintainability assessed. A report of such findings shall be made to the procuring agency. Care shall be exercised in selecting and sampling tasks to ensure that a true simpIe random sample is obtained when sequential tasks are employed. Departures from simple random sampling, such as proportionate stratified sampling, can effect the validity of the test procedures presented herein. However, this effect is considered minimal for the sample size required by the test procedures which are not sequential tests. Simple random samp ling shall be used for sequential tests. A-5. TEST SELECTION

A-5.1 In general, the test index to be demonstrated is the primary consiConsiderable savings in sample size deration in selecting a test procedure. can be obtained by use of sequential test procedures in preference to fixed As a general rule, however, the sequential test should be sample tests. used only when prior knowledge ( for example, from the prediction ) indicates that the equipment may be much better ( or worse ) than the specified values. A-5.2 The justification for the use of log normal assumption for corrective maintenance times is based on extensive analysis of field data which have shown that the log normal distribution provides a good fit to the data. However, in those cases where it is suspected that the log normal assumption does not hoId ( for example, equipment with a high degree of built in diagnostics ), then a distribution-free method should be employed to ensure preservation of specified risks. A-6. SYMBOLS

A-6.1 The following symbols and notations are common to the test methods 1 to 4 and 8 to 11 contained in this appendix. The symbols and notations for tests 5 to 7 are explained in their respective test methods. X = the random variable teristics of interest. X can denote nance time, task, etc. which denotes the maintenance charac-

corrective maintenance time, preventive maintefault location time, manhours per maintenance or value of the random variable X.

Xi = the ith observation

23

IS:9692(Part6)-1983
n
I

sample size.

IF = sample mean.

as=E[(LnXp =E( da= Var( X) -

0 )s 1, the true variance of LnX. E [ ( X F )s 1, the true variance of X.

X),thetruemeanofX.

2s = sample variance of X.

&=
XP -

prior estimate of the variance
( 1 p

of the maintenance

time.

)th percentile of X.

Example: Xs.s, is 95th percentile of X. G = X0.6, the median of X. Y = LnX, the natural logarithm of X. F = sample mean of Y. 8 = E ( LnX ), the true mean of LnX. T- Q prior estimate of the variance of the logarithm of maintenance times. normal deviate exceeded with probability, p,

ss = sample variance of LnX. zD ._ = standardized that is, co p=q I
P z.&. q 1-P) =

1 2/27r

,(

-2?,,

standardised normal babilities M and ( 1 24

deviates, exceeded @ ) respectively.

with pro-

1s : 9691 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
a = producer's
risk; the probability that the euipment will be rejected when it has a true value equal to the desired value ( Hs ).

fi =

consumer's risk; the probability that the equipment will be accepted when it has a true value equal to the maximum tolerance value ( HI ). value specified fication and is expressed tile, critical maintenance in the contract or specias a mean, critical percentime.

Ho = desired

HI = maximum

tolerable value ( Note: Ho <HI ) when X is a log normally distributed random variable: -1 *Is* (LnXB)s,

f(X)

=

J%

G o<x<co

where

If T = LnX, then the probability with mean 8 and variance T~.YV(&/.P) X,1 = maintenance downtime task ( of the Gh task ). downtime X pmi = maintenance task ( of the Gh task ).

density 02:

of Y is normal,

per corrective per preventive

maintenance maintenance

no = number
npm = #J = number

of corrective of preventive

maintenance maintenance

tasks sampled. tasks sampled.

that value, corresponding from a table of normal test.

to risk, which is obtained distribution for a one-tail tasks time tasks time

f. =
f pm =

number of expected corrective maintenance occurring during a representative operating ( I). number of expected occurring during a ( =)a item representative preventive maintenance representative operating time period. in the

T =

operating

Dt = total maintenance downtime operating time ( I). -EC, X,m, xp,O =

representative prevenmainte-

mean downtimes of sample. ( Corrective, tive and combined corrective/preventive nance times. ) 25

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

M'max =
C

sample calculated downtime. specified

maximum

corrective

maintenance time. time.

pc = specified mean corrective
CLPrn =

maintenance maintenance

mean preventive

PPlC =

specified mean maintenance time ( taking both corrective and preventive maintenance time into account ). a requirement levied in terms of a maximum value of a percentile of task times ( that is, 95 percent of all corrective task times shall be less than 60 minutes ) usually taken as the 90th or 95th percentile. specified times. specified times. Mm, Mmax of corrective maintenance maintenance the downdownof

M max =

M max M max

c

= =

Pm

of preventive

8, = Met = M,, =

value of E( LnX, ), expected corrective maintenance tasks. median median value of corrective value of preventive

logarithms tasks. tasks.

maintenance maintenance

Proberties of the Cog normal distribution Mean, p = d2 = M =e' 7eib-@Z) X, = e ( c + ZW ) e e ( * 4 + O3 ) ' ( eo2 1)

Variance, Median, Mode (1 M

P ) th percentile,

Table of standardized normal deviates P 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.30
51,

2.33 1.65 1.28 I.04 0.84 0.52

26

1s: A-7. TEST METHOD 1TEST

9692 ( part 6 ) - 1983

ON THE MEAN

A-7.1 General - This test provides for the demonstration of maintainability when the requirement is stated in terms of both a required mean value ( p1 ) and design goal value ( p0 ) [ or when the requirement is stated in terms of a required mean value ( pr ) and a design goal value ( pa ) is chosen by the manufacturer 1. The test plan is subdivided into two basic procedures, identified here as test plan A and test plan B. Test plan A makes use of the log normal assumption for determining the sample size and test plan B does not. Both the tests are fixed sample tests ( minimum sample size of 30 ) which employ the Central Limit Theorem and the asymptotic normality of the sample mean for their development. A-7.2 Assumptions

A-7.2.1 Test A - Maintenance times can be adequately described by a log normal distribution. The variance os of the logarithms of the maintenance times is known from prior information or reasonably precise estimates can be obtained. A-7.2.2 Test B - No specific assumption concerning the distribution of The variance d'r of the maintenance maintenance times are necessary. times is known from prior information or reasonably precise estimates can be obtained. A-7.3 Hypothesis H, : Mean is = p0 . . . . . . (l-1)

HI : Mean is =

~1, ( ~1 > p. )

. .._.. (l-2)

Illustration -

H,, : p. = 30 min HI : pl = 45 min
risk CL and consumer's

A-7.4 Sample Size - For a test with producer's risk p, the sample size for Test A is given by
-2

.(I-3) where u is a prior nance times: estimate of the variance of the logarithms of mainte-

(l-4)

where dz is a prior estimate of the variance ,& and <p are standardised normal deviates. 27

of the

maintenance

times.

IS : 9691 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 A-7.5 Decision Procedure - Obtain a random sample of n maintenance times, Xr, Xs _. . . . . . . X,, and compute the sample mean

and sample

variance

,....

(l-6)

Test A : Accept

if3

Q p0 + &

ddY --$.

. . . . . . ( 1 - 7) n ...... ( 1 - 8 )

Test B : Accept if x
Reject

Q pLo f

&

otherwise.

A-7.6 Discussion - By the central limit theorem, the sample mean 3 is approximately normal for large n with mean E ( X ) and variance Var ( x). In Test A under the log normal assumption:

where d2 =

e

p+:q

(,"-1)

=p2(e Thus, the sample

u2

-1) using a prior estimate ofk

size can be computed

In Test B, a prior estimate late the sample size. A critical value C is chosen

of dr is assumed to be available such that

to calcu-

c=,,+&~/=~~--_~~/ If p = P(Zgc)=p A-7.7 Example - It is desired to test the hypothesis that the mean corrective maintenance time is equal to 80 minutes against the alternate hypothesis that the mean is 45 minutes, ff = p = 28 0.05 p,,, then P(r>C)=aandifp=~_~~,then

ISr9692(Part6)-1989

Solution H 0 : p. = 30 minutes. H 1 : pl = 45 minutes. Test `A '
Under the log-normal assumption, ( 1 3 ) is (e0.s_l)=56 with prior estimate of 2 = 0.6, the sample size using equation

n= Test `B'

[1*65(30)+1*65(45)P ( 45 - 30 )s

Under the distribution free case with ( or d = 30 ), the sample size using equation

a prior estimate ( 1 - 4 ) is

of dT=

900,

A-7.8 OC Curve - The OC Curve for Test B for this example is given in Fig. 3. It gives the probability of acceptance for values of the mean The OC Curve for Test A for maintenance time from 20 to 60 minutes. It gives the probability of acceptance for this example is given in Fig. 2. Thus, if the true value of various values of the mean maintenance time. p is 40 minutes, then the probability that a demonstration will end in acceptance is 0.21 as seen from Fig. 2.

PO0

OC CURVE

ITEST

1Al

8 a t g z b z 3 B 8 0 faz

0.60

0.60

O-b0

o-20

o-00 20-00 25-00 3oao 35-00 10.00 L 5a 50-00 55-00 6Mla

MEAN

MAINTENANCE

TIME

FIG. 2

MEAN 29

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

MEAN

MAINTENANCE

TIME

FIG. 3 TEST METHOD 2 -

MEAN

TEST ON CRITICAL PERCENTILE

A-8.1 General - This test provides for the demonstration of maintainability when the requirement is stated in terms of both a required critical percentile value ( T1 ) and a design goal value ( Ta ) [ or when the requirement is stated in terms of a required percentile value ( I; ) and a design goal value ( 2-0 ) is chosen by the manufacturer 1. If the critical The percentile is set at 50 percent, this test becomes a test of the median. test is a fixed sample size test. The decision criterion is based on the asymptotic normality of the maximum likelihood estimate of the percentile value.
A-8.2 Assumption - Maintenance times can be adequately described by a log-normal distribution. The variance us of the logarithms of the maintenance times is known from prior information or reasonably precise estimates, can be obtained, A-8.3

Hypothesis
H,, : ( 1 - p ) th percentile, orP[X> To]==@ Hr : ( 1 X, X = =

T, Tl TO)-

. . . . . . (2-l) . . . . .. ( 2 - 2 >

p ) th percentile, orP[X> Tl]=p,(

fl>
30

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 Illustration: Ha : 95th percentile Ln T, = 0.405 H1 : 95th percentile = 5 X, = X0.,, = X0.,, = = 1.5 hours = 2 hours = ir, Tr

= X,

Ln CT1= 0.693 2.
A-8.4 Sample Size - In order to meet specified CI and /3 risks, the sample size to be used can be obtained from the following formula

n=

( 2 + 52
____ 2

>

;a

(

Ln P I- + Ln " TfJ >2

.., *...

(2-3)

y is a prior estimate of Ua, to be rounded up to the next integer where u the true variance of the logarithms of the maintenance times and <r is the standardized normal deviate corresponding to the ( 1 - p ) th percentile. A-8.5 Decision Procedure Compute F, ~2 and X* as follows:

E: Ln Xi
i=l 1 [ i-l

. . . . . . (2-4)

s2 =

~

n-l

n Z (LnXi)a-nP I

. .._.. (2-5)

X*

= Ln To + <a S X*

. . . . . . (2-6)
. . . . . . (2-7) the log

Accept if 7 + zp S < Reject otherwise.

A-8.6 Discussion - This test is based on the fact that under normal assumption, the ( 1 - p ) th percentile value is given by X, e ( 6 + 5t.P ) logarithms,

Taking

Ln X,

=

e + i&a
for the normal parameters likelihood estimate is 6 and

and using maximum likelihood estimates tr, the ( 1 - p ) th percentile maximum

Lnil,=T+<pS

n d n

'

LnXp

which is approximately normal. To meet the producer's and consumer's risk requirements, a critical value X* is chosen for the sample estimate of the ( 1 - Jo ) th percentile X,. It may be noted thatT= i an estimate for 8.

31

IS t 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1963
A-6.7 Example -

The following hypothesis are to be tested at

a

= p = O-10 H,, 95th percentile =X0.06 = 1.5 hours = rTO; In To = O-405 5 HI = 95 percentile = Xoeo5 = 2 hours = Tl In l-1 = 0.693 2
A prior estimate "as is equal to 1.0 using equation ( 2 - 3

2.56 )" 2 + ( 1*6512 (l) ( In 2.0 In 1.5 )" 2 C that is, n = 187. The critical value X* is given by equation ( 2 - u ); n=

1 [
2(n+

(

1'

),

X* = In I,

+ Z& S
1

4 I)_ -I ( 1.65 )" & 372

22

= In 1.5 + 1.28 S c 187 = 0.405 5 + 0,143 7 s

1

value of Xs.,, is 1.7 hours, then the probability end in acceptance is 0.57 as seen from Fig. 4.
OC CURVE I TEST 2 I

A-8.8 OC Curve - The OC Curve for this example ( Test Method 2 ) is of acceptance for various values given in Fig. 4. It gives the probability If the true of the 95th percentile of the maintenance time distribution.
that a demonstration will

0.60

-

800

, 130
l-30 1.10 l30 1.60 1

95th PERCENTILE

OF MAINTENANCE

TIME

DISTRIBUTION

FIG. 4

PERCENTILE

32

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1963 A-9. TEST METHOD 3 - TEST TIME OR MAN-HOURS ON CRITICAL MAINTENANCE

A-9.1 General - This test provides for the demonstration of maintainability when the requirement is specified in terms of both a required critical maintenance time ( or critical man-hours ) ( X,1 ) and design goal value ( X,, ) [ or when the requirement is stated in terms of a required critical maintenance time ( X,r ) and a design goal value ( Xn, ) is chosen by the contractor 1. The test is distribution free and is applicable when it is desired to establish controls on a critical upper value on the time or man-hours to perform specific maintenance tasks. In this test, both the null and the alternate hypothesis refer to a fixed time and the percentile varies. It is different from test method 2 where the percentile value remains fixed and the time varies. A-9.2 Assumptions - No specific assumptions are necessary the distribution of maintenance time or man-hours. A-9.3 Hypothesis H,,: H,: l-=X, Z-= . . . . ..( 3 - 1 ) regarding

X,,"p'?:!...
for specified a and B:

. . . . ..( 3 - 2 1

Illustration: Ho : 30 minutes = Xs.5s = 50th percentile ( median ) HI : 30 minutes = XD.76 = 25th percentile. A-9.4 Sample Size and Acceptance Number - The normal approximation to the binomial distribution is employed to find n ( sample size ) and c ( acceptance number ) when p. is not small. Otherwise, the Poisson approximation is employed. The equations for n and e are as follows: a) For 0*209P,90+30.
n =

(Pi = 1 1

Qi)
. . . ... ( 3 - 3 >

Use next higher integer value . . . . . . (3-4) Use next lower integer value. b) For P,<O*2O

Z'P~PI 1

QI

-I- 4df'~" p1- PO

33

1S : 9692 ( Part 6

j-

19&?

The values of n and c can be found from the following two equations:

(nPolY y=;e-nPo
)

1

_-cc

0

Y!

. . . . ..

(S-5)

y

nP1 ( nP1)' =ie0

Gp

Y!
sampling plans for various

. . . . . . (3-6)
GCand p risks and ratios

Table

2 provides

P1IP, when PO< 0.20.
A-9.5 Decision Procedure - In this method, random samples of maintenance times are taken, yielding n observations X1, X,... . . . . ..X. The number of such observations exceeding the specified time T is counted. The number is called y. Then, Accept Reject

Ho if y<c Ho if y >c

A-9.6 Discussion - In the development of the decision criteria and sample size, equations for the test, the normal or Poisson approximation to the binomial distribution is used. A-9.7 Example - A median value of 30 minutes is considered acceptable whereas if 3~ minutes is the 25th percentile, it is considered unacceptable cc=fi=o~lo.

Ho : 30 minutes = X s.60 = 50th percentile HI : 30 minutes = X0.,, = 25th percentile
Then, <a = <p = 1.28

median

PO = 0.50 PI = 0.75
Using n=( equations 1.28)s ( 3 - 3 ) and ( 3 - 4 ), __ .____ _ _ J@zj-~O?Fg + d/(0*50) (0.50) (0.25) 0*5*/@`75) 1*28,/ (0.25) +

1

zz23 _14 3 -

1.28 (0*75)4io-~O~ l-28,/ (0.75) (0.25)

(0.50) (0.50) +

A-9.8 OC Curve -The OC Curve for this method and for this example It gives the probability of acceptance for values of is given in Fig. 5. probability p, varying from 0.3 to 1-O. Here, X, = ( 1-p )th percentile. Hence, if the true value of the given critical maintenance time is 40th percentile, that is, if the value of P is O-6, then the probability that a demonstration will end in acceptance is 0.61 as seen from Fig. 5. 34

TABLE

2 SAMPLING PLANS FOR SPECIFIED P,,, PI, a and p WHEN PO IS SMALL (for example, PO < 0'20) ( Clause A-9.4)

k = ;+ p = 0.05 c _--__.____--____ DC

a = 0'05 p = 0'10 DE 4 54 18 10 7 5 3 2 5 43.4 12'4 6'17 3.98 2'61 1.37 0'818 6 39 14 8 6 4 3 1 p = 0.20 DC 7 30.2 9'25 4'70 3.29 _ 1.97 1.75 0'353 8 51 17 10 7 4 3 1 6 = 0.05 DC 9 43.0 12'8 7.02 4'66 2'43 1.75 0'532

cc = 0'10 g = 0'10 DC 10 40 14 8 5 3 2 1 11 33.0 10.3 5.43 3.15 1'75 1.10 0'532 g = o*zo--__--_12 29 10 6 4 2 2 1 DC 13 23.2 7'02 3.90 2'43 1.10 1'10 0'824 14 36 12 7 4 3 2 1 -S = 0'05 DC 15 31.8 9'91 5.58 3.09 2'30 1.54 0'825

CL = 0'20 S = 0'10 DC 16 27 9 5 3 2 1 1 17 23'5 7.29 3.84 2'30 1'54 0'824 0.824 18 17 6 3 2 1 1 0 @ = 020 D 19 14'4 4.73 2'30 1'54 0.824 0'824 0.227

1 2 3 ---________-------_----1.5 2
;;:

66 22 13 9 6 4 2

54'1 15'7 8.46 5.43 3'29 1.97 0'818

2'5 3 4 5 10

To find the sample size a, for given PO, PI, cc, and g, divide the appropriate than the quotient. tance number is
c =

D value by PO and use the greatest integer less = 4. Then n = oG =s = 48. The accep-

Example: 4.

PO = 0.05, PI = O-20, u = 0.10, g = 0'05, and k = ii:

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 I
lQ0 i

050

060

0.70

PROBABILITY FIG. 5

P

-_)

PROBABILITY. P

A-10. TEST METHOD 4-TEST ON THE MEDIAN ( ERT ) A-10.1 General - This test provides for the demonstration of maintainability when the requirement is stated in terms of an equipment repair time (ERT) median which will be specified in the detailed equipment specification. A-10.2 Assumption - The assumption made in this method is that the underlying distribution of corrective maintenance task times is log normal. This A-10.3 Sample Size - The sample size required is 20. shall be used to apply the equation given in this test method. sample size

A-10.4 Task Selection and Performance - Sample tasks shall be The duration of each sample task shall be selected as per Appendix B. recorded and used to compute the following statistics: Log

MTTR,

=-!-

nc

`C i=l

z Log

xc1

... ... ...

(4 - 1)

S =where

n~i~Iw% XciP C
MTTRa

(Log

M7TR0,`]4 .........(4

- 2)

It is equivalent

= Measured geometric mean time to repair. to the M,t used in other plans in this specification.
36

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 A-10.5 Decision Procedure - The equipment under test will be considered to have met the maintainability requirement ( ERT) when the measured geometric mean time to repair ( MTTRo ) and standard deviation ( S ) as determined in equations ( 4 - 1) and ( 4 - 2 ) satisfy the following expression: Accept if Log Ml-T& where Log

< Log ERT+O*397

(S)

. . . . ..(4 - 3)

ERT

Log MTTRo

= logarithm of the equipment repair time, = value determined in accordance with A-10.4,
S = value determined in accordance with A-10.4.

and

A-10.6 Discussion - The value of equipment repair time ( ERT) to be specified in the detailed equipment specification should be determined using the following expression.

ERT ( specified
where

) = 0.37 ERT,,,

. . . . ..(4 - 4)

ERTmax = maximum
more than 0.37 =

value of ERT that should be accepted 10 percent of the time; and

no

a value resulting from application of ` student's t ' operating characteristics that assures a 95 percent probability that an equipment having an acceptable ERT will not be rejected as a result of the maintainability test when the sample size is 20 and assuming a population standard deviation (u) of 0.55. of Criteria of various criteria specified

A-10.7

Derivation

A-10.7.1 The explanation of the derivation here are for information only.

A-10.7.2 The acceptance criterion, Log MTTR,< Log ERT+O*397(S) assures a probability of 0.95 of accepting an equipment or systems as a result of one test when the true geometric mean time to repair is equal to the specified equipment repair time ( that is, a probability of 0.05 of rejecting an equipment or systems having true MTTR, equal to the specified ERT ). This formula has been derived by using conventional methods for establishing acceptance criteria. The conventional methods for determining acceptance criteria based on the measured mean of a small sample (sample size less than 30 ) and also when the true standard deviation ( cr ) of the population can only be estimated is to compare the measured mean with the desired mean using the expression.

37

IS t 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 8-X0 s

t= sd
where XX ro
%

2/n,
deviation of the sample.

2(X,-X)8 aa

or the standard

sample or measured = specified
=

mean,

or desired mean, of the sample.

sample size, and Xi = value of one measurement

A-10.7.3 The decision to accept the product will be made when the test results give a value oft as calculated from the above expression which is numerically less than or equal to a value oft obtained from `student's t' distribution tables at the established level ( such as 0.99, 0.95, 090, etc ) The `student's t' distribuof acceptance and the appropriate sample size. tion tables ( for a single tailed area ) give a value of t=1*729 at the 0.95 acceptance level when the sample size is 20 ( that is, 19 degrees of freedom ). The table for single tailed area is used since only values of MTTRQ greater than the specified ERT are critical. An equipment with any value of MTTR, lower than the specified ERT is acceptable. TO apply the expression for t to the maintainability test, the following method should be followed: Let 38 = se .N=

ERT ( specified ), &SF = Log MTTRo ( measured),
measured standard deviation of the logarithms of measured repair time, and sample size of 20. with the desired ERT by of the sample

Log

The measured MTTRa is then compared calculating the value of t using the expression: t = (Log

MTTRrLogERT)Jx S-

.

The equipment under test can be acceptabIe if the vaIue of t cakulated from the expression above is equal to or less than l-729 ( the value of t from the `student's t' distribution tables at an acceptable level of 0.95 when the sample size is 20 ). Therefore, the equipment should be accepted when
4s

(Log MTTRo - LogER'U<1.72g
S

38

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
After re-arranging criterion will be Log MTTRo and simplifying Log this expression, (S) the acceptance

-

ERT

f

1.729 419-

that is, Log MTTRa<

Log ERT

+ 0.397 (S). MAINTE-

A-11. TEST METHOD 5 - TEST ON CHARGEABLE NANCE DOWNTIME PER FLIGHT A-11.1 General

- Due to the relatively small size of the demonstration fleet of aircraft and administrative and operational differences between the fleet and fully operational fleet, operational ready rate or availability can not be demonstrated directly. However, a contractual requirement for chargeable downtime per flight can be derived analytically from an operational requirement of an operational ready rate or availability. This chargeable downtime per flight can be thought of as the allowable time ( hours ) for performing maintenance provided that the aircraft has levied on it a certain availability or operational readiness requirement. The requirement for chargeable downtime per flight will be established using Chargeable downtime per flight can the procedure outlined in A-11.4. then be demonstrated using the procedures given in A-11.6.
A-l I.2 Definitions method. -The following definitions are applicable to this

A = Availability. A measure of the degree ( expressed as a probability ) to which an aircraft is in the operable and committable state at the start of the mission when the mission is called for at an unknown ( random ) point in Here, availability is considered synonymous with time. operational readiness. The aircraft is not considered to be in an operable and committable state when it is being serviced and is undergoing maintenance. TOT Active Time = Total active time in hours. = The time during which an aircraft is assigned to an organisation for the purpose of performing the organisational mission. It is the time during which: a) aircraft is flying or is ready to fly, is being is delayed performed, for supply and or administrative b) maintenance c) maintenance reasons. DUR AFL NOF = Daily utilisation = = Average Number

rate.

The number Flying

of flying hours per day.

flight length.

hours per flight.

of flights per day. 39

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
DT = Downtime. Time (in hours ) during which the aircraft is not ready to commence an assigned mission ( for example, flight crew not boarding the aircraft ). Chargeable maintenance downtime. Time ( in hours ) during which maintenance personnel are working on the aircraft except when the only work being done would fall downtime non-chargeable maintenance under the ( NCMDT ).

CMDT

=

NCMDT

= Non-chargeable maintenance downtime. Time ( in hours ) during which an aircraft is not available for immediate flight but the only maintenance being performed is not chargeable. It would include the following: a) To correct maintenance or operational errors not attributable to technical orders, contractor furnished training or faulty design; b) Miscellaneous tasks such as keeping of records or taxiing or towing the aircraft to or from other than the work centre area; c) Repair of accident or battle damage; d) Modification e) Maintenance tasks; and caused by test instrumentation,

DDT

-

Delay downtime. Downtime ( in hours ) during which maintenance is required but no maintenance is bemg performed on the aircraft for supply or administration reasons. It includes the following: a) Supply delay downtime: i) Not operationally and ii) Item obtainment centre area. b) Administrative i) Personal breaks ready supply ( NORS ) time,

time from other than the work

delay downtime: such as coffee or lunch, persons available and for adminis-

ii) No maintenance trative reasons. a =

Producer's risk. The risk that the producer ( contractor ) shall take that the hypothesis that a true mean =IW,, will be rejected even though it is true. The desirable value of a shall be determined by ,judgement and agreed upon by the procurement authority and the contractor. All other things being equal, a smaller value of CLwill require a larger size.

40

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 ilf = Maximum flight. mean mean chargeable CMDT maintenance downtime per

MO = Required M - M, = Difference

per flight.

between the maximum mean ( h1) of the parameter being tested and the specified mean ( MO ). This value shall be determined in conjunction with a value for p the consumer's risk. M is a value greater ( worse ) than the specified mean which the consumer is willing to accept, but only with a small risk or probability ( p ). If the true mean is, in fact, equal to the value of M selected the hypothesis that the true mean ( M,, ) will be accepted, although errorneously, is 100 p percent of the time.

p =

Consumer's risk. The risk which the consumer is willing to take of accepting the hypothesis that the true mean is equal to MO when in fact, the true mean is equal to M. All other things being equal, a smaller value of p will require a larger sample size.

u = True standard deviation of the parameter ( CMDT per flight ) being tested. This value, unless it is a specification requirement, will not be known and an estimate of this shall be made. It is assumed that both M and M, will have The contractor's maintainability the same value of U. mathematical model, previous models or previous data may be used for this purpose. All other things being equal, a larger value of u will require a larger sample size. A-11.3 Assumptions - This method requires no assumption for the probability distribution of chargeable downtime per flight. This method is valid only if the Central Limit Theorem is applicable, which means, the sample size ( number of flights ) is large enough for this theorem to be applicable. The sample size shall be atleast 50 but the actual size is to be determined in accordance with A-11.5. A-II.4 Derivation of CMDT per Flight from Availability

A-11.4.1 The requirement for CMDT per flight which will be demonstrated can be determined using the mathematical derivation given below: A=lA (TOT CMDT CMDT __NOF ) = = TOT TO-l CMDT -A + NCMDT TOT ) + DDT DDT DDT . . . . . . (5-l) ... ... ( 5 - 2 ) . .. ... ( 5 - 3 ) . . . . . . (5-4)

CMDT ( TOT

NCMDT NCMDT

=TOT

--(TOT)-NCMDT-DDT NOF 41

1s : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
but
NOF

-- TOT ( DUR 1
_

therefore, CMDT -NV =

24 ( \ AFL

)
I

. . . . . . ( 5 - 5) A ( 24 ) ( AFL DUR NCMDT ---NT NOF ) DDT . . . . . . (5-6)

24 ( AFL DUR

) -

hence, CMDT NOF = CMDT per flight, which will be demonstrated.
and AFL should be those planned are a function for the aircraft operational

NOTE 1 -Values for DUR during the operational use.
NOTE 2 Values for x$$T

and _DDx NOF

of the

environment. They will be provided to the contractor in the RFP or, if not, will be The value for availability or operational ready provided by him in his proposal. rate will be provided in the RFP.

A-11.4.2 per flight

The following

example

will show how a requirement

for CMDT

- ( CMDT - ) is derived. NOF

Required A = 0.75 DUR = 2 hours per day AFL = 4 hours per flight NCMDT ~ NOF DDT -.-NOF Therefore CMDT __-.NOF24(4) ( 0.75 ) ( 24 ) ( 4 ) = 2 = 48 : 36 - 0.2 - I.0 = 10.8 hours per flight. Size _ 0.2 _ 1.0 = O-2 hours per flight = 1 hour per flight

A-11.5

Sample

A-11.5.1 Since the Central Limit Theorem is applied, the expected distribution of the means will be in the form of a normal distribution as in Fig. 6. If the true mean is equal to MO and a particular tl is desired, the upper distribution ( mean of the distribution will be equal to MO ) will apply. It is on this basis that an acceptance rule is generated to the effect that if x is found to be equal to or less than the value M,, + item is to be accepted. 42 <a" ,, r the

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

where M + $$

corresponds to the value

MO+9 n
Fm.

6

DISTRIBUTION OF MEANS

A-11.5.2 If the true mean is equal to A4 ( which is greater than iWe ), the distribution of means will be in the form of a normal distribution with a mean of M as shown in the lower distribution. The value to be used as an acceptance criterion MO + $+ level. M +$& . . . . . . (5-7) ( where cc' is a new confidence Then MO + $%= 0 is equal ) Za' u to a value M + -== t/ nc

where M = MO `J ( M

-

Mans

. . . . . (S-8)

MO + dc?

1

MO+

(M-.A&).+$c

no
or simplifying, the requirement

. . . . . . (S-9)

for the sample size ( n ) is

. . . . . . (5-10)

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 If this expression should result in n less than of 50 shall be used. In this discussion, u = 1 & <( 1 to = B) = probability p, probability standardised of rejection normal of acceptance, deviates 50, then a sample size

if true mean equals M, if true mean as defined, equals iV, and

or ( 1 -p ). ZW = <a or Z( 1 ._ B ) andw = CC The following table gives the relationship between & and u and @. k_ ,@Ol jo.05 /o*l jo.15 I"" jo*3_1 0.7 1 0.8 1 2.33 1.65 1.28 1.04 0.84 0.52 -0.52.--0.84-1.04 0.851 0.9 ( 095j 0991 -1*28,---1.65 -2.33

Example: Suppose statistical test parameters and the contractor. M = 0.10 <E = 1.28 p = 0.10 $i---1 Mf o"= c3;28 1.0

for a requirement of M,, = Z-0, the following were agreed to by the procurement authority

M, u

= 0.3; using equation
( 1.28 + 1.28 )s ( 0.3 )"

( 5 - 10 ) 6.57 = m= 73.

n, =

A-11.6 Decision Procedure - The chargeable (Xi ) after each flight will be measured and, at total chargeable downtime will be divided by the to obtain ( X ), the sample mean CMDT and the tion(s) of CMDT. NOF

maintenance downtime the end of the test, the total number of flights sample standard devia-

x`=

i=

c

X1 1 NOF NOF ( xi - Z)Z (NOF)-1 1 + T$$& <as -~NOF N�F =

.._...( XI-(NOF)? -__--(NOF)

5 - 11 )

s=

c i=

i=l . . . . . . (5-12)
. . . . . . (5-13) . .,.... (5-14)

c

-1

Accept Reject

if x Q M, if X >

MO +

44

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 A-12. TEST METHOD A-12.1 General 6 TEST ON MANHOUR RATE

A-12.1.1 This test provides for the demonstration of manhour rate ( manhours per flight hour ). This test is based on a determination during phase II test operation of the total cumulative chargeable maintenance manhours and the total cumulative demonstration flight hours. The demonstrated manhour rate is equal to
Manhour Rate = Total Chargeable Maintenance Manhours Total Demonstration Flight Hours

. .. . .. A-12.1.2

(6-l)

If the demonstrated manhour rate is less than or equal to the manhour rate requirement plus a maximum value ( AA4R ) by which the demonstrated manhour rate, then the requirement has been met. MR will be provided by the procurement authority as a percentage of the system manhour rate requirement and will be determined based on considerations such as the expected phase II dmation and prior experience with It is recognised that this demonstration method is nonsimilar systems. statistical in nature and does not allow the determination of quantitative It is for this reason that the AMR producer's and consumer's risk levels. is provided ( in a subjective manner ) to minimise the producer's risk. A-12.1.3 Normally, all maintenance performed by approved maintenance test personnel during phase II and documented in appropriate maintenance reports will be the source of data for identifying chargeable maintenance manhours. The procurement authority may elect to terminate the demonstration prior to phase II completion if sufficient data is collected to project that the requirement will be met. A-12.1.4 The manhour rate requirement shall pertain to the aircraft configuration provided for in the contract. For phase II flights conducted with a configuration other than this, an appropriate amount of chargeable manhours will be included in calculating the total chargeable manhours. This amount will be based upon the predicted manhour rate associated with the equipment not installed. A-12.1.5 Care shall be exercised in assuring that the predicted manhour rate pertains to flight time and not equipment operating time. The contractor shall develop appropriate ratios of equipment operating time to flight time. A-13. TEST METHOD 7 SIMULATED FAULTS TEST ) ON MANHOUR RATE ( USING rate total

A-13.1 General - This ( manhours per operating

test provides for demonstrating manhour hour ). This test is based on the predicted

45

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 failure rate of the equipment used in the formulation of Table 3, Appendix B and also on the total accumulative chargeable maintenance manhours and the total accumulative simulated demonstration operating hours. The demonstrated Manhour manhour Total rate is equal to Chargeable Maintenance Total Operating Time Hours

rate =

n
=

i=l

c

xc1

+

( ps

)

lwhere XGi = n = MTBF = manhours for corrective maintenance task i. number of corrective not be less than 30. maintenance

. . . . . . (7-

1)

tasks sampled,

n shall

MTBF of the unit ( value used in development of Table 3 ). ( PS ) = estimated average total manhours which would be required for preventive maintenance during a period of operating time equal to n, ( MTBF ) hours.

2
i=l

Kc1 -=
*c T =

r0 = average number of corrective maintenance hours per corrective maintenance task. operating time. maintenance & = tasks are simulated rate When ) where

man-

A-13.2 Discussion Table 3. 2- = n ( MTBF equipment

as

in

Air the total failure

of the

under consideration.

.t.Jh+
2=

1

(PSI
T
--

=

i=

n m t

1

&i + ( PS)
) =----

n ( MTBF

1 MTBF

x,+0

All components dered constants. when n, is large de = -. no

of ( 7 - 2 ) with the exception of X, can be consi._ r0 can be considered a normally distributed variable ( due to the Central Limit Theorem ) with Variance

-

3 . . . . . . ( ,"" 2 )

46

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

If KC is normally

distributed,

it can be shown that, distributed (&F around the mean )Passumingd=j. rate requirement
A

is also normally of the manpower A-13.3 rate with variance = --,ri

Decision
Accept if r0

Procedure

-

If the manhour = risk. +

is ~LB,

< pa (MTBF)

. . . . . . (`-3)

where CC denotes procedure's

A-14. TEST METHOD 8 - TEST ON A COMBINED PERCENTILE EQUIPMENT A-14.1 General

MEAN/

- This test provides for the demonstration of maintainability when the specification is couched in terms of a dual requirement for the mean and either the 90th or 95th percentile of maintenance times when the distribution of maintenance time is log normal.
A-14.2 Assumptions - For use as a dual mean and 90th or 95th percentile requirement the mean shall be greater than 10 and less than 100 units of time; the ratio of the 90th percentile maximum value to the value of the mean shall be less than two; the ratio of the 95th percentile maximum value to the value of the mean shall be less than three. Maximum ratio of percentile Value Value to mean 2 3 are defined in A-14.1.

90th Percentile 95th Percentile Distribution

assumptions

A-14.3 Discussion - The test method actually demonstrates the 61st percentile value of maintenance time in combination with either the 90th or 95th percentile values of maintenance time rather than the mean value of maintenance time in combination with either the 90th or 95th percentile values of maintenance time. However, because of the particular characteristic of the log normal distribution once a 61st percentile value of maintenance time less than Xr and a 90th or 95th percentile value less than xs has been demonstrated, for all practical purposes a mean value of less than approximately X1 and a 90th or 95th percentile value less than Xs have likewise been demonstrated. A dual requirement on maintainability, assuming a log normal distribution of repair times of a maximum value of the Mean in conjunction with either the maximum value of the 90th or 95th percentile of repair

49

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
time ( to be referred to as AI,,, ) results in the definition of various combinations of B's and u's which are acceptable to the dual requirement. ( A complete technical description of a log normal distribution is provided by knowledge of 8 and CT, hence, all possible log normal distributions acceptable to the requirements are defined through definition of all possible acceptable values of B and cr. ) See Fig. 7 which defines the acceptable combinations of 8 and CTfor a mean of 30 min and a 95th percentile ( Mrrr,, ) of 60 minutes.

let pL1= required value of mean ( maximum allowable ). let Xp, `= maximum value of 95th percentile = A&ax. In k 2 0 + 0 5~2 0 _t 1.65~

In M2

define all possible values of 0 and TVwhich are capable of meeting or bettering the requirement ( defines the characteristics of all possible lognormal distributions capable of meeting or bettering the requirements ). let In p1 = Q

Fro. 7

ACCEPTANCE COMBINATION OF Q AND u FOR pl =

Q + O-5 0s

For the log normal distribution it is also possible to structure a dual requirement made up of the maximum values of two percentiles ( for example, the 61st percentile of repair time shall be a maximum of 30 minutes and the 95th percentile of repair time shall be a maximum of 60 also results in the definition of various minutes ) . This dual requirement combinations of acceptable values of fJ and u ( see Fig. 8 ). If a dual 50

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 percentile requirement could be structured such that the set of acceptable values of d and u defined were almost identical to the set of values of B and u defined for a given dual Mean and percentile requirement then a demonstration of that dual percentile requirement would in reality also demonstrate the attainment of the dual Mean and Mmax requirement. For this particular instance it has been found that under the assumptions listed above, almost identical acceptable values of 0 and u are provided for a combined Mean and Mmax requirement and a combined 61st percentile where the value of the 61st percentile is taken equal to the specified value of the Mean ) and Mmsx requirement. See Fig. 8 which defines the values of 0 and u acceptablet o a dual 61st percentile ( where the value of the 61st percentile is taken equal to a specified mean of 30 minutes ) and 95th percentile, (where the maximumvalue of the 95th percentile Mmax, is given as 60 minutes ) and Fig. 9 which is the superimposition of Fig. 7 on Fig. 8.

let px = required let Xpl = maximum using the required value

value

of mean

( maximum

allowable = Mmax. value

).

value

of 95th percentile

for the mean as the maximum

of the 61st percentile.

In pL1 2 0 + 0.28~ tn Mmax 2 0 + 1'656 define all possible values centile requirement. let In p1 = Q of 0 and u which are capable of meeting the dual per-

FIG. 8

ACCEPTABLE COMBINATION OF QAND u FOR pI =

4 + 0.28 a

51

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

Q-t FIG. 9 ACCEPTABLE COMBINATION OF QAND - 0.28 u AND/.L~ - Q + 0.5 & CL1
u

FOR

Therefore, tests performed to demonstrate the attainment of both the percentiles in question actually demonstrates the attainment of values of B and u which are almost identically acceptable to a dual requirements of the It follows then that an accept decision relative to both Mean and M,,,. percentiles would also approximately signify an accept decision for a dual Mean and Mmax requirement. Since both percentiles can be considered independent for practical purposes, the same samples can be used for demonstrating both percentiles, therefore, if desired the tests may be run simultaneously. - Sample tasks shall be selected with respect to the A-14.4 Procedure procedure defined for variable sample/sequential tests. The same sample tasks may be used simultaneously in the demonstration of both the Mean requirements. Tables 4, 5 and 6 ( which are appropriate and Mm, to Test Plans Al, B1 and B,, respectively ) are based upon the sequential They define the accept/reject criteria probability ratio test of proportion. for the values of the required mean, Mmax ( when defined as the maximum 90th percentile value ), Mmax ( when defined as the maximum The number of observations 95th percentile value ), respectively. greater than and less than the required values of the Mean and Mmar shall be cumulated separately and compared to the decision values shown in the tables applicable to the two requirements. When one plan provides an 52

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
TABLE 4 PLAN A,

( Clause A-14.4~) Observations
# OF TASKS OBSR ( no ) Exceeding

the Value of the Mean

( or 61st percentile

value )

ACCEPT REJECT #,~~,`;~~~ / ACCEPT

1

REJECT

1

5 6 7

81
9

I

I

5 6 t

p---?F---

55 56 58 59 60 61

___~ 12 13 -t 13 14 $

z 20 21 3 21 22 3 22 23

i7 7

10 11 12 13
15

--; n -

: 8 z?

_-

;

I

`8

64 -_------ 65 67 68

5 15

_I&_ 23

* 16

24 $ 24 25 ,r

;;
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 3 4 2 ~--

1;
11 * --z--12 + t 10 -

-70 717 __.72 73 .__ 74 75 76 77 78 79 p ---+17 18 5 18 19 z 19 20 27-

4 25 26 5 26 27 t 28

31 32 33 34 35 36 37

5 -6 :------

t

80 82 83 85 86 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 ____ _ 20 21 21 22 4 22 23 * 23 ___~ 24 t 24 25 f $ 25 26 _Y ISk

t 14 15 *

4 + 28 29 3 29 30 t 30 31

j_
15 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 16 t

I

I-

+ I -1
9 I l6
+ + --. 9 t 17 +I__ 10 17 18

31

32 33 + 4 33

I-

10 -___ 11

$ 18 *

z
11

19

I
53

l-4

19i9692

(Part6)-1983
TABLE Observations Exceeding REJECT I 2 + I I I 5 PLAN Mmitx # B1 90 Percentile ACCEPT I ---5.5 --& I 4 5 REJECT ( Clause A-14.4 )

I

# OX TANKS OBSR ( no ) 2 3 4 5

ACCEPT I

OF TASKS OBSR ( nc ) 52 53

--

s
__

--.
_---TO----

---

I

---54--

is
58

---

7 8 9 10

I

l I

13 14 16 17 18 19 20

I
-.___ ---68 ------_--

--

_-

27 28 a9 30 31 32 33 34 35 y37 18 3; 40 41 42 43

;
-i ------_--

n

I---l---l

-_ ------

--

I

2

;I;
81 82 83

l-l-l-1--l

K--_ _---_.___-_ +

---__---

---

78 79 80

+ 3 4 ------t -

--

-------

--

93 ---

I
i_

44 *--------- -J c-----y_e;_ n 46 47 48

;

I
-

---___.--i ?g;

--_---

;---,-,

I

54

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 )~- 1983
TABLE Observations # OF TASKS OBSR ( nc ) -.2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19

6

PLAN Ba ) 95 Percentile ACCEPT -_----; -_-_-_-w -_--_--_--_-_----e-y__-----_-_-I_ ---_---.--------_ ---_ ---_ -I_---_ ------_ -----_ ---_ --.-__ --+ 3 4 + -REJECT ?&ax

( Clause A-14.4 Exceeding REJECT

ACCEPT

I

I

# OF TASKS OBSR (ne) 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 81 82--83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 _~ 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 -p

I

4

_____

--------

--

--__ -----------63--

-

-

I
----

l-l-l
l=l--I -------~ ------------------------

20 21 22 23 -?EY-- 24 ------I 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 ---33 34 35 36-37 38 39 40 41 42 44 4546 47 48 49 51

$ 2 3 e

a0

-_ 43-

---

--

50--

l 4 0 1

---G 4

-

-----L-

55

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 accept decision, attention to that plan shall be discontinued. The second plan shall continue until a decision is reached. The equipment shall be rejected when a decision to reject on either plan has occurred regardless of the status of the other plan. The equipment shall be accepted only when an accept decision has been reached on both plans. If no accept or reject decision has been made after 100 observations, the following rule shall apply: Plan Al - Accept only if 29 or less observations are more than the value of the required Mean. Plan B1 Plan BB Accept only if 5 or less observations are more than Mmax . Accept only if 2 or less observations are more than Mm,`.

It is recognised and accepted that truncation will somewhat mod& probability of acceptance characteristics as described in the following section. A-14.5 The OC Curve - The operating characteristic curve for the test procedure may be determined by mapping the probability of acceptance for various selected points on a diagram of the acceptable and unacceptable regions such as Fig. 10. [ Note that any point can be identified uniquely by the coefficient of Q, where Q = L ( required mean ), on the ordinate and the coefficient of ,//Izon the abcissa. Let the coefficient of Qbe denoted as (C) and the coeffkient of 4 Q be denoted as (X) - for example, point B
1.250.

Q

0.750 t cr, O*SQ

O-250

0-w

Fm. 10

PROBABILITY OF ACCEPTANCF.

57

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
on Fig. 10 can be uniquely located at C = 3/4, X = 0.4 ). Each point is also representative of a particular log normal distribution possessing unique percentiles for the values given for ~(r ( required maximum value for mean ) and M,,,, respectively. ] The probability of acceptance relative to any point is equal to the compound probability of passing the percentile test relative to p1 ( test Ai ) and passing the percentile test relative to M,,, ( test B, or Ba ).

Let PAI, PB1, PBS be the probability of passing tests Al, Bl, BB respectively for any given unique combination of 8 and (T ( a particular point ).
PAI, PB1, Psa may the following equations: be determined by
cakuhting ml, h, ~BS from

. . . . ..

(8-l) (8-2)

. .. ...

and entering Fig. 11 ( for Test Al ) with the calculated value of Y*r and Fig. 12 (for Test B1 ) or Fig. 13 ( for Test Ba ) with the calculated value of r~r or TBS. The corresponding value of probability of acceptance, PAI and PB1 or PBa ( whichever of the B tests are appropriate ) is read from each Figure and PA~ and the appropriate P B1 or PBS values are multiplied. The result of this multiplication is the probability of acceptance of a unit having a particular 8 and e characteristic defined by ( C) and (K). Repeating the above for a number of points as in Fig. 14 define;;t; operating characteristic map relative to a given dual requirement. that probabilities of acceptance always decrease as the point is located upward or to the right and always increase as the point in consideration is located downward or to the left on the figure. Hence, sufficient knowledge of test characteristics can be generated by evaluating relatively few points.

A-15.

TEST METHOD 9 -TEST FOR MEAN MAINTENANCE TIME ( CORRECTIVE PREVENTIVE COMBINATION OF CORRECTIVE AND PREVENTIVE ) AND M,,,
of the folTime (pJ,

A-15.1 General - This method is applicable to demonstration lowing indices of maintainability: Mean Corrective Maintenance
58

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 Mean Preventive Maintenance Time ( pDrn), Mean Maintenance Time ( includes preventive and corrective maintenance actions ( pp,O ), and percentile of repair time ( Mmax ).

FIG. 11

PROBABILITY OF ACCEPTANCE FOR TEST AI

59

IS : 9692 ( Part

6 ) - 1983

FIG. 12 PROBABILITY OF ACaEPTmcE

FOR TEST &

60

ISi9692 (Part 6 )- 1969

FIG. 13

PROBABILITY OF ACCEPTANCE FOR TEST Bg

61

16r9692(Part6)-1963

FIG. 14

OPERATING CHARACTERISTIC MAP RELATIVE TO A GIVEN DUAL REQUIREMENT

A-15.2 Conditions of Use - The procedure of this method for demonstration of pc, are based on the Central Limit Theorem. No information relative to the variance ( ds ) of maintenance times is required. It may therefore be applied whatever the form of the underlying distribution, provided the sample size is adequate. The minimum sample size is set at 30. The actual sample size ( if greater than 30 are required ) shall be determined for each equipment to be demonstrated, and shall be approved by the procuring agency. The procedure of this method for demonstrating M,,, is valid for those cases where the underlying distribution of corrective maintenance task times in log normal. A-15.3 Quantitative Requirements - Applications of this plan requires identification of the index or indices of interest and specification of quantitative requirements for each. When demonstration involves p0 or ,~r,,,, or a combination of both, consumer's risks will be specified. When demonstration involves Mmax, the percentile point which defines the specified value of Mmaxc, will be specified. A minimum sample size of 30 corrective maintenance tasks is required for demonstration of corrective A minimum sample of 30 preventive maintenance maintenance indices. tasks is required where demonstration of preventive maintenance indices by sampling is permitted and is to be accomplished by this method.

62

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 A-15.4 Task Selection and Performance - Sample tasks shall be selected in accordance with the procedure outlined in Appendix B. The duration of each shall be recorded and used to conipute the following statistics:
% I: xoi

J?=

i=l

nc

Lpm s

1

%rn

npm i = 1

L:

Xpmi

4 ==fc
_?fplo =

xc +fpm qrn
xc +fPXpm
fc +fp*
i=l

.fc

2

L,X,,

nc

+

no - 1

nc

where Y is the value of the independent variable log normal function which corresponds to the percentile point at which Mmax has been establi0 shed. For the two most common percentile points, 90 percent and 95 percent, Y is 1 a282 and 1.645 respectively. A-15.5 Accept/Reject Criteria - A table of the normal distribution function shall be consulted for values of 4 ( for a one-tail test ) which corresponds to the specified level of consumer's risk p. Table 7 provides values of + which correspond to the most commonly used values of p.
TABLE 7 (b vs B

o-84 1'04 l-28 1'65

20

15

percent percent 10 percent 5 percent

63

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
Accept/reject criteria shall be computed for each specified index in accordance with the following sections. A-15.5.1 Testfor Mean Corrective Maintenance Time ( pO ) reject value for cl0 is: A z+ 0 $y
C

The accept/

A where d, = standard deviation of sample corrective maintenance tasks. bi *

Accept if p. ( specified ) > x,+

C

Reject if CL,, ( specified ) < XC + q/n, A-15.5.2 Test for Mean Preventive Maintenance Time ( ppm ) - The accept/ reject value for ppm is: A where d,, = standard deviation of preventive 4+&l x,El+4maintenance tasks. %-n Accept if pprn ( specified ) > Xpm + +^d,m d%m ;h 2/n;
Actions ( pplo ) -

Reject if pprn ( specified ) < Xpm + A-15.5.3 Test for the Mean accept/reject value of t+lc is:

of all Maintenance

The

TPIC + 46

npm (/c

22 )" + nc (fpm
(f c+fpm )"

irn 1'
(.f~m ;pm )* n0npm

Wpm

If ppio ( specified ) > xp,o t

apm (f0 d", )"+nO
(f c+f

pm )"

' Accept

If pplc ( specified ) < xp, c+
64

-

%m

Cf022 P+h
n&m

t&m __.~~(z,m j2 , Reject (fo+fDm )"

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
A-15.5.4 restfor Mm,, The accept/reject value for MrnmO is:

Accept if Mrnaxo ( specified ) >/ M'max Reject if Mrnao ( specified ) < Wmaxc c

A-16. TEST METHOD lo-TEST FOR PERCENTILES AND MAINTENANCE TIME ( CORRECTIVE PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE ) A-16.1 General This method employs a test of proportion of zOt, 2nrn, Mm, and Mmsx when to demonthe distristrate achievement

bution of corrective and preventive main&nance r epa!rmtimes is unknown. A-16.2 Conditions of Use - This method is intended for use in cases where no information is available on the underlying distribution of maintenance task times, The plan holds the confidence level at 75 percent or 90 percent as may be desired and requires a minimum sample size (n, ) of 50 tasks. A-16.3 Quantitative Requirements Application of this method requires specification of z,t, ( 95th percentile ) or Mm= zprn, M m%t ( 95th percentile ) and selection of 75 percent or 90 percent confidens level. A-16.4 Task Selection and Performance - Sample tasks shall be selected in accordance with the procedures of Appendix B. The duration of each task will be compared to the required value(s) of the specified index or indices ( zct, zprn, Mmaxct and Mm, than or lesser than each index. ) and recorded pm as greater

A-16.5 Accept/Reject Criteria - The item under test shall be accepted when the number of observed task times which exceed the required value of each specified index is less than or equal to that shown in the Tables 8 or 9 corresponding to each index for the specified confidence level. A-16.5.1 Test for the Median - Table 8 is a test of the median for corrective and preventive maintenance tasks. The acceptance level is shown for two confidence levels and a sample size ( n, ) of 50 tasks. 65

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

TABLE a ACCEPTANCE

TABLE FOR Met OR kfpm

( Clauses A-16.5 and A-16.5.1 )
SAMPLE SIZE = 50 CONBIDENOE LEVEL

75 percent

90 percent

ACCEPTANCE LEVEL 22 20

A-16.5.2 M

Testfor

Mm,,

and Mmax

-

Table 9 is a test for Mmsx

and

at the 95th percintile. Thcmacceptance level is shown fey two maxpm confidence levels and a sample size ( n, ) of 50 tasks.
TABLE 9 ACCEPTANCE TABLE FOR Mmax, OR Mmaxpm

( ClausesA-16.5 and A-16.5.2 )
SAMPLE SIZE = 50 CONFIDENCE LEVEL 75 percent 1 90 percent 0

ACCEPTAWE LEVEL

A-17. TEST METHOD NANCE TIMES

ll-

TEST

FOR

PREVENTIVE

MAINTE-

A-17.1 General - This method provides for maintainability demonstration when the specified index involves pprn and,/or Mm,, and when all possible preventive maintenance ( PM ) tasks are to be pi:formed. A-17.2 Conditions of Use - All possible tasks are to be performed no allowance need be made for underlying distribution. and

A-17.3 Quantitative Requirements - Application of this plan requires quantitative specification of the index or indices of interest. In addition, the percentile point defining Mm,, shall be stipulated when Mmax is Pm pm of interest. 66

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 Task Selection and Performance - All preventive maintenance The total population of PM tasks will be defined tasks will be performed. by properly weighing each task in accordance with relative frequency of occurrence as follows: A-17.4

Select the particular task for which the equipment operating time to task performance is greatest and establish that time as a reference period. Determine the frequency of occurrence (fpm ) of all other tasks during the reference period. Where the frequency of occurrence of a given task is a fractional number, the frequency shall be set at the nearest integer. The total population of tasks consists of al! tasks with each repeated in accordance with its frequency of occurrence during the reference period. A-17.5
Accept/Reject Criteria

A-17.5.1

Test for ppm k

The mean shall be computed as follows:

~ymi ppm ( Actual ) =

(

~Lnlll>

k I: frmll i=l

where f pml is the frequency of occurrence of the ith task in the reference period.
k is the number of different PM tasks.

zf *mi is the total number of PM tasks in population. Accept if : Reject if : ppm ( required ) ) ppm ( actual ) ppm ( required ) < pprn ( actual ) Test for Mm,, The PM tasks shall be ranked by magni-

A-17.5.2

tude ( lowest to highest va?Te ). The equipment shall be accepted if the magnitude of task time at the percentile of interest is equal to or less than the required value of Mmax pm*

67

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983

APPENDIX

B

( Clauses6.22, A-4.1, A-10.4, A-13.1, A-15.4 and A-16.4 )
MAINTENANCE TASK SAMPLING SIMULATION PLAN FOR FAILURE

B-l. B-l.1

OBJECT

The object of this appendix is to outline a procedure for the selection of a sample of corrective maintenance task for maintainability demonstration when the tasks result from failure simulation.

B-2. APPLICATION B-2.1 The procedure described in this appendix is applicable only when failure simulation is to be used to generate maintenance tasks. The procedure is applicable to the equipment level and it is presumed that system level maintainability requirements have been allocated to the equipment level for demonstration. The mean estimates for the equipment achievement of system maintainability may be employed to determine requirements.
B-2.2 If sampling of preventive maintenance tasks or servicing is permitted, a procedure and tables similar to that illustrated in this appendix for corrective maintenance shall be developed for each type of task ( that is, preventive maintenance, servicing, etc ).

B-3. SAMPLE

STRATIFICATION
of stratification in this standard are to:

B-3.1 The major objectives

a)

allow for the selection of maintenance tasks in such a manner that the selection simulates the failures frequency of the test unit in actual operation ( units with low, MTBF's will be selected more frequently than units with higher MTBF's ); and ensure that a proportionately times are selected. representative sample of task types/

b)

Proportional stratified sampling may be used for selection of maintenance tasks to be demonstrated using the fixed sample size test methods Sequential test method shall employ simple described in Appendix A. random sampling.

68

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 B-4. STRATIFICATION PROCEDURE

B-4.1 Preventive maintenance or servicing tasks should not be combined with corrective maintenance tasks for the purpose of task stratification. For system level demonstration of maintainability requirements, the procedure would be applied to each equipment and through appropriate techniques, the achievement of system maintainability requirements may be demonstrated. Maintenance tasks may be performed concurrently or serially provided that provision has been made to record the expended maintenance time for each maintenance task. The requirement to be demonstrated shall determine the manner in which the data shall be analysed. B-4.2 The stratification procedure is illustrated in Table 3 by applying the same to a radar equipment consisting of an antenna, receiver/transmitter, The frequency tracker, radar set control and drift angle indicator. procedure adopted here is classified as corrective maintenance. B-4.2.1 ment. Column 1 Identify the major units which comprise the equip-

B-4.2.2 Column 2 - Subdivide each unit to the functional level at which maintenance for the demonstration is to be performed in accordance with the approved maintenance plan. This level may be an assembly, module, printed circuit card or piece part. B-4.2.3 Columns 3 and 4 - For each functional level of maintenance identified in column 2, identify in column 3 the maintenance task or tasks to be performed and in column 4 the estimated mean maintenance time for the task. The maintenance task time shall include the time to perform each element of maintenance time as defined in IS : 1885 ( Part 34 )-1979*. The maintenance tasks and estimated maintenance time would be derived prediction from a maintenance engineering analysis, a maintainability effort or from a historical data. The same maintenance task such, as `remove and replace' of a module may result from different faults within the module. Column 3 would identify the maintenance task and not the fault or failure which results in the occurrence of the task. B-4.2.4 Column 5 - Determine the failure rate ( F/lOsh ) for each module, printed circuit card, etc, for which the maintenance task was identified in column 3 at the functional level of maintenance identified in column 2. The failure rates used shall be the latest available from the associated reliability programme. If there is no reliability programme, the failure rates may be selected or extrapolated from sources approved by the procurement authority.
( jirsl reuision ).

*Electrotechnical vocabulary:

Part 34 Reliability

of electronic

and electrical

items

69

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 B-4.2.5 Column 6 associated Determine the quantity with each task in column 3. of items in each major unit

B-4.2.6 Column 7 - Determine the duty cycle for, each item associated with each task in column 3 ( for example, operating time of the receiver engine operating hours to aircraft to the operating time of the radar, flight hours ). B-4.2.7 Column 8 column 3 which have: Group together the maintenance tasks identified in

a) similar maintenance b) similar estimated

actions,

and times.

maintenance

NOTE 1 - A maintenance action is an element of a maintenance task. Although the estimated maintenance time for different maintenance tasks may be similar, the actions may be different as one task may involve significant diagnostics and another involve minimum diagnostics but significant access time. NOTE 2 - The estimated maintenance times in each group shall be within a range that shall not exceed the smallest value in the group by more than 50 percent.
NOTE 3 column 1. Task grouping shall be limited to within major units identified in

B-4.2.8 Column 9 -Determine
ing identified in column the products of columns

the total failure rate for each task groupThis total failure rate is equal to the sum of 8. 5, 6 and 7 for all tasks within the group.

the relative frequency of occurrence B-4.2.9 Column 10 - Determine for each task grouping by dividing the sum of the total failure rate ( sum of column .9 ) into the individual total failure rate for each group.

B-4.2.10 Column 11 - This column is to be used where a fixed sampling A sample of maintenance tasks equal to at least four times is employed. the sample size specified for the selected test method ( Appendix A ) or as specified by the procurement authority shall be allocated among the task groups in accordance with the relative frequency of occurrence of the In Table 3, it is assumed that the test method to be employed task group. requires a sample of 50 maintenance tasks to be demonstrated and, therefore, a sample of 200 tasks ( 4 x 50 ) shall be allocated among the task groups as follows:
Group Group Group 1 2 3 0,177 x 200 = 35 tasks. 36 tasks. 3 tasks, etc.

O-178 x 200 = O-016 x 200 =

70

IS:9692 (Part6)-1983 This allocation is given in column 11. The maintenance tasks allocated to each group shall be randomly selected and identified from the population of maintenance tasks applicable to that group. These randomly selected maintenance tasks shall not be returned to the same pool. When a task group consists of more than one module or assembly such as group 2 of Table 3, the maintenance tasks assigned to the group ( 36 tasks ) shall be allocated to the modules, assemblies, etc, within the group in accordance with the relative frequency of occurrence of maintenance for each module, assembly, etc, within the group. The procedure would be the same as that used to determine the relative frequency of occurrence of the task groups ( column 10 ) would be applied to the modules, assemblies, etc, within the group. This is illustrated below for group 2, Table 3. Group 2 Task A-IF-A Task B-IF-B Task C-Amplifier Task D-Modulator Task E-Power Supply
Total Failure Rate Relative Frequency of Occurrence Demonstration Population Allocation

23 21 21 18 23 106

0.217 0.198 0.198 0.170 0.217 1.000

7.8~8 7.4~7 7.1~7 6.0~6 7.8~8 36

( 0.217 x 36 ) ( 0.198 x36 ) ( 0.198x36 ( 0.170~36 ) )

( 0.217 x36 )

B-4.2.11 Column 12 - The maintenance tasks to be demonstrated ( 50 tasks for this example ) shall be allocated among the tasks groups in accordance with the relative frequency of occurrence of maintenance for the group as given below: Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 O-177 x 50 = 8*85=9 0.178 0,016 x 50 = 8*90=9 x 50 s 0*8Ozl tasks. tasks. tasks, etc.

If a task group consists of more than one module, assembly, etc, such as group 2 of Table 3, the maintenance tasks to be demonstrated from the group ( column 12, 9 tasks for this example ) shall be allocated to the modules, assemblies, etc, within the group in accordance with the relative frequency of occurrence of maintenance for each module, etc, within the 71

IS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983
group. column This is illustrated 12, Table 3. below with the sample allocation shown in

Group 2 IF-A IF-B Amplifier Modulator Power Supply

Relative Frequency of Occurrence 0.217 0.198 0.198 0.170 0.217

Demonstration Sample Size 1*95=2 1.78~2 1.78~2 1*53zi 1*95s2 9 ( 0.217 ( 0.198 ( 0.198 ( 0,170 ( 0.217 x 9 ) x 9 ) x 9 ) x 9 ) x 9 )

The maintenance task to be demonstrated shall be randomly selected from the maintenance tasks allocated to the group or modules, assemblies, etc, within the group or modules. The maintenance task to be demonstrated shall not be returned to the sample pool and shall be demonstrated once only unless otherwise permitted by the procurement authority. B-4.2.12 Column 13 - This column is to be used where a variable samplingjsequential test method is employed. In this case, a simple random sampling of the total population of maintenance tasks using a random number table based on a uniform distribution from 0 to 1 shall be used. 1 through 10, determine from the relative Using Table 3, columns frequency of occurrence ( column 10 ), the cumulative range of frequency A maintenance task is selected from of occurrence for each task group. that group whose cumulative range of frequency of occurrence includes the number selected from the random number table shall be `returned' to the table before selecting a second number. The `specimen' task demonstrated shall be returned to the sample pool.

B-5. FAILURE B-5.1 A failure

MODE

SELECTION

mode and effect analysis ( FMEA ), applied to the functional level at which maintenance is to be performed shall be used to determine the failure modes or faults (open, short, etc) which will result in the occurrence of the maintenance task of interest. To avoid duplication of effort, the FMEA shall utilise inputs from the reliability programme efforts and be coordinated with same. The relative frequency of occurrence of the failure mode will determine the fault to be simulated. This procedure is illustrated in Table 10 and explained below. B-5.1.1 Column 1 Identify the maintenance the failure 72 task of interest. modes which will result jn

B-5.1.2 Column 2 - Determine the maintenance task of interest.

JS : 9692 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 B-5.1.3 Column 3 in column 2. B-5.1.4 Column 4 each failure mode. Determine Determine the effect of each failure mode identified the relative frequency of occurrence of

B-5.1.5 Column 5 - This column is to be used where a simple random sampling is used. Determine the cumulative range of frequency of occurrence for each failure mode. Using a random number table a number is selected and the failure mode to be induced is that whose cumulative range of frequency of occurrence includes the number selected. The number selected from the rondom number table shall be `returned' to the table The specimen demonstrated shall be before selecting a second number. returned to the sample pool.
TABLE

10 FAILURE

MODE

SELECTION

( Clause B-5.1 MAINTENANCE TASK (1) Receiver remove/replace FAILURE MODE

)
RELATIVE FREQUENT Y or OCCURRENCE (4) Percent 0'20 0'35 0.45 CUMULATIVE RANGE (5) Percent 0 0.200 0'550 0'199 0.549 1.00

EFFECT

(2) 1. Component out of tolerance 2. Component shorted/open 3. Tuning failure

(3) 1. Noise 2. Receiver inoperative 3. Cannot change frequency only and

NOTE modes, etc

This

table is for illustration

does

not reflect real

failure

13

INDIAN ON RELIABILITY EQUIPMENT IS

STANDARDS

I

OF ELECTRONIC

AND ELECTRICAL

COMPONENTS

AND

: : Part XXXIX
procedures Reliability of

1885 ( Part XxX1X )-1979 Electrotechnical vocabulary electronic and electrical items (first revision ) 2612-1965 7354 Recommendation components Preliminary Managerial for type approval of electronic reliability

and sampling items:

for electronic

Guide on reliability

and electrical considerations data

( Part I )-1975 ( Part II )-1975 ( Part III

aspects of reliability on electronic and electrical data in

)-1975 Presentation of reliability components ( or parts ) reliability,

( Part IV )-1974 Collection of from field performance

availability

and maintainability

( Part V )-1975 Inclusion of lot-by-lot and periodic inspection procedures specifications for electronic and electrical components ( or parts ) ( Part VI )-1983 Inclusion of reliability ( or parts ) (Jirsl revision ) 7690-1975 8161 clauses into specifications

for components of electronic

Mathematical guide to the terms and definitions for reliability equipments and components ( or parts ) used therein reliability testing: Principles and procedures test plans for success ratio of a constant failure failure rate

Guide for equipment

( Part I )-1976 ( Part V )-1981 ( Part VI )-I983

Compliance

Tests for validity

rate assumption rate and mean time

( Part VII )-I977
between test

plans for Compliance test failures assuming constant failure Flow chart describing

( Part XI )-1983
9185 Endurance ( Part I )-1979 ( Part II )-I979 9186-1979 9692

preparations~for and electrical

and execution

of reliability

( life

) test for electronic
endurance endurance of electronic

components:

Thermal

Mechanical

Guide for screening Introduction

and electrical

items

Guide on maintainability

of equipment: to maintainability requirements programme maintainability and availability predictions in specifications and contracts

( Part I )-1980 ( Part II )-1980 ( Part III 10139-1982 )-1981

Maintainability Maintainability of reliability,

Presentation

