UDC 621'7'06/07

: 001'4

IS : 6652 ( Part I ) - 1986
Indian Standard
( Reaffirmed 2006 )

m

1

I

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO METAL FORMING MACHINES AND TOOLS
PART 1 METAL ( First FORMING TOOLS

Revision

)

Other terms relating to 1. Scope -Covers the definitions of terms relating to metal forming tools. metal forming industry are being issued in the following two parts separately : Part 2 Metal forming machines relating to sheet metals. Part 3 Metal forming technology 2. Definitions A 2.1 Air VentA small hole for admitting and escaping air to avoid suction pockets of trapped air which will prevent proper tool closure or action. holding or to relieve and operations relating to sheet metals.

C

:

2.2 Angular Clearance - Relief given below the working edge of the punch or the die in an angular way to make the movement of the component easier. 2.3 Angle, Shear - An inclination between two cutting edges given to reduce the area cut at any one time, consequently reducing the cutting force but at the same time increasing the length of working stroke. 2.4 Automatic Stop - A device used in feeding strip stock to stop the strip automatically selected lengths and permit automatic repetition. at pre-

A plate ( generally hardened and ground ) used to absorb and dietri2.5 Backing Plate or Ringbute the impact on the punch or die over a wider area. 2.6 Blank HolderThe part of drawing of forming die which holds the work piece against the draw ring to central metal flow. 2.7 Blank Holder Ring ( also called Pressure Ring ) See 2.48.

2.8 Bottom Too/ Assembly - It is the sub-assembly of a press tool which Is secured to bolster plate of the press and includes any locating or fixing device. 2.8 Bottom Tool Holder ( also called Die Shoe) - A lower plate or block on which the die or punch holder is fixed and in which the guide posts or bushes are mounted. C 2.10 Cam A

mechanical part to provide movement at an angle to the direction of applied force.
A

2.11 Clamp 2.12 Clamping assembly.

device for holding single or more work pieces under pressure. Wedge -A wedge used for securing the tools either in the top or bottom tool

press tool in which cutting operation and non-cutting operations 2.13 Combination Press Tool -A 3n a work piece are accomplished in single stroke of a press, for example, a tool that blanks and jraws a component. 2.14 Compound Press Tool - A single station press tool stroke of a press to produce a single component. for several cutting operations in single

Adopted

6 August,

1966 I INDIAN
MANAn

@I February 1987, ISI

Gr2

I
STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR YARC

B SAHAOUR SHAH NEW DELHI t(oW9

IS : 6652 ( Part I ) - 1986
D 2.15 -Diea) A complete tool consisting of a pair or combination of pairs of mating members producing work in presses including all supporting/actuating parts of the tool. b) The female member of a press tool which ~works in conjunction member to perform any one or more press working operations. 2.16 Die Base for

with the punch or male

The main ~member of die assembly which is secured to the bolster plate. or in which

2.17 Die Block -The block or plate in which either the die form is machined directly -hardened die bushings or inserts are located. 2.18 2.19 2.20 die. Die Insert Die Holder Die Pad A segment of die which facilitate easy manufacture or replacement.

A plate on which dies and die blocks are mounted in their relative positions.

A movable plate or pad in a female die over which metal is formed or draw into the The radius at the entrance edge of a female die over which unit consisting of bottom -See 2.9. metal is formed or holder held in

2.21 Die Radiusdrawn into die.

2.22 Die Set -A standardized alignment by guide posts. 2.23

tool holder and top tool

Die Shoe ( also ca/led Bottom Tool Holder)

2.24 Draft -The angle or taper given to the vertical sides of a die or punch ( and the work piece thereby) to allow the work piece to be withdrawn from the die or punch after forming operation. 2.25 Draw Ring Ring shaped die part over the inner edge of which punch draws the work piece. E 2.26 Ejector A device for removal of component or scrap from punch or die. F 2.27 2.28 2.29 Finger Stop Floating Die A stop actuated by the operator in positioning the stock.

A die mounted in die holder with a slight amount of motion.

Floating Punch - A punch mounted in punch holder with a slight amount of motion. G

`2.30 Gauge - A device used for dimensional location of the work piece with Such a device may or may not form part of the press tool. 2.31 Guide Ways, Stock relation to die.

respect to press tool.

Part of tool assembly which guides the stock or a moving part in correct

2.32 Guide Bush - Hollow annular bush fitted to the top or bottom tool holder, arranged to form a close fit with the guide posts to ensure correct alignment between top and bottom tool assemblies. 2.33 Guide Post/Pillar - Posts/pillars fitted to top or bottom tool holders and accurately aligned with the bushing in opposite tool holder to ensure correct ali_gnment between top and bottom tool assemblies. H 2.34 Heel - A block or plate usually mounted on die base or punch holder against which the extension of punch or the punch itself is guided to reduce -or eliminate its deflection. 2.35 Hold Down -A device used to hold the work piece in position during operation. I 2.36 Inlaid Edges welding or brazing. Edges on press tool consisting of different metal joined to the base metal by

2.37 Inverted Press Tool -A and bed are reversed.

tool in which the conventional

positions of punch and die on the slide

2

IS:6652(Part
K
2.38 Knockout A device used for ejecting work~pieces scraps from the punch or die. I. 2.39 Locating Ring or Plate -

I)-

1986

A ring or plate to locate the work piece in the bottom tool assembly. M

2.40 Multiple Press Tool (Gang Press Tool) - A press tool with two or more like punches and dies for producing two or more like pieces at each stroke of press. These press tools may be ~single operation press tools or progressive press tool in which two or more pieces are fed progressively to the two or more work stations. P 2.41 Pilot - A device in a press tool used to correct the positioning of stock which has been approximately located with corresponding previously punched holes in stock. 2.42 Pilot Hole A punched hole in the stock used for location in subsequent operations. made holes of tool assemblies

2.43 Pilot Punch - ~Punch with a radiused nose point end which enters previously various shapes to pick up and accurately locate the stock within the die. press tool is a complete assembly comprising 2.44 Press Tool -A capable of performing any one or more press working operations. top and bottom

2.45 Press Tool, Shut Height - The closed height of press tool with work, having had the operation completed ( projections for locating or fastening which extend below the main finished bottom face of the bottom tool assembly and above the main finished top face of the top tool assembly -are not included in press tool height ). 2.48 Pressure Pad ( also called Die Pad ) - A movable plate or pad in a die actuated by mechanical means, springs or fluid cushions usually used for tightly holding or ejecting the work piece. 2.47 Pressure Pins blank holders. Pins which transmit pressure from cushion to pressure ring, presrure pads and

2.48 Pressure Ring (also called Blank Holder Ring) - Pressure ring is a pressure loaded part of the top or bottom tool assembly in contact with the blank performing the function of stripping, blank holding, ejecting, etc. 2.49 Progressive Press Tool (Follow Tool ) - A press tool in which~two or more sequential operations are performed at two or more stations on the work in one stroke of press, the work being moved to the next station after every stroke. male member of press tool which works in conjunction 2.50 Punch -A member to perform any one or more press working operations. 2.51 Punch Holder--A plate or block on which the punches are mounted. with the die or female

2.52 Quill Punch -

A slender punch mounted in a sleeve ( quill for extra support ). R

2.53 2.54

Relief -

It is undercutting

or relieving of tool to reduce COnt8Ct area.

Riser Block -

A packing block which is used to adjust the height of tha tool or part thereof. S

2.55 Sectional Tool--A die or punch which is made of number of pieces ( sections or laminations ) instead of one piece ( solid tool ). These pieces can often be identical, radial or rectangular sections, thereby simplifying manufacture, improving accuracy and servicing, 2.56 Segment Tool - A tool for which either punch or die or both are made by combining to facilitate easy manufacture or replacement. 2.57 Shank A portion of top tool holder which registers in the recess in a press slide. segments

2.58 Shedder -A pin, rod, ring or plate operated by mechanical means, air or a rubber cushion that either ejects blanks, parts or adhering scrap from a die or release them from punch, die or pad surfaces. 3

IS : 6652 ( Part I ) - 1986
2.59 Space Block press. A block or plate used to make up the press tool height to suit shut height of the from which

2.60 strip - Material in the form of a long narrow piece of uniform width and thickness the components are produced. 2.61 2.62 2;63 Stripper Stop -A Stock -

A device for removing or stripping the work piece or stock from the punch or die. device for positioning the shock in a die.

Raw material from ~which components are produced. T

2.64

Tool Clearance -

it is the gap between the punch and die per side. of press tool secured to the slide of the press and

2.65 Top Tool Assembly - It is the sub-assembly includes any locating and fixing device.

2.66 Top Tool Holder - A top plate or block on which the punch or die holder is fixed and in which the guide posts or bushes are mounted. W 2.67 Work Piece Any material part or piece that is being processed.

EXP~LANATORY

NOTE

This standard was first published in 1972, to cater the needs of metal forming industry for standardization of terms used in connection with metal forming machines, processes, relating tools and their components in order to assist the correct interpretation of common terms being used in this fietd. The committee responsible for formulation of this standard decided to revise the same based upon experience gained in implementing this standard over so many years. in the present revision, same terms have been deleted and additional terms have been included. This standard forms Part 1 of the glossary of terms. bean revised : The following other two parts have also

Part 2 Metal forming machines relating to sheet metals Part 3 Metal forming technology and operations relating to sheet metals.

in preparing this standard assistance has been derived from : a) b) Die Design USA; and Metal Handbook, 2nd Edition, issued by Society of Manufacturing Engineers,

Handbook. Volume 4, Forming, issued by American Society of Metals, USA. 4
Printid at D&I Prlnhrr, Oelhl. India

