NAT He IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Tape tar RT — Fette 
AM 2 atada 


(FAT JPET ) 


Asphalt Paver Finisher — 
Specification 
Part 2 Hydraulic 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.220 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2021 Price Group 4 


Construction Plant and Machinery, Sectional Committee, MED 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard supersedes IS 3251 (Part 2) : 1992 (Reaffirmed 2017) ‘Specification for asphalt paver finisher: 
Part 2 Hydraulic’. In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the available 
International Standards. 


This standard was first published in 1992. The latest revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. In this revision following major changes have been made: 
a) Capacity and rating; 
b) Method of transporting; and 
c) BIS certification marking. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 
ASPHALT PAVER FINISHER — SPECIFICATION 


PART 2 HYDRAULIC 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) lays down the requirements 
regarding materials, construction, capacity and 
performance of asphalt paver finishers (hydrostatic). 


2 TYPE 


For the purpose of defining capacity and rating the 
pavers can be classified in two types as Type A and 
Type B. 


3 MATERIALS 


Materials used in construction of asphalt paver finisher 
and the power unit shall comply with the requirements 
of relevant Indian Standards. 


4 CAPACITY AND RATING 


The capacity and rating for two types of paver shall be 
as given in Table 1. 


5 TRANSMISSION 


Transmission shall be fully hydrostatic capable 
of providing variable paving and travel speed and 
differential locking arrangements. 


6 MOUNTING 


6.1 The paver finisher may be mounted on wheels or 
tracks. 


6.2 If the paver finisher is mounted on wheels, the front 
tyres shall be a minimum of two in number and shall be 


of solid rubber type. Hydraulic steering arrangement 
shall be provided. 


6.3 If the paver finisher is mounted on crawlers the 
crawler shall be independently operated to furnish 
full steering control. Crawlers shall be provided 
with a suitable track tensioner (or) tightener and all 
rollers, sprockets and idlers shall be designed with an 
adequate means for lubrication. The bearing pressure 
of the crawler assembly when the paver finisher is 
empty shall not be greater than 10 N/mm’. The bearing 
pressure of crawler assembly under loaded condition 
shall not be greater than 17 N/mm’. 


6.3.1 Three Point Crawler Suspension 


Three-point crawler suspension may be provided 
which allows position contact of crawler shoes and 
positive traction on undulated terrain like access road 
to paving areas. This will reduce strain to the tractor 
frame on corrugated surface. 


6.4 If the paver finisher is mounted on wheels, the 
front wheels shall be with hydrostatic steering and 
the main drive wheels shall be controlled through a 
differential drive. The recommended tyre pressure 
for pneumatic tyres shall be clearly indicated on the 
machine. 


6.5 Whether mounted on wheels or tracks, sufficient 
traction shall be provided by the crawlers or pneumatic 
tyres, when working on a firm unyielding base, 
to push up a 10 percent grade, a fully loaded truck 
of 10 ton. 


Table 1 Capacity and Ratings for Paver 


( Clause 4 ) 
SI No. Ratings TypeA Type B 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Recommended paving thickness 200 mm 250 mm 
li) Paving width 
a) with basic screed (hydraulically extendable) 2to4m 2.5 to 6 m 
b) with extensions Up to 4.5 m 4.5 to 16 m or any other size as recommended by user 
c) with cut off shoes 1.8 m 2m 
iii) Recommended paving rate 150 ton/hr 250 ton/hr 
iv) Engine rated output (Minimum) 44 kW 55 kW 


IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 


7 PUSHING ROLLERS 


The front end of the main frame of the paver finishers 
shall be equipped with two rollers with adjustable/fixed 
height and oscillation properly spaced to contact the 
rear wheels or the material feeding truck when feeding 
premixed material into the paver finisher. 


8 RECEIVING HOPPER AND FEEDING 
CONVEYOR 


8.1 The paver finisher shall be provided with a steel 
hopper to receive material direct from trucks. The 
hopper for the paver finisher shall have two bar type 
conveyors with suitable hydrostatic drive independent 
of traction transmission, and also capable of being 
operated individually. 


8.1.1 The floor of the hopper shall be constructed of a 
steel plate having a minimum thickness of 6 mm. 


8.1.2 The minimum capacity of the hopper shall be as 
follows: 


Screed width with Minimum capacity 
Extension 
Up to 2.5m 8 Ton 
3 mand above 12 Ton 


8.1.3 The sides of the hopper shall consist of wings so 
arranged that each hopper wing may be individually 
raised or lowered by hydraulic ram to a position 
within the paver’s overall width for travel or to avoid 
accumulation of material in the corners of the hopper. 


8.2 The conveyor shall move the premixed material to 
the spreading screws, the volume of material moved 
being controlled by means of adjustable gates. Feed 
control limit switches shall be provided at the screed 
which automatically switches ‘on’ or ‘off’ the conveyors 
and augers on either side independently, to assure the 
even flow of material to the screed so that surging or 
waiting for material shall be avoided. 


9 SPREADING AUGERS 


9.1 The paver finisher shall be provided with two 
spreading augers having independent drives which may 
be extendable hydraulically/mechanically and capable 
of evenly distributing the material delivered by the 
bar type conveyor over the whole or either half of the 
width of the area to be surfaced. One auger shall have 
right hand thread and the other a left hand thread, each 
moving the material from the centre to the side. 


9.2 The auger conveyor shall have removable 
anti-abrasion segments. 


9.3 Limit switches shall be provided at the auger ends 
of the screed which sense the presence of material 


and automatically start or stop the auger conveyor 
individually. 


9.4 The spreading augers shall be 


hydraulically/mechanically. 


operated 


9.5 The height of the auger conveyor can be adjustable. 
10 SCREED 


10.1 Compaction 


The paver finisher shall be provided with a device for 
obtaining preliminary compaction of the material by 
either of the method described on 10.1.1 and 10.1.2. 
Compaction may be affected either by means of tamping 
device ahead of the screed or by vibration applied to the 
screed or combination of the both. 


10.1.1 Tamper 


If compaction is obtained by means of tamper, the 
tamper shall operate at the rate of not less than 
1500 strokes/min. The vertical strokes may be about 
5 mm. The wearing parts of the tamper shall be 
manganese steel or equally wear resisting alloy steel 
and shall be renewable and adjustable to the optimum 
projection below the screed. The tamping action shall 
leave the material in proper condition for smoothening 
and finishing by the screed. The tamper shall be 
operated hydraulically. 


10.1.2 Vibrating Screed 


If compaction is obtained by means of a vibrating 
screed, the intensity of vibration shall be capable 
of being controlled through a range of 0 to 
3 000 vibrations/min so that the optimum intensity in 
relation to mat thickness density, working speed and 
material specification may be employed. 


10.2 The paver finisher shall be equipped with a fully 
floating, heated screed. The screed shall slide over 
the compacted mat and smooth it out in preparation 
for rolling and shall be adjustable to give a crown of 
—1 to +3 percent to the compacted mat. 


10.3 The screed shall be hydraulically extendable so 
that the width of the mat is infinitely variable between 
that minimum and maximum specified width. The 
telescopic system shall preferably have separate guide 
cylinders to increase the stability of the adjustable 
screeds. Extension of screed also have either of the 
arrangement for compaction, such as tamper vibration 
or both. 


10.4 The screed shall be equipped with diesel propane, 
LPG/electric heating system which will enable the 
screed to be uniformly heated before and during 
the operation of the paver finisher. An electronic 
safety-ignition system coupled with a thermostat or by 
any other means shall be provided. 


10.5 The screed shall be constructed from abrasion 
resisting steel and the wearing parts shall be renewable. 


10.6 The screed and the tamper, if employed, shall 
be so carried and drawn over the material that it will 
maintain a predetermined average thickness which will 
not be affected by sudden or minor changes in the level 
ofthe base on which the material is being applied. 


10.7 The height of two points to which the side arms 
are attached shall be hydraulically adjustable to enable 
the changes in the angle of attack during operation. 


10.8 Means shall be provided for raising the screed and 
the tamper if employed, by a power operated hydraulic 
ram or similar device to a traveling position clear ofthe 
road surface. Locks or safety chains shall be provided 
for holding the screed in the raised position while the 
paver finisher is being moved from one working point 
to another. 


10.9 Minimum paving speed shall vary from 0 to 
15 m/min for crawler paver and 0 to 30 m/min for 
wheeled paver. 


11 OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT 


11.1 Automatic Screed Controller 


Automatic screed controller shall be provided as a 
standard option with the pavers consisting of slope 
sensor, grade sensor and the related system. 


11.1.1 Grade Controller 


This controller detects the level in the travelling 
direction and maintains surface smoothness. 


11.1.2 Slope Controller 


This controller detects the slope in the transverse 
direction and maintain the cross slope at the present 
level. Setting can be made to a desired level. 


11.1.3 Levelling Cylinder 


This cylinder automatically moves up and down 
in accordance with electrical signals sent from the 
controllers, changes the attack angle of the screed and 
maintains the thickness and cross slope of pavement at 
a fixed level. 


11.1.4 Mobile Reference or Averaging Beam 


This can also be used with sensor. This beam is towed 
along the side of the machine and by averaging out the 
undulation on the surface over which it travels allows 
the sensor to maintain long uniform longitudinal 
profile. Beams takes several forms, a long skid with 
a length of 9-14 m or more, which averages over the 
high spots; wheeled models which follow all 
undulation; or one with random placement of sledges. 


IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 


11.2 Automatic ‘Pave’ Control 


The screed may be locked in its position and the tamper 
vibrator drives are automatically shut off when the 
finisher stops moving (traction level in neutral). 


11.3 Dual Controls 


Dual controls shall be provided as an option so that the 
paver may be operated from each side of the machine. 
This may be achieved with a set of readily relocatable 
master panel and driver’s seat. 


11.4 Wide Crawler Shoes 


Wide Crawler shoes shall be offered as an option which 
reduces the ground contact pressure eliminating the 
damage to the unstable sub-grade or sub-base course. 


11.5 Rubber Pads for Crawler 


Rubber pads for crawler shall be offered as an option 
for crawler shoes, which ensures positive traction on 
steep hill climb job. This will avoid damages to the 
finished pavement surface when the paver has to travel 
on the pavement. 


12 CONTROL CONSOLE 


Engine, water temperature gauge, fuel level gauge, 
hour meter and other warning lamps on the instrument 
panel/on machine shall be of first quality design. Single 
control console for power steering, finger tip top control 
for hopper, feeders, screws, flow-gates, screed hoist, 
tamper vibration, speed, differential lock, forward or 
reverse travel, automatic level and grade control, etc. 
needed for all operations of paver. 


13 CONSTRUCTION 


13.1 The drives from the engine to crawlers or driving 
wheels, hopper conveyors, screw spreaders, etc. 
shall be of first quality design in accordance with 
best engineering practice. Gears and sprockets shall 
be machine cut and properly hardened. Clutches and 
brakes shall be of simple design, of ample capacity and 
shall be accessible for quick adjustment. 


13.2 Workmanship 


All parts, components and assemblies of the paver 
finisher including castings, forgings, moulded parts, 
stampings, bearings, seals, machines surfaces and 
welded parts shall be clean and free from sand, dirt, fins, 
pits, sprues scale, flux and other harmful extraneous 
material. All exposed edges shall be rounded or 
bevelled. 


14 METHOD OF TRANSPORTING 


The maximum travelling speed of the paver shall not 
be less than 10 km/h for wheeled and 3 km/h for 
crawler/tracked paver. 


IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 


15 PERFORMANCE 


The paver finisher shall lay, compact and finish a mat 
of asphaltic material of thickness and widths specified 
in 4. The compacted mat shall be free from tearing 
and dragging and the surface shall be smooth laterally 
and longitudinally. The limits of tolerances for surface 
irregularity on bituminous surfacing laid by a paver 
finisher is given below: 


Type of Longitudinal Cross Profile 
Surfacing profile (mm*) (mm**) 
Bituminous 10 6 
macadam 
Semi dense 10 6 
asphaltic 
Concrete 
Asphaltic 8 4 
Concrete 


*Measured with a 3 m straight edge. 


**Measured under a camber template. 


16 MAINTENANCE ACCESSIBILITY 


16.1 Ease of Maintenance 


All major assemblies and installed attachments shall 
be accessible for maintenance, repair, and replacement, 
without the removal of other major assemblies and 
installed attachments. Covers and plates which shall be 
removed for component adjustments, replacements and 
maintenance shall be equipped with quick-disconnect 
fasteners. 


17 LUBRICATION 


17.1 Means for lubrication shall be provided for all 
bearings, power transmitting gears, sprocket, chains 
and all other parts requiring lubrication. Plain bearings 
on their shafts shall have oil or grease grooves. All 
lubricating nipples shall be of similar type and shall 
be readily accessible. Where access for lubrication 
is difficult, bearing shall be such that lubrication is 
required as infrequently as possible or facilities for 
lubrication from a remote position shall be provided. A 
lubrication chart indicating the points to be lubricated 
shall be permanently affixed in a conspicuous place 
on the machine describing the type of lubricant, the 
interval of greasing and the amount to be used. Chain 
shall be enclosed and provided with oil bath or drip 
feed lubrication. 


17.2 Automatic pressure release devices shall be 
provided where pressure lubricating equipment may 
damage grease seals or other parts. 


18 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


18.1 All exposed parts which are subject to high 
operating temperatures or which are energised 
electrically shall be insulated, fully enclosed or 
guarded. All moving parts which are of such nature or 
so located as to be a hazard to operating or maintenance 
personnel shall be fully enclosed or guarded. Protective 
devices shall not impair the operating functions. 


18.2 Effective precautions shall be taken to minimize 
fire hazard. 


19 FINISHING 


All exposed parts of the paver finisher shall be cleaned, 
treated and painted with suitable anti-corrosive 
protective paint conforming to the relevant Indian 
Standards. Electric equipment, power units and parts 
subjected to high temperature shall be painted with 
special paint suited for the purpose. 


20 MAINTENANCE AND 


ACCESSORIES 


TOOLS 


20.1 A strong tool box with lock and key and 
containing necessary tools and accessories for normal 
maintenance, adjustment and lubrication of the paver 
finisher together with instruction and inventory of tools 
and accessories shall be provided. Provisions shall be 
made for suitable affixing the tool box on the paver 
finisher. 


21 MARKING 


21.1 Instruction Plates 


The paver finisher shall be equipped with instruction 
plates including warnings and cautions, suitably 
located, and describing any special for important 
procedure to be followed in operating and servicing the 
machine. 


21.2 Marking Plate 


The paver finisher shall have an identification plate 
permanently affixed to it with the following particulars 
conspicuously marked on it: 


a) Manufacturer’s name or Trade-mark; 
b) Manufacturer’s reference no.; 

c) Capacity (See 4); 

d) Type and rating of power unit; and 
e) Year of Manufacture. 


21.3 The following information shall be provided by 
the Manufacturer: 


a) Dimensions 
1) Overall length, mm; 
2 
3 
4) Gross weight, kg (Approx.); 


— 


Overall width, mm; 


— 


Overall height, mm; 


5) Distance between track centre, mm; 
6) Track length on ground, mm; 
7) Track shoe width, mm; 
8) Hopper width, mm; 
9) Hopper capacity, kg; 
10) Screed plate width, mm; and 
11) Screed plate length, mm. 
b) Engine 
1) Model; 
2) Rated speed, rev/min; and 
3) Rated output, kW. 
c) Performance 
1) Paving width, m; 
2) Paving thickness, mm; 
3) Crown, percentage; 
4) Paving speed, m/min; 
5) Maximum paving rate Ton/hr; 


IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 


6 


7) Minimum turning radius, m; 


wm 


Travelling speeds kmph; 


8) Vibrator revolutions, vibrations/min; 
9) Tamper frequency, strokes/min; 
10) Tamper stroke, mm; and 
11) Screed heater. 
d) Optional Equipments 
1) Automatic screed controller, 
2) Automatic paving controller, 
3) Dual controls, 
4) Crawler rubber pad, and 
5) Wider crawler shoes. 
e) Accessories 
1) List of tools, and 
2) Special accessories, if any. 


21.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


Organization 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Ammann Apollo India Private Limited, Jagudan 


Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 
B G Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Pune 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
Caterpillar India Private Limited, Chennai 
Central Water Commission, New Delh 
Chief Quality Assurance Establishment, 

Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Escorts Construction Equipment Limited, Faridabad 


IRCON International Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers 
Association, New Delhi 

Jaypee India Limited, Kolkata 

John Deere India Private Limited, Mumbai 

KYB Conmat Private Limited, Sahibabad 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Bric P. K. SHRIVASTAVA (Chairman) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
Suri K. K. V. Yasas (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. CHOUDHARY 
SHRI R. L. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH DIXIT 
SHRI ASHISH PATEL (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANAN RAJPURA (Alternate II) 
SHRI PRASAD Daya (Alternate III) 


SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH TULJAPURKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. D. BHOSALE 
SHRI SUNIL KEDAR (Alternate) 


Dr SUVIR SINGH 
SHRI Rasiv GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI K. REJI JOSE 
SHRI RAMESH VISHWANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL JAIN 
SHRI A. S. GOEL (Alternate) 


COL SURESH K. 
Lr CoL A. K. Maurya (Alternate) 


Sarı P. R. Ray 
CoL MANJUNATH BT (Alternate) 


SHRI FAIZ AHMAD 
SHRI ASHOK CHAUHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI LAXMI CHAND TyacI (Alternate I) 


SHRI RANDHIR GUPTA 
SHRI S. K. Ray (Alternate) 


SHRI K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA 
SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
SHRI RAJ ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESH KUDVA 
SHRI KALPESH SONI (Alternate) 


SHRI K. KESHAVA 
SHRI M. SURESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. SHARMA 
SHRI ROHIT SINGH (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


Universal Construction Machinery and Equipments 
Limited, Pune 


Volvo Construction Equipments India Private 
Limited, Bengaluru 


Wirtgen India Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (G-99, Pushkar Enclave, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat no. 3052, Prestige 
Shantiniketa, Whitefield main road, Bengaluru) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 64, Pocket D-10, 
sector 7, Rohini, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (D-24, Amar Calony, 
New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 3251 (Part 2) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 
SHRI SAURABH BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI NEERAJ KAPOOR 


SHRI RANJEET MORE 
SHRI Ravi CHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI V. R. SAI PRASAD POLIPALLI 
SHRI K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BHOIR 

SHRI PARUL ARORA (Alternate) 
SHRI HANS RAJ 
SHRI S. N. MAHAJAN 


SHRI RAJENDRA JEE 


SHRI SATANDER KUMAR 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 18 (14885). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


