**************** 



* tOT£ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 5492 (1969) : Pirns for Woollen and Worsted Plain Looms 
[TXD 14: Machinery for Fabric Manufacture] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




5fR TT^ ^TT <sMHI | *ft ^fft ^TRT ^ff ^TT ^T^fT )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<*i *3f», 




*?W!& 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



( Reaffirmed 1998 ) 



IS s 5492 -1969 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR PIRNS FOR WOOLLEN 
AND WORSTED PLAIN LOOMS 



Textile Mill Accessories (Other Than Jute) Sectional 
Committee, TDC 19 

Chairman Representing 

Sbri B. R. Ramaswamy Sri Krishnarajendra Mills Ltd, Mysore 

Members 
Shbi S. N; Abora Shalimar Industries Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Dit U, Bhattachakta Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shbi P. J. Soman (Alternate) 
Shbi D. F. Colah Mafatlal Gagalbhat & Sons, Bombay 

Shri Y. N. Contractor Bharat Timber Industries (Bombay) Private Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri P. D. Desai Association of Merchants & Manufacturers of Textile 

Stores & Machinery, India, Bombay 
Shbi G. C. Ghosh Abmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmedabad 
Db P. C. Gotta The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, Delhi 

Shbi D. D. Kalla Sayaji Mills Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Shbi H. P, Kepia The Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. P. Koppikar West End Works, Bombay 

Shri H. N. Mistry National Machinery Manufacturers Ltd, Thana 

Shki B. Ramacbandran Indian Textile Paper Tuoe Co Ltd, Virudhunagar 

Shri P. D. Desspande (Alternate) 
Shbi G. V. Shah The Metro Wood & Engineering Works Privale Ltd, 

Ahmedabad 
Shjm V. S. Shah All India Bobbin Manufacturers' Association, Bombay 

Shri D. K. PaNchaL {Alternate) 
Shbi S. N. Sbabma Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

SHitr C. G. Shividasani Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Shbi S, S. Nekubkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Sbinivasau The Textile Association ( India } Regd, Ahmedabad 

Shei R. T. Aminbravi ( Alternate ) ■ ■ 

Shbi E. R. Susbabam The Abmedabad Miliowners' Association, Ahmedabad 

Shbi V. N. Subba Rao The Southern India Miliowners' Association, 

Cotmb&tore 
Shei N. V, Uiaal The Miliowners' Association, Bombay 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 



ISs 5492- 1969 

{ Continued frempagt 1 ) 

Members 

ShriS, R. Vyas 
Shki S- M, Chakhabohtv, 
Director { Tex ) 



Representing 

Kesoram Industries & Cotton Mills Ltd, Calcutta 
Director General, ISI (Ex-e§jcio Member) 

Secretory 

Shki H- L. Pmithi 

Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 



Bobbins Used in Woollen and Worsted Mills 
Subcommittee, TDC 19:6 



The Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Bombay 



Ctmeemr 
Shri H, P. Kedja 

Members 

Shbi Bhagwasdas Dakodae Mi&try Bobbin Works, Bulsar 

Mistry 
Shri I. C. Moss 
Shri D. K. Panchal 
Shri Lal Chakd Shabma 



Shki G. P. Sikoh 

Shbi Jaomsh C. W ai.ua 



Shree Digvijaya Woollen Mills Ltd, Jamnagar 

Panchal Engineering Works, Bulsar 

The Bombay Fine Worsted Manufacturers ( Castle 

Mills ), Bombay 
Simplex Woollen Mills, Bombay 
Model Woollen Mills, Bombay 



IS: 5492- 1969 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR PIRNS FOR WOOLLEN 
AND WORSTED PLAIN LOOMS 



0. FORE WORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 29 December 1969, after the draft finalized by the Textile Mill Accesso- 
ries (Other Than Jute) Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 In formulating this standard, due weightage has been given to inter- 
national co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in 
different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from B.S. 3848: 
Part 1 : 1965 ' Weft pirns for woollen and worsted yarns (Part 1: Pirns for 
use in shuttles fitted with tongues) 5 issued by the British Standards 
Institution. 

0.3 Pirns covered in this standard are meant for use in shuttles after 
rewinding only. In case of pirns for use on spinning frames the bore 
dimensions shall be as prescribed by the buyer. 

0.4 In this standard, the following have been excluded from the purview 

t~X ct>s«rtai"i4i^df inn piT*r»o it le f**1t th a *" t*f"* v yctrv with tll£ t* ;r *e ^^ i^QT"* 

a) Sleeves for electrical feelers, 

"/ ~ ~~-« •" — J 

c) Bunch grooves, and 

d) Bore dimensions. 

0.5 This standard contains clauses 4.2 to 4,5, 5.3 and 8.3 which call for 
agreement between the buyer and the seller permitting the buyer to use his 
option for selection to suit his requirements. 

0,6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 

expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 

IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
l..-. „i tj u~ *-i~~ .« ..„ +u n * ~r *u~ „: :c — i t — :„ *i.:» -*~ — j a 



*Rules for rounding off num erica! values { revised), 



IS s 5492 -1969 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements for weft pirns for use in 
shuttles for woollen and worsted plain looms. 

2. NOMENCLATURE 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the nomenclature relating to various 
components of pirns shall be as indicated in Fig, 1. 

3. TYPES 

3.1 The pirns shall be of the following two types: 

a) Type 1 — half cone base pirns (see Fig. 1 ), and 

b) Type 2 — full cone base pirns (see Fig. 2). 

4. MANUFACTURE 

4.1 -General Design — The pirns should generally be as shown in Fig, 1 
or 2. 

4.2 Steps or Grooves — The pirns shall have steps or grooves or both on 

the body as agreed to between the buyer and the seller. 

4.3 Timber — The pirns shall be manufactured from fully seasoned timber 
( see IS: 1141-1958* ) of any of the species listed below or as agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller in case made of any other material: 

Trade Name Botanical Name 

Birch Betula sp. 

Haldu Adina cordifolia Hook. f. 

Kaim ( Kalam } Mitragyna par mf die ( Roxb. ) Korth. 

Maple Acer sp. 

Mullilam gantkoxyium rhetsa DC. and 

^anthoxylum budrunga DC. 

White Cedar Dysoxyium maiabaricum Bedd. 

4.4 Shields — If agreed to between the buyer and the seller, shields 
should be provided at the butt and the tip of the pirns. The shields shall 
be rigidly fixed. 

4.4.1 The metal for the shields shall be as agreed to between the buyer 
and the seller. 

4.5 Finish — The pirns shall be varnished, sand-papered or enamelled as 
agreed to between the buyer and the seller. 



*Code of practice for seasoning of timber { tenialwt ).. 

4 



18:5492-1969 

4.5.1 The pirns shall have a smooth finish, 

4.6 Freedom from Defects — The pirns should be visually free from bark 
pockets, checks or cracks, gum ducts, knots, splits and any other defect 
which is likely to affect the life or usefulness of the pirns. For the descrip- 
tion of various types of defects, see IS: 707-1968*. 

5. REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Dimensions — The dimensions of the "irns of T""es 
as given in Fig. 1 and 2 respectively. 



; ^- FIRST WINDING 
BUTTj CONE BASE 



SI 



2s*i I ill It ii mnrtm — n — n — it 

I 22*1 

1X4 



IIP 

1 9H 

i I 



^E^2^ 



rn 



METAL 
SHIELD 



ZZ^ZZZttzLsZ& ^ZgrT^ , 7? T^ SS 



13* 



T"T 



-54- 



METAL 
SHIELD- 



\ - — — LENGTH (175,200,225,240 OR 250*2 5- 

Ali dimensions in millimetres. 

Fro, 1 A Typical Half Cone Base Pirn for Woollen 
and Worsted Plain Loom 



-FIRST WINDING 




32bRTTr 



LENGTH iT/i>,ZUU, 2^, «U UK »V:i| ' ; 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 A Typical Full Gone Base Pirn for Woollen 
and Worsted Plain Loom 



9 

-*1 



5.2 Tackiness — The pirns shall not be tacky when tested as prescribed 
in A-l. 



♦Glossary of terms applicable to timber and timber. products (Jirsl revision ). 

5 



IS:5492-19S9 

5.3 Weight — Collective weight of a number of pirns shall be as agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller when tested as prescribed in A-2. A 
tolerance of ±4 percent on the specified weight shall, however, be 
permissible. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 Each pirn shall be marked at a suitable place with its type and the 
brand or trade-mark of the man ufactufer. 

6.1.1 The pirns may also be marked withthe ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution { Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of thai standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control during production. This system, which is devised and super- 
vised by ISI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the 
products as actually marketed are continuousiy checked by ISI for conformity to 
the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the 
ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. PACKING 

7.1 The pirns shall be packed in wooden cases strong, enough to withstand 
normal hazards of storage and transport. 

7.1.1 Each case of pirns shall bear the following information: 

a) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; and 

b) Number of pirns in the case. 

8. SAMPLING 

8.1 Lot — All the pirns of the same type and manufactured from the same 
raw material delivered to a buyer against one despatch note shall consti- 
tute a lot. 

8.2 The comformity of a lot to the requirements of this standard shall be 
determined on the basis of the tests carried out on the samples selected 
from it. 

8.3 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and the seller, the 
samples shall be selected as prescribed in BA and 8.5. 

8.4 The number of cases to be selected from a lot shall depend on the 
size of the lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 -and 2 of Table 1 . The 
cases so selected shall constitute the gross sample. 



ISj5492-1969 

8.5 The number of pirns to be tested and the criterion for conformity for 
each of the characteristics shall be as follows: 



Characteristic No. of Pirns to be Tested 

Dimensions According to col 3 of 
Table 1 



Tackiness According to col 5 of 

Table 1 



Weight Two sets of specified num- 

ber of pirns from each 
case if the gross sample 
consists of 5 or less cases, 
or one set of specified 
number of pirns from each 
case if the gross sample 
consists of more than 5 
cases 



Criterion for Conformity 



Non-conforming pirns not 
to exceed the corres- 
ponding number given 
in col 4 of Table 1 

Non-conforming pirns not 
to exceed the corres- 
ponding number given 
in col 6 of Table 1 

Each observed value to 
satisfy the requirement 
(see 5.3) 



TABLE 1 SAMPLE SIZE AND PERMISSIBLE NUMBER OF 
NON-CONFORMING PrRNS 



( Clauses 8.4 and 8.5 ) 



No. of Cases 


No. of Cases 


No. or Pirns 


Permissible 


No. of Pirns 


Permissible 


in the Lot 


TO BE 


TO BE 


No. or Nos- 


TO BE 


No. or Non- 




Selected 


Selected 


toHfOBMINO 


Selected 


CGNFOSMINO 




( Gross 


foe Testing 


Pirns 


por Testing 


FlfiNS 




Sample ) 


Dimensions 


Amongst 


Tackiness 


Amongst 








Those 


TitoM Amongst 


Those 








Selected 


THOSE 


Selected 








as nrCoL 3 


Selected 
AS IK Col 3 


as in Col 5 


(') 


(2) 


(3) 


(*) 


(5) 


(6) 


Up to 3 


AH 


150 


4 


20 





4 to 6 


4 


250 


5 


30 





7 to 14 


5 


300 


7 


40 


I 


15 and above 


10 


450 


9 


50 


2 



IS: 5492 -1969 



APPENDIX A 

(Clauses 5.2 and 5.3) 

METHODS OF TEST 



A-I. TACKINESS 



A-1,1 Take a pirn out of the test sample {see 8.5). Place it in one pan of 
suitable balance, counterpoise it with weights in the second pan and add a 
2 - 5-kg weight. Press down the pirn in the first pan with the thumb till the 
two pans are balanced. Hold the balance in that position for one minute 
and release the pressure of thumb slowly. 

A-1.2 Report the pirn to be in conformity in respect of tackiness if: 

a) it does not show any apparent tendency to stick to the thumb; and 

b) the thumb impression on it, if any, can be wiped out with dry 
cotton. 

A-2. WEIGHT 

A-2.1 Take one set of pirns (see 8.5) and put it in the pan of a conditioning 
oven of suitable capacity capable of maintaining a temperature of 105° to 
110°C. Start the conditioning oven. Note the constant weight of the 

pirns. 

Note — The weight shall be taken to be constant when the difference bet%veen two 
consecutive weighings at an interval of one hour is less than 0'05 percent of the first 
of the two weighings. 



* 



M 



M 



