IS 13808 v7m7m

(Part 4) : 1996

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

QUALITY MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITAL SERVICES (FOR 30-BEDDED HOSPITAL) - GUIDELINES
PART 4 HOSPITAL SUPPORT SERVICES

ICS 11.020

0 BIS 1996

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

September

1996

Price Group

6

Hospital

and Medical

Care Services

Sectional

Committee,

MSD 8

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. Need has been felt for establishing quality management and quality assurance procedures in hospital services so as to make the same more effective, economical and accountable. Once a health and medical care facility has been planned and equipped, there is a~need to manage it scientifically so that quality service is provided to patients on a continued basis. While basic management principles and individual skills are helpful in such efforts, optimum results can be achieved only if certain standards and guidelines are available for the management and operational systems of health and medical care services. For this purpose, it is necessary, as a first step, to lay down norms and standards and then to provide the requisite infrastructure needed for achieving the desired targets. The purpose of this standard is to provide basic guidelines for evolving a well-planned and systematic management procedure for hospital support services, the activities under which may be grouped into the following sub-units, taking the similar and allied functions together: a) h) c) d) e) Hospital Central Hospital Hospital Supply Sterile Dietary Laundry System (Hospital stores) (CSSD) (Laundry)

and Supply and Linen Services

Department services (Kitchen) Services

Housekeeping

and Maintenance

Hospital Supply System is an essential part of a hospital and comprises stores which are needed for its smooth functioning. Needless to say these stores need to be provided at the right cost, at the right place, at the right time, and need to be of the right quality and quantity. With upgradation in technologies for health care delivery system, the importance of Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD) in terms of reducing hospital infection, providing quality medical care and reducing operating cost, is well established. `For a 30-bedded hospital a separate CSSD with separate staff may not be an economical proposition and hence it is suggested to have sterilization room along with Operation Theatre. Laundry services of a hospital should be such that the basic requirements of cleanliness and disinfection should he satisfied. In addition, the requirements of safety, adequacy and timely supply of linen to various user areas at reasonable cost should also be met. Mechanical laundering is preferable for any size of hospital irrespective of the bed strength as it proves to be more methodical, time saving and cost effective. In addition, it minimizes the possibility of infection being carried to the washerman. For a small bedded hospital, a conventional laundry system is generally recommended. However, in planning for hospitals in future, adequate space should be provided for putting up a mechanized laundry. Dietary service in a hospital serves for providing suitably appetizing and nourishing diet to the patients. It should be such that the basic requirements of hygiene, cleanliness, disinfection as well as the timely supply should be invariably met. However, provision of a kitchen for dietary service in a 30-bedded hospital may not be feasible, which, if provided, may be on contract basis. Generally the attendants of the patients are advised as to what diet to be given to the patients and the same is procured from home. House-keeping and general maintenance of the hospital comprises the activities related to cleanliness, maintenance of hospital environment and good sanitation services for keeping the hospital premises free from pollution.

(Continued

on third cover)

(Continued

from

second

cover)

This Part of the standard provides basic guidelines for evolving a well planned system for hospital support services in a 30-bedded hospital which would result in quality health care to the patients. Other parts of this standard are as follows: Quality Part 2 Part 3 Part 5 management Diagnostic Wards, Hospital for hospital services (for 30-bedded services theatre hospital) Guidelines

Part 1 OPD and emergency nursing

services and operation

and blood transfusion services equipment management

This standard is mainly for 30-bedded general hospitals, such as, community health centres/sub-district hospitals/intermediate hospitals and covers only a part of the quality management aspect in hospital services relating to infrastructure, skills, procedures and systems, etc, which is a prescription type provision, adherence to which is expected to result in services of desired quality. The other part, comprising identification of attributes of quality and quantifying them, that is, performance type of standards for hospital services would he published in due course. This standard has been prepared, keeping in view the minimum resources available with respect to functional requirements, such as, space; manpower; instruments and equipment; and building requirements for 30-bedded hospitals in accordance with IS 12433(Part 1):1988 `Basic requirements for hospital planning : Part 1 up to 30-bedded hospitals'. The committee responsible for formulation of this part of the standard is given at Annex C.

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996

Indian Standard

QUALITY MANAGEMENT FOR HOSPITAL SERVICES (FOR 30-BEDDED HOSPITAL)- GUIDELINES
PART 4 HOSPITAL 1 SCOPE SUPPORT SERVICES Supply System 3.4 Hospital

This standard lays down guidelines for quality management system for hospital support services offered in a 30-bedded general hospital with reference to: a) Hospital supply system (Stores) b) Central sterile and supply department d) Hospital dietary services (kitchen) services (CSSD) c) Hospital laundry and linen services (laundry) e) Housekeeping 2 REFERENCES and maintenance

Process of organizing stores and its function in terms of identification and specification of inventory; budgetary projection; demand estimation; procurement, inspection, storage, distribution and disposal of various inventory required in the hospital. 3.5 Inventory Inventory refers to the stock in hand at a given point of time (a tangible asset which can be seen, weighed or counted). It refers to the stock in hand and work in progress. In most general sense, inventory is an idle resource. The financial expression is inventory in number of days. 3.6 Inventory Control

The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standird: IS No. 12433 (Part Title

Basic requirements for hospital I) : 1988 planning: Part 1 Up to 30-bedded hospitals

A functional activity the objective of which is to minimize the cost of procurement or maintenance of the stock in order to maintain a stipulated level of service so that the primary work of the hospital does not get disrupted. 3.7 Sterilization Process by which all forms of live vegetation, bacteria (pathogenic and non-pathogenic), spores and viruses are destroyed. 3.8 Storage Classification, accounting, grouping and stocking of provisions and to ensure the prevention of damage, pilferage or deterioration of its physical and chemical quality. 3.9 Stores Management

13808 Quality management for hospital (Part 5) : 1996 services (for 30-bedded hospital) - %uidelines: Part 5 Hospital equipment management 3 TERMINOLOGY

3.1 ABC Analysis The technique used to classify items into three classes A, B and C based on annual usage value. Class A covers about 10 percent of the items with highest annual usage value which in aggregate generally account for over 70 percent of the total annual usage value of all items. Class C covers about 70 percent of the items which account for up to 10 percent of the total annual usage value. The remaining about 20 percent items are classified as Class B. 3.2 Autoclave Equipment, of various dimensions, used for sterilization. It operates at high temperature and a sustained high pressure. 3.3 Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD)

The process of carrying the right kind of materials, in right quantity, neither in excess nor in short supply, providing it quickly as an when required, keeping it sale against any kind of deterioration, pilferage or theft and to carry out the efficient performance of all these functions at the lowest possible cost. 3.10 VED Analysis

An establishment of hospital system which collects, stores, processes and distributes articles used in the care and treatment of the sick.

The technique used to classify itemsinto three classes in the descending order of their criticality. V stands for `vital' items without which the hospital cannot function and which will cause serious dislocation in the normal functioning of the hospital, such as, oxygen, anaesthetic drugs, life saving drugs, stethoscope,

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996 suction machine etc; E stands for `essential' items, the absence of which can be tolerated for a short time period, such as, IV fluids, antibiotics, O.T. trolley, patient trolley, etc; and D stands for `desirable' items, the non-availability of which for a longer time period also will not affect the normal functioning of the hospital, such as, tonics, vitamins, etc. 4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 5.4 Functional Activities

A typical flow of activities involved in a hospital supply system is depicted in the diagram given in Annex A. The functional areas may include : Common receiving counter Issue counter Traction facilities (for example pushcarts) Storage rack (to be calculated areawise) Standby cold storage facilities Cold storage (with standby) Bonded drugs activities may be as follows: types (see

~For functional, space, manpower, instruments and ~building requirements for various departments of hospital support services, reference may be made to IS 12433 (Part 1):1988. 5 HOSPITAL SUPPLY SYSTEM

.

The flow of functional

5.1 Hospital supply system comprises the stores management involving stores organization. The type of inventory in a 30-bedded hospital may include the following in its domain;

4

Enlisting of inventory 5.1 and 5.3.2) -

of different

b) Demand Estimation

iI Medical and Surgical Stores - For materials
of medical use including medical equipment and appliances; chemical and other pharmaceutical products, such as, medical gases, surgical sundries, etc, required for patient care services.
ii)

which is based on Actual consumption from the past data Last one year's consumption Reserves for contingency Expected work load Projection of new facilities/services

c) Procurement

General stores - For non-medical items required for supportive services which may be sub-grouped as follows: Linen, Stationary, Furniture. and

and placement of order - which may be based on the specified procedure and adherence to: Specifications Market competition of suppliers (preferable from the manufacturers directly)

5.2

Location

The stores should be grouped conveniently which will facilitate least travel time for distribution of supplies and easy accessibility from outside to receive supplies. 5.3 Organization Structure

Procurement and placement of orders should be a continuous process depending on stock evaluation based on the principles of material management like ABC analysis, VED analysis and other approaches of inventory analysis. d) Receiving and inspection of stores for determining the quantity and quality as per the laid down specifications and standards and drawing of samples for Qhysical and chemical analysis. This may be done independent of placement of orders. Storage and distribution - The stores should be kept secured and should be accessible only under the supervision of the designated stores in-charge. The system of receipt and issue of the stores is to be done under the supervision of the authorized personnel.

5.3.1 A part time middle level manager, preferably, a doctor should be the in-charge of the stores (Storekeeper) to facilitate technical supervision, control and monitoring. Overall charge and responsibility should be with the designated Medical officer-in-charge.
NOTE - One of the medical officers in the hospital is designated LX Medical officer-in-charge by rotation.

e)

Items requiring cold storage should be stored in refrigerator. Inflammable material should be kept 5.3.2 A structure showing the type of inventory to away from other stores. Short shelf-life items should be controlled in hospital stores is given below: Store ,Keeper Medical I and surgical

I
stores + Linen General stores Medical gases Consumable expendables, for example, dressing 2 Non-expendables, for example, equipment, * instruments Stationary Furniture

1 Chemicals Drugs and crystalloids
NOTE -

Reagents

The organization or functioning of the medical and surgical stores is to be guided by Dru,qv und Cosmeric~A(v ils applicable from time to time.

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996 be stored hy first-in-first-out techniques. ABC and VED analysis of all drugs/items should be carried out to present stockouts of vital items/drugs and to exercise control over expensive drugs/items. Frequent review of holding of stocks to be done in user centres to prevent excess holding. The layout of the stores should be such that there is a straight line tlow of activities. A centralizetl/dcccntralizcd system of distribution should hc adopted depending upon the type of inventory. Inverrtor)~ c.ontrol Physical inventory verification; review of the stock book and other records; and audit evaluation of the practice and procedures should he done periodically (at least once a year). 5.5 Procedure 5.5.1 General A standard manual should be developed and followed with regard to each area of the support services including their day-to-day work. This may include staff development, operating procedures, maintenance of equipment, storage of materials, disposal of waste, and controlling mechanism. 5.5.2 Standard procedures should be laid down and followed for smooth functioning of the hospital stores. Based upon the functional activities relevant to the particular store, policy guidelines comprising the stores procedures and duties of staff may be laid
down. 5.5.2.1

Manual

Training

of staff of staff

.!a Security and prnwho~r

of pilferage and loss Adequate security means should be undertaken to avoid lo~scs due to pilferage and theft, such as: Physical control by authorized security personnel. Control of visitors. Timely/schedule opening and closing of stores hy designated official. Fire alarm system and burglar alarm system or any other technological innovation should be introduced depending on fund availability. Fire fighting equipment should be installed and the equipment should be tested at least monthly. Main switch of the store room area should be outside this area, so that electricity ~111 be eaGly switched off in the event of fire.

Induction training and on-the-job training should be done for functional activities. 5.5.2.2 Maintrnancr of equipment

-

The store should liaise with the dealers/vendors for procurement, maintenance and repair of equipment. For guidance in hospital equipment management, reference may be made to Part 5 of this standard. 5.5.2.3 Storage under functional activities [see 5.4 (e)].

As given

5.6 Performance 5.6.1 General

Evaluation

h) Records

Proper system of record keeping should bc instituted for maintenance of proper inventory control. The record requirements would he determined by the issue, distribution and accounting procedure of the hospital. A standard format of indent book and updating and posting in stock ledger should be evolved. The storekeeper should maintain and update the inventory record from time to time. The other records, that is, financial, manpower/personal etc, may be maintained by the administrative assistant of the hospital. Corrdm~rrrrtio~~ arrd Disposal of Unused Stores Materials which become unusable to a specific use or scrap after condemnation or due to obsolescence or damage or deterioration should be periodically (preferably six monthly) be reviewed for condemnation. Such material can he disposed of in order of preference as under:

A suitable mechanism should be available with requisite infrastructural facilities for evaluating the performance of hospital support services. Performance evaluation/review should be carried out on the basis of appropriate records and statistical indices regarding performance on quality, productivity, consumption of materials, etc. on a routine basis, say every month by the department in-charge. Internal quality audit may be carried out every six months on the basis of performance records/indices and on the spot inspection/interview on sampling basis, if required to check conformance to standard procedure laid down in the standards/manuals and assess the efficacy of the system. The feedback arising out of such evaluation should be recorded and made use of in improving the quality related activities in future. Appropriate records should consist of the data reflecting the qualitative and quantitative aspects of the various functional activities carried out. The statistical indices should be so formed that they facilitate quick assessment of the different aspects of the functional activities. 5.6.2 In hospital stores, evaluation should be carried out regularly by a committee designated by the hospital to carry out the stores audit and to periodically review quality assurance programme in stores. This review should preferably be done once in six months. 6 CENTRAL STERILE DEPARTMENT sterile supply SUPPLY department (CSSD)

3

-

Circulate within the hospitals, wards and OPD Return to vendor if he is willing _to accept Sell to other hospitals Sell to scrap dealers Sell to hospital employees Destroy Sell it by public auction 3

6.1 Central

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996 comprises the services within a hospital which receives, stores, processes, sterilizes, distributes, and controls professional supplies and equipment, both sterile and non-sterile, to all departments of the hospital for the care and safety of patients. CSSD is responsible for increasing the efficiency, economy and uniformity of supplies. Major responsibilities of CSSD include processing and sterilization of needles; syringes; rubber goods (gloves, catheters, tubing); surgical instruments; treatment trays and sets; dressings, etc. Besides, it is also responsible for pooling of equipment resources of the hospital that is, economic and effective utilization under controlled supervision. 6.2 Expected Workload

b) Cleaning c) Drying -

should be done brush and detergent.

by means

of

Rubber goods should be drip dried by hanging. Articles should preferably be packed in porous material and individual pack should not exceed 300 mm x 300 mm in size and should not weigh more than 5.5 kg. Dating of the package is essential. Each pack should be marked with

4 Packing -

e) Lubelling
-

Nomenclature of the article Contents of the ~pack Initials of the person who packed it Date and initials of the person who sterilized Sterilization The operation of autoclave should be entrusted to a responsible and fully trained person. It should be kept in a state of good maintenance and repair.

The load of sterilization is expected to be 15 cubic feet/day (at the rate of l/2 cubic feet per bed per day) approximately. 6.3 Location The location of the department should be centralized to all the user departments but preferably near the operation theatre. Close proximity to operation theatre will help in its functioning by operating room assistants and close supervision by sister in-charge of the operation theatre and surgeon. 6.4 Organization Structure

8) Storage
separately

-

should be properly managed for sterile and unsterile stores.

h) Distribution

refers to clean and dirty articles exchange system. There should be fixed timings (morning and evening) for distribution of sterilized goods and all user areas should also deposit their unsterilized goods at CSSD at a fixed time. Manual

CSSD should he under technical supervision of a responsible officer who is concerned with asepsis of the hospital. This officer can be either the matron or the pathologist of the hospital. Sister in-charge of 0.T will assist him in his job. She will also be Operating room responsible for quality control. assistants will be responsible for-handling of sterilizers and supervise helpers who will assist in receiving, cleaning, packing, loading, distribution, etc. 6.5 -Functional Activities

6.6 Procedure

Standard technical procedures for operating schedule, sterilization, packing, labelling, etc, should be followed as laid down by the Government (see also 53.1). 6.6.1 Training of Staff

6.51 CSSD may function for one shift in the routine working hours of the hospital. Some spare sterilized linen may either be kept in the operation theatre or at the despatch window in CSSD manned by a CSSD attendant/helper for use beyond the normal functioning hours. 6.5.2 Job specifications of different categories of personnel in CSSD should be laid down according to the functional requirements as shown below: User Areas F Receiving 4 Cleaning Packing Sterilization

Initial training in use of sterilizers may be carried out by the vendor supplying sterilizers. On the job training of helpers should be carried out in CSSD so that they become proficient in use of sterilizers independently. 6.6.2 Maintenance of Equipment

Mainterrance of equipment should be the responsibility of the user. However, store assistant should extend all co-operation for repairs. For guidance on hospital equipment management, reference may be made to Part 5 of this standard. 6.6.3 Storage goods

2
Stores X Distribution /

For storage of unsterilized as well as sterilized two separate stores should be provided. 6.6.4 Record Keeping

Quality Control

Functional flow of activities in CSSD may be generally specified as follows: Rinsing Articles used should be rinsed immediately after use in the patient care area itself. However, thorough rinsing should be done at CSSD. 4

Proper records should be maintained with respect to inventory, equipment maintenance, receipt and issue, etc. 6.7 Performance Evaluation

Quality of the sterilized goods may be assessed by the use of temperature sensitive tapes. A pathologist/ microbiologist should necessarily be involved for culture of spore tubes. Other areas of interest may

IS 13808 (Part be purchase, processing, sterilization, storage, distribution, usage of the materials and serviceability of items under CSSD (see also 5.6.1). 7 LAUNDRY and laundry service is to provide from bacterial contamination, supply of linen to various user laundry is to wash.the followin!? rj-+ 7.52 Flow of Activity

4) : 1996

It should be as follows:
-HYDROSORTING-+SLUICING~EXTRACTION & WASHING DRYING J REPAIR & ISSUE OF CLEAN LINEN t STORE t IRONING

7.1 The aim of linen clean, aseptic, free adequate and timely areas. The scope of types of linen: a) -

Patient care linen: Bed linen Body linen Operation theatre - Staff linen Laundry linen: - Contaminated - Soiled linen - Foul linen Workload

7.6 linen

Procedure

Manual (See 55.1) of Staff

7.6.1 General 7.6.2 Training

b)

or infected

linen

The supply vendors should train the laundry staff at the time of installation and if required periodically. 7.6.3 Maintenance of Equipment

7.2 Expected

The expected workload is 150 kg per day, calculated on the basis that 5 kg linen is generated per bed per day on an average. 7.3 Location Laundry should be conveniently away from O.T. and Wards. 7.4 Organization Structure located, preferably

Preferably by rate contract through hospital stores. For guidance on hospital equipment management, reference may be made to Part 5 of this standard. 7.6.4 Storage

Clean and ironed linen should be stored in almirahs. 7.7 Performance Evaluation

Quality assurance of laundry should ensure physical, chemical and bacteriological changes in the linen washed. Appropriate records may be maintained staff in various areas (see also 56.1). 8 HOSPITAL DIETARY SERVICE by nursing

The laundry should be under the supervision and control of the nursing superintendent (matron) who would be reporting to th: designated medical officerin-charge. 7.5 Functional Activities involved in functioning of

7.5.1 Various activities laundry arc as follows:

Collection of sluiced dirty linen from individual department areas. Transportation to central dirty linen collection
room.

8.1 Hospital dietary service includes planning and executing suitable appetizing, wholesome and nourishing diets. It is directly responsible for the selection and purchase of food, receipt and storage of food, its preparation and distribution. For a small hospital of this size, it may not always be feasible to provide a kitchen within the hospital, in which case, dietary service should be arranged on contract basis or the attendants of the patients may be advised as to what diet is to be given to patients which can be procured from home. 8.2 Location If provided, such that: the location of the kitchen should be

Sorting of linen into: Soiled linen Infected linen Foul linen Removal of blood stains/sluicing. Disinfection/autoclaving. Washing/ hydroextraction. Drying in natural way/ drying tumblers. Repairs of linen (if required). Pressing/hand ironing. Distribution to individual departments where it is stored. Suitable records for receipt and distribution shall he maintained.
Cal-e should be taken to form a strict barrier separating the infected and non-infected linen

4 It is in the ground floor. b) It is centrally located and close to the wards.

c>Convenient
4

_

e>
5

delivery of raw supplies to the kitchen is ensured. Premises should be large enough for orderly sequences of work without undue crossing of traffic lines. All parts of the premises used for food preparation should be adequately lit and ventilated.

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996 8.3 Organization Structure (optional) 8.6 Performance Evaluation

Nutritionist

L Cooks(2) J Helpers(2) L Attendant( 1)

The Supervisor would report to the designated medical ol`ficcr-in-charge who has the overall. charge of the hospital. 8.4 Functional 8.4.1
shifts.
llWd%

Assessment regarding the dietary services of the hospital can be made directly from the patients. The response of the patient will assess the working of the department. A committee may be constituted within the hospital to carry out internal audit and review the quality and service of meals cooked and served. Regular surprise checks by the hospital authority are important for better working of the department (see also 56.1). 9 HOUSE-KEEPING AND MAINTENANCE

Activities

Kitchen should work for 14 hours in two equal The timings may differ according to the local functions of the kitchen include:

9.1 The hospital house-keeping service comprises the activities related to cleanliness, maintenance of hospital environment and good sanitation services for keeping hospital premises free from pollution. 9.2 Location

8.4.2 The important

Menu planning. Procurcmcnt of perishable, non-perishable al-ticlcs and equipment. Rccciving and storing supplies. Establishment and maintenance of safe food ~tOr:Lgc plXAiCCS. Prcpm~ion of` quality food and its distribution. appropriate controlling ~Practicc of mcchonism. A typicill i'low diagram for functioning kitchen is given in Annex B.
NUTE t?ovi~ion for milk formula

Housekeeping should be departments of the hospital 9.3 Organization Structure structure for the housekeeping Clinician t Residents t

integrated system.

with

all

A recommended activity is as follows: Matron t General Nurses

Hospital Administrator + (Medical Officer-In-charge)

of a hospital Public

i Health
I

Nurse -

t

should be made in

Paedinrric ward. 8.5

Procedure

Manual

Hospital Attendants

Sanitary

Attendants

Based upon the functional activities, gLidelines for selection, training and assignment of duties should be laid down (see ulso 5.5.1). 8.5.1 Troirlitlg of Staff

9.4 Functional Activities - Various activities under housekeeping and general maintenance of the hospital include: 9.4.1 Waste management Hospital hygiene maintenance Infection control Interior decoration contribution Pest control Odour control Management of housekeeping staff Environment cleanliness Sanitation Administrative policies related housekeeping Waste Management

The kitchen staff should be trainedfor diet calculation, demand calculation, placing order to the supplier, checking items received for quality and proper storage. All those engaged in handling food should be trained for personal hygiene and proper food handling while cooking and distrihution. Medical checkup of the staff should be done at regular intervals and records maintained. 8.5.2 Muirrtenurzce of Equipment

Daily inspection of kitchen equipment for sanitation should be done. Maintenance of equipment shall be the responsibility of the user. All repairs and rate contract for the equipment should be done through stores. 8.5.3 Storrrge of Materials

to

Items should be optimally stored in a manner so as to prevent any deterioration of physical quality. For example perishable items such as, milk, fruit, butter, vegetables, etc, should be kept-in deep freezer/ cold storage and non-perishable items should be stored in a dry store/cabinet at room temperature. 6

On an average approximately 2 kg of solid waste is generated per bed. This will include both organic and inorganic waste material, such as, bandages, plaster casts, disposables, laboratory waste (chemical and non-chemical), kitchen waste, garbage, aborted faetus and placenta, amputated parts and other surgical waste. This is highly prone to decomposition. Besides, it is highly infected and contagious and may pose serious health hazard to the community as well as patients and employees. Therefore, it becomes

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996 important to dispose this waste in a secured manner so as to prevent not only the health hazards, and also its recycling by the rag-pickers. The routine garbage including kitchen waste, paper, plastic disposables, etc, should be separated from the infected waste and collected and disposed separately. The best way for disposal of hospital waste is through incineration. Alternatively, the municipality trucks should be made to remove this waste in covered vehicles for safe disposa'. as per their disposal system. 9.4.2 Sanitation Function proper upkeep of fire fighting, similar equipments. 9.4.5 Rodent smoke detecting and

and Pest Control

This may include identification of sources; organising, supervising and executing rodent and pest control measures. 9.4.6 Linen Management coordination with laundry services.

This includes 9.4.7

Horticulture

and Landscaping

This may include dusting; cleaning; windows/walls cleaning; mopping; cleaning of furniture, fixtures, curtains, blinds, etc; sweeping; trash removal; garbage removal; bathroom maintenance; plants cleaning; elevator cleaning and environmental hygiene. 9.4.3 Muirltenunce Furlctiorz

The hospital premises should look clean and inviting which can be facilitated through horticulture and landscaping services, that is, adequate plantation of trees and seasonal plants. Provision may also be kept for adequate open space and parking space. 9.5 Procedure Manual

This may include cleaning, positioning, and maintenance of all equipments; periodic oiling and greasing of trolleys, beds, equipment/instrument trolleys, etc; maintenance of furniture and ftxtures, doors, lifts and elevators, etc. 9.4.4 Safety and Security Function

In-house `House-Keeping Manual' should be developed in a hospital to suit its needs and preferences (see also 5.5.1). 9.6 Performance Evaluation

This may include identifying fire risks in the hospital; making the housekeeping and other related staff aware of fire detection and fire prevention modalities; detection of fire and operation of fire alarm; ensuring

Quality assurance of housekeeping activities should ensure physical, chemical and bacteriological changes of the environment of the hospital. Appropriate records should be maintained by the housekeeping supervisory staff in various areas (see also 56.1).

7

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996

ANNEX A (Clause 5.4)
FLOW DIAGRAM FOR MATERIALS MANAGEMENT IN HOSPITAL STORES

CONDEMNATION AND DISPOSAL

INVENTORY CONTRO

ISSUE

MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR

IS 13808

(Part 4) : 1996

ANNEXB (Clause 8.4.2)
ACTIVITY FLOW IN HOSPITAL KITCHEN

1

PERISHABLE ITEMS

NON-PERISHABLE ITEMS

RECElVlNG AND CHECKING

*..

I

c FOOD TRANSPORT

NURSING UNITS

M

DISH WASHING

-

CAFETERIA (IF ANY)

GARBAGE DISPOSAL

9

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996

ANNEX C
(Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Hospital and Medical Care Services Sectional Committee, MSD 8
Chuirmun

MAI GEN M. L. SAPRA. AVSM.VSM (Retd)
Reprerenring DR A. K. AGARWAL DR J. K. DAS (AIr~rr~m) DR R. N. BAISHYA LT GEN H. S. BANGA DR A. H. BHATKHANDE(Alrerwre) LT.OIL R. K. BHASKAR DR NARENDRA BIHARI COL A. K. CHATTERJEE, SM (RETD) DR S. K. CHOUDHURI DR J. N. MOHANTY (A/tenure) COL A. K. DAS LT-COL VED PRAKASH (Alrernure) DR (SHRIMATI) S.S DE~HMUKH DR P. K. KHOSLA (Alterrum) DIRECT{ IR HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ANAESTHESIOL~ K;Y (Alrernore 1) HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT OF RADIODIAGN( )SIS (Alrernure 2) PROF S. DWIVEDI DR P. N. GHEI DR S. D. VOHRA (Alrernure)

National

Institute of Health and Family Welfare,

New Delhi

Lok Nayak Jai P&ash P. D. Hinduja National

Narain Hospital, New Delhi Hospital and Medical Research

Centre.

Bombay of Defence.

Directorate General of Medical Services (Army), New Delhi Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi B. M. Birla Heart Research Centre, Calcutta Directorate of Health Services, NCT, Delhi

Ministry

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services, Ministry of Defence. New Delhi National Jawaharlal Academy of Medical Sciences (India). New Delhi and Research, Pondicherry

Institute of Post Graduate

Medical Education

University College of Medical Sciences (UCMS). Indian Hospital Association, New Delhi Indian MedicP Association, New Delhi

Delhi

DR N. K. GROVER DR Y. P. MUNJAL (Alrernure)
DR SHYAM JOSHI DR YWESH MI~AL DR G. B. MAHAPATRA LT-COL S. K. MATHUR DR Y(GI MEHROTRA SHRI C. D. D. REDDY (A/rem&) DR K. C. MEHTA DR ANIL NAR~NG SHRI S. S. PILLAI DR (SHRIMATI) IRA RAY DR (SHRIMATI) P. S. RUCMINI DR SUBHASHR. SALUNKE DR S. S. DODWAD (Alrernure) (Alrermre)

Institute of Public Health and Hygiene,

New Delhi

Tata Engineering & Locomotive Company Limited, Pune Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, Delhi Indian Hospitals Corporation Limited, Madras Commissionerate of Health, Medical Services and Medical Education, Ahmadabad Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh General Insurance Corporation of India. Bombay National Institute of Biologicals. New Delhi Medical Council of India, New Delhi Directorate of Health Services, Bombay Christian Medical College and Hospital. Vellore Department of Hospital Administration, All India New Delhi Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi Escorts Heart Institute and Research Hospital Services Consultancy

DR T. SAMRAI DR R. K. SARMA
DR V. N. `EHGAL DR (SHRIMATI) SAROI SHARMA (Alrernure) DR SATYENDRA SINGH DR (SHRIMATI) ANITA ARORA (Alrernare) SHRI SANJIV SOOD SHRI V. S. KRISHNAN(Alrernure)

Institute

of Medical

Sciences,

Centre, -New Delhi (India) Limited, Sciences, New Delhi Lucknow

Corporation

DR A.K. SRIVASTAVA
DR HEM CHANURA(Alrerrute) DR V. H. TALIR DR A. K. NAGPAL SHRI A. K. TALWAR. Director (MSD)

Sanjay Gandhi

Post Graduate

Institute of Medical

Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi Chairman, Hospital Planning Sectional Committe. Director General, BIS (Ex-o@io Member)
Member Secrerury

MHD 18

SHRIMATIBINDU MEHTA Deputy Director (MSD),

BIS

(Continued

on page

1 I)

10

IS 13808 (Part 4) : 1996
(Continued from page 10)

Hospiial Support Services Including Equipment Management Subcommittee, MSD 82
CfJflVtVW,
PROF

Representing

V. N. SEHGAL Members

Directorate National

General

of Health Services,

New Delhi

DR A K. ACARWAL DR (SHRIMATI) ANITA ARORA
LT-COL R. K.

Escorts Heart Institute

BHASKAR

DR S. DWIVEDI LT.COL S. K. MATHWR DR 1. N. MOHANTY DR R. K. SARMA DR (SHRIMATI) SAROI SHARMA SHRI SANW SOI)D DR V. H. TALIB

Institute of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi and Research Centre, New Delhi Directorate General of Medical Services (Army), Ministry of Defence, New Delhi University College of Medical Sciences (UCMS). Delhi Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences, Delhi Directorate of Health Services, NCT. Delhi Department of Hospital Administration, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd. New Delhi Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi

Panel for Hospital Support Services, MSD 8:2iP-4 cunvener
DR K. K. SARMA Member:r DR (SHRIMATI) ANITA AR(?RA LT-COL R. K. BHASKAR DR AMAL KALRA DR J. N. MOHANTY

All India Institute of Medical Sciences,

New Delhi

Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre. New Delhi Directorate General of Medical Services (Army). Ministty of Defence. New Delhi Department of Hospital Administration, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi Directorate of Health Services, NCT, Delhi

11

Xureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to~copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standar`d along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that ho changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. MSD 8 (75).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone { 323 76 38 41 17

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

{ 337 84 86 26,337 99,337 85 9120 61

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022
-

( 60 38 20 43 25 Southern : C. I. T. Campus. IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 1 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 Western
: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANEStiWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi-l 1001.5, India.

