IS 10106

( Part

2/Set

6 ) : 1990

Indian Standard
PART 2 Section PACKAGING 6 Flexible MATERIALS Laminates

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

UDC

621'798'22 : 675'5/`8 - 419

@ BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

June 1990

Price G roop 1

Packaging

Codes Sectional Committee,

LMD 26

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 2 Set 6 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 9 January 1990, after the draft finalized by the Packaging Codes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This Packaging Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Code is being issued in the following parts, which have one or more sections:

Product packaging, Packaging materials, Ancillary materials, Packaging, Packaging operations, Storage and transportation, Packaging machinery.

and

This section of Packaging Code ( Part 2/Set 6 ) deals with flexible laminates. Attempt has been made to include, in this section of the Code, the general guidance on selection of some of the material that are used in laminate manufacture and the methods which may be used For properties and other details of specific materials used to form for combining such materials. laminates, reference may be made to the related Indian Standards, wherever available. In the preparation of this Standard, considerable assistance has been derived from BS 1133 : Section 21 : 1976 `Packaging code. Section 21 Regenerated cellulose film, plastics films, aluminium foil and flexible laminates', issued by the British Standards Institution ( BSI ).

IS10106(Part

Z/Set 6 ):1990

Indian Standard

PACKAGINGCODE
PART

2 PACKAGING

MATERIALS Laminates

Section6 Flexible
1 SCOPE

1.1This standard (Part 2[Sec 6 ) gives a general description and guidelines for selection of the materials that are used in the manufacture of laminates and also lists typical applications in packaging for some of those in widest use.
2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian Standard is a necessary adjunct to this standard: IS No.
Title

webs. It may not always be possible to draw a distinction between a laminate and a coated Most laminates were originally dematerial. slgned to provide increased strength or rigidity, but the widening demands of modern packaging, coupled with the extensions of the range of available films, have led to the development of functional laminates with properties not possessed by any single material and generally made specifically for a particular application. 4.2 Materials Any two or more materials can be combined to form a laminate and a large number of different laminates is therefore possible. In actual practice the range is limited mainly to the combination of materials having different and complimentary properties. The properties of the separate webs are usually combined in the final laminate and may be supplemented by those of the laminating agent. Certain properties, for example, flexibility, moistureproofness, may be adversely affected by the process of laminating. 4.2.1 The materials most widely used in laminates together with the chief properties they impart to the laminate are listed below:
Properties

7019: 1982

Glossary of terms in plastics and flexible packaging excluding paper ( first revision )

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 For the purpose of this Code, the definitions given in IS 7019 : 1982 shall apply. 4 LAMINATES 4.1 General Laminate is a composite material obtained by combining the complete surfaces of two or more
Material

Paper Aluminium

foil

Cellulose film ( coated >

Polyethylene Ethylene copolymers ionomers and

Polypropylene and copolymers of propylene Oriented Polyester Nylon 6 Rigid PVC polypropylene film

Strength; rigidity; opacity; printability. Negligible permeability to water vapour, gases and odours; greaseproofness, opacity brilliant appearance; dead folding characteristics. Machinability and strength, transparency, gloss and resistance to oils and greases; very low permeability to water vapour, gases and odours, which property can, however, be varied according to the type of coating used; heat-sealability; printability. Grades coated on one side only facilitate adhesion to other plies. Durability; heat-sealability; low permeability to water vapour; good chemical resistance; good low temperature performance. Improved toughness and improved heat-sealing characteristics; generally higher permeability to gases and water vapour when compared with low density polyethylene. Very low permeability to water vapour; resistance of heat-seals to steam sterilization; mechanical strength at low temperature varies accdrding to chemical composition of the copolymer. Transparency and gloss; good water vapour and gas barrier ( coated films ); good mechanical strength; not heat-sealable unless coated; relatively poor dimensional properties at elevated temperatures. Transparency and gloss; durability; coated film has good barrier properties to gases and water vapour. Thermoformable grades available. Durability; high water vapour permeability; gas permeability depends on moisture content of film; good resistance to heat; printability; thermoformable. Transparency and gloss, thermoformability; mechanical strength and rigidity ; good chemical resistance.

IS 10106 ( Part Z/Set 6 ) : 1990 4 3 Types of Laminate The laminates can be made by one the methods given below. 4.3.1 Adhesive Lamination T%e webs are bonded at -the contacting surfaces by means of a suitable adhesive which may be an aqueous, lacquer or hot-melt type. The adhesive is applied to one web which is subsequently brought into contact with the second web between nip rollers. With hot-melt adhesives, which are usually based on wax, the two webs are brought into contact before the adhesive sets. The lamination of two non-porous webs with an aqueous or lacquer adhesive requires that the adhesives should be dried on one web before combining it to the second web, the adhesive being reactivated, if necessary, by heat between heated nip rollers.
' gums casein

or more

of

perties that may differ slightly from laminates made, for example, by adhesive lamination. 4.3.3 Extrusion Lamination Laminates can be made by using molten thermoplastics polymer, for example, polyethylene, as an adhesive. The polymer is -extruded between the two webs prior to entry into the laminating nip. Again, the properties of extrusion laminates may differ slightly from laminates made by other means. 4.3.4 Coextrusion Laminates containing two or more different thermoplastic plies may be made by coextruding the different plies from the same die. 4.3.5 Thermal Lamination Laminates can be made by bonding two separate plies by heat and pressure at heated nip rollers, where each of the two separate plies is either a thermol9astic material or a heat-sealable coated material; alternatively, one of the plies may be paper. 4~4 Typical Laminates and Applications

Aqueous adhesives, for example, starch, dextrin, and sodium silicate, are normally used where at least one web is porous, the moisture being dried off through the porous web by heating the laminate. 4.3.2 Extrusion Coating

extruded thermoplastic layer is applied while still in the molten state, to a substrate web. A laminate of this type has prodirectly,

An

It is not practicable to refer specifically to all the many different laminate types available for packaging. Typical applications in packaging for some of the laminates in widest use are given in Table 1.

Table 1

Typical Laminates and Applications ( Clause 4.4 )

Description Aluminium Cellulose Cellulose Nylon 6 foil film film -

of Laminate paper cellulose Elm polyethylene Biscuits; Biscuits; sweets; ice-cream; sw:ets;

Application margarine; luncheon butter, meats, soap; cigarettes etc; ground coffee; shampoos;

nuts; crisps and other snack foods

Vacuum packs for bacon, hardware items

polyethylene

Polyester - -polyethylene Oriented polypropylene ( coated - polyethylene Oriented polypropylene - polyethylene Paper - aluminium polyethylene Paper polyethylene aluminium foilCellulose film polyethylene Rigid PVC copolymer (uncoated)

)

Vacuum packs and formed vacuum packs for cheese, bacon products, subprimal packs for fresh meat Ground coffee; boil-in-packs for precooked deep frozen convenience foods Vacuum picks for bacon, luncheon meats, etc Hardware Dehydrated items; sweets etc ) frozen foods fruit juices

foil -

foods ( soups, potatoes,

Dry foods and sauce mixes, chemicals, Dehydrated foods ( soups, potatoes, for example,

etc ) and dehydrated pill packs )

vinylidene

chloride

Pharmaceuticals~(

push-through

.

2

Standard ~Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro-. ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence ~for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

/,

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
CQpyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time 30 time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possessi on Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS of the latest amendments or edition. giving the following reference : Dot : No. LMD 26 ( 0823 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend ~No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Telegrams : Manaksanstba ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone I 331 01 13 75 31

37 86 62 2 1843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Blanches
: AHMADABAD.

COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATL JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

