ата ATP IS 13643 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Wa ча GA ФІ ger Фф fag 
Wadd ата Hl Sanur Фф Ес 
WST&IUT 


(TEC УТ?) 


Test for Corrosivity of Solvent used 
for Removal of Water Formed 
Deposits 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 77.060 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Чач, 9 sgrgs Ve WH AMT, Ag Тас - 110002 
хмччшышш МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in | www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 8 


Water Quality for Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the Water Quality for 
Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council. 


Internal surfaces of water steam circuit of any heat exchanger are generally fouled with water formed deposits. For 
effective and efficient heat exchange, it is necessary to remove these water formed deposits. Very occasionally, 
mechanical means like nylon brushing, jet washing are employed to dislodge the deposits, but more often solvent like 
acid, alkali, mixtures of acids are invariably utilized to remove the deposits from surface of water steam circuits. 
However, it is necessary to examine the solvent before its use whether the same could be detrimental to metal surfaces, 
by way of corrosion. 


This standard prescribes the methods of test for corrosivity of solvent before or during use for removal of water formed 
deposits. Since, in most of the cases, it may not be practicable to isolate the components of equipment either in full or 
in part, standard coupons of material of construction of such equipment would form the basis for evaluating the 
corrosive attack on industrial components of equipment. 


This standard was published in 1993. In this revision the following modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Salt Spray/Fog corrosion testing technique has been incorporated; and 
b) Ultrasonic thickness monitoring testing technique has been incorporated. 


Different solvents used for removal of water formed deposits shall be as indicated in 0.3 of IS 12479 : 1988 'Methods 
for analysis of solvent systems used for removal of water formed deposits. These solvents are categorized as 
acid, alkali and others. 


Acids which are highly corrosive are generally mixed with suitable inhibitors so that they only descale the metal 
surfaces, but do not attack the bare metal. For the purpose of this standard, inhibitor together with acid will be treated 
as acid solvent. 


In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ASTM G4-01 standard guide for 
conducting corrosion tests in field application. 


The composition of committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex B. 


In reporting the test result or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 13643 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


TEST FOR CORROSIVITY OF SOLVENT USED FOR REMOVAL 
OF WATER FORMED DEPOSITS 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the methods of tests for 
corrosivity of solvents/mixture of aqueous solutions of 
different chemicals used for chemical cleaning of 
equipment. 


1.2 It also outlines the procedure for qualitative 
assessment of degree of corrosion as ready test 
methods for adoption whenever found necessary. 
Examination of suitability of solvents, the 
hazardous/safety aspects associated with the use of the 
chemicals/solvents are not covered. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, which constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publications, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 11671:1985 Glossary of terms relating to 
boiler water 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in 
IS 11671 shall apply. 


4 LIMITATIONS OF TESTS 


4.1 Metal specimens/coupons in a specific solvent 
may not get corroded at the same rate or in the same 
manner as in equipment. Effects caused by high 
velocity, abrasiveness, contact time, contact area, 
amount of chemicals, corrosion product, etc which 
may be typical in pipe, elbows, pumps, etc may not be 
easily reproduced in coupon tests. Users will have, 


therefore, to establish appropriate interpretation of 
coupon test results on their own. 


4.2 Coupon corrosion testing is predominantly used to 
describe general corrosion rate. However, specific 
type of corrosion may be evaluated by naked eye or by 
casual, inspection or by metallographic examinations. 


4.3 A well designed coupon programme should give 
results within appreciable limits which can relate to 
the existing material of construction and the solvent 
used for removing deposit from its surfaces. 


5 SOLVENTS 


During chemical cleaning process of industrial 
equipment for removing water formed deposits, the 
following most efficient commercially available 
solvents or solutions or liquid mixtures could be 
encountered in different environments as indicated 
below. 


5.1 Acid Solvents [Circulation Washing Velocity (1 
m/s)] 


5.1.1 Hydrochloric acid (5 percent m/v) mixed with 
suitable inhibitor at a temperature of 65 °С + 5 °C 
under mild steel construction for removal of scale 
including corrosion products. 


5.1.2 Ammoniated citric acid (3 percent m/v) mixed 
with suitable inhibitor at a temperature of 90 ?C under 
austenitic steel or non-ferrous alloys construction for 
removing thin layer scale and corrosion products at 
variable pH 3.5 to pH 4 for oxides of iron and at high 
pH 9.5 to 10 with ammonia for copper removal using 
suitable oxidizing chemical such as potassium 
bromate, sodium nitrite, hydrogen peroxide etc. 


5.1.3 Compounds based on chelating agent (1 percent 
m/v) like EDTA, Trilon B, etc mixed with suitable 
inhibitor at 90 °C under austenitic steel or non-ferrous 
alloys construction for removing thin layer scale and 
low degree of corrosion products. 


IS 13643 : 2022 


5.1.4 Sulphonic асі/рһоѕрһогіс  acid/adipic 
acid/phthalic anhydride (2 percent, m/v to 3 percent, 
m/v) mixed with suitable inhibitor at 90 °C under 
austenitic steel or non-ferrous alloys construction for 
removing thin layer scale and low degree of corrosion 
products. 


5.1.5 Hydrofluoric acid (0.5 percent, m/v to 1 percent, 
m/v) mixed with suitable inhibitor at 65 °C to 70 °C in 
all metal construction for removing most of the scales 
(excluding calcium) and most of the corrosion 
products. 


NOTE — Optimum temperature as mentioned in the above 
clauses shall be maintained, as Car as possible, throughout 


the process. 
5.2 Alkali Solvents 


5.2.1 Solution of trisodium phosphate (0.1 percent 
m/v) mixed with suitable surface active agent, at 130 
°С to 140 °C under mild steel surfaces for removing 
oil borne matters, organic species and silica deposits. 


5.2.2 Solution of caustic soda (0.5 percent, m/v) along 
with 0.5 percent of sodium nitrate at 60 °C under mild 
steel surfaces for removing oily matters, thin layer of 
silica deposits, etc. 


5.2.3 Triammonium citrate at a pH of 9.5 to pH 10 with 
suitable oxidizing agent to remove copper deposits 
from mild steel equipment. 


NOTE — Optimum temperature as mentioned in the above 
clauses shall be maintained, as far as possible, throughout the 
process. 


6 INHIBITORS 


For each of the above solvent different types of 
inhibitors are recommended for use which prevents the 
bare metallic surface to react with the solvent in use. 
Inhibitors subjected to corrosion test at different 
working conditions shall be used. 


7 TEST COUPONS 


7.1 Standard metal coupons of the metals employed in 
industrial equipment from the surface of which water 
formed deposits are to be removed, are made to 
establish corrosion rates by loss in weight in the 
different solvent environments encountered as 
mentioned in 5.3. 


7.2 Test coupons having a minimum exposed surface 
area of 26 cm? (typically 50 cm?) are obtained and 
prepared as described in 7.3. However, the specimen 


should be as large as can be, for convenient handling 
depending on the available analytical balance and the 
operating equipment, that is, laboratory corrosion test 
rig. The test coupons could be either rectangular or 
circular but sufficient thickness should be allowed to 
minimize the possibility of perforation of the specimen 
during the test exposure. While preparing the coupons, 
sharp edges are to be avoided as far as possible. Again 
if they are subjected to severe cold work, they need to 
be stress relieved. 


7.3 Preparation of Test Specimen 


7.3.1 The test specimen of required size from the 
material of construction actually in use of the 
industrial process arc cut either from plate if available 
or from the equipment sample. A convenient size for a 
standard corrosion coupon is 38 mm in diameter and 3 
mm to 5 mm in thickness with 11 mm hole at the center 
of the circular coupon. For a rectangular type, the size 
could be 50 mm x 25 mm x 3 mm. Other sizes, shapes 
and thickness for the specimen can be made for special 
purposes or to comply with the design of a special type 
of corrosion rack. Usually no specific finish is 
necessary for the specimen, unless special aspects 
have to be examined or studied (like testing on pre 
passivated sample, machining/polishing to eliminate 
cold worked metal, etc). However, uniformity in 
surface including its shining characteristics are 
desirable to facilitate comparing data from different 
tests. 


7.3.2 After cutting, it is necessary that each of the 
specimens are coded with some identification marks 
by notching the edge of the specimens or by stamping 
or embossing 3 mm high letters or numbers. When 
identifications on each of the specimens are marked, it 
is necessary that the specimens are perfectly cleaned 
to remove all previously formed oxides or films. The 
stainless steel alloy specimens are given a surface 
conditioning using wet 40 grit silicon oxide paper, 
whereas all other materials are scrubbed under a slurry 
of 53 micron pumic stone with a bristle brush. The lead 
coupons are mechanically cleaned and then polished 
with soft cloth. However, before abrasive cleaning, the 
specimens should be degreased first by acetone or 
trichloroethylene vapour. 


7.3.3 The treatments are completed by hot and cold 
distilled water washing, acetone washing and warm air 
drying followed by swabbing and rinsing in hexane to 
remove any residual cleaning materials and then 
followed by 100 °C air drying. Then the coupons are 


cooled in circulating dry air and stored under 
desiccator prior to repeat weighing. The coupons are 
weighed to 0.10 mg accuracy. Triplicate specimens are 
used for important testing and duplicate for all other 
normal testing. 


NOTE — Average surface roughness values for the 
exposed materials should generally be 0.2 um for mild 
steel, low alloy steel, cast iron, etc and 4.0 um to 5.0 uum for 
copper, brass, lead and zinc. 


8 TEST COUPONS SUPPORT AND SPACERS 


8.1 To hold specimens firmly in space inside the 
corrosion test rig either singly or jointly and to prevent 
loss or damage to specimens, suitable support of 
corrosion resistant material preferably, of 
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or metal rod coated 
with PTFE arc provided. Specimens are generally held 
by the hold in them, the hold should be made large 
enough for sliding the specimen over the supporting 
rod. Clamping devices should not be used to support 
the specimens. 


8.2 For exposing more than one specimen on the same 
holder and to prevent interference of one specimen 
with the other during the test period, it is necessary that 
each of the specimen is suitably separated by 
insulating material like PTFE. These separators are 
called ‘spacers’ which also give firm support for the 
specimen without occupying more area. 


8.3 Although there are many ways of supporting and 
spacing the test coupons, these are generally made as 
per requirement of tests and accommodating freely in 
the test exposure apparatus. A typical assembly of 
support and spacers called ‘spool rack’, which is 


IS 13643 : 2022 


useful for exposing in open vessels such as reactors 
and tanks is given in Fig. 1. All materials used in the 
assembly should be sufficiently corrosion resistant to 
ensure the assembly remaining intact for the duration 
of the test. Also a typical insert rack as given in Fig. 2 
is desirable for use in pipes or other units which have 
flanged connections which allow access to the system. 
A rack suitable for larger diameter pipes, long length 
of horizontal and vertical pipe called ‘Dutchman’ type 
rack as shown in Fig. 3 is also employed. A ‘Slip in’ 
corrosion rack as shown in Fig. 4 is ideally suited for 
effecting the entry and removal of corrosion coupons 
from the exposure equipment when required without 
affecting the active service. 


9 PROCEDURE 


9.1 Suitable specimen rack is chosen as per the 
exposure apparatus in which respective solvent 
indicated earlier for removing water formed deposits 
are placed or circulated as per the operating conditions 
required. Already weighed, prepared test coupons in 
duplicate are then properly put in the rack. The 
specimen rack with test coupons are then inserted into 
the exposure apparatus to dip into the liquid suitably 
without touching the walls of the exposure apparatus. 
The preferred position of the rack shall be such that 
drippage of corrosion products from one specimen to 
another is prevented and the flow of liquid, if any, 
should be adjusted accordingly. The same condition of 
agitation of the liquid should then be encountered by 
all specimens. Also, the position of different 
specimens in the same rack should be such that 
galvanic reaction due to different metals in solution is 
avoided. 


IS 13643 : 2022 


NUT AND 
LOCK NUT 


SUPPORT RODS 
©6.55-9.55 


MOUNTING STRIP 


82-102 82-102 
DIA OF 
82-102 
A 


MOUNTING 
STRIP 


END PLATE OPTION END PLATE OPTION 
All dimensions in millimetres. 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL SPOOL RACK 


FOR UNUSED 
NOZZLE 


SOLIO DISK TO FiT 
WITHIN BOLT CIRCLE 


FOR PIPE LINES 
OR NOZZLES IN USF 


THIS PLATE MAY BE 
SLOTTED OR OTHERWISE 
PERFORATED TO PEPMIT 
FLOW IN PIPE LINES 
OR NOZZLES IN USE 

(SEE OPTIONS BFLOW)- 


$6.35mm ROD 


$9.52mm ROD 


SPACERS 


300- 460mm 


IS 13643 : 2022 


INSULATION FLAT BAR 


END PLATE 
OPTIONS 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL INSERT RACK 


9.2 The duration of exposure is based on known rates 
of corrosion of the materials or more often by the mode 
of actual operation in removing water formed deposits. 
However, short exposure (as in actual operation) may 
lead to incomplete study in view of protection given 
by films on the metal surfaces initially while extended 


exposure of more than two weeks may cause for 
nonuniform effects such as pitting and phase selective 
corrosion to occur. As per thumb rule, approximate 
minimum duration of the test in hours should be either 
50 divided by expected corrosion rate expressed in 
mils per year, or 2 000 divided by the 
expected corrosion rate expressed in millimeter per 
year. 


IS 13643 : 2022 


9.3 After the test exposures for a stipulated period, the 
test coupons are taken out and the condition and 
appearance of the holder and specimens together with 
adhesion of any coatings of films on the surface are 
examined and recorded. As a record, it is advisable to 
have the test coupons photographed, and the loose 
corrosion product mechanically removed for X-ray, 


TUBULAR SPACERS 


150- 300 ——— — —— — — —ex« 


spectrometer, chemical analysis etc. The test coupons 
are then carefully washed with distilled water and 
chemically cleaned with suitable solvent to remove 
soluble materials from the surface of the test coupons, 
or chemical cleaning methods to remove corrosion 
products as indicated in Table 1, Table 2, and Table 3 
as given in Annex A are to be applied. 


TPE -FLUOROCARBON 
GASKET AND NUT 
BOTH ENDS 


— COUPON 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL DUTCHMAN TYPE RACK 


After successive chemical cleaning, the loosened 
corrosion products are scrubbed off with a wet nylon 
bristle brush. The cleaned coupons are washed in cold 
and hot distilled water, dried in warm air and then 
vacuum desiccated before being weighed. The 
effectiveness of cleaning is judged, visually and 
supported by mass loss measurement. Mass loss 
results are obtained for one of the two or two of the 
three coupons exposed in each environment prior to 
deciding whether the remaining coupon shall be used 
for metallographic examination or additional mass 
loss evaluation. 


10 RESULTS 


10.1 The material loss is defined as the mean thickness 
of the material wasted in corrosion during an exposure 
period. Mass loss results obtained from the tests are 
converted to value of ‘material loss’ and ‘corrosion 
rate’. 


Material Loss (ML), mm = 2 ...(1) 


Р*А 
where 


S = mass loss in mg; 
P = density of the test material, mg/mm?; and 
A = exposed area of the test material, mm?. 


Material 1055*К 


Corrosion Rate (CR), mm/year = n 


..(2) 
where 


К = 31.557 x 10° in seconds per mean solar year; 
and 
t = duration of exposure period in seconds. 


The above unit for expressing results relate to 
corrosion in terms of penetration damage. However, 
where the corrosion has been substantially uniform in 
distribution over the surface of the specimen, an 


evaluation based on mass loss is appropriate, the unit 
of which is expressed as g/m?/day. 


10.2 The specimen should be carefully examined for 
type and uniformity of surface attack such as etching, 
pitting, de-alloying or parting, tarnish, film, scale, etc. 
The maximum and minimum depth of the pits can be 


IS 13643 : 2022 


measured with a calibrated microscope or by the use 
of a depth gauge to the nearest 0.02 mm and not 
interpolated or extrapolated. Corrosion at or under the 
insulating spacers is an indication of susceptibility of 
the material to crevice corrosion whereas pitting on the 
surface is indicative of the intrinsic pitting tendency of 
the environment. 


SERIES FLANGE(TO 
MATCH GATE VALVE) 


TPE-FLUOROCARBON re 


SPACER 
6.35mm SS ROD 
(USE WELDING ROD А 
AND THREAD TO f 
COUPON 4 Д 


10/24 ОМ ENO) 


[ 10/24 SS 


LOCK NUTS FA 


DRAIN VALVE „у 
OPTIONAL — =, 


9.52mm SS ROD 
BONNET FROM V 
13mm SS VALVE 


025-75 
mm PIPE 


HANDLE 


250 


All dimensions are in millimeters. 


FIG. 4 TYPICAL SLIP IN CORROSION TEST RACK 


IS 13643 : 2022 


10.3 The ability of coupons to simulate the 
performance of the materials of construction is largely 
dependent on the design of the programme and on a 
number of factors including metals tested, variability 
of the environment and nature of corrosion process. 
Accordingly the reproducibility of the results may 
vary to the extent of + 20 percent from the mean value. 


11 REPORT 


The following proforma is recommended to be 
adopted for reporting the results of corrosivity of 
solvent for removing water formed deposits. 


11.1 Process Description 


11.1.1 Operating equipment from which water formed 
deposits to be removed; 


11.1.2 Material of construction of operating 
equipment; 


11.1.3 Nature of deposits formed on the equipment; 


11.1.4 Solvent proposed to be used to remove water 
formed deposits; and 


11.1.5 Temperature velocity, strength of solution and 
any other information on actual operation during 
cleaning of equipment. 


11.2 Corrosion Test 
11.2.1 Material, size and number of test coupons. 


11.2.2 Surface condition of coupons (mill finish 
machined, polished 120 grit, etc). 


11.2.3 Type of rack prepared. 


11.2.4 Type of exposure equipment, solvent taken and 
its concentration. 


11.2.5 Temperature maintained during test. 


11.2.6 Test conducted by circulation of solvent or 
static solvent. 


11.2.7 Duration of test in hours. 

11.2.8 Cleaning method for coupons applied after test. 
11.3 Corrosion Results 

11.3.1 Percentage loss in mass of coupons. 

11.3.2 Corrosion rate, micrometer per year. 

11.3.3 Type of corrosion. 


11.3.4 Specific observation on corrosion products. 


12 SHORT TERM/PRELIMINARY TEST FOR 
INHIRITOR EFIFCIENCY/CORROSIVITY OF 
HYDROCHLORIC ACID COMMONLY USED 
FOR REMOVING WATER FORMED 
DEPOSITS 


12.1 Hydrochloric acid when used in the system to 
remove water formed deposits, can cause vigorous 
reaction with the steel surfaces of the system after 
removing the deposits if suitable inhibitor is not mixed 
with hydrochloric acid before its use. Since it is a 
general practice of removing water formed deposits by 
circulating hydrochloric acid for 3 to 4 h continuously 
in the system, it could be quite possible that at any 
stage due to temperature and other effects, inhibitor 
efficiency could have come down to undesirable 
values. Under such circumstances, it is necessary that 
intermittently acid coming from the system, is tested 
for inhibitor efficiency so that the bare metal surface 
is saved from corrosion. Corrosion coupon test for 
testing such corrosion action or inhibitor efficiency 
will take considerable time and, therefore, the 
following tests are recommended to establish inhibitor 
efficiency in a short time: 


12.1.1 A degreased steel wool ball is placed in a test 
sample. If the solution is not effectively inhibited, 
hydrogen gas is evolved and the ball will float in the 
solution instead of sinking. 


12.1.2 An untarnished carbon steel specimen is added 
in a sample of acid at its working concentration and 
temperature. If one or more streams of bubbles appear, 
rather than an occasional isolated bubble, the acid is 
not safe to be used without using fresh inhibitor 
addition. 


12.1.3 A more elaborate test can be made as follows: 
The loss of weight after machining the material with 
known surface area may be measured for 30 min 
immersion in the inhibitor acid diluted to strength and 
maintained at a temperature that is to be used in acid 
cleaning. The loss of weight should not be more than 
1 mg/cm?/30 min. 


12.2 Efficiency Test for Inhibitors used along with 
Acids for Removal of Water Formed Deposits 


12.2.1 Two test coupons of equal surface area with 
blunt sharp ends and corners are pickled in uninhibited 
hydrochloric acid of 5 percent m/v strength, for about 
45 min for removal of all oxide layer and other 
contaminants. Acid cleaned coupons are rinsed in 
Demineralized Water (DM) water and dried with 
acetone and weighed to fourth decimal accuracy. 


12.2.2 A solution of acid of required strength to be 
used is prepared in two separate beakers and correct 
proportion of inhibitor is added in one. Temperature of 
both solution, is raised to the recommended level. One 
test coupon is immersed in inhibitor solution and the 
second in uninhibited solution under identical 
condition for 1 h or more. After 1 h or more, both the 
coupons are removed, rinsed with DM water and dried 
with acetone and weighed. 


Percentage of parent metal protection is calculated as: 


Weight loss without inhibitor — Weight loss with inhibitor 


- n "ETT x 100 
Weight loss without inhibitor 

NOTE — Inhibitor efficiency test or metal loss test shall give more 

than 99 percent efficiency of inhibitor or less than 1 mg/cm?/h metal 

loss under conditions. 


IS 13643 : 2022 


13 OTHER 
TECHNIQUES 


CORROSION TESTING 


Apart from coupon exposure method, a brief 
description of other testing techniques are given in 
Table 1 of Annex A with their advantages and 
disadvantages. The user may adopt any method of tests 
as per their choice and facilities available at site. 


14 CHEMICAL CLEANING METHODS 


A brief description of individual chemical cleaning 
methods are given in Table 2 of Annex A. The 
different types of chemical cleaning methods used for 
removal of corrosion products are given in Table 3 of 
Annex A. 


IS 13643 : 2022 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 9.3) 


CORROSION TESTING TECHNIQUES AND CHEMICAL CLEANING METHODS 


Table 1 Corrosion Testing Techniques 
(Clauses 9.3 and 13) 


SI No. Methods Brief Description Advantages Disadvantages 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
a) Main Methods 
i) Coupon exposure Long term exposure of Test all materials. Can Long evaluation. 
metal coupons. Monitor be in a remote site. Requires intensive 
change in weight Accurate and labour. Multiple 
comprehensive exposure often necessary 
corrosion information 
ii) Corrosometer Changing resistance due to Actual corrosion rate Cannot distinguish the 
probes corroding metal elements сап be obtained in a type of | corrosion. 


ili) Hydrogen probes 


iv) Electro-chemical 
v) Stress Ruptures 
Tests ‘U’ 


Selected Stress 


vi) Corrosion 
Test 


Fatigue 


Volumetrically measures 
the hydrogen gas liberated 
by corrosion reactions 


Measures the corrosion 
rate by electro chemical 
polarization resistant 


Measures the corrosion 
rate by electro chemical 
polarization resistant 


Testing the susceptibility 


of rotor and blade steels to 
stress corrosion cracking 


10 


short time. Continuous 
record of corrosion 
rate 


Good warning means 
for a sudden change in 
a system. Continuous 
record of the corrosion 


Instantaneous measure 
of corrosion rate. 


Provides rapid 
assessment of 
environments and 
material 

Indicates allowable 
stress levels 

Indicates degradation 


of fatigue performance 
due lo environment 


Limited material choice. 
High cost. Requires daily 
monitoring 


Cannot distinguish the 
type of corrosion. Useful 
for carbon steel only. 
Requires daily 
monitoring 


Applicable only to liquid 
dominated environments 
where the conductivity of 
the fluids is suitable 


Requires intensive 
labour. Sensitive minor 
chemical changes 


Test is sensitive to 
exposure time 


vii) 


Salt 
testing 


spray/fog 


b) Supplementary Methods 


i) 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


Chemical analysis 


Corrosion 
analysis 


product 


Metallographic 
examination 


Theoretical 
evaluation 


Ultrasonic thickness 
monitoring 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


5 % NaCl solution is 
atomized in a chamber at a 
temperature adjusted to 95 
°С (95 °F). The time that 
samples can resist against 
corrosion is the criterion 
used to understand test 
sample durability. 


Measure concentrations of 
corrosive species апа 
corrosion products 


Energy dispersive X ray 
spectroscopy (EDX); X- 
ray diffraction (XRD), X- 
ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy(XPS) апа 
electron micro-probe, 
Identify major corrosion 
product species 


Optical-Sem-(Tem) 
microscopic examination 
of corrosion and corrosion 
products 


Potential pH diagrams. 
establish equations 
describing equilibrium 


Used to monitor the 
internal corrosion of 
pipelines or storage tanks. 
The ultrasonic sound 
wave, which is produced 
by an ultrasonic 
transducer, traverses to the 
back wall and reflects back 
to the source, making it 
possible to calculate the 
thickness of metal by 
measuring the reflection 
time and considering the 
velocity of sound waves in 
the tested material. 


11 


Indicates the corrosion 


probability in 
accelerated marine 
environment 

Characterize specific 
environment for 


comparative purposes 
Suggest corrosion 
mechanisms 


Reveals form and type 
of corrosion. Suggests 
history of ‘corrosion 


Indicates stable 
corrosion X products. 
Suggests possible 


corrosion mechanisms 


Actual corrosion rate 
can be calculated as 
thick ness 
measurement is very 
accurate 


IS 13643 : 2022 


Test is sensitive to 
sodium chloride (NaCl) 
atomization. 


Sensitive to sampling 
and analysis technique. 
Requires expertise 


Limited equipment 
availability. Sensitive to 
sampling and analysis 


techniques. Requires 
expertise 
Limited equipment 
availability. Requires 
expertise 


Results generally apply 
to equilibrium conditions 
only 


It is sensitive to 
ultrasonic probe 


IS 13643 : 2022 


Table 2 Description of Individual Chemical Cleaning Methods 


(Clause 9.3, and 14) 


Method A 

Electrolytic cleaning in : 
Triammonium citrate 
Distilled water to make 
Temperature 

Time (10 min repeated) 
Anode 

Cathode 

Current density 

Method B 

Electrolytic cleaning in : 
Dihydrogen ammonium citrate made from triammonium citrate 
Citric acid 

Distilled water to make 
Solution, pH 

Temperature 

Time (10 min repeated) 
Anode 

Cathode 

Current density 

Method C 

Dip in: 

Triammonium citrate 
Distilled water to make Temperature 
Temperature 

Time (10 min repeated) 
Method D 

Dip in: 

Nitric acid (specific gravity 1/42 ) 
Distilled water to make 
Temperature 

Time (5 to 10 min, repeated) 


Timing control by indication of hydrophobic surface film in acid 
solution, a modification of ASTM test for hydrophobic surface films 


by the Water-Break test 
Method E 

Electrolytic cleaning in : 
Hydrochloric acid (specific gravity 1.19) 
Hexamine 

Distilled water to make 
Temperature 

Time 

Anode 

Cathode 

Current density 


12 


200 g 

11 

70 °С 

10 to 40 min 

Carbon 

Test material 

0.001 A/cm?-0.02 A/cm? 


233g 

402 g 

3] 

3 

70°С 

10 min to 40 min 
Carbon 

Test material 

0.001 A/cm?-0.02 A/cm? 


200 g 

1 

60 °C 

10 min to 40 min 


200 ml 

П 

60 °С 

5 піп їо 20 тіп 


0.51 

2.0 g 

П 

Room temperature 

5 min to 20 min 
Carbon 

Test material 

0.01 A/cm?-0.02 A/cm? 


IS 13643 : 2022 


Table 2 (Concluded) 
Method F 
Dip in: 
Potassium cyanide 50g 
Distilled water to make П 
Temperature Room temperature 
Time ] min to 2 min 
Method G 
Dip in: 
Sulphuric acid (specific gravity 1.25) 100 ml 
Distilled water to make П 
Temperature Room temperature 
Time 1 min to 10 min 
Method H 


Wash in cold water and scrub lightly using a medium hard nylon bristle brush remove all foreign corrosion products 
and monitor weight again 


Method J 

Electrolytic cleaning in: 

Sodium hydroxide 100 g 

Distilled water to make 10 min to 40 min 

Time (10 min repeated) 10 min to 40 min 
Anode Carbon 

Cathode Test material 

Current density 0.01 A/cm?-0.02 A/cm? 


13 


IS 13643 : 2022 


Table 3 Chemical Cleaning Methods used for Removal of Corrosion Products 


(Clause 9.3 and 14) 


SI No. Material Cleaning Method (Refer Table 2) 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Carbon steel, low-alloy steel Use A or B or both 
ii) Cast irons Use A only 
lii) Types 304, 321, 347, 316, 410 stainless steel; E-Brite 26- Use C or B followed by D (and E, H if 
1 FV520 (B), 3RE60, 2RK65, Carpenter 20-Cb3, Incoloy necessary) 
825 
iv) Deoxidized copper and arsenical aluminium brass Use F and alternate with G after the major 
portion of soluble corrosion products have 
been removed 
v) Ti, IM1318, IM1550 Use H 
vi) Nickel alloys, cobalt alloys, lead, zinc, tantalum, Under review 
molybdenum, zinconum alloy GR 32 
vii) Removal of deposited amorphous silica Use J 


14 


IS 13643 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Water Quality for Industrial Purpose Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


Organization Representative(s) 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai SHRIK. P. BHATTACHARYYA (Chairperson) 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai SHRI SHIVAYYANAMATH $. 


SHRI T. K. DEY (Alternate) 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, Thiruchirapali SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI K. ANANDA BABU (Alternate) 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad DR NEELAM NIGAM 
SHRIMATI POOJA MEHROTRA (Alternate) 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai DR C. MURALIDHARAN 
DR K. SRI BALA KAMESWARI (Alternate) 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi SHRI NAZIMUDDIN 
SHRI VISHAL GANDHI (Alternate) 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, Sharanpur DR NITIN ENDLAY 
DR SANJAY TYAGI (Alternate) 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar DR SOUMYA HALDAR 
DR D. N. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


Consumer education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad MISS ANINDITA MEHTA 
MIss DOLLY JAIN (Alternate) 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai SHRIS. SHANKAR 
CECRI, Karaikudi DR S. VASUDEVAN 

DR R. MALINI (Alternate) 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, New Delhi SHRIT. S. G. NARAYANAN 

SHRI UDAY SINGH MINA (Alternate) 
Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi DR NEELIMA ALAM 

DR SANJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 
Delhi Jal Board SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 
Grasim Industries Limited, Nagda SHRIS. N. SASTRY 


SHRI ALOK SINGH (Alternate) 


Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited, Allahabad SHRI GORAKH SINGH 
SHRI K. S. S. MOORTHY (Alternate) 


Indian Chemical Council DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
SHRI KEDAR OKE (Alternate) 


15 


IS 13643 : 2022 


Ion Exchange India Limited, Mumbai 


Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Chandrapur 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation ,New Delhi 


Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation, New Delhi 


National Environment Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Padarsh Pharmaceuticals Private Limited, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


The Energy and Resource Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Water and steam Chemistry Division, BARC facilities, Kalpakkam 


CII-Triveni Water Institute 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SACHIN SAHA 
DR RENU SARAPH (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANIL K KHERA (Alternate II) 


SHRI V. P. GHODMARE 
SHRI RAJESH DATTATRAYA CHIVANE (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJASEKHAR 
SHRI SUMIT PRIYADARSHI (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
MISS CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. KHADSE 
DR V. ATUL MALDHURE (Alternate) 


SHRI L. K. NAYAK 
SHRI ANKIT VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNEESH CHADDA 
SHRI MAHON MANOHAR KHANDEKAR (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK NARAYAN SINGH 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHUMAN 
DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR B. ANUPKUMAR (DIRECTOR) 


SHRI KAPIL K NARULA 
DR SIPIKA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. BAGHEL 
SHRI D. K. JAIN 
DR A. LAWRENCE 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 13 (19412). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


