NAT HA IS 17356 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


FI carte — HI sik SERTSITHT TEE 
AT gar Hare rer — fates 


Agro Textiles — Windshield Nets 
for Agriculture and Horticulture 
Purposes — Specification 


ICS 59.080.70; 65.020.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR U, 9 serere TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


— SS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 6 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Technical 
Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Windshield nets are barriers used to reduce wind speed. Windshield nets are used in various agriculture and 
horticulture applications mainly to protect young plants, fruit, trees or harvest crops from high speed wind which 
causes severe damage to crops. The construction of right angle windshields protects young plants and mature 
plants from dying out and being broken. These nets reduce the effects of high winds and even help to keep away 
sand and salt from the air in areas near the sea. The protection of plants against high wind also promotes plant 
growth and are also prevented from being cooled by the wind. The windshield nets are available in a various 
structures and variety of colours that are aesthetically pleasing so that structures are not an eye-catcher on the 
farm. 


The method for installation of windshield nets is given in Annex D for information only. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 1s given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17356 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


AGRO TEXTILES — WINDSHIELD NETS FOR 
AGRICULTURE AND HORTICULTURE 
PURPOSES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 
This standard prescribes constructional and other 
performance requirements for windshield nets 


manufactured from mono filament yarns for agriculture 
and horticulture purposes to protect the flora from 
the damage caused by high speed wind by reducing/ 
blocking the amount of wind passing through them. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in 
IS 16366 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Windshield Nets — These are textile fabrics that 
protect the crops from exposure and damage from high 
speed wind. 


3.2 Wind Blockage Percent — This is the term for 
expressing the quantification of the amount of wind 
passing through the sample and gives the capacity of 
the net sample to block the amount of wind passing 
through the sample. 


3.3 Open Area Percent — The percentage of the total 
area of a net sample that is not occupied by the threads 
of the weave, which is that portion of the fabric area 
through which wind can pass. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 HDPE Monofilament 


Monofilament yarn shall be manufactured from 
HDPE granules, which shall be UV stabilized by 
adding suitable UV stabilizer. The linear density of 
the monofilament yarn used for the manufacture of 


windshield nets shall be 35.56 tex (320 denier). As 
agreed to between the buyer and the seller, coloured 
monofilament yarn shall be manufactured using colour 
master batch. The denier of HDPE monofilament yarn 
used in the manufacture of windshield nets shall be 
subjected to the following tolerances: 


a) + 10 percent on individual value; and 


b) +5 percent on average. 


4.1.1 The heat shrinkage of the monofilament yarn 
at 60°C shall not exceed 5 percent when subjected 
to the specified temperature for a period of 10 min 
in an air circulating oven. The heat shrinkage of the 
monofilament yarn at 95?C shall not exceed 8 percent 
when subjected to the specified temperature for a period 
of 10 min in hot water bath. 


5 MANUFACTURE 


5.1 Fabric 


The fabric used in the manufacture of windshield nets 
shall be knitted on the warp knitting machines and 
shall have a width as per the agreement between the 
buyer and the seller. A tape of 1.70 + 0.1 mm width or 
monofilament yarn of suitable diameter having the name 
of the manufacture and GSM shall be provided at one 
end of the fabric which shall run through the complete 
length of the roll for identification of manufacture. 


5.2 Eyelet 


5.2.1 Eyelets shall be provided during knitting along 
the width of the net after every 1 m length or as agreed 
between the buyer and the seller. Length of the eyelet 
shall be 20 + 5 mm. Eyelet to eyelet edge distance 
across the width of the net shall be 45 + 5 mm or 
as agreed between the buyer and the seller. The line 
diagram showing the location of eyelets across width 
and length of the fabric is shown in Fig. 1. 


5.2.2 Location of the eyelet shall be between 6" and 
7" pillar. 


5.2.3 For reinforcement of the eyelets, minimum double 
yarn in the warp (course) shall be used in minimum 3 
pillars on both sides of eyelet. 


IS 17356 : 2020 


Length of fabric 


eyelet 


width of fabric 


a — eyelet edge to edge distance across the width of fabric 


b — eyelet to eyelet distance across the length of fabric 


c = length of eyelet, across the width of the fabric 


Fic. 1 LocarioN or EYELETS AcROss WIDTH AND LENGTH OF THE FABRIC 


5.3 Colour 


The colour or a mixture of colour of the windshield 
nets fabric shall be as per the agreement between the 
buyer and the seller. The colour/shade shall be as 
specified in the contract or order. In case a sample has 
been agreed upon and sealed, the supply shall be made 
in conformity with the sample in such respects. 


6 TYPES 


Based on the mass in g/m’, the windshield nets are 
classified as follows: 


a) Typel  — having mass of 100 g/m?, Min, 
suitable for wind speed up to 55 
km/h; and 

b)Type2  — having mass of 150 g/n?, Min, 
suitable for wind speed up to 80 km/h 

7 REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 Dimensions and Mass 


The windshield nets shall be made to the shade and 
dimensions as specified in the contract or order. 


The dimensions shall be determined by the method 
prescribed in IS 1954. The following tolerance shall 
be permissible for length, width and mass (g/m?): 


Dimension Tolerance, Percent 
Length +1 

-0 
Width +1 

-0 
Mass, g/m? +6 

-0 


7.2 The windshield nets fabric shall confirm to the 
requirements specified in Table 1. 


8 PACKING AND MARKING 


8.1 Packing 


The windshield nets shall be packed in roll form 
in length of 50 m or in bundle form or as agreed to 
between the buyer and the seller. 


8.2 Marking 


8.2.1 Each fabric roll/bundle shall be marked legibly by 
affixing an identification tag/label with the following 
information: 

a) Indication of the source of manufacture; 

b) Declared length and width of the windshield nets; 


IS 17356 : 2020 


C) Mass per square meter of the windshield nets; 
d) Batch No. and date of manufacture; and 
e) Any other information desired by the buyer. 


8.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The windshield net rolls/bundles conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be certified as per the 
conformity assessment schemes under the provisions 
of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the 
Rules and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
windshield net rolls/bundles may be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


9 SAMPLING 


9.1 Lot 


All monofilament windshield nets rolls/bundles of same 
construction and type dispatched to a buyer against one 
dispatch note shall constitute a lot. 


9.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller, the number of monofilament windshield nets 
rolls/bundles to be selected at random from a lot shall 
be as given in column 3 or column 4 of Table 2. 


10 NUMBER OF TEST SPECIMENS AND 
CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


Number of test specimens and criteria for conformity 
shall be as given in Table 3. 


Table 1 Requirements of Windshield Nets Made from Monofilament Yarns 
( Clause 7.2 ) 


Requirement(s) Method of Test, Ref to 


+, 


Mono construction 


SI No. Characteristic(s) 
Type 1, Mono x 
a) (2) (3) 
(i) Mass g/m?, Min 100 
(ii) Average breaking strength of wind shield net 
fabric (Strip method, 325x50 mm test piece 
with gauge length of 200 mm), N, Min; 
a) Warpway 350 
b) Weftway 350 


Retention of breaking strength after UV 
exposure of 144 h, percent, Min 


iii) 


iv) Colour fastness to artificial light? 


v) 


vi) 


Bursting pressure, kgf/cm?, Min 
Wind blockage, percent, Min 


»Applicable for coloured windshield nets only. 


85 percent of original actual value (fabric) 


Type 2, Mono x 
Mono construction 


(4) (5) 
150 IS 1964 
IS 1969 (Part 1) 
400 
700 


Annex B and IS 1969 (Part 1) 


4 or better IS 105-B02 
14 IS 1966 (Part 1) or IS 1966 (Part 2) 
35 Annex C 


IS 17356 : 2020 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 
( Clause 9.2 ) 


SI No. No. of Rolls/Bundles in Lot Sample Size Sub-Sample Size Permissible No. of Defective 
Rolls/Bundles 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Up to 50 3 2 0 
ii) 51-150 5 2 0 
iii) 151 - 300 8 3 1 
iv) 301 - 500 13 5 2 
v) 501 and above 20 5 3 
Table 3 Number of Test Specimens and Criteria for Conformity 
( Clause 10 ) 
SI No. Characteristic No. of Rolls/Bundles Criteria for Conformity 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Material, manufacture, dimensions and According to column 3 of Table 2 The defective rolls do not exceed 
mass the corresponding number given in 
column 5 of Table 2 
ii) All other requirements According to column 4 of Table 2 All the test specimens shall pass the 


tests 


IS 17356 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
105-B02 : 2014 Textiles — Tests for colour (Part 1) : 2009 Hydraulic method (second 


fastness: Part B02 Colour 
fastness to artificial light : 


revision) 


(Part 2) : 2009 Pneumatic method (second 


Xenon arc fading lamp test revision) 
1954 : 1990 Determination of length and 1969 (Part 1) : 2018 Textiles — Tensile 

width of woven fabrics — properties of fabrics: Part 1 

Methods (second revision) Determination of maximum 
1964 : 2001 Methods for determination force and elongation at 

of mass per unit length and maximum force using the strip 

mass per unit area of fabrics method (fourth revision) 

(second revision) 16366 : 2015 Glossary of terms used in 
1966 Textiles — Bursting properties agrotextile 

of fabrics — Determination of 

bursting strength and bursting 

distension 

ANNEX B 
[ Table 1, SI No. (iii) ] 
UV RESISTANCE TEST 


B-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


The test specimens for breaking strength shall be cut 
from the sample as specified in IS 1969 (Part 1). 


B-2 TEST CONDITIONS 


B-2.1 The test shall be carried out with fluorescent 
UV-B lamp (313 nanometer or its equivalent). 


B-2.2 The duration of the test shall be 144 h (that is 
6 days). 


B-2.3 The test cycle shall be 8 h at 60 + 3 °C with 
UV radiation alternating after 4 h at 50 + 3? C with 
condensation. 


B-2.4 Irradiation level throughout the test shall be 
maintained at 0.63 0.03 W/m?. 
- 0.0 


B-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


B-3.1 Determine the original average breaking strength 
of windshield nets specimens separately as per the test 
specified in IS 1969 (Part 1). 


B-3.2 Expose the specimens alternately to ultraviolet 


light alone and to condensation in one respective 
cycle. 


B-3.2.1 The type of fluorescent UV lamp, the timing of 
the UV exposure and the temperature of condensation 
shall be as specified in B-2. 


B-3.3 Determine the average breaking strength of the 
specimens separately after UV exposure as mentioned 
above. 


B-3.4 Determine the percent retention of original 
strength as follows: 


b 
Percent retention of original breaking strength — 3 x100 


where, 
a= Average breaking strength before UV 
exposure as obtained in B-3.1; and 
b= Average breaking strength after UV 
exposure as obtained in B-3.3. 
NOTES: 


1 The UV source is an array of fluorescent lamps (with lamp emission 
concentrated in the UV range). 


2 Condensation is produced by exposing the test surface to a heated, 
saturated mixture of air and water vapour, while the reverse side of the 
test specimen is exposed to the cooling influence of ambient room air. 


IS 17356 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
[ Table 1, SI No. (vi) ] 
DETERMINATION OF WIND BLOCKAGE ( PERCENT ) 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


This instrumental set up helps in determining the value 
of wind blockage based on the relative measurement. 
It consists of a wind source generated with pressure 
arrangement under the controlled temperature and 
humidity conditions. A chamber has been designed 
with arrangement for proper placement of wind source, 
sample holders for holding the windshield net sample 
and the anemometer as wind measuring source. The 
wind velocity passed with and without the sample is 
measured by anemometer (in km/h that is kilometer per 
hour) and accordingly the wind blockage percentage 
is calculated. The test shall be performed in closed 
chamber. 


C-2 SAMPLING 


C-2.1 Laboratory Sample 


For the laboratory sample take a swatch extending the 
full width of the product, of sufficient length along 
the selvage from each sample roll/bundle so that the 
requirements of C-2.2 can be met. 


C-2.2 Test Specimens 


From the laboratory sample, cut at least 10 samples 
each having dimensions of 200 x 200 mm. Space the 
specimens along a diagonal on the unit ofthe laboratory 
sample. Take no specimens nearer the selvage or edge 
of the shade nets. The selected test specimens shall not 
have any creases or folds. 


C-3 CONDITIONING 


Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in 
the atmosphere for testing windshield nets (65 + 5 
percent relative humidity and 27 + 2°C temperature). 
Equilibrium is considered to have been reached when 
the increase in the mass of the specimen, in successive 
weightings made at intervals of not less than 2 h, does 
not exceed 0.1 percent of the mass of the specimen. 


C-4 APPARATUS 


C-4.1 General 


Instrument 1s based on principle given in C-1. The 
schematic diagram of the apparatus is given in Fig. 2. 


NOTE — The Wind blockage tester has been designed and 
developed by the Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai. 


C-4.2 The apparatus consists of the following parts: 


C-4.2.1 Source of Wind — Blower/compressed air with 
velocity range of 30 km/h to 180 km/h. 


C-4.2.2 Measurement Chamber — Cylindrical with 
diameter of 160 mm. 


C-4.2.3 Clamping Device — Sample holder. 


C-4.2.4 Sensing probes will be used in alignment with 
the source (stationary mode). 


C-4.2.5 Measurement 
anemometer 


of Wind Energy — By 


Fic. 2 Winn BLOCKAGE TESTER 


C-5 TEST PROCEDURE 


C-5.1 For type 1 wind shield nets, wind blockage test 
shall be carried out at wind velocity of 55 km/h and 
for type 2 wind shield nets, wind blockage test shall be 
carried out at wind velocity of 80 km/h. 


C-5.2 Put on the wind source and measure wind speed 
passed through the sample holder without sample with 
the help of anemometer and record as w,. Hence, w, is 
the reading of wind velocity without sample. 


C-5.3 Then mount the sample on the sample holder and 
insert the sample holder in the slot. Put on the wind 
source to measure the wind speed with the help of 
anemometer and record it as w,. Thus, w, is reading 


IS 17356 : 2020 


with sample. 


C-5.4 Calculate the wind blockage percentage with the 
following formula: 


MM 100 


Wind blockage, percent = 


Where, 


w= Reading of wind velocity, in km/h (without 
sample); and 


w,= Reading of wind velocity, in km/h (with 
sample). 


C-5.5 Repeat the procedure for other 9 samples as 
specified in C-5.2 to C-5.4. 


C-5.6 Take average of all 10 readings. 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 


GUIDELINES FOR INSTALLATION OF WINDSHIELD NETS 


D-1 PREAMBLE 


D-1.1 The primary function of windshield net applied 
in agriculture and horticulture applications is protection 
of crop from high speed wind. The durability of 
windshield net is based on a good quality material and 
proper installation technique. 


D-1.2 There are number of fabrics specifically produced 
for windshields. The longest lasting and most resilient 
are knitted from monofilament yarn and have wind 
porosity at least 50 percent. 


D-1.3 To improve the service of windshield nets, it is 
essential that the windshield nets are placed on suitable 
structures according to the dimensions. To achieve this 
proper onsite laying, joining and fixing of windshield 
net is imperative. 


D-2 LOGISTICS 


Windshield nets are packed in roll form/bundle form 
with suitable packing material and transported by 
appropriate means to protect the windshield nets and 
avoid any type of damage. Rolls of windshield nets are 
loaded manually or with forklift and can be unloaded in 
a similar manner at the destination. Use of hooks shall 
be avoided for loading and unloading of the rolls of 
windshield nets at site. 


D-3 STORAGE AT SITE 


D-3.1 The windshield nets shall be stored so as to be 
protected from damage, dirt, grease, water, moisture, 


mud, mechanical abrasions, excessive heat or any other 
damage. The rolls/bundles shall be stored on a prepared 
surface and to be stacked not more than three rolls/ 
bundles. 


D-3.2 The owner of the site where the windshield 
net 1s to be installed shall provide storage space in a 
location sufficiently near the windshield net structure 
to minimize any additional handling. 


D-3.3 The storage area shall be protected from theft, 
vandalism, vehicular traffic and any other source 
which could create potential damage to the windshield 
nets. 


D-4 PLANNING 
INSTALLATION 


FOR WINDSHIELD 


D-4.1 The windshield structure should be planned 
taking into consideration the type of crop to be grown, 
locally available materials and the finance budget and 
local climatic conditions. The provision should be there 
for future expansion. 


D-4.2 Ideally, a windshield net should be at right angles 
to the prevailing wind. Note that there will be areas of 
high wind speed and turbulence around the ends of a 
windshield fence, so the fence should always be longer 
than the area requiring protection or it should have 
sides. It’s recommended that windshields net should 
not be less than 11 times as long as they are high for 
best effect. For example, 5 m high windshield should 
be at least (5 x 11) 55 m long. 


IS 17356 : 2020 


D-5 SITE CONSIDERATIONS 


Windshield should be installed in high speed wind 
affected areas to protect the crops from wind damage. 
The zone of protection on the down-wind side of the 
windshield will be 6 to 8 times the fence height. This 
distance of protection will be less if the ground rises 
on the down-wind side and will be more if the ground 
drops away. When calculating the required height or 
distance between windshield fences, consideration 
must be given to the crop height. 


Zone of protection — (Actual windshield height — crop 
height) x 6 


D-6 STRUCTURAL MATERIALS 


D-6.1 Support Posts 


Timber posts are normally used because of availability 
and ease of use. Tapered hardwood or pine of an 
appropriate diameter is most suitable. Generally 
speaking, shaved pine posts or sawn hardwood are not 
suitable. Steel posts can also be used but present some 
difficulties in attaching cables and cloth. When selecting 
posts, it is the strength at ground level which is the most 
important factor. Line diagram for installation of wind 
shield nets is shown in Fig. 3. 


D-6.2 Wire and Cable 


Wire or cable is used to support the cloth and transfer 
the loads to the posts. In the more traditional forms of 
construction where posts are less than 8 meters apart, 
single strand wire 1s used. 3.15 mm high tensile (HT 
wire) is used to support the top and bottom edges and 


Windbreak Net with eyelets 


2.5 mm HT wire is suitable as intermediate wires (anti- 
billow wires). Ultra long span (ULS) construction 
methods use wider post spacing and fewer wires. Multi 
strand high tensile cables are used on top and bottom 
edges of the cloth to support higher wind loadings. 


D-6.3 Construction 


The distance between posts depends on several factors 
but is commonly 6 to 8 meters. For cantilever pole 
construction, post embedment depth is a critical factor. 
In general posts should have 30-40 percent of their 
height in the ground. The following situations would 
require greater depths of post embedment: 


a) Weak, sandy or wet soils; 

b) Areas of higher than normal wind speeds; 

c) Wider post spacing; 

d) Greater windshield heights; 

e) Undulating topography (higher wind speeds); and 
f) Lower porosity windshield cloth. 


The erector should not ignore the wind loading on posts. 
For example, for a 4.5 m high fence with a 6 m post 
spacing, a 20 m/s wind would give each post a loading 
of 0.54 tonnes. At 30 m/s wind speed the post loading 
goes up to 1.2 tonnes. If post strength is doubtful or 
adequate embedment depths cannot be achieved, then 
an option is to install an anchored guy on each post 
that is brace each post with a cable from the top of the 
post to an anchor in the ground. Guy-wires can restrict 
access but this system allows the use of smaller poles 
and shallower embedment. 


Da DADA DA 


LN XKW S 


Support Pole 


Support wires / ropes 


Fic. 3 Line DIAGRAM FOR INSTALLATION OF WIND SHIELD NETS 


IS 17356 : 2020 


ANNEX E 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


Organization 


The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


Agriculture University , Rahuri 
Central Agricultural University, Imphal 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology 
(CIPET), Chennai 


Central Silk Board, Bengaluru 
Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kanpur 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 
CTM Technical Textiles Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


FAD 17, BIS, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 


Garware Wall Ropes Limited, Satara 

Gujarat Green Revolution Company Limited, Vadodara 
Horticulture Training Centre, Pune 

ICAR-Directorate of Rapeseed-Mustard Research, 


Bharatpur 
ICAR-National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering and 


Technology, Kolkata 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Vegetable Research, Varanasi 


Representative(s) 


Dn U. K. GANGOPADHYAY (Chairman) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRIMATI MAMONI PROBHA BORAH 


Dn G. KnisHNA PRASAD 
Dn P. K. MANDHYAN (Alternate) 


Dr ABDUL KADER 
SHRI RAJIv KUMAR LILHARE (Alternate) 


Dn SUBHASH V. NAIK 
Suni V. RAMESH (Alternate) 


Dr ASHOK KUMAR 
Dn JITENDRA Y ADAV (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI AMIT AGARWAL 
SHRIMATI JYOTI AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr SwAPAN KUMAR GHOSH 
Pnor S. C. Rav (Alternate) 


MEMBER SECRETARY 


Suri Nitin R. BHOJANI 
SHRI VIVEK PRABHU (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY RAUT 
SHRI S. G. PALUSKAR (Alternate) 


DR Y. P. SINGH 
Suri P. D. Kotak (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA DESHMUKH 
SHRI SAMPAT Y ADAV (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Dr PANKAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dn Sanjoy DEBNATH 
Dn. G. Basu (Alternate) 


Dn T. V. S. RAJPUT 
Dn NEELAM PATEL (Alternate) 


DR TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI MADHAB CHAKARVARTY (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 17356 : 2020 


Organization 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkata 

Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 

Lamifab & Paper (P) Ltd, Aurangabad 

Maharashtra State Horticulture & Medicinal Plant Board, 
Pune 

MAHA Seedsmen Association, Jalna 

National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, 


Mumbai 


National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in 
Agriculture & Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkata 


Office of Jute Commissioner, Kolkata 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Parry Enterprises India Limited, Bharuch 


PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


Plast India Foundation, Mumbai 


Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Rishi Techtex Ltd, Mumbai 


Shri Ambica Polymer Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Shubham Sales, Valsad 


Texel Industries Limited, Kalol 

Textiles Committee, Mumbai 

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 
The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 


Mumbai 


10 


Representative(s) 


Dr MAHUYA GHOSH 
Suri D. K. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. BEHARA (Alternate) 


DR ANUP RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI RUCHITA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMLEISH DHOOT 
Suri KısHorı LAL DHooT (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


PROJECT MANAGER (PC & FP) (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYANARAYAN B. RATHI 


SHRI UDDHAV MANIKRAO SHIRSATH (Alternate) 


SHRI R. ANAND 
Suri B. K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
Suri K. K. KausHaL (Alternate) 


Suni P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


SHRI SOUMYADIPTA DATTA 


SHRI PRABHAS KUMAR Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI NOBLE DEIVANAYAGAM 
Suri NIKHIL JAIN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SURENDER CHOUDHARY 
Dn E. SUNDARESAN (Alternate) 


Dn SuniL MAHAJAN 
SHRI SHRICHAND SANTANI (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA MEHTA 
Suri Mavji Savant (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI JYOTIKA NAGRI 
SHRI PARTH NAGRI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY LOHIYA 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R. MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRIP. N. S. SIVAKUMAR 
SHRI R CHANDRAN (Alternate) 


Suni V. K. PATIL 
Suri G. R. MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


IS 17356 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
V. K. Packwell Pvt Ltd, Kanpur SHRI VIKESH KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI PARTH Gupta (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 35 (14876) 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


