IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

wRdhvmw

Indian Standard
TRACTORS AND MACHINERY FOR AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY - TECHNICAL, MEANS FOR ENSURING SAFETY
PART 2 TRACTORS

(First Revision)

ICS 65.060.10: 65.060.01

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

August 1999

Price Group 7

Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee, FAD 32

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by-the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. With the increased use of agricultural tractors and power tillers for various agricultural operations, the need of human safety has attained importance. This standard indicates appropriate safety parameters to be met when designing tractors. This standard has been published in three parts. This part (Par~2) covers requirements related to agricultural tractors. Part 1 of the standard covers general requirements and Part 3 relates to power tillers. This standard was first published in 1988. This first revision is based on the following IS0 standards: IS0 4252 : 1992 Agricultural tractors Operators work place, access and exit Dimensions

IS0 4254-3 : 1992 Tractors and machinery for agriculture and forestry safety - Part 3 : Tractors.

Technical means for ensuring

This standard is technically equivalent to IS0 4252. As tractors with three point linkage at front are not being manufactured in India, requirements of front three point linkage of IS0 4252-3 has not been incorporated in this Indian Standard. Requirements of guards, operators controls and lighting of earlier version has been retained and certain norms that should be observed during the operation of tractors are also given in Annex A for guidance. Requirements given in 4.3.1 to 4.3.3 of this standard are applicable only for tractors with cabs. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999

Indian Standard

TRACTORS AN-DMACHINERYFOR AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY -TECHNICAL MEANS FOR ENSURING SAFETY
PART 2 TRACTORS (

First Revision )
IS No. 12061 : 1994 Title Agricultural tractors Braking performance Method of test (first revision) Agricultural tractors Recommendations on selected performance characteristics (first revision) Method of test for hydraulic power and lifting capacity of agricultural tractors Tractors and machinery for agriculture and forestry - Technical means for ensuring safety - Part 1 : General Agricultural tractors - Operators seat Technical requirements first revision) Agricultural tractors and machinery - Lighting devices for travel on. public roads

1

SCOPE

This standard (Part 2) covers constructional and operational requirements for improving the degree of personal safety of operator of the agricultural tractor. 2 REFERENCES

12207 : 1999

The following Indian Standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated: IS No. 4468 (Part 1) : 1997 Title

12224: 1987

12239 (Partl) 1996

12343 : 1998

Agricultural wheeled tractors Rear-mounted three point linkage: Part 1 Categories 1, 2 and 3 (third revision) 6283 Tractors and machinery for agriculture and forestry, powered lawn and garden equipment Symbols for operator controls and other displays: (Part 1): 1998 Common symbols (first revision) (Part 2) : 1998 Symbols for agricultural tractors and machinery yirst revision) 8132 : 1999 Tractors and machinery for agriculture and forestry - Operators -manual - Content and presentation 8133 : 1983 ~Guideline for location and operation of operators controls on agricultural tractors and machinery (first revision) 9939 : 1981 Glossary of terms relating to agricultural tractors and power tillers 10703: 1992 Agricultural tractors - Maximum activating force required to operate control (first revision) 11113: 1993 Earth moving machinery - Seat index point (first revision)

14683 : 1999

3

DEFINITION

For the purpose of this standard in addition to the following definitions given in IS 9939 shall apply. 3.1 Access Door (Doorway) or

Means cab. 3.2

of entry to and exit from the workplace

Emergency

Exit

Means of exit which is capable of being opened from the inside of the cab. It may be a normal access door. 3.3 Narrow Track Tractor

A narrow track tractor is an agricultural tractor with a smallest adjustable track range equal to or less than 1 150 mm.

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999 4 4.1 REQUIREMENTS Three-Point Linkages

4.1.2
4.1.2.1

Controls Main controls

The hazards of coupling implements with three point linkages can be reduced by the use of semi-automatic implement couplers (quick coupling devices). 4.1.1
4.1.1.1 Three-Point Linkage at Rear

The main controls and their linkage shall be arranged or protected in such a way that the operator cannot reach them if he is standing on the ground between the tractor and the mounted implement. 4.1.2.2
External controls

Forward of a plane passing through the median plane of the pivot points of the lifting rods in a three point coupling system, a minimum safety margin of 25 mm shall be maintained between the moving parts at each point of the lifting device's travel. This does not however apply for the extreme upper and lower range of travel 0.1 n which are defined in (a) below and illustrated in Fig. 1. A minimum clearance of 25 mm or a minimum angle of 3O*C shall be maintained between parts in shear where the angle can change (see Fig. 2). 4 For the total movement range, n, the lower position A of the lower hitch point is limited by the dimension in definition 3.3.14 and [14] in Fig. 2 of IS 4468 (Part 1) while the upper position E is limited by the maximum hydraulic travel. Travel n' corresponds to travel n reduced upwards and downwards by 0.1 n and constitutes the vertical distance between A' and B'. safety margin of 25 mm in relation to the adjacent parts shall be maintained around the / profile of the lifting rods.

When additional external controls are fitted, they shall be arranged in such way that the operator can actuate them from a safe position, for instance where the three point hydraulic lift controls or the additional controls for the lifting mechanism are located outside the vertical planes formed by the internal walls of the mudguards. In addition, the three point hydraulic lifting mechanism shall be actuated by means of controls which either restridt the amount of movement to a maximum of 100 mm each time the control is actuated, the measurement points in this case are formed by the coupling points on the lower arms of the three point coupling; or operate on the operator presence and continual activation principle (dead man's control). 4X2.3
Main controls on narrow-track tractors

b) Within the distance of travel, a minimum
The controls on narrow track tractors are arranged

in front of the transverse vertical plane through the seat index point (SIP) as defined in IS 1 It 13.

FIG. 1 L~rn RANGE

2

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999

PLANE THROUGH THE LIFT F!OOS

CLEARANCE

ENVELO

__ --

-I

FIG.2 THREE-POINT LINKAGE 4.1.2.4 Other arrangements
b) Brake(s) 4.1.2.9.1 normally 4.2 (operated by right foot). should

Other arrangements are permitted if the manufacturer provides evidence that they have an effect at least equivalent to the requirements set out in 4.1.2.1 to 4.1.2.3.

The accelerator pedal, if installed be operated by right foot.

OPERATOR'S WORKPLACE
or pinching points within reach of the operator's hands Fig. 3) or ~feet. For tractors designed applications the requirements in IS 1) may not apply. In these cases the in 4.2.2 shall apply.

4.1.2.5 All controls shall be identifiable.

If symbols are used for controls, they shall be in accordance with IS 6283 (Part 1 and 2).

4.2.1 When seated, no shearing
are permitted (Reach B in for special 12239 (Part requirements

4.1.2.6 Location and movement af operator shall be in accordance with Table 1 of IS 8133. 4.1.2.7 It should be possible to activate the controls with reasonable force, where appropriate, in accordance with IS 10703. 4.1.2.8 Hand controls should be of a shape and size permit an adequate grasp and hand clearance. The clealance around these controls shall be not less than 70 mm.

4.1.2.9 The pedals shall be in position

where all free play is removed. The steering wheel shall be adjusted to its mid position. The pedals shall be placed in the following order from the left hand side to the right hand side : a) Clutch (operated by left foot), and 3

4.2.2 The reach of the operator is divided into spherical volumes A and B (shown as Reaches A and B respectively in Fig. 3). The spherical centre-point of the volumes is located 60 mm in front and 580 mm above the seat index point (SIP) (see Fig. 3). Volume A is formed by a spherical radius of 550 mm, volume B is the volume between this radius and a spherical radius of 1 000 mm. Within volume A, a minimum clearance of 120 mm between power and inertia-operated, and other adjacent parts shall be maintained. Within volume B, a minimum clearance of 25 mm shall be maintained. Within both volumes, a minimum angle

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999

/

REACH

6

\

1.

All dimensions FIG.

in millimetres.

3 OPERATOR'S REACH 4.3.2.2 Dimensions exits with

of 30' shall be maintained each other.
In

where parts shear against

the case of narrow-track tractors, these requirements do not apply to any points behind a plane which is located at an angle of 45' to the rear and which runs transverse to the travel direction through a point located 230 mm behind the SIP (see Fig. 4). Warning decals shall indicate hazards, if any. 4.3 Access to Operator's Passenger's Seat 4.3.1 Access Doorway(s) Seat and Optional

The cross sectional dimensions of emergency shall be large enough to enclose an ellipse principal axes of 640 mm and 440 mm. 4.3.3 Internal Clearance Dimensions

4.3.3.1 The minimum clearance dimensions inside the cab shall be as shown in Fig. 7 and Table 1 and Table 2. These dimensions are defined in relation to the vertical reference plane; generally longitudinal to the tractor and passing through the seat index point and the steering wheel centre.
NOTE - The dimensions only one driving seat. are basically valid for cabs with

The minimum dimensions of the access doorway aperture, both for the frame and with the door open shall be as shown in Fig. 5 and 6. 4.3.2 4.3.2.1 Emergency Exits Number and location

4.3.4 The seat index point (SIP) shall be determined according to IS 11113. 4.3.5 The distances from the seat index point to the pedals and the steering wheel shall be in accordance with IS 12343. The exhaust outlet shall be positioned so that exhaust fumes pass above or behind the driver (see 6.6 of IS 12343). 4.3.6 Access should minimize operator being inadvertently 4 the probability of the restrained; that is

There shall be a minimum of three emergency exits, each of which shall be on a different side of the cab : the front, rear and roof of the cab may be considered as sides for this purpose.

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999 . Table 1 Minimum Internal Clearance Dimensions (Clause 4.3.3.1)

Diitance Distance from the seat index point to any part of the cab ceiling surface, above, forward of and to either side of the operator's head" Distance from the seat index point to the cab back wall ata height between 210 mm above the seat index point and the line roof contour defined by the 960 mm radius plus the 150 mm blend radius*) Lateral clearance at any distance between 310 mm above the seat index point and the roof contour defined by-the 960 mm radius plus the 45' line, perpendicular to the vertical reference plane for a distance of 235 mm* rearward from the seat index point Distance from the outer side of the steering wheel rim to the cab surface or other hand contro!s3' `)Soft materials such as padding may penetrate into the free space up to a maximum of 50 mm.

Dimedon,

Min

tmm)
960 365

450

80

2'If the horizontal seat adjustment provide exceeds + 75 mm from the mid-position,then any dimensions forward from the seat index point shall be reduced, and dimensions to the rear from the seat index point increased, on the basis : [Total adjustment to the rear of the seat mid position minus 75 mm] %xcluding hand controls mounted on the steering column.

Table 2 Clearance Dimensions Around the Controls (Clause 4.3.3.1)

Type of Control For engine controls and controls which require an operating force of more than 150 N For controls, other than engine controls, which require an operating force of 80 N to 150 N "These minimum distances shall be valid for ail control positions

Dimension')

, Min

Wd
50 -25

catching or holding be avoided.

of the person or clothes should

so that its hot parts cannot be touched by the driver whilst gaining access to the tractor seat or sitting at the controls. 4.4 Guards Guards [See 5 and 6 of-IS 12239 (Part l)] shall be provided wherever necessary, particularly on following points. 4.4.1

If any parts protrude from the standing area (for example clutch pedal), provisions shall be .made to enable one foot to be placed either in front of, rearward or at the side of such parts. These requirements also apply where an optional passenger seat is provided (see Fig. 8). In addition, where a passenger seat is fitted and where parts could constitute a danger to the feet, provision shall be made for protective devices within a hemispherical radius of 800 mm starting from the forward edge of the seat cushion and pointing downwards. Dangerous parts in reaches A and B shall be protected within a sphere centred 670 mm above the centre of the passenger seat front edge. 4.3.7 For narrow-track tractor, whether vertical or horizontal, the exhaust system, shall be positioned 5

Hot Parts

A guard or shield shall be fitted to reduce to a minimum, the possibility of inadvertent contact during normal operations with any exposed hot element that may cause harm when the operator is -seated in the normal operating position. The guard should be coustructed of heat-insulating material, or positioned and mounted in such a manner that it will not itself become hot.

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999

All

dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 4 LIMITATION TO OPERATOR'S MACH VOLUMESFOR NARROW-TRACK TRACTORS

~~-~~--~~-~--~~~~~~~_~~_~_,

;\ \\ \
e_c-----_

\\ \ \
\
I \ . . .

-a

*-

\ \ \ \ \ \ \

I
I

I

I :

-L-J
250 min.
All dimensions NOTE--For tractors where the seat in millimetres.

can be reachedstraightfrom the footstep,the height at which the widths are me?suredmay be FIG. 5 ACCESS DOORWAY DIMENSIONS 6

decreased.

IS 12239 (Part

2) : 1999

WHEEL OR OTHER TRACTOR PART

FIG. 6 EXAMPLES OF LIMITATION OF DIMENSIONS WITHDOOROPEN 4.4.2 Rear Wheels or Tracks 4.4.5 Other Points points shall also be guarded by or so located that they are safe

~A11 tractors shall Abe provided with rear wheel or full track guards (mud guards) which should be higher than the circumference of the wheels or track and so far ahead that the operator's or passenger's feet cannot come into contact with the wheels or track. The wheel guard may be omitted when the wheels are already protected by other means, such as, auxiliary equipment. 4.4.3 Fans

Other dangerous adequate guards enough. 5 LIGHTING

For safe operation in night and on highway lighting provisions shall be made according to IS 14683. 6 BRAKE PERFORMANCE

All propeller or axial fans which are exposed and within the reach of the ground, the operator's position or the passenger's position shall be guarded against contact. 4.4.4 Pulleys and Belts

When tested in accordance with 4 ~of IS 12061 each tractor shall meet the requirement given in 3.5 of IS 12207. 7 SLOW MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM

Tractor belt pulleys shall be so located OT guarded that while in operation if the belt breaks or slips off, it should not strike the operator and there is no risk of contact with the nip point. Open gears, belts and chain drives, and idlers shall have nip points protected by guards or by other parts of the equipment. Chain drives as well as belts that are joined in such a manner as to prevent protrusions, shall be guarded over their entire length if there would be a possibility of contact with them. 7

One SMV (Slow Moving Vehicle) identification emblem as shown in Fig. 9 consisting of a fluorescent orange equilateral triangle with a red retro-reflector border positioned with a point of triangle up shall be provided on the rearside of the vehicle. The red retro-reflector border defines the shape of the fluorescent colour in daylight and appears as a hollow red triangle with path of motor vehicle headlight in the night. The emblem shall be mounted in a plane perpendicular to the direction of travel and shall be visible from the rear of SMV. It shall be located 0.6 m to 1.8 m above the ground

IS 12239 IPart 2) : 1999

CA8

WAIL

I -

SEAT INOEX POINT

L-

SEAT INDEX POINT

IdAND CoNTROLS -*

SEAT INDEX POINT/

I

365min.'. _

I

Valid for tractors with only one operator position. See Table 2. If the horizontal seat adjustment provided exceeds f 75 mm from the mid-position, thenany dimensions forward from the seat index point shall be reduced, and dimensions to the rear from the seat index point increased, on the basis: [Total adjustment to the rear of the seat mid-position minus 75 mm] The clearance zone, as defined in this region by the 960 mm radius, may be reduced for cabs where limiting overall tractor maximum dimensions are of prime design importance and/or for accommodating specific roof-mounted equipment. All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 7 MINIMUM INTERNAL CLEARANCE DIMENSIONS

2 3

4

8

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 8 PART OF TRACTOR END VIEW SHOWING REACH VOLUMES IN RELATION TO PASSENGER SEAT measured structure maintain given in provided 8 from the lower side of the emblem. If the of the vehicle makes it impossible to the dimensions of the SMV emblem as Fig. 9, it may be suitably modified that each side is not less than 200 mm. REQUIREMENTS 10 OPERATOR'S MANUAL

OTHER

The operator's manual shall meet the requirements of IS 8132. It shall also include mention of the safety aspects of the tractor together with information on any special requirements to ensure its safe operation. The operator's manual should also cover the fitting and use of additional accessories and/or optional extras and their routine maintenance. 11 MARKING

8.1 When tested in accordance with 5.1 of IS 12224 the drop in the height of the point of specification of force after each 5 minutes interval for a total duration of half-an-hour shall meet the requirement given in 3.4 (b) of IS 12207. However, implement shall not suddenly drop to the ground during the test under any circumstance. 8.2 Spark arresters shall be provided in the exhaust system of the engine of each tractor. 8.3 Provision for locking the agricultural shall be provided at the hitch point. 8.4 Differential trailer

11.1 Each tractor shall~be marked with the following information on a metallic plate rigidly attached at prominent place on the tractor:

a>Manufacturer's
c>Power
take-off

name ,and trade-mark,

if any;

b) Model, code and serial number;
power, kW; and

4 Specific fuel consumption.
lock shall be provided in the tractor. start of engine 8.5 Safety device against accidental shall be provided in the tractor. 9 ACCESS FOR LEVEL CHECKS SERVICING 11.2 A minimum cautionary notice worded as under shall be written in vernacular language legibly and prominently on a label fixed on the tractor:

a) DO NOT MAKE
AND FLUID TRACTOR

ADJUSTMENTS IS IN OPERATION;

WHEN

b) DO NOT USE INTOXICANTS

Appropriate access steps and handholds shall be provided for routine servicing and fluid level checks. 9

LIKE LIQUOR, OPIUM, ~ETC, WHILE OPERATING;

c) DO NOT PUT OR TAKE OFF BELT WHILE
PULLEY IS RUNNING;

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999 RED RETRD REFLECTIVE BORDER 3 STRIPS

A

FLUORESCENT ORANGE EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE Q) +I rl) s

t-NOTE Emblem must be mounted with the point upward.

FIG. 9 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE IDENTIFXZATIONEMBLEM

4 DO NOT SIT OR STAND OR SIT IN AN
UNSAFE PLACE SUCH AS ROOF, DRAWBAR, MUDGUARD, RUNNING BOARD OR LOAD WHEN THE TRACTOR IS MOVING;

POWER TAKE-OFF TO NEUTRAL AND LOWER THE ATTACHED EQUIPMENT TO THE GROUND BEFORE LEAVING THE STOPPED TRACTOR;

e) NO

PERSON SHOULD MOUNT OR DISMOUNT FROM A TRACTOR WHILE IT IS IN MOTION EXCEPT IN AN EMERGENCY; THE OPERATORS OF TRACTOR SHOULD:

7) LOCK

THE BRAKE PEDALS TOGETHER WHEN TRAVELLING ON PUBLIC ROADS; AND RAILWAY CROSSINGS AND MAKE SURE THAT NO TRAINS ARE COMING. Marking with Standard

8) STOP AT ALL UNGUARDED

1) BE ADEQUATELY TR%INEDANDwHEN
REQUIRED, PROPERLY LICENSED,

2) OBTAIN

AND READ THE OPERATING MANUAL BEFORE USING A TRACTOR FOR THE FIRST TIME; ADEQUATE FOOTWEAR; SNUG-FITTING AND WELL-

11.3

BIS Certification

3) WEAR FITTING 4 WEAR

Each tractor may Mark for safety.

also be marked

CLOTHING;

5) KEEP HANDS, FEET AND CLOTHING AWAY FROM ALL MOVING PARTS; 6) PUT THE GEAR SELECTOR, OPERATED ATTACHMENTS POWER AND

11.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details of conditions under which the licence for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

10

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999

ANNEX A ( Foreword)
INFORMATION ON SAFE OPERATION A-2 Aa2.1 OF TRACTORS

A-l
A-l.1

GENERAL Operator

TRAVELLING General

All operators of tractors should:

A-2.1.1 When a safety frame or cab is provided, the

a>be

in good health, sound mind and be not under the influence of any sort of intoxicants;

operator should use a seat belt. It is strongly recommended that no seat belt be used if a safety frame or cab is not provided. A-2.1.2 Adjustable wheels should, whenever be spread as far as practicable, necessary, considering the work to be done, to reduce tipping hazards. A-2.1.3 Tractors should not be driven faster than is safe, having regard to prevailing conditions. A-2.1.4 While a tractor should: is moving, no person

b) be adequately

trained and, when required, properly licensed; using a tractor for the first time;

c) obtain and read the operating manual before 4 wear adequate and well-fitting footwear; e) wear snug-fitting clothing; and f, keep hands, feet and clothing away from all
moving parts.
A-l.2 Starting of Tractor

stand or sit in an unsafe place such as roof, drawbar, mudguard, running board or load; climb from one tractor or trailer to another; jump on or off except in emergencies; apply wheel chokes; and leave arms, legs or any object protruding outside.
A-2.1.5 The operator should check brake adjustment

Before starting a tractor, the operator should:

4 clear all material from the operator's work
place and mud from the pedals;

b) inspect the tractor to make certain that it is
properly adjusted condition; and is in good working

cl lubricate working parts, tighten all loose parts
and secure safety shields in place;

at the start of the day, before starting down steep slopes and before entering a public highway. A-2.1.6 Tractors should be driven with particular care: a) over sloping, uneven, otherwise unsafe ground; soft, slippery or

4 check engine oil level and water in radiator (in
case of water cooled engines); and

e>place
A-l.3

all the controls in neutral.
Conditions

Operating

4 Tractors should not be started or operated in
buildings unless conditions are such that there is no risk of fue or contamination of the air.

b) along side ditches or banks; c) when turning; d) when reversing; and e) when driven with any attachment that drastically raises or changes the tractor's centre of gravity. A-2.1.7 Owing to the possibility of tipping backward, particular care should be taken in driving when: a) transporting heavy loads up a slope; b) using rear wheel weights or ballast in rear tyres; 11

b) All shields for power take-offs, including the
tractor master shield and the power take-off shaft shield, should be in place during use.

c) When power take-off isnot

in use, the stub shaft should be provided with a shield.

4 Except in an emergency, no person shoukd
mount or dismount from a tractor while it is in motion.

e) All clutches should be engaged gradually,
particularly when starting to move heavy loads.

IS 12239 (Part 2) : 1999 c) using rear-mounted d) raising loads; the position equipment; of the hitch point on towed A-3.2 Before turning or reversing, the operator should make it certain that there workers or obstacles in the path of travel. tractor are no

e)

the rear wheels

dig into soft ground;

f) using forward gear if the wheels are frozen to the ground; and g) attempting to drive forward are in a ditch or hole. if the rear wheels

A-2.1.8 If necessary to prevent rearing, the tractor should be weighted. A-2.2 A-2.2.1 operator Travelling on Public Roads on public

the front of

A-3.3 When a tractor is mired in mud or stuck in a ditch, the operator should always attempt to drive out in reverse gear only. If this attempt is unsuccessful, he may secure logs or planks behind the rear wheels, to increase traction, and again attempt to drive out using reverse gear. Under no condition should logs or planks be secured in front of the rear wheels to increase traction. A-4 STOPPING A-4.1 Before leaving should: a stopped tractor, the operator

When travelling should:

roads,

the

a>~shift the c>lock

gear selector

to neutral;

a) lock the brake pedals together;

b) re-engage the master clutch, except in the case
of torque converter the parking machines; brake; to the ground; and

b) comply with all traffic laws and regulations;

c>stop

at all unguarded railway crossings make sure that no trains are coming;

and

4 lower attached equipment e) put all power-operated
take-off into neutral.

4 signal intention

to turn, slow down or stop;

attachments

and power

e) keep on the correct side of the road and, when
it is safe to do so, pull of the highway faster traffic to pass; to allow

A-4.2 The operator should not dismount unless the tractor _is stationary and there is an adequate and safe place for him to step onto. A-4.3 When slowing down or stopping, brakes should be applied equally to the two rear wheels. A-4.4 Tractors should not haul heavy vehicles or machinery unless they can be stopped in a safe and controlled manner. A-5 USE OF ATTACHED EQUIPMENT only to

8) shift to a lower gear for control when going
downhill;

h) shift to a lower gear to avoid stalling
going uphill; and

when

3 reduce speed when the roads are slippery.
A-2.2.2 The moving in such a way that: a) moves of tractors should be planned

are made during

daylight

hours; and of heavy

A-5.1 Towed equipment should be attached the drawbar provided on the tractor.

b) moves are not made during traffic.

periods

A-2.2.3 When moves are made during the night or other periods of reduced visibility, all lights and reflectors should be used as required by law, and they should be kept in go~od working condition and clean. A-2.2.4 adjusted. Rear-view mirror should be properly

A-S.2 In no case should attachments be secured at the front or rear axle, to the seat bracket or to any other frame member. A-5.3 When ~attachments are hitched to the tractor:

a>the

attachment should be blocked with blocks or chokes, if the tractor is backed; is pulled onto the tractor, the attachments, should be kept under control by brakes or chokes; and person should remain between the tractor and the attachment, and the drawbar should be handled with a hook or other suitable device. are unhitched, by brakes or

b) if the attachment

A-2.2.5 In case of travel during rain and hot sun when a cab is not provided, provision should be made to mount a canopy above the driver's seat. A-3 REVERSING AND TURNING

c>no

A-3.1 Speed should be reduced, using the tractor throttle as much as possible, before maiking any turns. 12

A-5.4 When attachment and tractor both vehicles should be blocked chokes.

IS 12239 (Part A-5.5 All shield should be secured in place after hitching and before the use of any attachment. A-6 CARRYING A-6.1 Tractors OF PASSENGERS should not carry: OR OBJECTS b) the tractor frame should be earthed static electricity, and c) while threshing, spark arrestor on the exhaust pipe.

2) : 1999 to remove

should be used

a) any person for whom there is not a safe seat, b) children,. or c) loose objects for them. A-7 TOWING unless a safe place is provided

A-9.2 When tractors are used for stationary work inside a building, adequate means of removing exhaust gases and supplying fresh air should be provided. A-9.3 When a tractor with a winch is used for pulling, the tractor should be properly aligned in the direction of the pull. A-10 TRACTOR FUELLING combustion

AND PUSHING

A-7.1_ A tractor should not be used to, push other vehicles unless an adequate and securely fastened push bar is fitted to it. A-7.2 Tractors should not haul loads so heavy as to prevent effective control, specially on any sloping, uneven, soft or otherwise unsafe ground. A-8 OPERATING ON SLOPING GROUND

A-10.1 When the fuel tanks of internal engines are being filled: a) the engines should not be running,

and

b) no open flame devices, open lights, lighted cigarettes or the like should be allowed. A-10.2 Hot engines should be allowed to cool down I before refuelling. Normally, the fuel tank should be refilled in the evening after the day's work. A-10.3 After fuelling, some time should be allowed for fuel vapours to disappear before the engine is re-started. A-10.4 Contact should at all times be maintained between the metal outlet of the refuelling hose or the can spout, on the one hand, and the fuel tank opening on the tractor on the other, or other means of bonding should be ensured to minimize the possibility of an explosion or outbreak of fire due to the discharge of an accumulation of static electricity. A-10.5 The tractor fuel system should be checked frequently to detect fuel leaks. To be checked in particular are the fuel tank seams, fuel lines, fuel filler caps, fuel line shut-off valves, chokes and all fuel line connections. A-10.6 Fire extinguishers should be provided on the tractor, at the refuelling point and in the building where the tractor is stored.

A-8.1 When starting up a slope, the operator should choose a power gear to avoid stalling or shifting of gears on the slope and should engage the clutch slowly to avoid upsetting backwards. A-8.2 Adjustable wheels should be spread as far as possible for the job at hand. A-8.3 The and clutch descending to assist in gear lever should not be put in neutral pedal should not be disengaged when slopes. A low gear should be selected braking the tractor.

A-8.4 If necessary to prevent rearing, the front of the tractor should be weighted when ascending a slope, or the tractor should preferably be backed up to the top. A-8.5 Unbraked towed equipment should not be taken down steep slopes without extreme caution. A-9 STATIONARY WORK

Ai9.1 When using the tractor as a source of power for stationary power take-off or belt work, a) all shields and guards should be in place before the power is applied,

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of f&iart Stan&r& Act, 1986 to promote harmonious developinent of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters ix-the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review bf Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on thhcbasis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are inpossession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions' This lndian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. FAD 32 (837). Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue Issued Since Publication Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Afar

Marg

323 76 17,323 38 41 86 99,337 85 9120 61 { 337 84 26,337 60 38 43 60 20 25
{ 2350216,2350442 235 15 23 15

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022 600113

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAI

19,235
: Manakalaya,

E9MIDC, MUMBAI 400093

Marol, Andheri (East)

{ 832 78 92 95,832 78 `58 92

91,832

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
F'rinted at Simco Printing Prew, Delhi, India

