IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004

m3fsaim5'dta'i@

Indian Standard GAS TURBINES
PART

-- PROCUREMENT
REQUIREMENTS

3 DESIGN

ICS

27.040

@ BIS 2006

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

110002
Price Group 15

Apri/

2006

IS 15666

(Part

3) :2006

ISO
Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ET 15

3977-3:2004

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 3) which is identical with ISO .3977-3 : 2004 `Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 3: Design requirements' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee and approval of the Electmtechnical Division Council. The text of the ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their respective places are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated:
International Standard Corresponding indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IEC 60034-1 Rotating electrical machines -- Part 1 : Rating and performance IEC 60079 (all parts) Electrical apparatus for explosive gas atmospheres

IS 4722:2001 Rotating electrical machines -- Specification (second
revision)

Technically Equivalent

,.,,

IS 2148:2004 Electrical apparatus for explosive gas atmospheres -- Flameproof enclosures "d" (third
revision)

Identical

ISO 3977-1 :1997 Gas turbines -- Procurement --- Part 1 : General introduction and definitions ISO 3977-2: 1997 Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 2: Standard reference conditions and ratings

IS 15666 (Part 1) : 2006 Gas turbines -- Procurement: Part 1 General introduction and definitions IS 15666 (Part 2) : 2006 Gas turbines -- Procurement: Part 2 Standard reference conditions and ratings IS 15666 (Part 4) : 2006 Gas turbines -- Procurement: Part 4 Fuels and environment IS 15666 (Part 7) : 2006 Gas turbines -- Procurement: Part 7 Technical information IS 15666 (-Part 8) : 2006 Gas turbines -- Procurement: Part 8 Inspection, testing, installation and commissioning

do

do

ISO 3977-4:2002 Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 4: Fuels and environment ISO 3977-7:2002 Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 7: Technical infmmation ISO 3977-8:2002 Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 8: Inspection, testing, installation and commissioning

do

do

do

i

IS 15666 ISO

(Part 3) :2006
Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

3977-3:2004 International

ISO 3977-9:1999

Procurement availability, safety ISO 11086: Vocabulary

.Gas turbines -- -- Part 9: Reliability, maintainability and

(Part 9) : 2006 Gas IS 15666 Part 9 turbines -- Procurement: Reliability, availability, maintainability and safety IS 15665:2006 Vocabulary Gas turbines --

Identical

1996 Gas turbines --

do

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard:
International Standard Title

ISO 1940-1:1986

Mechanical vibration -- Balance quality requirements of rigid rotors -- Part 1 : Determination of permissible residual unbalance Industrial liquid lubricants -- ISO viscosity classification Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating machines -- Measurements rotating shafts and evaluation criteria -- Part 1 : General guidelines on

ISO 3448 ISO 7919-1:1996

ISO 7919-2:2001

Mechanical vibration -- Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements on rotating shafts -- Part 2: Land-based steam turbines and generators in excess of 50 MW with normal operating speeds of 1 500 r/rein, 1 800 r/rein, 3000 r/rein and 3600 r/rein Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating machines -- Measurements rotating shafts and evaluation criteria -- Part 4: Gas turbines sets Petroleum and natural gas industries -- General-purpose refinery service on

ISO 7919-4:1996

ISO 10436:1993

steam turbines for

1s0 10441:1999

Petroleum and natural gas industries -- Flexible couplings for mechanical power, transmission -- Special purpose applications Petroleum and natural gas industries -- Flexible couplings for mechanical power transmission -- Special purpose applications Gas turbines and gas turbines sets -- `Measurement noise -- Engineering/survey method of emitted airborne

ISO 10442 :1)

1s0 10494:1993

ISO 10814:1996
1s0 10816-1:1995

Mechanical vibration--- Susceptibility and sensitivity of machines to unbalance Mechanical vibration -- Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements of non-rotating parts -- Part 1: General guidelines Mechanical vibration -- Evaluation of machine vibraticm by measurements of non-rotating parts -- Part 2: Large land-based steam turbine generator sets in excess of 50 MW Mechanical vibration -- Evaluation. of machine vibration by measurements of non-rotating parts -- .Part 4: Gas turbine driven sets excluding aircraft derivatives Gas turbines -- Exhaust gas emission -- Part 1: Measurement and evaluation Gas turbines -- Exhaust gas emission -- Part 2 : Automated monitoring emission

ISO 10816-2:1996

ISO 10816-4:1998

ISO 11042-1:1996 ISO 11042-2:1996

` ~ To be published.

IS 15666

(Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004

International ISO 13691

Standard :2001

Tit/e

Petroleum and natural gas industries -- High-speed industries Centrifugal pumps for petrochemical

special-purpose

gear

ISP 137091,
ANSI B 31.3

and natural gas industries

Chemical plant and petroleum refinery piping Boiler and pressure Vessel Code Section IX Carbon and alloy steel nuts for bolts for high-pressure and high-temperature service Carbon steel externally threaded standard fasteners Sulfide Stress Cracking Resistant Metallic Materials for Oilfield Equipment

ASME ASTM A 194

ASTM A 307 NACE MR 0175

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off The number of in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. significant places reta~ned in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

. ,.

`) To be published.

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004

Indian Standard GAS TURBINES
PART

-- PROCUREMENT
REQUIREMENTS

3 DESIGN

1

Scope

This part of ISO 3977 covers the design requirements for the procurement of all applications of gas turbines and gas turbine systems, including gas turbines for combined cycle systems and their auxiliaries, by a purchaser from a packager. It also provides assistance and technical information to be used in the

procurement. It is not intended to deal with local or national legislative requirements with which the installation may be required to conform.
This part of ISO 3977 is applicable to simple-cycle, combined-cycle and regenerative-cycle gas turbines working in open systems. It is not applicable to gas turbines used to propel aircraft, road construction and earth moving machines, agricultural and industrial types of tractors and road vehicles. In cases of gas turbines using special heat sources (for example, chemical proGess, nuclear reactors, furnace for a super-charged boiler), this part of ISO 3977 provides a basis.

The relevant parts of ISO 3977 are applicable to closed and semi-closed systems.
NOTE Addtional requirements for special gas turbine applicationsare describedin ISO 3977-5.

... .

2

Normative references

The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. NOTE In cases where there are no International Standards available, national standards as shown in `AnnexB may be used as guidelinesw"ththe mutual agreement of the purchaserand packager. ISO 1940-1:2003, Mechanical vibration -- Balance quality requirements Pari 1: Specification and verification of balance tolerances ISO 3448, Industrial liquid lubricants -- /S0 viscosity classification ISO 3977-1:1997, ISO 3977-2:1997, ISO 39774:2902, ISO 3977-7:2002, ISO 3977-8:2002, ISO 3977-9:1999, Gas turbines -- Procurement Gas turbines -- Procurement Gas turbines -- Procurement Gas turbines -- Procurement Gas turbines -- Procurement Gas turbines -- Procurement -- Part 1: General introduction and definitions and ratings fbr rotors in a constant (rigid) state --

-- Part 2: Standard reference conditions -- Part 4: Fuels and environment -- Part 7: Technical information -- Part 8: Inspection, testing, installation -- Part 9: Reliability, availability,

and commissioning and safety

maintainability

1

IS

15666 (Part 3) :2006 1S0 3977-3:2004
machines -- Measurements on rotating shafts

ISO 7919-1:1996, Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating and evaluation criteria -- Part 1: General guidelines

on rotating ISO 7919-2:2001, Mechanical vibration -- Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements shafts -- Part 2: Land-based steam turbines and generators in excess of 50 MW with normal operating speeds of f 500 r/rein, 1800 rlmin, 3000 r/rein and 3600 rlmin ISO 7919-4:1996, Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating and evaluation cn"teria -- Part 4: Gas turbine sets ISO 10441:1999, Petroleum and natural gas transmission -- Special purpose applications ISO 10442:2002, air compressors ISO 10494:1993, Engineenn@urvey ISO 10814:1996, Petroleum, chemical industries machines -- Measurements on rotating shafts

--

Flexible

couplings

for

mechanical

power

and gas service industries

-- Packaged,

integrally

geared centrifugal

Gas turbines method Mechanical

and

gas

turbine

sats

--

Measunment

of

emtied

airborne

noise

--

vibration -- Susceptibility

and sensitivity of machines to unbalance of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating

ISO 10816-1:1995, Mechanical vibration -- Evaluation parts -- Part 1: General guidelines

ISO 10816-2:2001, Mechanical vibration -- Evacuation of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating parts -- Part 2: Land-based steam turbine generator sets in excess of 50 MW with normal operating speeds of 1500 rlmin, 1800 rlmin, 3000 r/rein and 3600 rlmin ISO 10816-4:1998, Mechanical vibration -- Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements parts -- Part 4: Gas turbine driven sets excluding aircrait derivatives ISO 11086:1996, on non-rotating . . ..

Gas turbines -- Vocabulary
and evaluation

Gas turbines -- Exhaust gas emission -- Pad 1: Measurement ISO 11042-1:1996, ISO 11042-2:1996, ISO 13691:2001, ISO 13709:2003, ISO 15649:2001, Gas turbines -- Exhaust gas emission -- Pad 2: Automated Petroleum Centrifugal and natural gas industries -- High-speed pumps for petroleum, petrochemical

emission monitoring gear units

special-pwpose

and natural gas industries

Petrcdeum and natural gas industries -- Piping

IEC 60034-1, Rotating electrical machines -- Part f: Rating and performance IEC 60079 (all patts), E/ectrica/ apparatus ASME, Boiler and Pressure for explosive gas atmospheres

Vessel Code Section IX for Carbon and Alloy Steel Nuts for Bolts for High Pressure or High

ASTM A 194, Standard Specification Temperature Service, or Both ASTM A 307, Standard Specification

for Carbon Steel Bolts and Studs, 60000 and natura/

PSI Tensile Strength for use in H2S containing

NACE MR0175/1S0 15156, Petroleum environmentsin oil and gas production

gas industries -- Materials

2

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
3 Terms

and definitions
ISO 3977<, ISO 3977-8,

For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in ISO 3977-1, ISO 3977-9 and ISO 11086, and the following apply.

3.1 aeroderiuative aircraft propulsion gas generator adapted to drive mechanical, electrical or marine propulsion equipment 3.2 anti-icing system system to heat up the air entering the air filter or compressor to prevent the formation of frost or ice on the filters or compressor inlet 3.3 area classification classification of an area according to differing degrees of probability with which concentrations of flammable gases or vapours may arise 3.4 atomizing air compressed air used to aid formation of finely dispersed spray from liquid fuel nozzles 3.5 bi-fuei operation simultaneous operation of the gas turbine on two dissimilar fuels (not pre-mixed), such-as gas and distillate 3.6 back draft damper arrangement with eccentrically pivoted vane(s) designed to close and seat when through flow is reversed NOTE Their function is to prevent backflow through a unit on standby in a spared installation. The dampers are ~` installedin the fan discharge. 3.7 coalescing eiement arrangement of fibrous material with special properties which accumulates, entraps and drains moisture from a main air stream 3.8 coiumn mounting arrangement whereby a baseplate is mounted at discrete points 3.9 cooiing peFiod period in time immediately following the shutdown of the gas turbine during which precautions have to be taken to protect the unit EXAMPLE Duringlubricationand turning.

3.10 criticai speed rotating speed which corresponds to resonant frequencies of the system and of the forcing phenomena NOTE If the frequency of any harmonic componentof a periodicforcing phenomenon is equal to, or approximates the frequencyof any mode of rotor vibration,a conditionof resonance may exist. If resonance exists at a finite speed, that speed is called a criticalspeed. 3.11 driven unit components of plant being driven by the gas turbine EXAMPLES Generator, pump or compressor.

3

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
3.12 dual fuel system system which allows the gas turbine to operate on two dissimilar fuels separately 3.f3 electrical and mechanical run out total indicated reading from an inductive gap measuring transducer targeted on the rotots designated vibration monitoring track when the rotor is rotating at very low speed (slow roll) in the gas turbine or is turned on V blocks supported on its bearing surface This will includemechanical (eccentricity,ovalityor any surface irregularity)and electrical (residualmagnetism NOTE and non-uniformity of the electricalprope!tes of the rotorsurface material)effects. 3.74 enclosure housing over the gas turbine usually designed for acoustic cooling and/or fire retention purposes NOTE It also may ba used to segregate gas turbinecoolingand a hazardous area,

3.15 emergency shutdown immediate manually or automatically initiated shutdown of the gas turtine danger to personnel or impending damage

to prevent/minimize

hazards,

3.16 filter stage section of a filter system which is designed to remove specifii site contaminants at a prescribed efficiency and pressure drop NOTE A stage maybe a specific media, an inertialseparator, a mist eliminator,or a self-cleaningsection. Multistage filtersare combinationsof the various filter stages. 3.17 foreign object damage damage to a gas turbine component from the passage of an object not belonging to the gas turbine ,.

3.18 hgh-pressure spool compressor and turbine rotor assembly of high-pressure stages when driven by a turbine independent of the low-pressure stages 3.19 hot gas path temperatures temperatures of the combustion gases, anywhere in the hot section of the gas turbine, normally measured at a point downstream of the combustion system 3.20 inertial mist eliminator arrangement of vertical chord-wise curved Iouvres with entrainment lips on the pressure side trailing edge which separates by inertia effect, entraps and drains moisture from a main air stream 3.21 inlet plenum compartment immediately upstream of the compressor inlet NOTE This is more commonly applicable to aeroderivative gas tucbineswhich require an undisturbedflow into the compressor.

3.22 landfill gas operation
operation of the gas turbine on a fuel gas which has been produced by a natural decomposition process of waste material

IS 15666

(Part

3):

2066

1s0
.

3977-3:2004

3.23 -loading application of load to the gas turbine via the driven unit, generator, pump or compressor 3.24 low-pressure spool compressor and turbine rotor assembly of low-pressure stages when driven by a turbine independent of the high-pressure stages 3.25 lower explosion level concentration of flammable gas or vapour in air, below which the gas atmosphere is not explosive 3.26 real-synchronization connection of an alternator to an electrical system when the phase of the alternator voltage does not match that of the system 3.27 maximum continuous speed (for generator drive applications) speed equal to the specified upper system frequency 3.28 maximum continuous speed (for mechanical drive applications) speed equal to the 105% driven machine specified operating conditions

of the highest speed required by any of the

3.29 multilane dynamic balancing balancing by spinning a rotor on bearings and applying corrections at balancing planes along its length .,, , 3.30 net specific energy minimum energy within a fuel of given constant constituents without latent heat from condensation of water resulting from combustion NOTE 1 NOTE 2 Expressed inJ/m3[15 `C and 101,3kPa(1,01325 bar)] or J/kg.

Net specificenergy is also knownas net calorificvalue or lower heating value.

3.31 off-line compressor washing procedure for cleaning the compressor by soaking in a cleaning fluid whilst slowly turning the gas turtine 3.32 on-line compressor washing procedure for cleaning the compressor by injecting cleaning fluid into the compressor inlet-with the gas turbhe loaded 3.33 operating speed range range from the minimum to maximum continuous speed defined by the requirements of the application, as limited by the gas turbhe design 3.34 packager supplier having responsibility for coordhating the technical aspects of the equipment, and all auxiliary systems included in the scope of the supply This includesresponsibilityfor such factorsas the power requirements,+eed, rotation,general arrangement, NOTE couplings, dyrramks, noise, lubrication, sealing system, material test reports, instrumentation, piping and testing of components.

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
,
3.35 potential maximum power expected power capability when the gas turbire is operated at maximum allowable firing temperature, rated speed, or other limiting conditions as defined by the manufacturer and within the range of specified site values 3.36 process controller control of a process variable, such as driven unit pump suction pressure, via the control of the gas turbine speed 3.37 quill shafts shaft of reduced section designed to be torsionally and laterally flexible NOTE [t may also be designed to fail when the drive torque exceeds a predeterminedvalue.

3.38 reset action, usually manual, to allow the control system to prepare for a further start attempt following a fault shutdown or unsuccessful start condition 3.39 residual magnetism magnetism inducted into a magnetic material by exposure to magnetic fields during manufacture or service 3.40 ribbon cable wiring multiple conductors arranged in parallel, insulated from each other in a flat form 3.41 rotor blade .,, . blade ftied to the rotor (sometimes referred to as a bucket) as opposed to the blades fitted to the stator (FeferFedto as blades, stator blades or nozzles) 3.42 rotor dynamics analysis of the motiin of a rotor-bearing support system with respect to lateral and torsional perturbations 3.43 safe area area in which explosive atmospheres are expected to be present in low quantities so that special precautions for the ignition sources are not necessary 3.44 self-sustaining spaed minimum speed of rotation of the gas turbine's rotor under normal operation in which no external power supplied by a starthg device is required to maintain steady-state operation 3.45 sewice life duration that a component will fulfil its function under operating conditions 3.46 shear type coupling shear pin coupling which drives through a bolt(s) in shear which has (have) a reduced cross section, in line with the coupling flange to flange interface, which is designed to fail when the drive torque exceeds a predetermined value

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
3.47 shutdown, automatic stopping of the gas turbine which is fully executed by the control system from a single operator action NOTE This type of.stoppingnormallywill not lock out furtherstart attempts,and will-notrequire reset action.

3.48 shutdown, manual stopping of the gas turbine which is manually initiated or controlled at each step NOTE This type of stoppingnormallywill not lock out furtherstartattempts, and will not require reset action.

3.49 shutdown, semi-automatic shutdown of the gas turbine which is in part manually initiated or controlled NOTE This type of shutdownnormallywill not lockout furtherstartattempts, and will not require reset action,

3.50 starting action of starting the gas turbine, through all parts of the package start cycle 3.51 stranded conductors cable having a multiplicity of wires making up the core conductor 3.52 un-interruptible power supply power supply that is maintained for a stated period under main grid failure conditions 3.53 Wobbe"index WI heating value of the fuel divided by the square root of the specific gravity (relative to air)

[1s0 3977-4]
NOTE 1 The heat input from the gas fuel through the governor fuel valve under defined conditions is directly promotionalto the Wobbe index. NOTE 2 Alternative definitionsfor Wobbe index exist and the way of defining the Wobbe index for gases should be agreed upon between the purchaserand packager. 3.54 Zone l/DIv I area in which an explosive atmosphere is likely to occur in normal operation 3.55 Zone 11/Div II area in which an explosive atmosphere is not likely to occur in normal operation and, if it occurs, it will only exist for a short time

4 4.1

Basic

requirements

General

This clause covers the basic requirements for the procurement of gas turbines and gas turbine systems for all applications, including combined-cycle systems, and their auxiliaries by a purchaser from a packager. Additional requirements for special gas turbine applications are described in ISO 3799-5. It provides assistance and technical information to be used in the procurement.

7

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
4.2
4.2.1 Site-specific conditions

Site conditions

The purchaser shall furnish accurate site condition data to the packager on data sheets such as those shown in Annex A. The purchaser shall specify whether the package is intended for indoor or outdoor installation. 4.2.2 Site operating point

The purchaser shall specify the site-specific operating point(s) on the data sheets (similar to those included in Annex A, Table A.1 ). Unless otherwise specified, the gas turbine shall be designed to provide site rated power with no negative tolerance, at the heat rate tolerance quoted. 4.2.3 Preliminary design review

Many factors (such as piping and ducting loads, alignment at operating conditions, supporting structure and assembly at the site) can adversely affect site performance. To minimize the influence of these factors, the packager shall review and comment on the purchaser's piping, dutilng and foundation drawings.

4.3
4.3.1

Clperational

requirements

-Operational criteria

The package shall operate on the test stand andlor on its permanent foundation within the specified acceptance criteria. The gas turbine package shall be mechanically designed for continuous service at design power output. All components of the package shall be designed for service at potential maximum power corresponding to the peak load or low ambient temperature characteristics; i.e. components such as couplings, gears and driven machines shall not impose a mechanical limit on the output from the unit. When a unit operates intermittently at a rating higher than peak rating, it may have components rated at higher power levels or with shorter life expectancy. The purchaser shall specify the available utility supplies on the data sheets. The packager shall provide the required utility requirements on the data sheets (see Annex A, Table A. 1). 4.3.2 Temperature and speed limits

Within the packager's allowable temperature range, the following requirements shall be satisfied. Equipment shall be run without damage or need for inspection at the overspeed resulting from the irrstantaneous loss of maximum potential load with the speed control system fully functional, Equipment shall not fail at the overspeed resulting from the following: a) b) instantaneous loss of maximum potential load with the fuel control valve failed in the full open position; instantarreous loss of load resulting from failure of the main drive coupling (e.g. shear pin coupling).

The packager shall advise the purchaser of any inspection that would be required if such overspeed conditions occur. Attention is drawn to the necessity of also ensuring that all coupled equipment (including auxiliaries, etc., electrically, mechanically or hydraulically coupled) will withstand the corresponding overspeed.

8

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
4.3.3 Starting requirements

The purchaser shall define any operating requirements which impact the start cycle sequence or duration. The package design shall permit immediate restarting from any condition (i.e. hot starts or cold starts). Any restrictions shall be defined in the proposal. Any turning device necessary to meet this requirement shall be provided by the manufacturer (see 6.2). 4.3.4 Transient requirements

Operational stability under transient load conditions shall meet the requirements as specified by the purchaser. These requirements should be clearly defined by a relationship of load, speed and time parameters. 4.3.5 Control requirements

The package control system designed by the packager shall provide for sequenced startup, stable operation, warning of abnormal conditions, monitoring of operation, and shutdowns of the package in the event of impending damage to the unit (see Clause 6). 4.3.6 Instrumentation and communication

The purchaser shall specify requirements for instrumentation, data acquisition, data transmission and system interface with the total facility (see Clause 6). 4.3.7 Fuels

The fuel system shall be operable with the normal fuel or any alternative or starting fuel specified in [S0 3977-4. The packager shall advise the purchaser of the effects of the fuel(s) on gas turbine package operation and equipment life. 4.3.8 Exhaust emissions

The exhaust emissions from gas turbines (mainly NOX, CO, UHC, SOX, smoke and particulate) depend to a large extent on the fuels used and the operating conditions of the gas turbine. Therefore the conditions for the specified exhaust emission limits to be met shall be agreed between the-purchaser and packager. If not otherwise specified, the limit values required by national legislation valid in the country -where the gas turbine operates shall be met. Where no national legislation exists, the limit values shall be agreed between the purchaser and packager, In all cases, the exhaust emission measurement shall be carried out according to ISO 11042-1 and ISO 11042-2. The exhaust emissions control technique shall be specified by the purchaser (see 4.6.2 and 5.2.8.5). 4.3.9 Noise emissions

If sound control is specified, the requirements of ISO 3977-4 shall apply. Any special near field or far field or neighborhood sound restrictions that are applicable shall be specified by the purchaser in the data sheets, The permitted near-field, far-field and inside-buildings noise levels shall be provided by the purchaser. The noise emission measurement of the gas turbine and gas turbine package shall be carried out according to 1s0 10494.

9

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
4.4 4.4.1 Service requirements

Design life

Unless otherwise specified, the gas turbine packages covered by this part of ISO 3799 shall be designad and constructed by the packager for the following minimum design criteria (corresponding to class D, range IV, defined in ISO 3977-2:1997):

--
-- --

a design life of 20 years or 100000

operating hours, whichever occurs first; h; h

a hot gas path inspection interval of 8000 a time between major overhauls of 24000

Shorter inspection and major overhaul intervals may result from

-- -- -- --

operationwith fuels other than natural gas,
applications with water or steam injection, operating regimes other than class D, range IV, or special designs. and maintenance

It is the packager's responsibility to identify in his proposal any special equipment procedures necessa~ to achieve the aforesaid life and service intervals. 4.4.2 Responsibility for the unit

The packager shall `be responsible for the gas turbine package performance and mechanical provided the package is operated and maintained as per the packager's instructions. 4.4.3 Inspection schedule normal maintenance and major overhaul

integrity, . ..

Recommended inspections, packager's proposal.

intervals shall be stated in the

All -equipment shall be suitable for periods out of operation up to a minimum of 4 weeks, under specified site conditions, without requiring any special maintenance procedures. 4.4.4 Inspection and maintenance access

The package shall be designed for ease in sewicing and to provide adequate clearances necessary to perform all maintenance to be done between hot gas path inspection, Special tools and procedures shall be stated in the packager's proposal. Provision shall be made for the complete inspection of all rotating gas path and combustion system components, using borescopes or other devices, without major disassembly of the gas turbine. The packager shall provide details of the procedures and any special equipment to be used, 4.4.5 Power train maintainability

All major equipment shall be designed to permit rapid and economical maintenance. Parts such as casing components and bearing housings shall be designed (shouldered or cylindrically doweled) and manufactured to ensure accurate alignment during reassembly. Stationary vanes, nozzles, seals, bearings, diaphragms, modules and the rotating elements shall preferably be replaceable at site. If required, the packager's proposal shall describe the special tooling needed for the above purposes. If the equipment designs do not permit such replacement, the packager shall state in his proposal the procedures required for carrying out such repairs.

10

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
4.5 4.5.1 Rotating Coupling equipment requirements

Couplings shall be sized for maximum continuous torque, based on the potential maximum power capability that can be delivered. For power generation sewice, the generator load coupling shall be sized to withstand the worst case of generator fault conditions unless a shear-type coupling is provided. The couplings shall be dynamically balanced on an individual component basis and then assembled into a completed coupling which is also dynamically balanced as an assembly. Coupling-to-shaft connections shall be designed and manufactured so as to be capable of transmitting power at least equal to the maximum continuous torque rating of the coupling. Coupling spacer length shall allow removal and replacement of bearings and seals without disturbing the main equipment casings. Where this is impractical, the removal of components shall be kept to a minimum and the driven equipment should not be disturbed. When specified, the main load couplings shall conform to ISO 10441. The coupling make, type and mounting arrangements shall be agreed by the purchaser and packager. A spacer-type coupling shall be provided unless otherwise specified. 4.5.2 Auxiliary gears

The gas turbine driver may utilize auxiliary gears for starting and turning functions, lubrication pump, liquid fuel pumps, and bearing sump scavenging pumps. Main load gears may utilize auxiliary gearing for main load train lubrication pump drives and starting and turning functions. Auxiliary gears shall comply with an agreed standard, and shall be rated for at least 110 % of the maximum power transmitted. 4.5.3 Load-gears

Unless otherwise specified, the load gear design, testing and application shall comply with ISO 13691 and the purchaset% specifications. Pertinent gear loading data shall be designated by the purchaser. The minimum power ratings of load gears shall be at least equal to the maximum power output of the gas turbine per the purchaser's stated ambient temperature range. If this results in an excessively large gear rating, the packager and purchaser may mutually agree on an actual gear rating or power limiting control device. The minimum load shall also be considered in the design of the load gear, taking into account critical speeds and bearing stability. The purchaser shall specify the minimum load. 4.5.4 4.5.4.1 Driven equipment General

Typically the gas turbine driven equipment will comprise a) b) c) d) axial compressors, centrifugal compressors, centrifugal pumps, a.c. power generators,

or combinations thereof.

11

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
4.5.4.2 Centrifugal and axial compressors

Unless otherwise specified, centrifugal compressor design, testing and installation shall be in accordance with ISO 10442 and the purchaser's specifications. For axial compressors, ISO 10442 may be used as a guideline. Compressor equipment may include seal oil or seal gas arrangements. Where seal oil systems are utilized, a combined seal oil/lubrication oil system shall be utilized only with purchasers approval. If separate systems are specified, the means of preventing interchange of oil between the two systems -shall be described in the packager's proposal. Compressor performance requirements, including gas flow rates, operating pressure, temperature ranges and gas composition, shall be provided by purchaser. 4.5.4.3 Centrifugal pumps with

Unless otherwise specified, centrifugal pump design, testing and installation shall be in accordance ISO 13709 and the purchaser's specifications.

Centrifugal pump performance requirements with regard to flow rates, operating pressures and temperature ranges, and liquid fluid properties shall be provided by purchaser. 4.5.4.4 Reciprocating compressors

Gas turbine driven reciprocating compressor packages are not addressed by this part of ISO 37899. The purchaser and packager shall mutually agree upon the unique design issues of torsional vibration and specific packaging provisions associated with reciprocating compressors. 4.5.4.5 Generators

Generators shall be designed according to the purchaser's requirements and specifications and meet,,the requirements of IEC 60034-1. The generator rating, as well as the electrical hardware and instrumentation to be provided by the packager, shall be specified by the purchaser, The packager shall provide equipment as indicated on data sheets such as given in Annex A, Table A.6. The purchaser and the packager shall agree on the scope of the supply and location of the required equipment, When specified, inspection and testing shall be in accordance with ISO 3977-8. The package design shall be capable of withstanding short-circuit conditions, or malsynchronisation, without permanent damage to the machinery train, Where these requirements cannot be satisfied without the use of torque limiting devices (i.e. shear pins, quill shafis, etc.), then this fact shall be adequately outlined in the packager's proposal. 4.5.5 Mechanical drives (variable speed application)

The output shaft operating speed range of gas turbine units for mechanical drive applications shall be suitable for meeting all the operating conditions specified by the purchaser on the data sheets, Where only one operating condition is specified for an application, the speed range for single-shaft machines is typically a maximum of 25 YO (from 80 YO to 105 YO of the rated speed) and the speed range for two or more shaft machines is typically a maximum of 55 ?/o (from 50 YO to 105 YO of the rated speed). The actual speed range shell be mutually agreed between the purchaser and packager. The gas turbine shall have satisfactory mechanical performance at all operating conditions specified on the, data sheets and within the range among those conditions. The unit shall be capable of operation, without damage, to the trip speed setting at all operating conditions.

12

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1S0 3977-3:2004
The startup and shutdown procedures can only be initiated when certain predefine safety criteria associated with the process plant, which have to be agreed between the purchaser and packager, are met. This also implies that the plant control valves will be activated in a predefine sequence. Mechanical constraints and process limitations shall be considered in establishing these procedures (see 6.2). 4.6 4.6.1 Other equipment requirements

Compartment

enclosure(s)

When specified, suitable enclosure(s) shall be provided to meet the purchaser's acoustical, weatherproofing and/or fire protection requirements. Enclosure(s) shall be designed to ensure that the package can meet the operation, maintenance, service life and safety requirements. 4.6.2 Steam or water injection

When specified, the gas turbine shall be designed to permit steam or water injection for either increasing the power capability of the unit or for emission control. The packager shall specify the required quality and quantity of the injection fluid (see 5.2.8.5), 4.6.3 Oil resewoirs and housings

Oil reservoirs and housings that enclose moving lubricated parts (such as bearings, shaft seals, highly polished parts, instruments and control elements) shall be designed to minimize contamination by moisture, dust and other foreign matter during periods of operation and idleness. 4.6.4 Motor and electrical

Motors, electrical components, and electrical installations within hazardous zones shall meet the requirements of the relevant parts of IEC 60079. Area classification shall be carried out by the supplier, or packager, in' "" respect of all potential sources of release that are likely to create an explosive atmosphere in accordance with IEC 60079-10. NOTE If effective and reliable isolationof flammable substances is provided, it may be possible to demonstratethat an installationis safe when shut down and that unprotectedelectricalequipmentmay be used at such times. 4.6.5 Special tools and dynamics

When special tools and fixtures are required by the purchaser to d@ssemble, assemble or maintain the package, they-shall be included in the quotation and, when specified, furnished as part of the initial supply of the package. For multiple unit installations, the requirements for quantities of special tools and fixtures shall be mutually agreed upon by the purchaser and packager. These or similar special tools shall be used during shop assembly and post-test disassembly of the equipment. When special tools are provided, they shall be packaged in separate permanent tool boxes and marked "Special tools for (tag/item number)". Each tool shall be stamped or metal tagged to indicate its intended use. 4.6.6 Dry low emissions combustion

When specified by the purchaser, the gas turbine shall be equipped with dry low emissions combustion (DLE) to control NOX and CO emissions. `On request, the packager shall demonstrate to the purchaser that the likelihood of a damaging thermal acoustic and flashback phenomena occurring from the combustion system is acceptably improbable. 4.6.7 Exhaust catalytic converters

When specified by the purchaser, the gas turbine shall be equipped with an exhaust catal~tc converter to meet more stringent emissions legislation.

13

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
4.7 4.7.1 Vibrations General and dynamics

This section is concerned with the rotordynamics of the gas turbine as well as with the associated driven equipment. Vibrations affect availability and safety, and can cause damage to equipment. Vibrations are generally the response of systems to excitations. The best known excitation of turbomachinery is unbalance, causing lateral vibrations. The rotor speed at resonance condition is also called the critical speed. Lateral vibrations can be measured and are used for monitoring and protection. Balancing reduces the unbalance excitation and is applied during assembly and maintenance. The sensitivity to unbalance excitation shall be addressed in the engine design. Torsional excitations cause torsional vibrations. This is more difficult to measuFe. It shall be addressed in the design phase of a shaft train because torsional vibration modes have generally low damping. The packager shall ensure that each component meets the rotordynamic design requirements as an isolated, singular component in accordance with the applicable component-standards. Rotating machinery can encounter very high vibrations when components are coupled by their shafts and foundations even though they operate satisfactorily while urrcoupled. A system analysis of the shaft train in the design stage permits corrective actions against vibration problems during operation. The packager shall ensure that the resonance frequencies of the complete power train (rotor lateral, system torsion and blading modes) are in the acceptable ranges. The combination shall be suitable for the specified operating speed range, including any starthg speed hold-point requirements of the train. A list of all undesirable speeds shall be submitted to the purchaser. This also shall be included in the technical manual and preferably should be programmed into the control system in order to avoid the undesired speed ranges. Generally the packager is responsible for the lateral and torsional vibration analysis of the entire system. All shaft critical speeds, perthent modes of exciting frequencies of the driver and driven equipment throughout the startup and operating speed range, and any external exciting forces, as defined by the purchaser,. 6hall provide specified separation margins to prevent excitation of one by another. All these modes shall provide for ample frequency ranges within which the supporting foundation's natural frequencies can be designed. This analysis shall be performed before the package installation design. 4.7.2 4.7.2.1 "Lateral vibrations General (critical speeds)

An analysis of the lateral vibration characteristics of the system is recommended if the gas turbine is the first of its kind, or if its load coupling is modified, or if rigid couplings are employed, or if a bearing support has been modified. Flexible couplings or slender intermediate shafts allow the lateral analysis-to be carried out separately for theindividual components. Lateral vibrations shall be measured and monitored during operation. The required type and number of vibration pick-ups for a rotor train depend on the type of machine support. Therefore the relative shaft vibration measurement or the bearing vibration measurement can be selected according to specific machine structural characteristics, as follows. a) stiff support If the dynamic support stiffness is significantly higher than the dynamic stiffness of the oil film, the relative shaft vibration measurement is more sensitive and shall be applied for machine protection purposes. b) Flexible support If the dynamic support stiffness is significantly lower than the dynamic stiffness of the oil film, the bearing vibration measurement is more sensitive and shall be applied for machine protection purposes.

14

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
In the case of uncertainty between these two options, the measured sensitivities of both measurements on the machine at transient and steady-state operation may be used to make a decision. ISO 10814 establishes methods to assess the modal sensitivity of machines to unbalance and these methods shall mainly be applied in the design analysis phase. Gas turbines are referred as Type II machines in ISO 10814, which also gives the required frequency separation margin for vibration response peaks (also referred to as "critical speed, "mode" or "resonance"). It applies to lateral vibrations based on unbalance response calculations or on measurements from the same or a similar machine. A high modal -sensitivity according to this method (designated with range D or E) is a warning, indicating that at least one of the following actions is recommended:

-- --
--

shifting either the exciting frequency or the critical speed; increasing the damping; performing a stress response analysis demonstrating that the resonance in question has no adverse effect on any part of the shaft train.

NOTE 1 Aeroderivative type combustion gas turbines generally use antifriction ball and roller type bearings. Rotordynamicresponse functions and associated amplitudefactors will be differentfrom those of hydrodynamicbearing designgas turbines. NOTE 2 In shaft trains with gears, the interaction of close torsional and lateral critical speeds can cause slight deviationsof the eigenfrequenciescalculatedwith uncoupledmodels. 4.7.2.2 4.7.2.2.1 Measurements General

Vibration measurements may be"taken either on rotating or stationary elements. The packager shall define the type and location of vibration measurements most suitable for the equipment. Levels of vibration for alarm and,,, for automatic protective interventions shall be indicated by the packager and programmed in the control system. During a factory test or commissioning of the assembled (measured at the manufacturers standard sensor locations, shall not exceed two thirds (2/3) of the manufacturet's alarm the specified operating speed range. This limit may be based gas generetor/gas turtine the vibration level shaft or casing vibration) shall be measured. It set point value at any steady-state speed within on filtered or unfiltered date.

Beyond the requirements of the International Standards cited in 4.7.2.2.2 to 4.7.2'2.4, it is recommended that at any speed outside the specified operating speed range, up to and including the trip speed of the rotor, the vibration level shall not exceed 200 ?40of the maximum value allowed at-the maximum continuous speed. NOTE The design details, includingmass and stitTneas distribution aa well as accessibilityof the parts, determinethe most significantlocationsfor vibrationmeasurement. 4.7.2.2.2 Relative shaft displacement vibrations

The requirements of 1S0 7919-1, ISO 7919-2 and ISO 7919+ apply. ISO 7919-1 provides general guidelines for shaft displacement vibrations in power trains. ISO 7919-2 applies to steam turbines and large generators. If not otherwise agreed, the assessment of vibration levels of gas turbine driven generators shall be based on ISO 791%2. ISO 7919-4 gives applicable measurements and evaluation criteria for relative shaft vibrations for gas turbhes (except small or aeroderivative gas turbines). If not othenvise agreed, the assessment of vibration levels of gas turtines shall be based on ISO 79194. However, ISO 7919-4 does not cover all types of gas turbines. In these cases mutual agreement shall be sought between the purchaser and packager. Beyond the requirements of the relevant part of ISO 7919, the following is recommended. Electrical and mechanical runout shall be determined and recorded by rolling the rotor in bearing shells, V blocks, or in another appropriate setup while measuring runout with a non-contacting vibration probe and a dial indicator at

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
the same shaft location. Electrical and mechanical runout, for the full 360� at each probe location, shall be

includedin the mechanicaltest records.The packager shall demonstratethat electrical and mechanical runout is in accordance to the relative parts of ISO 7919.
In order to derive the effective vibration amplitudes, this runout can be vectorially subtracted from the NOTE 1 measuredvibrationvalues. NOTE 2" If the runout requirement according to ISO 7919-1 cannot be kept, the cause may be a mechanical shape deviation of the rotoror residualmagnetism. 4.7.2.2.3 Bearing housing vibrations

The requirements of ISO 10816-1, ISO 10816-2 and ISO 10816-4 shall apply. ISO 10816-1 establishes a basis for the evaluation of mechanical vibration of machines by measuring the vibration response of support structures. This is also called "seismic measurement". ISO 10816-2 shall be the basis for the assessment of vibration levels of gas turbine-driven generators, if not otherwise agreed. ISO 10816-4 applies to bearing housing vibration measurements on gas turbines. If not otherwise agreed, the assessment of vibration le~els of gas turbines shall be based on ISO 10816-4. In any case where the above International Standards do not cover the shaft train in question completely, mutual agreement shall be sought between the purchaser and packager. On gas turbines where case-mounted (seismic) vibration systems are used, or which are not covered by ISO 10816-4, the manufacturer shall provide the purchaser with the acceptable vibration limits, taking account of the following: a) b) c) d) e) locations and types of transducers; filtration and signal ccmditioning; operating conditions; quoted limits; shop/field experience factors from previouslsimilar units. Absolute shaft displacement vibrations

4.7.2.2.4

The ISO 7919 series treats absolute shaft displacement vibrations too. These maybe measured by vectorial summing of relative vibration with the seismic probe, but this is normally not used. If it is installed, it is mainly applied for diagnosis. Installation of such measurements may be done if mutually agreed between the purchaser and packager. 4.7.2.3 Balancing

Balancing the finally assembled rotors reduces the unbalance excitatin. The main machine rotors shall be multi-plane dynamically balanced in the machine or in a special spin pit. In the case of several machines combined into one train, an extra balancing after the addition of no more than two major components is recommended. Balancing correction masses shall only be applied to the components added. Minor correction of other components may be required during the final trim balancing of the completely assembled equipment. On rotore with single keyways, the keyway shall be filled with a fully crowned half-key. ISO 1940-1 indicates the allowable balance quality grade for gas turbines as G 2.5. A better balance quality requirement than this applies only if mutually agreed between the purchaser and packager. If mutually agreed between the purchaser and packager, the methods and criteria given in ISO 11342 maybe used.

16

-IS 15666 (Patt 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
In the case of a stacked rotor assembly where the rotor is progressively assembled and cannot be removed as a unit, the manufacturer shall develop a standard procedure to achieve the above balance quality grade. When spare rotors are supplied, they shall be dynamically balanced to the same tolerances as the new rotor. Final residual unbalance levels (in gram millimetres) shall be recorded with the rotational speed of balance and unbalance phase angle locations for each rotor assembly. 4.7.3 Torsional vibrations

The packager shall carry out an analysis of the torsional vibration characteristics of the complete system. A minimum separation margin of 10 `Yo is recommended between each torsional eigenfrequency and any possible torsional excitation frequency, If this cannot be fulfilled, a torsional response calculation shall be performed. For all generator drives, a response calculation for excitation by real-synchronization and by shortcircuit shall be done. The torsional response calculations shall demcmstrate that all stress responses remain in safe limits. NOTE 1-- Torsionalexcitationsources can include,but are not limitedto, the following:

for trains with generators or electric motors,one and two times the rotationspeed should be consideredas excitation frequencies; if electronic frequency converters are used, other integer multiples of the speed can excite torsional modes too; gear unbatenceor pitchline runout; hydraulicgovernorcontrol-loopresonance.

-- --

For generator disturbanceresponse calculations,no widelyaccepted standard is available. The packager may NOTE 2 apply an appropriateinternalstandard.

5
5.1 5.1.1

Packaging and auxiliary equipment
.,
Basic design

Basic scope of supply

The packager shall provide, as a minimum, the equipment listed below (referred to herein as a package) packaged to meet the specified operating conditions. This equipment shall be assembled (packaged) to the maximum extent practical. Exceptions should be mutually agreed between the packager and the purchasen a) b) c) d) e) f) 9) h) i) )) k) baseplate(s); combustion gas turbine or gas generator; controls and instrumentation; couplings and guards; exhaust collector and/or diffuser; fuel system(s); lube oil system(s); power turbine (if separate from gas generator); starting system; gas turbine washing or cleaning system; vibration monitoring system;

17

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
1) m) n) o) P) @ control panel; inlet ducting; inlet filtration system; inlet silencer; combustion system; protection systems. .

It is recognized that for some package designs some of the above-listed items will be shipped separately. 5.1.2 Optional equipment

Any other equipment required shall be specified by the purchaser and shall be included in the packager% scope of supply. Such equipment may include: a) b) c) d) e) f) 9) h) i) j) k) 1) m) n) o) P) @ r) combustion emission control system; driven equipment in accordance with applicable specifications; enclosure(s) for acoustical, weather, and/or fire protection; exhaust system (including expansion joints, silencers, structures); fuel conditioning; inlet evaporative air cooler or absorption chiller cooler combination; inlet anti-icing system; lifting equipment for maintenance; lifting equipment for shipping and handling; motor control center recuperator or regenerator for gas turbine performance enhancement; starting system auxiliaries; Stea,n or water injection fluid conditioning system; Gas turbine load train condition monitoring equipment Uninterrupted power supply for controls, instrumentation, and operation; Waste heat recovery systems and associated dampem; Foundation anchor bo[~ barring equipment.

.,, ,

This equipment shall also be assembled (packaged) to the maximum extent practical, The arrangement of the package, including piping, coolers, pumps and controls shall provide adequate clearance areas and safe access for operation and maintenance.

18

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
5.1.3 5.1.3.1 Materials of package construction Generai

Materials used of package construction shall be the manufacturers standard for the specific site operating and environmental conditions. Specific attention shall be given to the choice of materials and protective coating systems to prevent a) b) c) d) corrosion, stress corrosion cracking, galvanic corrosion, and brittle fracture. or adequate

Materials for sour (acid) gas service shall comply with the recommendations of NACE MR-0175 internaticmai or nationai standards as shown in Annex B. Materials shall be identified in the proposal. Structure steel and piping shall be identiied in the proposal.

Minor patis that are not identified (such as nuts, springs, washers, gaskets and keys) shall have corrosion resistance at least equal to that of specified parts in the same environment. 5.1.3.2 Non-metaiiic materiais

Non-metallic materials, such as elastomers, shall be compatible with the process or motive fluids with which.., . they come into contact during normal operation or.maintenance functions. 5.1.4 Weiding

Welding of pressure-containing parts, as well as any dissimilar-metal welds and weld repairs, shall be performed -and inspected by operatora and procedures qualified in accordance with Section Vlli, Division "1, and Section IX of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, or relevant international or national standards given in Annex B, Welding of piping shali be in accordance with ISO 15649, or relevant international or national standards given in Annex B. Welding on baseplates, non-pressure ducting, iagging and control panels, shall be performed in accordance with AWS D1.1, or relevant international or national standards given in Annex B. The packager shall be responsible for the review .of all repaira and repair welds to ensure that they are properly heat treated and non-destructively examined for soundness and compliance with the applicable qualified procedure. Repair welds shall be non-destructively tested by the same method used to detect the original flaw. 5.1.5 Fiange connections

The packager shall provide details of all the purchaser's connections to the package and shall state the acceptable forces and moments that these connections will tolerate. The acceptable loading for connections to connected equipment, such as compressors, pumps or steam turbines, shall not be less than that specified in the relevant standards "forthese items.

19

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
5.1.6 Bolting

The quality of bolting for pressure joints including piping shall be determined from the actual bolting temperature as defined by ISO 15649, or relevant international or national standards given in Annex B. Nuts shall conform to ASTM A 194, Grade 2 or 2H, for A 194 bolting, and ASTM A 307, Grade B casahardened for A 307 bolting, or relevant international or national standards given in Annex B. 5.1.7 Nameplates

A nameplate shall be of conosion-resistant material and securely attached at a readily accessible point on the package and on other major pieces of equipment within the package. The nameplate shall, as a minimum, include the purchaser's item number, the vendor's name, the machine's serial number, and the machine size and type. Additional information may include the minimum and maximum allowable design limits and rating data (including pressures, temperatures, speeds and power), maximum allowable working pressures and temperatures, hydrostatic test pressures and critical speeds. S1 units shall be used. Rotation arrows shall be of corrosion-resistant material and cast in or attached to each major item of the rotating equipment. 5.2 5.2.1 Auxiliary equipment

Starting systems

The packager shall furnish the type of starter system specified by the purchaser. Typical starters are electric motors, gas expansion turbines, steam turbines, hydraulic motors, internal combustion engines, air/gas motors, small gas turbines and generators in the motor mode. All starter units shall be suitable for satisfactory operation with the specified electrical power characteristics, inlet and exhaust steam pressure and .,,. temperature, air/gas or fuel. If the plant is designed for contracted black start capability, it should contain its own power source for start batteries, diesel or alternatives. Starting units and associated power transmission equipment shall be suitable for the acceleration of the gas turbine uniVdnven load equipment train, and for extended operation during purge and compressor cleaning cycles. The packager shall determine the ratings, which shall be at least 110 `A of the starting and acceleration torque required by the gas turbine (and the driven equipment train for single-shaft machines) from standstill to self-sustaining speed throughout the specified ambient temperature range. Utilities required for the starting system shall be defined by the packager in his proposal. For single-shaft gas turbhes, anticipated process variations which can affect the sizing of the starter (such as changes in pressure, temperature or properties of the fluid handled, and special plant start-up conditions) shall be specified by the purchaser. For single-shaft gas turbines for mechanical drive applications, the packager shall prepare a spaed torque curve for the gas turbine and driven equipment with the starting driver torque superimposed. Gas expansion starters using flammable gas as motive power shall be designed for zero leakage from the seals to the immediate surroundings. Any starting driver shall disengage automatically and shut down before reaching its maximum allowable speed. The starters normally are disengaged at turbhe governing speed and idle, or are at rest during operation. Failure of the starting driver to disengage shall automatically abort the sta!%ng sequence (see Clause 6). Electrical drive starting systems shall be capable of starting the gas turbine when the Supply voltage has fallen to the minimum level mutually agreed between the packager and purchaser.

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
5.2.2 5.2.2.1 Mounting systems Generai

The package support base shall be of structural steel design and shall be of sufficient strength for shipment and installation, and to transmit equipment-generated forces and couples to the purchaser's foundation. The purchaser shall specify the type of foundation on the data sheets. 5.2.2.2 Anchoring systems

When a baseplate is installed directly on a concrete foundation, accessibility shall be provided for grouting under all Ioad-camying structural members. Single-level foundation for the baseplate shall be used. Mounting surfaces that are not to be grouted shall be coated with a rust preventive immediately after machining. The packager shall specify the size, number and location of anchor bolts required for the specified method of fastening the package to the foundation. 5.2.2.3 Baseplate design

A baseplate shall preferably be a single fabricated steel unit, unless the purchaser and packager mutually agree that it may be fabricated in multiple sections. When specified, the baseplate shall be provided with Ievelling pads or targets protected with removable covers. The pads or targets shall be accessible for field Ievelling after installation, with the equipment mounted and the baseplate on the foundation. When specified, the baseplate ~hail be suitable for column mounting, with suftlcient rigidity to be supported at specified points, without continuous grouting under structural members. The baseplate design shall be ~~ mutually agreed upon by the purchaser and packager. The baseplate shall be provided with attachment points for at least a four-point lift. If lifting lugs are used, weld joints shall be full-penetration, full-length continuous welds, and nondestructively tested. Lifting the baseplate complete with mounted equipment shall not permanently distort or otherwise damage the baseplate or the machinery mounted on it. The-purchaser and packager shall mutually agree on lifting arrangements based upon available facilities at the p.urchasets site-or other limiting factors. When specified, non-skid decking or grating covering all walk and work areas shall be provided on the top of the baseplate. All deckplates shall be positively attached to each crossing structural member. Baseplate shall be furnished with vertical jackscrews, where practical, adjacent-to each anchor bolt. Otherwise, means shall be provided to raise the baseplate readily to facilitate alignment in situ. Baseplate(s) shall be provided with drip containment and low point drains, 5.2.2.4 Equipment mounting

Provisions for axial, lateral and vertical jackscrews alignment shall be provided for the package train. Where jackscrews are used, they shall be arranged to prevent marring of shimming surfaces. The packager shall furnish suitable shim packs under all machinery mounting feet.

21

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s03977-3:2004
5.2.3 5.2.3.1 Enclosure and fire protection General

When specified, an enciosure system shali be suppiied consisting of the following: a) b) c) an enclosure surrounding the gas turbine and/or driven equipment; an enclosure ventilation and purging system; a fire protection system. Construction

5.2.3.2

Enclosuresshaii be resistantto the ingress of dust, and outdoorenclosuresshail be additionallyweatherproof. Water and/or dust leakage through the enclosure wall and roof seams is unacceptable. Panels shail be designed to minimize internal moisture build-up and corrosionof the panel. Panel materiais shall be nonhydroscopic, non-combustible, and insect and vermin resistant. Enclosures shall be designed to permit easy on-site maintenance. if necessary, removabie roof sections, -side panels or hinged bulkhead walls shall be provided for heavy maintenance. The construction of maintenance accessways shall permit easy return to the original condition. Caulking is not acceptable. Access doors and/or manways shali be provided for routine maintenance and inspection. Seals shall be used around the perimeter of the accessway. Accessways shall be iockable. Conduits, fire-prevention systems, gas detection, etc., shall not be attached-to the underside of the roof or any other panels that must be removed for maintenance or are to be equipped with quick connection couplings, .,, , When specified, windows shall be provided, preferably located in access doors on either side of the enclosure, opposite each other. Each window shall be double pane, of wire-reinforced glass, with a dead air space between panes, if specified, iighting for general observation shall be provided within the enclosure. Lube oil filling points used during operation shall be outside the engine enclosure or remote from hot parts of the engine. 5.2.3.3 Fire and gas protection

Fire and gas protection systems shall be furnished when an enclosure is specified, unless specifically deleted from the packager's scope of supply. by the purchaser. The system shall consist of the following as a minimum: a) b) c) a fire suppression system; a fire detection system; a gas detection system for: 1) 2) .3) gas fuelled units, when the driven machine handles flammable gas, when operating in a hazardous area (see 6.4.4, 6.10.7 and 6.10.8).

22

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 "1s03977-3:2004
5.2.3.4 Ventilation and purging

The enclosure shall be provided with a forced or induced -ventilation (cooling) and purging (hazardous area declassification) air system designed to provide 100 % of the ventilation and purging load in the most severe climaticlload conditions. The ventilation shall be sufficient to avoid heat damage to the equipment within the enclosure. The purge air shall be distributed to ensure it sweeps around all areas of the gas turbine and through all areas of the enclosure in sufficient quantity to avoid dead spots where gases could accumulate in explosive concentrations. Furthermore, in cases of fuel gases heavier than air and/or gas mixtures with low autoignition temperature, sufficient dilution and scavenging of the lower portion of the enclosure shall be provided. The ability Of the ventilation system to fulfil these requirements shall be demonstrated. The purchaser shall specify on the data sheets system redundancy requirements and whether positive or negative pressure is required. The ventilation system shall include air filtration and silencing equipment if required. Ventilation systems shall be designed to operate satisfactorily over the ambient temperature range specified. Overcooking under low ambient temperatures shall be avoided. Ventilation and purging flow shall leave the enclosure via a flanged exhaust port(s). Each port shall be equipped with a fire-suppression medium damper and, where specified, with a back-draft damper. The purchaser shall specify if additional ventilation ducting is required. If coot-down ventilation is required to prevent damage to the gas turbine major auxiliary or instrumentation systems within the enclosure, a separate back-up fan shall be provided. 5.2.4 5.2.4.1 Air inlet system "General

The air inlet system typically consists of the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) inlet filter (either single or multi-stage); silencec ducting; expansion joints (as required); pressure drop test connections at the gas turbine inlet; instrumentation and protection devices.

Optional features, when specified, may include the following: 9) h) i) j) k) 1) anti-icing system; evaporative cooler with downstream moisture separation; insect/bird screens; washing system (on- and/or off-line); walkways, handrails, platforms and ladders required for access and maintenance; absorption chillers;

23

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
m) weather Iouvres; n) o) p) facility to service filter repla~ements, i.e. lifting into position.and removal; high efficiency vane separator upstream of the air filters to prevent water ingress; bypass door which opens after reaching a specified pressure drop.

Unless otherwise specified, the inlet system shallbe designed for a maximum total pressure drop of 1 kPa with a clean air filter.and a maximum at-site air flow.
Unless otherwise specified, provision shall be-made to permit the maintenance and cleaning of prefilters on multi-stage filters during operation of the gas turbine, Bolts, rivets or other connectors that can become loose and be carried in the air stream shall not be used in the inlet system downstream of the final filter media. Unless otherwise specified, reinforced coarse mesh (stainless-steel screen) shall be provided upstream of the gas turbine inlet to minimize the potential of foreign object damage (FOD screens). The actual location shall be mutually agreed upon by both the packager and purchaser, considering such facilities as cleaning systems, access plates, vaned elbows and aerodynamic disturbance at the intake volute or the bellmouth. When specified, all metallic air path components shall be stainless steel. When carbon steel air path components are provided, corrosion protection of the filter, ducting and silencer is required. Protective material or coating and details of the surface preparation proposed shall be submitted by the packager for approval with proposal. An indication of the life of the surface coating should be provided by the `packager, Grades of stainless steel that are sensitized by welding should be avoided. The purchaser shall specify whether the filter house is to be at grade level or elevated. packager shall provide all structural support to grade. If elevated, the

To minimize the ingress of airborne dust, it is recommended that the air intake be not less than 5 m abok grade or any adjacent large flat surface such as a roof. 5.2.4.2 inlet filters

Filter systems shall be of a design well proven for the environmental conditions specified on the data sheets. The purchaser and the packager shall agree on the type of inlet filtration system. If single-stage filtration only is specified, the purchaser may specify if provisions are to be made for the future addition of extra stages. Debris screens and weather [ouvres shall not be considered stages. The packager shall provide in his proposal the filter system performance data as required on the data sheets (see Annex A, Table A.3). Unless otherwise specified, a high efficiency mist eliminator shall be furnished as the first stage -for marine environments. Metallic filter or non-absorbent type filter elements such as glass or polypropylene -fibre shall be provided. All filter systems require the following design features. a) b) c) All wiring and conduit located downstream of the air filter elements shall be outside of the airpath. All suppoding structural steel shall be of bolted and welded design. Modular construction with each module shall be fully factory assembled, wired and plumbed. Each module shall have lifting provisions to be used for loading and unloading and for lifting into the final assembled position. All seams and joints on the clean air side of each filter system shall be airtight. All welded seams Shall be continuously seal welded.

d)

24

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
5.2.4.3 Inlet silencers

Silencer attenuationshall be capable of meetingthe system noise limitationsspecified by the purchaser. Silencers shall preferably be"flanged and suticiently rigid to be supported only by the end flanges when
mounted in a horizontal or vertical duct system. The construction of the silencer baffles shall prevent the entry of the baffle packing material into the air stream. The silencer shall be designed to prevent damage resulting from acoustical or mechanical resonances. Lifting provisions shall be incorporated on the silencer for handling.

The directionof flow shall be indicatedon silencers,vents and cascade bends,
5.2.4.4 Inlet ducting

The duct system shall be arranged to give the minimum number of bends. Turning vanes shall be provided at changes in direction when required to ensure uniform flow distribution at the gas turbine flange. The leading and trailing edge of each vane shall be tapered and smooth. Vanes shall be attached to the duct by a continuous weld and shall be designed to avoid resonance conditions. For transition sections between duct components of different cross-sectional areas, the angle between the sides and the axis of the duct should be minimal to reduce pressure drop, In general, the angle should not exceed 15". The ducts shall be supported to allow lateral as well as axial growth due to temperature changes. The ducting and supports shall be designed to remain stationary when sections near the gas turbine are removed to provide access for unit maintenance. Ducts shall be sufficiently rigid to avoid vibration. Where not restricted by size, access shall be provided in each duct adjacent to the gas turbine inlet flange to,, allow final cleaning `and inspection of the entire duct system before operation. Covers, if required, shall -be designed to permit their removal at any time without risk of fasteners or other objects being ingested by the gas turbine. They shall be gasketed and secured to ensure positive leakproof closure. Gastight expansion joints shall be provided to remove all loads between the ducting and gas turbine inlet flanges. These joints shall accommodate the relative movement of the ducting, regenerator (if any) and gas turbine in the vertical and horizontal directions, 5.2.4.5 Evaporative cooling system

Evaporative cooling can be used to reduce the ambient temperature as perceived by the gas turbine, thereby giving extra output. Evaporative cooling systems may be based on either a rigid media or a compressor epray. The rigid-media type shall consist of the cooling media, pump, sump, drains and all necessary controls for water circulation and cooler control. The compressor spray shall consist of high-pressure pumps and a control system. Evaporative cooler performance shall be based on the maximum possible airflow and Ihe most severe site environmental conditions. The cooler system shall be designed to prevent liquid carryover. The cooler percent efficiency, E, as stated on the data sheet, is defined as: E= T~ -Te ~loo T~ � TW (1)

where Te is the cooler exit temperature;

Td is the dry bulb inlet temperature; TW is the wet bulb inlet temperature.

25

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
A corrosion-resistant inertial mist eliminator or coalescing element shall be provided in the ducting, downstream of the evaporative cooler. The mist eliminator or coalescer shall be selected to minimize moisture carryover from the inlet air stream. Cooler water circulation shutdown shall occur on air temperature control. To prevent icing a temperature probe shall be provided to automatically shut down water circulation when the exit air temperatures are less than 10 "C. All evaporative cooler metallic housing and internal structural supports shall be of stainless steel. All metallic downstream air path components shall be of stainless steel. The evaporative cooler, mist eliminator or coalescer, and exit ducting shall be designed for complete drainage. The bottom of each shall slope towards a flush drain. Protrusions or standpipes at the drain nozzles are not permitted. Each drain nozzle shall be arranged to prevent unfiltered air from being drawn into the ducting. Emergency overflow capability is required in addition to the primary drain system. When specified, walkways, handrails, access ladders and manways shall be provided to service both upstream and downstream of `the evaporative cooler media, mist eliminator .or coalescer, and ducting downstream of the cooler. The packager shall specify the quality and quantity of the evaporative cooler water that is necessary to minimize cooler and water system operating problems. If the gas turbine drives a generator, the packager should ensure that the generator and other electrical equipment can cope with the extra electrical output without overheating. `5.2.4.6 Absorption chillers

Under certain ambient conditions (high ambient temperature and high humidity) it may be desirable for the purchaser to consider the use of an absorption chiller to artificially reduce the ambient temperature as perceived by the gas turbine. This may be used instead of an evaporative cooling system which is generally used when ambient temperature is high and humidity is low. When specified, the vendor shall furnish an integrated packaged system in such way as to keep installation and commissioning time to an absolute minimum. The purchaser shall specify the preferred source of heat for the absorption chiller (i.e. steam, hot water or gas fired) and the available temperatures and pressures thereof. Absorption chillers are available as single- or double-effect refrigerant machins?s. Due consideration shall be given to the chilled coil arrangement and design within the gas turbine air inlet system to maintain pressure loss at the minimum possible level. For coastal locations, the material of the chilling coils should be marine grade to avoid corrosion problems. All inlet duct work downstream of the cooling coils should be of suitable corrosion-resistant material. If the chilling coils need to be drained in the winter, then coils should be of suitable corrosion-resistant material. The absorption chiller shall be designed for the optimum duty condition (cooling effect). The scope of supply for the system shall include the absorption chiller package, including evaporators, condensers, chilling coils, transfer pumps, instruments and associated control panels (interfacing with the gas turbine control system) and auxiliaries. The purchaser shall indicate or specify if the waste heat (hot water) is required for other purposes.

Sufficientflexibilityshall be accommodated in the system design to facilitate operation at conditions other than full load. The chilling capacity must therefore be variable and controllable.

26

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Controls, instrumentationand equipment necessary for both the modulation and safe operation of the plant shall be includedand integrated into the gas turbinecontrolsystem.
Features shall be incorporated in the design to support a philosophy of minimum maintenance. It shall be possible to operate the gas turbine in the event that the chiller is rendered inoperative and to maintain the chiller when the gas turbine is in operation. Refrigerants used shall conform with the environmental requirements. Ail utility requirements, quality and quantity, shall be defined by the packager, i.e. a.c. power, water treatment, etc. The unit shall be tested to the manufacturer's standard prior to dispatch to ensure satisfactory operation of the unit. If the gas turbine drives a generator, the packager should ensure that the generator and other electrical equipment can cope with the extra electrical output without overheating. 5.2.4.7 Water wash system

When specified, the packager shall provide a water wash system for off-line compressor washing of the gas turbine compressor section. The packager shall provide fluid quality and quantity and utility requirements with the proposal. Flow isolating drains shall be provided at suitable locations within the gas turbine with facihties for collection of the drainage and its subsequent removal. The packager shall provide access to the inlet plenum for compressor inlet bell mouth area inspection. When specified, the packager shall also provide a complete on-line washing system. The water wash system(s) shall be fully described in the proposal, including a system schematic. The packager shall provide operational procedures for the water wash system with the proposal. ,, 5.2.4.8 Anti-icing system

When site ambient temperatures are below 5 "C, the purchaser and pa~kager shall agree on the need and type of automatic anti-icing system. This maybe either at the front face of the filter or downstream of the filter stage(s). The effect on package performance shall be identified and quantified. The system selected may rely upon heating of the inlet combustion air or use of air-activated pulse-type filters. The packager may recommend the fitting and control of compressor air intake anti-icing to prevent ice build-up on the intake bell mouth and first-stage blading (see 6.10.3). 5.2.5 Exhaust system

When specified by the purchaser, a complete exhaust system shall be furnished consisting typically of the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) turbine-to-exhaust duct expansion joint; exhaust silenceh exhaust ducting; exhaust system structural supports; exhaust drains; stack,

27

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
The purchaser shall specify special design considerations, such as: g) h) i) j) insulation requirements for areas where personnel protection is required; exhaust system discharge flangeorientation, location and installed configuration;

pressure drop associated with equipment supplied by others, e.g. waste heat recovery units; emission sampling port(s).

The maximum allowable back-pressure, specified by the packager, shall be considered. For regenerative cycle gas turbines, the packager shall supply and prefit the regenerator, the necessary air piping and exhaust ducting between the gas turbine and regenerator, including all required expansion joints, supports, structures and necessary insulation and controls. The basic material for construction of the exhaust system shall be selected with suitable temperature- and corrosion-resistant material, taldng into account the turbhe operating cycle and site operating conditions. Components of the exhaust system shall be" connected for ease of installation and maintenance. components shall be furnished with suitable provisions for litlng. All

Acoustic and/or thermal insulation, whether externally or internally applied, shall be suitably captured to pFevent its deterioration over time when subjected to a normal exhaust system environment. The exhaust joints shall be constructed of metal or reinforced high-temperature fabric. Expansion joints shall be designed to prevent undue flutter, joint deterioration or pressure drop. The fabric shall be replaceable without removal of major components. Where not restricted by size, access shall be provided in the exhaust system to allow for cleaning and inspection of the exhaust system. If required, structural supports shall be furnished for the portion of the exhaust system provided by the packager. These supports shall be designed to allow for thermal growth and to reduce duct loads at the gas' turbine flanges to within the manufacturer's specified limits. The ducting and supports shall be designed to remain stationa~ when duct sections near the gas turbine are removed to provide access for gas turbine maintenance. 5.2.6 "5.2.6.1 Piping -General

The packager shall furnish all piping systems, including mounted appurtenances, located within the confines of the main unit's base area, any oil console base area, or any auxiliary base area. The piping shall terminate with connections at the edge of the base. Unless otherwise specified, the purchaser shall furnish only interconnecting piping between equipment groupings and off-base facilities. The design of piping systems shall achieve the following: a) proper support and protection to prevent damage maintenance; from vibration or from shipment, operation and

b) c)

proper flexibility and normal accessibility for operation, maintenance, and thorough cleaning; installation in a neat and orderly arrangement adapted to the contours of the machine without obstructing access openings; elimination of air pockets by the use of valved vents or non-accumulating piping arrangements; complete drainage through low points without disassembly of piping.

d) e)

28

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
Piping systems furnished by the packager shall be fabricated, installed in the shop, and properly supported. Welding shall be performed by operators in accordance with procedures specified in Section IX of the ASME

Boilerand Pressure Vessel CQde,-orrelevant internationalor national standards given in Annex B.
5.2.6.2 `Oil piping

Gravity oil return piping shall be sized to run no more than half full when flowing and shall be arranged-to ensure good drainage (recognizing the possibility of foaming conditions). Horizontal runs shall slope continuously towards the reservoir. If possible, not more than one lateral in any transverse plane should enter the drain headers at a 45" angle in the direction of flow. Pressure piping downstream of oil filters shall be free from internal obstructions that could accumulate dirt. Unless otherwise specified, the material for all piping downstream of the oil filter shall be stainless steel. 5.2.6.3 Instrument piping and tubing

The packager shall supply all necessary piping, valves and fittings for instruments and instrument panels. Separate secondary block and bleed-type isolating valves are required for each instrument on a common connection. Where a pressure gauge is to be used for testing pressure alarm or shutdown switches, connections according to national or purchaser's safety regulations are required for the pressure gauge and switches. Unless otherwise specified, control-air and instrument tubing shall be of stainless steel. !5.2.6.4 Steam or water injection piping system injection into

.Unless otherwise specified, piping, fittings, valves and tubing materials for steam/water combustion systems shall be of stainless steel. 5.2.6.5 Process piping

The extent of the process pi@ng to be supplied by the packager shall be specified by the purchaser. When specified, the packager shall review all piping, appurtenances (intercoolers, aftercoolers, separators, knockout drums, air-intake filters and expansion joints), and vessels connected immediately upstream and downstream of the equipment components and their supports. The purchaser and packager shall agree on the scope of this review. 52.7 Oil systems

Unless otherwise specified, the oil system required for the drive train components (gas turbine, main load drive gear and driven equipment) shall preferably be integrated into the gas turbine and/or driven equipment package. When any international or national standard is applied, the extent of compliance shall be mutually agreed upon between the purchaser and packager. The oil system may be a single common system or two separate systems. One of the two systems may be dedicated to an aeroderivative gas turbine or any other component which uses a synthetic lubricant. Synthetic and mineral oil systems, including vents and drains, shall be segregated. A mineral oil based system may be used to supply the compressor sealing requirements (if applicable) with approval of the purchaser. The packager shall provide a complete description of the oil systems in the proposal, including schematic diagrams and lists of materials.

29

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Unless otherwise specified, a pressurized oil system(s) shall be furnished to supply oil at a suitable pressure or pressures, as applicable, to the following: a) b) c) d) e) the bearings of the driver and of the driven equipment (including any gear); the continuously lubricated couplings; the governing and control-oil system; the seal-oil system; the hydraulic oil system for hydraulic starter(s) when required.

Where oil is supplied from a common system to two or more machines (such as a compressor, a gear and a turbine), the characteristics of the oil shall be specified on the "data sheets by the packager. The packager shall ensure that the specified oil meets the requirements of the different m lchines. When the usual lubricant employed in a common oil system is a hydrocarbon oil, the oil shall correspond to ISO viscosity grade 32,46 or 68, as specified in ISO 3448. Pressure lubrication systems shall typically consist of the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) a supply and return system; an oil cooler (when required); a full flow (nominal) filter; a low lube-oil pressure shutdown; steel oil-containing pressure components; a main oil pump, full capacity, separately driven, and automatically controlled when the package main oil pump is not shaft driven; standby (spare) pumps; a prelube/postlube/cool-down lubrication system when required; a lubrication system capable of safe coast down in the event of loss of a.c. current; instrumentation to indicate operating parameters such as temperature or pressure. Fuel system General

g) h) i) j)

5.2:8 5.2.8.1

The packager shall supply the system for receiving precompressed, superheated (if necessary) and filtered fuel from the purchaser. The interface between the -purchaser's and the packager's supply shall be agreed upon. The fuel system shall be operable with any specified and agreed upon fuel(s). When specified, the packager shall review the purchaser's fuel system. NOTE The purchaser may specify a day tank for liquid fuel operation to allow stati-up and sustahed operation for a

reasonable period of time.

The purchaser and packager shall mutually agree on the type, grade, composition, range of lower heating values, temperature(s), delivery pressure(s) and contaminants of the proposed fuel in the inquiry specification.

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
The contaminantslikely to be found in fuels depend on the kind of fuel involved, such as pipeline natural gas and producer gas. Some of the contaminants that are likely to be found include: a) b) c) d) e) f) water and gas hydrates; sand, iron oxides and other solids; naphthalene; hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, sulfur trioxide and total sulfun alkali metals; chlorides, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide.

Concentrations of hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, sutfur trioxide, total sulfur, alkali metals, chlorides, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide are corrosive agents that will cause elevated temperature corrosion of turbine nozzles and blading materials and ambient temperature corrosion of fuel control valves and systems. The total sulfur content shall be considered and the temperatures at any point in the exhaust system must be above the acid dewpoint (approximately 150 "C) in order to prevent the formation of sulfurous and sulfuric acid which will accelerate corrosion and reduce component life. The ignition system shall include an ignition transformer and igniter plugs. Ignition shall be automatically deenergized and fuel flow stopped if the gas turbine fails to establish combustion. Fuel distribution piping and tubing shall be of stainless steel. The use of flexible hoses shall be minimized.and, when used, limited to locations where relative movements must be accommodated. All fuel hoses shall be made of stainless steel and covered with abrasion-resistant braiding. 5.2.8.2 5.2.8.2.1 Gaseous fuel ., General

The packager shall advise the purchaser of maximum/minimum fuel temperatures and pressures required at the packagets fuel gas inlet connection. The maximum temperature is set by the gas turbine fuel system design (e.g. seals, brackets, valves and instrumentation). The minimum temperature is set primarily by a specif~d margin above the dewpoint of the fuel gas and may be limited in extreme cases by the gas turbine fuel system design. As the dewpoint cannot be consistently measured, the packager and purchaser shall mutually agree on a gas analysis as a basis for the dewpoint calculation. A safety margin of typically 20 `C to 30 "C is required. The pressure is set by a specified margin above the gas turbine pressure ratio, which is a function of the particular gas turbine ambient temperature load (base or peak) and site elevation. This margin is influenced by the pressure drop of valves, pipings, filters, etc. Gas shall be free of liquids and solids at the purchaser's connection to the package. Special provisions by the purchasers, such as separators or knockout drums, may be required to eliminate condensate in situations where condensation could occur. Also liquid hydrocarbons shall be eliminated. 5.2.8.2.2 Net specific energy

The range of net s~ecific ener!ay of each gas shall be s~ecified by the purchaser, For variations of Wobbe index of-moFe than"5 Yo, the ra~- of change-shall be specified by the purchaser as special equipment may be required. 5.2.8.2.3 Fuel.gas system

A gaseous fuel system shall typically include the following: a) b) Y-type fuel strainer(s); necessary instrumentation;

31

IS 15666 (Patt 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
c) a manifoldand nozzles;

d)

two fuel shut-offvalves with an intermediate vent valve for automatic operation and system purging prior to starting; a fuel controlvalve;
a fuel gas pressure regulator, if required.

e)
f)

When specified, a fuel bypass valve and vent valve for purging the fuel gas line shall be provided. If the fuel gas pressure required by the packager is higher than that available, a fuel gas compression system shall be furnished by the packager when specified by the purchaser. The packager shall state the maximum allowable fuel gas temperature supplied by the purchaser. 5.2.8.3 Liquid fuei

A liquid fuel system shall typically include the following: a) b) c) d) e) f) 9) h) i) duplex fuel filters with a continuous flow transfer valve; fuel charge pump; atomizing air compressor (if required by the packager); two fuel shut-off valves for automatic operation; necessafy instrumentation; fuel control valve;
,!

fuel flow dividers, if required; fuel nozzles and manifold; draining facilities.

For dual fuel engines where the principal fuel is gas, a single fuel filter may suffice. To prevent coking and plugging, the packager's design shall include facilities to purge or drain liquid fuel from the fuel manifold system. Unless agreed otherwise, dual fuel filters shalt be accessible and capable of being cleaned while in operation. The transfer valve shall have a carbon-steel or stainless-steel body with stainless-steel plugs and plug-jacking devices. 5.2.8.4 Duai fuei operation

When specified, the gas turbine should preferably be provided with the necessary equipment to permit normal (starting and continuous) operation on any of the fuels; i.e., liquid/natural gas, liquid/liquid or gas/gas. The dual fuel system shall provide the capability of automatic transfer from one fuel source to another while under full or part load operation. When operating on gas fuel, the liquid fuel lines, nozzles, manifolds, etc. shall be prevented from plugging, coking or overheating either by continuously purging or other mearrs. The packager shall provide a project-specific flow diagram, complete with a bill of material and a written technical description of the dual fuel system, with the proposal. Water/steam injection requirements during fuel transfer shall be stated in the technical description (see Annex A, Table A.4).

32

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
5.2.8.5 Water/steam injection operation

The water/steam injection system shall be capable of providing the specified power augmentation or specified levels of NOX and CO suppression. The packager shall provide a project-specific flow diagram, complete with a bill of material and a written technical description of the water/steam injection system, with the proposal (see Annex A, Table A.4).

Water/steam qualityand supply requirementsshall be stated in the proposal(see Annex A, Table A.4).
5.2.8.6 DLE combustion

When specified, the gas turbine shall be provided with a DLE combustion system to suppress emissions of NOX and CO. The purchaser shall specify whether dual fuel capability is required and whether dry-dry or drywet mode is acceptable. 5.2.9 Electrical systems such as those used for motors, heaters and

The characteristics of the electrical power supplies, instrumentation, shall be specified by the purchaser.

Electrical controls may be either a.c. or d.c. and shall be described in the packager's proposal. The purchaser shall specify whether the d.c. power supply is to be provided by the packager. When a.c. power is specified, an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) shall be provided. The purchaser shall specify whether the UPS is to be provided by the packager. When specified, the control system shall be designed to maintain operation and unit protection for a period to be stated by the purchaser in the event of interruption in the utility a.c. supply. Power and control wiring within the confines of the baseplate shall be resistant to oil, heat, moisture and abrasion. Protection relevant cabling shall be fire resistant to ensure the safe shutdown of the unit. Stranded conductors shall be used within the confines of the baseplate and in other areas subject to vibration: Thermocouple and control panel ribbon cable wiring may be solid conductors. The wiring system shall be suitable for the environmental conditions specified, Earthing systems shall be provided as well as suitable plugs and sockets. Unless otherwise specified, all leads on terminal strips, switches and instruments shall be permanently tagged for identification. To facilitate maintenance, clearance shall be provided for all energized parts (such as terminal blocks and relays) on turbine and auxiliary equipment. Electrical materials, including insulation, shall be as corrosion resistant and non-hydroscopic as possible (see 5.1 .3). When a tropical location is specified, materials shall be given the treatments specified below. a) b) Parts (such as coils and windings) shall be protected from fungus attack. Unpainted surfaces shall be protected from corrosion by plating or other suitable coating.

Control, instrumentation and power wiring (including temperature element leads) within the limits of the baseplate shall be either steel wire armored or installed in rigid metallic conduits and boxes as specified by the purchaser, properly supported to minimize vibration and isolated or shielded to prevent electromagnetic interference. Conduits may terminate (and, in the case of temperature element heads, shall terminate) with a liquid-tight flexible metallic conduit or explosion-proof ftexible fittings (as applicable to the area classification). All flexible conduit shall be long enough to permit access to the unit for maintenance without removal of the conduit. Steel wire armored cabling shall be suitably glanded through junction box penetrations.

33

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004 6
6.1 6.1.1

Control and instrumentation
Control General systems

The gas turbine power plant shall be provided with a cmntrol system to enable the operator to sequence the gas turbine and its load device through its duty cycle (start-up, loading, operation, shutdown and stand-by), The system shall also provide protection for the equipment via alarm and trip functions, and shall, where specified by the purchaser, provide information to the operator for condition monitoring. Control of ancillary systems such as exhaust reduction emissions systems, plant auxiliaries and combined cycle shall, where specified by the purchaser, be included. Where the control equipment has to meet national standards, it shall be the responsibility of the purchaser to advise the packager of the latest relevant standards. 6.1.2 Control and protection systems

Turbine control and protection systems shall be designed as "fail safe" unless otherwise agreed between the purchaser and packager. Fail safe for the purposes of this specification, when applied to a digital control system, shall be as follows. a) Digital instrument

A digital input instrument (e.g. pressure switch) used to protect the gas turbine shall be designed as "normally open" and is then closed when the gas turbine is running and re-opened again on fault. b) Analog instrument circuit

An analog instrument (e.g. thermocouple input) used to protect the gas turbine, shall be continuously monitored for open circuit and input value "out of range" detection, Either state shall cause the control system to take appropriate action, depending on the criticality of the parameter monitored and the level of redundancy (if any), c) Digital control output circuit

A digital output (e.g. relay output) shall be arranged to be "energized to run" and electrical power failure shall cause all digital outputs to move the process to a safe state, d) Analog control output circuit

The device being controlled shall be continuously monitored-for position, directly or by inference; a position error shall cause the demand signal to be driven to its safe level. e) On-line testing of control and protection devices

Modern digital control systems normally have some degree of redundancy on critical circuits and/or provide continuous health monitoring of many instrument loops, e.g. thermocouple open circuit and out of range detection. The packager shall advise the purchaser of the available facilities. The final scope shall be by agreement between the purchaser and packager. f) On-line replacement of instruments and controls

When specified, all instruments and controls other than shutdown sensing devices shall be installed with sufficient valving to permit their replacement while the system is in operation. When isolation valves are provided for shutdown sensing devices, the packager shall provide means of locking the valves in the open position.

34

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.2 Starting

The starting control system, including any start requirements such as turning, should be fully automatic with a minimum -of manual intervention. The start sequence should be initiated from a single action up to minimum governed speed (or ready to synchronise in the case of a generating set). Start hold and release stages or dwells may be built into the sequence accoFding to the packager's design requirements and the purchaser's operational requirements (see 4.3.3,4 .5.5,4,7.3.1 and 5.2.1). 6.3 Loading

Subsequent loading of the set maybe manual, or automatic up to demanded power level, as specified by the purchaser. Manual operation requires the operator to raise the output to the desired set point. Automatic loading is when the output is automatically increased to the set point without manual intervention. Automatic loading may directly follow the starting sequence without any additional action of the operator. In any mode of loading, periods of dwell at specific outputs maybe introduced to meet warm-up requirements. Where a generator requires synchronizing to a particular system prior to loading, this may be achieved by manual or automatic means, as specified by the purchaser. 6.4 6.4.1 -Unioading General and shutdown

This may be achieved by manual, semi-automatic or automatic means, as specified by the purchaser, Manual operation requires the operator to perform or initiate each step. Semi-automatic requires the operator to perform some funtilon such as unloading manually while other parts of the sequence are automatic. Automatic operation is carried out from a single operator command. In each case, however, the principal sequence of operations shall be as follows. ., 6.4.2 Controlled shutdowns: Generator drives

The sequence shall be: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) 6.4.3 controlled unloading to nominal zero output whilst remaining synchronized; opening the circuit breaker reduction to idling speed and period of cooling under fired conditions (where applicable); fuel cut-off and shutdown of auxiliaries not required for turning; turning period, (if necessary); shutdown of remaining auxiliaries, for example lubricating oil pumps, after-gas turbine cool down; reset to starting conditions. Controlled stop: Mechanical-drives

The sequence shail.be: a) b) c) controlled unioading to minimum ioad conditions, or to idling speed; cmling period (where applicable); fuel cutd followed by shutdown of auxiliaries not required for turning;

"35

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1S0 3977-3:2004
d) e) f) 6.4.4 6.4.4.1 turning period, (if necessary); shutdown of remaining auxiliaries, for example lubricating oil pumps; reset to starting conditions. Emergency protection General system

The emergency protection system shall protect the gas turbine and connected equipment against hazards or impending damage and shall, where appropriate, detect and operate independently of the governor. In order to maximize the life of the gas turbine, under certain circumstances, it may not always be necessary to immediately execute an emergency stop, by tripping to minimum self-sustaining speed or minimum load as follows. 6.4.4.2 Protective load shedding

Under certain fault conditions, the sequence may allow for the gas turbine to go to minimum load, no load (generator breaker open) or trip to self-sustaining speed for a period of time, allowing for cooling before the fuel is shut off automatically and the gas turbine is shut down. The packager shall advise the purchaser when this is the case. Under certain fault conditions, mutually agreed between the purchaser and packager, the sequence may allow for the gas turbine to go to a partial load for a period allowing the hult time to correct itself. "Failing this, the fuel is shut off automatically and the gas turbine is shut down. Assuming the fault clears, the set may be reloaded automatically or manually. The requirement to decelerate to minimum load or trip to minimum self-sustaining speed is set by the core gas turbine manufacturer, but the feature may be of interest when designing the process for the driven unit or hqat recovery systems to reduce the number of potential full shutdowns, The application shall be agreed between the purchaser and packager. 6.4.4.3 Emergency shutdown

Emergency shutdown may be manually initiated but shall occur automatically on operation of applicable gas turbine/process plant protection devices as agreed with the purchaser. The system shall operate directly on the fuel shut-off valve to stop the gas turbine fuel supply. Following emergency shutdown, normal turning and shutdown sequences, as appropriate, shall subsequently take place. An automatic restart shall not be possible without a manual reset unless mutually agreed between the packager and purchaser and supported by the package safety assessment. 6.4.5 Fire, gas detection and ventilation failure shutdown

Should a serious fault `be detected, such as fire, gas leakage at trip level, or ventilation failure, shutdown shall occur automatically as a result of the function of automatic detection devices, The system shall operate directly on the fuel shut off and vent valves. The gas turbine shall be shut down immediately without ramping to minimum load or cooling period. In the case of gas detection at an enclosure ventilationoutlet (but not the inlet), the ventilation fans shall be retained on to purge remaining gas from the enclosure. If an unacceptable level of explosive atmosphere is detected at a ventilation inlet, the ventilation fans shall be tripped where applicable as the source is most probably external to the enclosure, and shutdown of the gas turbine shall occur.

36

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.4.6 Shutdown of generator sets

For electricgeneration, means shall be provided,either on the gas turbine or .on the generator, for prevention of motoring of the generator when the fuel stop valve is closed. Where synchronous compensation or generator starting is specified, these requirements maybe operationally over-ridden.
-6.4.7 Shutdown of mechanical drive sets

Automatic means shall be provided upon shutdown for isolating the driven equipment from the system it supplies in order to prevent rotation or reverse flow. 6.5 6.5.1 Ventilation and purging

Turbine enclosure

Ventilation air movement should be monitored and interlocked with the automatic start sequence. Only after a satisfactory purge of the enclosure where no unacceptable level of explosive atmosphere has been detected shall the automatic start sequence continue. Unless national regulations state otherwise, the purging cycle shall displace normally at least three times the volume of the enclosure before the starting sequence is allowed to proceed. 6.5.2 Gas turbine purging

The starting control system shall provide an automatic turbine purge period of sufficient duration to ensure safe operation of the gas turbine and down stream components. Unless national regulations state otherwise, the purging cycle shall displace normally at least three times the volume of the entire exhaust system (including the stack) before firing the unit. In cases where alternative precautions are taken, this may not be necessary. .,, , Where large exhaust system volumes lead to excessive purge times, reduced cycle times may be agreed betweemthe.parties involved. 6.5.3 Special precautions

Where liquid fuels of a highly volatile nature are used, such as naphtha or gases with a density greater than air, special precautions may be necessary (see 5.2.3.4). These shall include, but are not limited to, automatically operated fuel dump valves, segregation of fuel handling equipment, special hazardous atmosphere detectors and liquid detectors. 6.6 6.6.1 Fuel control General

The fuel supply shall be automatically controlled during starting and running so as to maintain the gas turbine within its safe operating envelope and to maximize the life of the machine. Where necessary to meet environmental limits for emissions, the fuel supply shall also be controlled to meet combustion design criteria. 6.6.2 Dual fuel system operation

When specified by the purchaser, the control system shall be capable of controlling the gas turbine on gas fuel(s) and/or liquid fuel(s) and shall allow for automatic (hi-directional) changeover throughout the full operating power range. Any restrictions on transient changes in speed or load shall be advised to the purchaser by the packager. Initiation of the transfer shall be a signal provided by the purchaser.

37

IS 15666 (Part 3j: 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.6.3 Ei-fuel operation

When specified by the purchaser, the controi system shall be capable of proportionally controlling each fuel in parallel to maximize the use of the primary fuel according to availability. The packager shali advise the purchaser of any Iimitatiins with regard to the minimum percentage for each fuel. 6.6.4 Low specific energy gas operation

Where the gas turbhe is to be designed to run on very low specific energy gasses, such as some landfill or coal derived gases, it maybe necessary to start the unit on liquid fuel or naturai gas from other sources, which

shail be made available by the purchaser.It may also be necessary to continuouslypilot on one of these fueis to preventthe combustionflame from blow out on transientload changes.
6.6.5 Variabie specific energy gas fuei controi

Where specified by the purchaser, the control system shall be capable of automatically compensating for varying specific energy gas suppiy, maintaining stable operation over the full load range.

a

The purchaser shall specify the range of specific energy and Wobbe index of the proposed gas supply, which shall be confirmed as acceptable by the packager. 6.6.6 6.6.6.1 Fuei shut-off (gas and iiquid fuei) Fuei shut-off biock vaiving

in addition to the governor fuei valve(s), two independent means shall be provided to shut off ail gas fuel to the gas turbine on any shutdown condition and shall not open until all permissible firing conditions have been satisfied. If the gas governor fuel valve is of a tight shut-off design, and fail safe closed, this may be accepted as one of the shut-offs. In the case of liquid fuel operation, the shutdown of the fuel pump, if it is of a positive displacement design, may be considered as one means when backed up by a shut-off vaive. 6.6.6.2 Vent vaiving

For gaseous fuels, appropriate vent valve(s) shall be used to reduce the risk of leakage into the gas turbine when the gas turbine is shut down.
6.6.6.3 Biock and vent vaiving (gas turbine enclosures)

For installation where the gas turbine is located in an enclosure and gaseous fuels are used, appropriate biock and vent valve@) shall be used to reduce the risk of leakage into the enclosure when the gas turbine is shut down and ventilation fans are not running. The requirement of 6.6.6.2 and 6.6.6.3 may be met using common equipment providing the primary block valve is located outside the enclosure. 6.7 6.7.1 Governing and limiting

Speed demand

The control system shail provide for both manual and automatic speed demand via an auto/manual selector. The speed range shall be the same for both and designed for bumpless transfer at any point after achieving self sustaining speed.

38

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 Iso 3977-3:2004
a) Constant speed (generator set applications)

Unless othetwise agreed between the purchaser and packager, no-load speed shall be adjustable, while running, within the range of 95 `Yoto 105 YOof the rated speed. The speed changer, when remotely operated, shall be compatible with other speed changers on units running in parallel. The rate of load reduction from maximum site rated load to zero load shall be agreed between the purchaser and packager. b) Variable speed (pump and compressor drive applications)

Where the pump or compressor is required to run at varying speeds to meet process demand, the control system shall be capable of accepting an input from the process controller to regulate turbine speed demand over an output shaft operating speed range as specified by the purchaser. 6.7.2 6.7.2.1 Speed control Governor transient performance (single-shaft gas turbine generator set applications)

The governor shall limit the output speed at 105% of the rated speed under all conditions of steady state. The governor systems for electric generator drive shall prevent the gas turbine from reaching the gas turbhe trip speed after an instantaneous loss of maximum potential load. This assumes the gas turbine is operating under conditions within the limits of capability set by specified ambient conditions with design fuel pressure, temperature and fuel specific energy, and with the speed changer set and controlling at the.rated speed. 6.7.2.2 Governor transient performance (twin-shaft gas turbine generator set applications)

The speed governor shall control the -speed rise of the gas turbine and/or power turbine to a value which will permit a restart without need for an inspection of the gas turbine after shedding of maximum potential load (see 4.3.2). The packager shall advise the purchaser of the maximum single step load that maybe applied to the unit. NOTE 6.7.2.3 In the case of a free power turbine,this can be significantlylees than 100 % load due to relative low inertia. Dead band ~`'

The dead band at rated speed and at any power output up to and including. the maximum power output shall not exceed 0,1 `Yoof the rated speed. 6.7.3 6.7.3.1 Speed control stability Capability

The speed governing system controlling the fuel rate for the gas turbine operating between zero and its maximum power, shall be capable of stable control of a) b) the speed of the gas turbine when the driven equipment is operated in isolation; the fuel energy input to the gas turbine when the driven equipment is operating in parallel with other driven equipment. System stability

6.7.3.2

The system shall be considered stable under the following conditions. a) The driven equipment is operated and under sustained load demand, provided that the magnitude of the sustained oscillations of turbine speed produced by the speed governing system and fuel control system does not exceed a specified percentage of the rated speed (e.g. 0,12% to 0,25 % of rated speed).

39

IS 15666 (Part 3):-2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
b) The magnitude of the sustained oscillations of energy input produced by the speed governing system and fuel control system does not produce a change in output exceeding & 2 `?(oof the rated output when the driven equipment is operated at rated speed in parallel with other driven equipment at constant speed and under sistained load. Governor fuel valve

6.7.4

The fuel governor valve shall return to the closed or minimum position after any turbine shutdown condition (see 6.6.6.1). 6.7.5 Temperature limiting

The fuel control system shall include an override system to prevent exceeding the gas turbine rated firing temperature, or maximum gas generator speed, whichever is-the more stringent limit. 6.7.6 Temperature limit stability

The temperature control and fuel control systems shall be capable of reliably controlling the temperatures of the gas turbine, when the gas turbine is operating on temperature control, at the set limit for the ambient conditions existing, when the driven equipment is operating in parallel with other driven equipment. The temperature Iimiting.or control system and fuel control system shall be considered stable when the driven equipment is operating in parallel with other driven equipment at constant speed, provided the magnitude of the sustained oscillation of turbine fuel energy input produced by the temperature limiting or control system and the fuel control system does not produce a change in output exceeding 6 % of the rated power output. 6.7.7 Other limits

Other control limits may be applied to the fuel control system as required by the packager. Limits may be applied, for example, to the LP or HP spools of a gas generator speed, power turbine speed, Compressor delivery, temperature or pressure and power turbine exit temperature. "6.8 6.&1 Emission General control

The gas turbine control system shall incorporate all the functions to sequence, monitor and control the combustion process to meet the specified emissions Ievets using the specified emissions control technique (DLE, water or steam injection). 6.8.2 Emission monitoring

To satisfy the requirements of some national regulations, it maybe necessary to provide emission monitoring systems, These may be based on measurements (continuous or intermittent) or on predictive calculations. 6.9 6.9.1 Overspeed General protection system unless it can be shown that protection

Each separate shat? shall be fitted with an overspeed dangerous overspeeding is not aerodynamically possible.

The overspeed protedlon system, if electronic, shall employ a minimum of two independent sensors and circuits.

40

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.9.2 Overspeed settings

The main function of the overspeed protection system is to cause the fuel to be cut off near the burner(s) by means which are independent of the main governor valve(s). The overspeed setting on a single-shaft generator set shall not be set above 110 % of the synchronous speed. For twin-shafl (free power turbine) generating sets, the setting shall exceed the speed resulting from sudden loss of maximum potential power with a margin that-avoids spurious trips but does not result in overstressing of the rotor(s). For twin-shaft (free power turbine) mechanical drive sets, the setting shall be 5 Y. above the maximum continuous speed. NOTE 6.9.3 See 4.3.2. Overspeed testing

Provision shall be made for testing of the overspeed trip. This may be manual or automatic operation, and may or may not require interruption of normal operation. The design shall be agreed between the purchaser and packager. 6.9.4 Additional protection

Gas turtines with `separate power twbhes or with heat-exchangers may.require additional protetilon against overspeeding due to stored heat or large stored volumes of high pressure air, or both. Such protection may, for example, take the form of blow-off valves actuated by the main governor or overspeed trip, or both. 6.10 6.10.1

Protectionsystems
,, Flame monitoring

Direct or inferred (indirect) flame failure sensing shall be provided to monitor the presence of a combustion flame at the appropriate point during the start cycle and subsequently during normal operation. Should the burner(s) fail to light within a safe time period, or extinguish while running, the fuel supply shall be shut off. Unless otherwise agreed between the pumhaser and packager, the above shall be considered a firm requirement. E1O.2 Bearing temperature

Gas turbines with main shaft bearings of the hydrodynamic type shall be equipped with temperature monitoring, which shall measure the bearing metal and/or return-oil temperatures, and actuate alarms andlor shutdowns should an abnormal temperature be detected. 6.10.3 Air intake icing The packager shall install the necessary equipment .to automatically control the action of any-anti-icing system ffled to the gas tuibine inlet air filtration system or intake bellmouttdfirst-stage blading (see 5.2.4.8). 6.10.4 Air intake pressure drop The intake system shall be instrumented to provide indication of, and actuate atann and/or trips on, high differential pressure between the ambient and intake flange, as agreed between the purchaser and packager.

41

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.10.5 Exhaust system back pressure

Where exhaust heat is to be utilized directly or recovered through the use of-a waste heat recovery unit, the packager shall advise the maximum acceptable total system back pressure. To protect the gas turbine from excessive back pressure, fault monitoring shall be provided; either damper position or pressure monitoring maybe used as agreed between the packager and purchaser. In all cases, the packager shall ensure that the method used is fast enough to prevent damage to the gas turbine or system components. 6.10.6 Vibration and axial position monitoring 6.10.6.1 General

A vibration and axial position monitoring system shall be supplied to warn the operator of changing vibration levels or shaft axial position, and to trip the machine if they change by an unacceptable value. NOTE 6.10.6.2 The purchasermay specify a system in accordancewithAPI 670. Aeroderivative gas turbines

Case-mounted seismic acceleration sensors (integrated to read velocity) are normally fitted. If the gas turbine is of a multispod design, it may be necessary to employ a monitoring system with tracking filters to isolate spool specific frequencies. Shall axial position monitoring is not ftied to this type of gas turbine. 6.10.6.3 Industrial gas turbines

Industrial gas turbines shall be fitted with shaft displacement vibration probes and axial position indicators. The fhent of casing mounted acceleratiordvelocity sensora may be considered, providing the packager can demonstrate satisfacto~ correlation between his measured acceptance levels and the absence of `long-term damage (see 4.7.2.2). The final selection shall be as agreed between the purchaser and packager. 6.10.6.4 Gearboxes and driven units

The design and scope of supply for vibration monitoring on gearboxes and driven units shall be agreed between the purchaser and packager. 6.10.7 Fire detection and protection

Where the gas turbine is installed in an enclosure, suitable means shall be provided to monitor for the outbreak of fire within the enclosure. The fire suppression system and fire detection system shall be designed a) b) to satisfy the national or regional requirements, and in accordance with the mutual agreement between the purchaser and packager.

Rate-compensated thermal detection shall be considered the minimum level of detection. Additional levels of detection, such as optical (ultraviolet, infrared) or smoke, shall be specified by the purchaser. All fire suppression and detection devices utilized within the enclosure shall be designed throughout the entire range of operational service conditions encountered within the enclosure. HaIon or other ozonedepleting agents shall not be used for fire suppression. to operate

The shutdown sequence shall be treated as in 6.4.5 unless otherwise agreed between the purchaser and packager. The shutdown sequence shall include the isolation of the ventilation fans, closing of fire dampers and the release of extinguishant to bring the fire under control.

42

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
The fire extinguishant shall be automatically released unless agreed otherwise between the purchaser and packager. In the case of automatic release, a delay maybe necessary after an alarm to warn personnel of the situation. When C02 is used as a fire extinguishant, a warning and a delay is required.
A means shall be provided to safely isolate the release during maintenance and entry into the enclosure.

NOTE 1

Isolation for entry may not be required if non-toxic or non-asphyxiant extinguishant is used.

A manual actuation system shall be provided. A manual release station shall be located externally on each side of the enclosure. Following afire in the enclosure, the extinguishant shall be sustained at an adequate level for a period of time to allow cool down of the gas turbine to a level below self ignition of any flammable fluid that maybe present in the enclosure. For large heavyduty gas turbines this is not possible due to excessive need of extinguishant. in these cases, the sufficient extinguishant level shall be kept until the engine is at law speed (typically 15 min to 30 rein). Other measures like supervision and foam application have to be prepared to prevent re-ignition. NOTE 2
An egreement with the local fire marshal or authorities is recommended.

NOTE 3 The purchaser may specify any special design considerations to be included in the suppression system, including the specificfire suppressionmedium.

6.10.8 Gas detection
A gas detection system shall be provided where

a) b)

the gas turbine

is gas fuelled,

and/or

when the gas turbine is operating in a hazardous area,
Additional fira explosion risks relating to the driven unit should be considered and properly addressed. `"

NOTE

Suitable means shall be provided to monitor for gas leaks entering or within the enclosure, and for alarm and shutdown at appropriate concentrations. The shutdown shall be treated as in 6.4.4. In an environment where gas can occur in the atmosphere (gas plants, LPG plants, etc.) a gas detector should be placed at the air intake of the gas turbine. The philosophy of initiation and warning and shutdown levels for the gas detector(s) shall either a) b) satisfy local or national regulations, or be agreed between the.purchaser and packager.

Gas detectors shall monitor for gas leakage and shall be arranged so that their efficiency is not impaired by adverse air flow, i.e. by a high airdemand for heat removal, When the gas alarm system detects a specified percentage [typically in the range of 5 % to 10 % at the vent outlet of the lower explosive limit (LEL)], it shall give an alarm. When the gas alarm system detects a specified higher percentage (typically in the range of 10% to 25 % of the LEL at the vent outlet), the gas turbine should trip, as described in 6.4.5. 6.10.9 Lubrication

The control system shall provide for full automatic control, monitoring and protection as specified by the packager. This shall cover the following conditions: a) b) prestart priming, to establish minimum lubricating oil pressure; starting, changeover of pumps as necessary;

43

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 ISO 3977-3:2004
c) d) e) running, continuous monitoring of supply pressures and temperatures; shutdown, including the starting of any emergency oil pumps; any post-shutdown cool-down period.

The gas turbine supply oil temperature or bearing differential temperature shall be continuously monitored for operation within safe limits as specified by the packager. 6.10.10 Exhaust temperature loading

An array of temperature detectors shall be provided to monitor the temperature of the gas turbine exhaust or the temperature before a separate power turbine. Sufficient detectors shall"be provided to detect asymmetric failure or deterioration of the combustion system or turbine nozzles. An alarm shall be initiated if an abnormal temperature deviation is detected. When higher deviation is specified, deloading, shutdown or trip shall occur. Appropriate action should be taken in accordance with 6.4.4. 6.11 Compressor

wash system

A compressor on-line and/or off-line wash system with manual or automatic control may be supplied as

recommended by the packager or specified by the purchaser (see 5.2.4.7). In the case of automatic controi, the control system shail provide the automatic ~equence of the cycle(s) and ali the necessary safety interlocks and overrides to prevent improper use.

6.12 Controlsystemconsiderations
6.12.1 Architecture 6.12.1.1 (digitai systems) .,, , Simpiex systems

Where the controlsystem reliabilityfigures can be shown to be better than the gas turbine and in line w"th the
purchasers requirements, a simplex control and instrumentation system shall be considered acceptable. A

simplex system shall employ adequate safeguards ("watchdogs")to monitor for a processor hardware or
software failure and take necessa~ 6.12.1.2 Fauit toierant systems executive action to force the outputs to a safe state or watchdog trip.

Where it is vitally important that unscheduled shutdowns are kept to a minimum as specified by the purchaser, the control systems, power supplies, engine instruments and end devices may, as agreed between the purchaser and packager, be provided with up to triplicated hardware providing two out of three voting and online change-out of the offending control component or instrument where practical, 6.12.2 Man machine interfacing (MMi)

When specified by the purchaser, the control system shall provide the operator with a computer/monitor based display system, providing plant mimics, displays, performance information, trend information, and alarm and shutdown logs. 6.12.3 Aiarm and annunciation 6.12.3.1 Fauit shutdown

The control system shall employ a "first up lock out" shutdown sequence, the output of which may be displayed on a conventional lamp box style annunciator or monitor system, as agreed between the purchaser and packager. The fault output annunciation shall not clear itself until manually reset.

44

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.12.3.2 Fault warning

The control system shall employ a warning annunciator to alert the operator of impending failure. The output shall clearly indicate the sequence in which the faults occur. The fault output annunciation shall not clear itself until manually accepted and the fault level has returned to normal. The alarm annunciator may be integrated with the shutdown annunciator. 6.12.3.3 Status information

The control system shall clearly indicate to the operator the status of the gas turbine during start-up, running and shutdown, and shall advise the operator when a command input is required. Status information may be integrated into the fault warning and shutdown display. 6.12.3.4 Audible alarm

The control system shall be provided with audible panel alarms and outputs to drive a remote klaxcin when specified by the purchaser. 6.12.4 Recording of hours run and starts

The control system shall be provided with a means of recording the number of hours run and the number of starts made. The hours run may be segregated by the fuel used and in the form of normal and peak power as specified by the packager. 6.12.5 Indication of shaft speed and hot gas path temperature

The control system shall be provided with a permanently installed means of displaying turbine shaft speed(s) and hot gas path temperature(s) downstream of the combustor. The display may be in the form of analog or digital meters, or maybe agreed between the purchaser and packager, 6.12.6 Performance monitoring built into a monitor display system, as .,. ,

When specified by the purchaser, the control system shall provide the operator with adequate data to determine when compressor fouling has reached a level which requires that on-line or off-line washing be performed. 6.12.7 Trouble-shooting 6.12.7.1 aids

Controls and Instrumentation

Where specified by the purchaser, the control system shall be supplied with fault diagnostic capability to help identify instrument and control component faults. 6.12.7.2 Gas turbine

Where specified by the purchaser, the control system shall be supplied with fault diagnostic capability to help identify transient faults in the operation of the gas turbine. 6.12.8 Electromagnetic compatibility

The control panel shall be so designed and constructed that external electromagnetic radiation does not interfere with its operation and that any emissions are limited to the extent necessary for its operation. Where national regulations exist, the packager shall comply with these regulations,

45

IS 15666 (Patt 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.12.9 Spare termination The packager shall allow for 10% spare termination capacity, and adequate space for additional 1/0 circuit boards. This spare capacity may be used during the engineering of the project. The minimum amount of spare capacity remaining at the point of delivery shall be agreed between the purchaser and packager. 6.12.10 Control system power supplies

Where the purchaser desires to supply his own uninterruptible power supply systems, the packager shall advise on the voltage range and tolerance, and both static loading and inrush current conditions. 6.12.11 Internal control panel wiring

Internal control panel wiring shall be to the packager's standard, providing this complies with national standards as specified by the purchaser.

6.13 Controlpanel installation
Where the installation is to be carried out by the purchaser, the packager shall advise all special requirements with respect to earthing and cabling to maintain electromagnetic compatibility. The purchaser shall specify any special installation requirements with regard to dust, humidii, temperature and isolation from any source of vibration. water,

The purchaser shall specify the area classification for the location of the control panel and operator stations. The purchaser shall specify the location of the control panel with respect to the gas turbine, and shall also specify any additional operator stations (e.g. local to the machine, central control room). The purchaser shall also state the degree af control and monitoring required at each position.

.,
The packager shall advise the purchaser of any cable segregation requirements and the maximum cable length that the control panel may be mounted away from the gas turbine. 6.14 Operability and diagnostics

The gas turbine shall be adequately instrumented for ease of operation, maintenance and diagnosing of fault conditions as agreed between the purchaser and packager.

.If specified by the purchaser,

the packager shall offer a support sewice employing the use of telecommunications (modem interfaces) to aid in the identification of faults on gas turbines and their control systems, which require specialist diagnostic knowledge. 6.15 Data communications

The purchaser shall specify if any serial-communication facilities are required. The purchaser and packager shall agree about the protocols to be used, the scope of data-and control facilities over the link, data-transfer rates and time-tagging requirements.

6.16 Specialapplications
6.16.1 6.16.1.1 Dynamic positioning Emergency and marine propulsicm (marine propulslori)

and safety critical shutdown

Where gas turbines are being used for marine propulsion duty, emergency and safety critical shutdowns shall be kept to a minimum in line with the Classification Society's Rules and Regulatory Authori~s Requirements.

46

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
6.16.1.2 Marine survey authority requirements

The packager shall meet the Classification Society's Rules and Regulatory Authority's Requirements with respect to cetilfication for environment, vibration, and electromagnetic compatibility of the control panel. 6.16.2 Emergency power gas turbine generator sets

Where gas turbines are being used for emergency applications, defined as maintaining power under lifethreatening circumstances due to earthquake, fire or flOQd, the controls and instrumentation requirements specified in 6.1.2 e) to 6.15, excluding 6.9, maybe relaxed and the following shall take preference. a) National regulations

Where national regulations exist for the safe reliable operation of an emergency plant, the gas turbine control system shall be designed to meet these regulations, b) Quick starting/loading `

The requirement for a rapid, reliable start-up is of prime importance on emergency generator sets. The start sequence shall .be initiated `automatically from the detection of an emergency condition such as power failure in earthquake and fire-fighting situations and shall be designed to minimize the time required to start and load the set from cold. c) System protection considerations

The requirement for uninterrupted operation is of prime importance on emergency generator sets. The number of shutdown protection circuits shall be kept to a minimum and shall be designed to maximize availability during emergency conditions even though the gas turbine may be damaged by continued operation, d) Fault alarms/shutdowns . ,,

"To maintain uninterrupted operation, it is not unusual to only allow manual shutdown following a critical alarm annunciation; only extremely critical faults such as overspeed are allowed to automatically shut down the set.

47

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 ISO 3977-3:2004

Annex A
(informative) Data sheets

Table Al

-- Data sheets -- General
JOB No.

ITEM DATE
BY

SO 3977 DATA SHEETS

P.O. No.

INQUIRYNo. REVISION APPLICABLE TO ) FOR ) SITE
)

DATE AS BUILT

O

PROPOSAL

o

PURCHASE O UNIT
O O O

O

SERVICE ) GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION _ ) PACKAGER DRIVER MANUFACTURER DRIVEN EQUIPMENT TYPE ADITTIONAL DRIVEN EQUIPMEiNT WPE TYPE > OUTPUT REQUIRED 3 OPERATING SPEED RANGE REQUIRED >YCLE: O REGEN O SIMPLE

SERIAL No. NO. REQUIRED SEISMIC REQUIREMENTS MODEL MODEL MANUFACTURER MANUFACTURER _ MANUFACTURER _

SHOP ORDER SERIAL No. MODEL _ MODEL I -_ MODEL _

SERIAL No. _ SERIAL No. SERIAL No. ~

O

EXHAUST HEAT RECOVERY

lYPE OF GAS TURBINE O AlTENDED

+ + O

SINGLE SHAFT MULTI SHAFT UNATTENDED,,,

)UTY iOTE:

O CONTINUOUS O INTERMITTENT INFORMATION TO BE COMPLETED

O

STANDBY

OPERATION

O BY PURCHASER

BY PACKAGER

+ BYPACKAGER IF NOTBY PURCHASER

.OSSES
O SITE RATE NORMAL DUIY SITE MAX TEMP SITE MIN TEMP DRY BULB TEMP., "C REIATIVE HUMIDITY, % BAROMETER, kPa OUTPUT, kW (HP) (1) HEAT RATE, LHV, kJ/kW-H OUTPUT SHAFT SPEED, r/rein INLET AIR FLOW, kg/a INLET AIR SYSTEM, @, kPa FIRING TEMP., "C EXHAUST FLOW, kgls (1) EXHAUST SYSTEM, ~, kPa EXHAUST TEMP., "C :1) INCLUDING EFFECTS FOR 3 SEISMIC REQUIREMENTS O O O 10 INDOOR HEATED UNHEATED O O O OUTDOOR UNDER ROOF PARTIAL SIDES

Electrical

AREACLASSIFICATION
CUGRPIDIV

NON-HAZARDOUS GAS TURBINE AREA o GAS TURBINE ENCLOSURE o CONTROL PANEL o

II II
II

O MARINIZATION REQUIRED WINTERIZATION REQUIRE[ O TROPICALIZATION REQUIRED USUAL CONDITIONS: O DUST O FUMES O OTHERS

O STEAM O WATER INJECTION DRIVEN EQUIPMENT, SEE SEPARATE DATA SHEETS + EMISSION CONTROL + AUGMENTATION STEAM FLOW, kg/h WATER FLOW, US

o
O

SOUND powER LEVEL SOUND PRESSURE LEVE~_

dBA at 1 m

48

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Table A.1 (continued)
JOB No. ITEM DATE
No.

SO 3977 DATA SHEETS

P.O. No. INQUIRY

BY

REVISION DATE ?,,. ,., ,. . ,. :.). . . . ,., : GE~ERAL(continued] ,..... . ..- .,, .-. -'-',.-~=. * ;~#@~,~~;:,:~+;5 m "' EMIS$IONS (4:3.8) ~*., ,, . ~, ... ,* ,. . ) WEIGHT/DIMENSIONAL LIMITATIONS 0 NO, REQUIREMENTS ) SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS NO, EMITTED ) DOMESTIC O EXPORT O EXPT BOXING REQUIRED EMISSIONS REDUCTION METHOD (IF REQUIRED) ) OUTDOOR STORAGE MORE THAN 6 MONTH + WATER INJECTION + SCR ) OCEAN TRANSPORT PREPARATION TYPE + STEAM + DRY COMBUSTOR ) LIH SLINGWSPREADERS BY PACKAGER 4 OTHER O S0. REQUIREMENTS O SULFUR CONTENT OF FUEL SO=EMlllED (BASED ON STATED SULFUR CONTENT) _ CO REQUIREMENTS CO EMllTED O PARTICULATE REQUIREMENTS PARTICULATE EMITTED O UNBURNED HC REQUIREMENTS O APPLICABLE EMISSIONREGULATION ) ) MANUFACTURER'S STD. OTHER O

49

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Table A.2 -- Data sheets -- Utilities and connections
JOB No. P.O. No. ISO 3977.DATA SHEETS INQUIRY No. REVISION BY DATE ITEM DATE

O

UTILITY CONDITIONS AUX DRIVERS: kPa "c kPa -- "C -- kPa -- "C -- kPa -- "C kPa -- "C kPa -- "C ~ kPa -- "C _ -- HEATING: kPa -- "c kPa "c kPa -- `C kPa -- "C kPa -- "c kPa _ "C kPa -- "c

TOTAL UTILITY CONSUMPTION": COOLING WATER STEAM LEVEL STEAM, NORMAL STEAM, MAX. INSTRUMENT AIR MOTORS (AUXILIARIES) BAITERY CHARGES HEATERS PURGE kg/rein kPa

STEAM INLET MIN. NORM MAX. EXHAUST MIN. NORM INLET ,MIN. MAX,

-- -- -- -- ~ --

-- -- --

kpa

_ -- --

kPa

_ -- --

m3/min kW kW kW
m3/min

INLET MIN. NORM -- -- MAy. EXHAUST MIN. -- NORM -- -- MAX. ELECTRICITY (4.6.4} MOTORS VOLTAGE _ HERTZ PHASE

INJECTION: STARTING kPa kPa "c "c kPa -- "C `-kPa -- "C kPa `�C~kPa -- "C kPa -- "C kPa -- "C kPa -- "C -- kPa -- "C kPa -- "C -- kPa -- "C TURBINE AIR EXTRACTION REQUIRED CONTROL _ _ _ SHUTDOWN _ -- -- O O O O kg/rein MAXIMUM PRESSURE AVAILABLE @ kPa @ DISCHARGE TEMP COMPRESSOR STAGE EXTRACTED @

HEATING _

"c ,,

COOLING WATER TEMP INLET PRESS NORM -- MIN. RETURN -- TEMP INLET -- -- DESIGN WATER SOURCE "c kPa kpa "c MAX. RETURN DESIGN MAX. ALLOW AP -- MAX. RETURN "c "c kPa "c

NOTES:

INSTRUMENT AIR PRESSURE: kPa: MAX. ,. CONNECTION o SIZE NORMAL MIN.

FACING & RATING

POSITION

FIANGED OR STUDDED

MATING FLG & GASKET BY VENDOR

GAS VELOCITY In/s

INLET AIR EXHAUST GAS GAS FUEL SUPPLY STARTING AIR SUPPLY NO, SUPPRESSION WATER COOLING WATER NO, SUPPRESSION STEAM STARTING STEAM SUPPLY NOTES --

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Table A.3 -- Data sheets -- Accessory systems supplied by packager
ITEM DATE BY DATE

JOB No. P.O. No.

SO 3977 DATA SHEETS

INQUIRYNo.
REVISION

) )

GAS EXPANDER GAS TURBINE

O +

HYDRAULIC IC ENGINE O STARTER IS CLUTCHED kw

STARTER RATING SHA17 TURNING DEVICE REQUIRED MOTOR YPE dFR STEAMTURBINE tiFR MAX. STEAM FLOW (w rOTAUSTART 3 GASEXPANDER 4PPLICABLE SPECIFICATION MODEL MFR MAX. GAS FLOW <w kg TOTAUSTART D GAS ~R EXPANSION TURBINE MAX. MIN. RATING MODEL

D D O D O O O

TYPE OF FOUNDATION (5.2.2.1) SUITABLE FOR EPOXY GROUT (5.2.2.2) MULTIPLE BASEPLATE (5.2.2.3), SINGLE LEVELLING PADS/ARGETS O THERMAL tSOLATION COLUMN MOUNTING EXTERNAL EXCITING FORCES SUPPORT SYSTEM VALUE DECKING/GRATING, TYPE (5.2.2.3)

W kW

O

MODEL k@h kg

kg/h

NORMAL

O O

FIRE SUPPRESSION BY WATER MIST SPECIAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS VENTILATION FAN REDUNDANCY (5.2.3.4) POSITIVE PRESSURE VENTILATION (5.2.3.4) EXTERNAL DUCTING BY PURCHASER (5.2.3.4) D.C. FAN REQUIRED k w I I ,,,

INLET PRESSURE, kPa EXHAUST PRESS, kPa GAS TEMP., "C INLET GAS TEMP., "C EXHAUST MOLECULAR MASS

~
O 0 O

I SPEED CONTROL REGULATOR O GOVERNOR O PRESSURE

I

51

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Table A.3 (continued)
JOB No. P.0, No, ITEM

SO 3977 DATA SHEETS

DATE
BY DATE

INQUIRYNo.
REVISION

#@CESSOllY..SYSTEMS SUPPLIED BY PACKAGER (continued) NO COUPLINGS AIWGUAROS (4.5,4], YES ~LET CONTROL VALVE FURNISHED TYPE ;TAINLESS-STEELPIPING MANIFOLD MANUFACTURER GUARD-SUPPLIED BY :ARBON STEEL FIANGES MODEL MAX. O.D `-STRAINER W/BREAKOUT FLANGES k! HUB MASS OW SPEED CAPABILITY (FOR COMPRESSOR CLEANING) SPACER LENGTH kPa k! IELIEF VALVE PRESSURE SET POINT SPACER MASS o IDLING ADAPTER REQUIRED :ASING MATERIAL ;EALlYPE IC ENGINE YPE O .SPARKIGNITED O DIESEL \PPLICABLE SPEC. LUBRICATION REQUIREMENTS: MODEL flFR rlmin CONT. OIL LUBE w o NON-LUBE O GREASE O GAS TURBINE kg or I/s iPPLICABLE SPEC QUANTITY PER HUB MODEL I!FR RPM NOTES: ,W

JOTES

~~.p@fj. mm AIR FILTER MFR MODEL TYPE ) AIR PATH COMPONENT MATERIAL (5.2.4.1 ) ) ELEVATED GROUND LEVEL O .OCATION O PROVISIONS FOR EXTRA STAGES ) DESIGN WIND VELOCITY km/h ) gm3 NORMAL DUST LOADING ) FILTRATION EFFICIENCY (5.2.4.2)

--

EXHA(lSTSYSTEM (5.2.5) COMPLETE EXHAUST SYSTEM REQUIRED TYPE EXPANSION JOINT MFR k~a SILENCER MFR 4 DUCTING GAUG13MATERIAL o PERSONNEL PROTECTION INSULATION DISCHARGE FLANGE ORIENTATION: O HORIZONTAL O VERTICAL o EXTERNAL @BY OTHERS kPa, MAX. o HEAT RECOVERY DEVICE MAINTENANCE INTERVAL (5.2.4.2) --MONTHS kPa MFR TYPE@ _ CLEANING FREQUENCY (5.2.4.2) DAYS kPa, TEMP "( STEAM GEN PRESS kglh AIR FILTER ~, kPa, @ 100% RATED AIR FLOW (5.2.4.2) RATE SHUTDOWN ALARM kP{ COMPLETE EXHAUST SYSTEM RATED AP cLEAN, o

52

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977:3:2064
Table A.3 (continued)

b
~ INDICATOR MFR SILENCER, TYPE (5.2.4.3) MODEL SILENCER, MFR SILENCER &, kPa @ 110 % RATED AIR FLOW DUCTING GAUGE/ATERIAL (5.2.4.4) lYPE EXP JOINT MFR OFF-LINE WASH SYSTEM, lYPE (5.2.4.7) ON=LINE WASH SYSTEM, TYPE (5.2.4.7) EFFICIENCY _ EVAPORATIVE COOLER (5,2.4.7) EVAPORATIVE COOLER MFR --MODEL-- ABSORPTION CHILLER MFR MODEL _ EVAPORATIVE COOLER & kPa @ 110% RATED AIR FLOW ANTI-ICING, TYPE (5.2.4.8) COMPLETE AIR INLET SYSTEM & kPa @ 110% RATED AIR FLOW (5.2.4.1) OTHER MODEL

iwtivP&cMmk i$iwijii:)' ,, ,. . . : `dkd%his(s.m
LUBE OIL VISCOSITY ISO GRADE

m,,,, `. ,'..> ~r%

;OMMON TO GAS GENERATOFUSINGLE-SHAFT TURBINE LOAD GEAR FREE POWER TURBINE AUXILIARIES DRIVEN EQUIPMENT SYSTEM FOR SYNTHETIC LUBRICANT LUBE SPECIFICATION :OMMON TO GAS GENERATOR LOAD GEAR POWER TURBINE AUXILIARIES DRIVEN EQUIPMENT > AIR OIL COOLER lYPE )

WATEF

53

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Table A;4 -- Data Sheets -- Fuel Systems
JOB No. ITEM DATE
No.

ISO 3977 DATA SHEETS

P.O. No. INQUIRY

BY DATE DUAL(LtQUIDiLIQUID) O OTHER

REVISION

SYSTEM: O o 0 DUAL FUEL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS (5.2.8.4) O SHUTDOWN TO TRANSFER O (MANUAL) (AUTO) TRANSFER .UNDER LOAD O TRANSFER AFTER STARTUP ,, 0 FUEL ANALYSIS - MOL % COMPOSITION MW AIR 29 OXYGEN 32 NITROGEN 28 WATER VAPOUR 18 CARBON MONOXIDE 28 4a CARBON DIOXIDE HYDROGEN 2 HYDROGEN SULFIDE 34 METHANE 16 ETHYLENE 26 ETHANE 30 PROPYLENE 42 PROPANE 44 n-BUTANE 58 i-BUTANE 58 n-PENTANE 72 i-PENTANE 72 HEXANE 86 HEPTANE 106 OCTANE PLUS 114 MIN. MAX.

(GAWLIQUID) O o o TRANSFER AT (RATED) ( _T RATED) LOAD MAX TIME ALLOWED TO COMPLETE TRANSFER AT --s

AVERAGE

O FUEL GRADE (5.2.8.3) LIQUID FUEL TREATMENT REQUIRED O YES 0 NO TREATMENT SYSTEM SUPPL. BY O VENDOR O OTHER HEATER REQUIRED O YES O NO LIQUID FUEL PRESS REQUIRED, MAX./MlN., kPa / 0 FUEL ANALYSIS DATA PROPERTY VISCOSllY AT 40/100 "C, mmVs DISTILLATION DATA 90 % (tirn) RECORDED AT "C SULFUR CONTENT % (m/m) LOW HEATING VALUE, mJ/kg CARBON RESIDUE (ON 10 Y, BOTTOMS), % (nVm) COPPER CORROSION 3 HAT 100"C MAX. LOW TEMP. OPERABILITY, "C AROMATIC CONTENT ASH CONTENT, % (tire) DENSITY AT 15 "C, kg/ins FLASH POINT, "C POUR POINT, "C WATER, % (WV) SEDIMENT, % (m/m) FILTERABLE DIRT, mg/100 ml TRACE METALS SODIUM, mgkg POTASSIUM, mglkg VANADIUM, mg/kg CALCIUM, m~kg LEAD, mgikg OTHER METALS OTHER MEASURED VALUE

METHOD

,,

TOTAL AVG. MOL MASS. CORROSIVE AGENTS, mg/kg (NATURE AND CONCENTRATION) CONTAMINANTS, mg/kg (NATURE AND CONCENTRATION) LOW HEATING VALUE, mJ/kg FUEL PRESS. MAX./MlN., kPa ~ ~ ~ FUEL TEMP MAX./MlN,, "C ~ ~ ~ FUEL PRESS. REQUIRED ~ ~ ~ MAX.IMIN., kPa ~ ~ ~ O FUEL GAS COMPRESSION SYSTEM BY PACKAGER O FUEL GAS COMPRESSION SYSTEM BY PURCHASER O FUEL GAS PREHEATING SYSTEM BY"PAC~"GER 0 FUEL GAS PREHEATING SYSTEM BY PURCHASER O O O O O O O NJ#.md#f#.i.ki5j WATER PRESSURE REQUIRED STEAM PRESSURE REQUIRED STEAM TEMPERATURE REQUIRED WATERLSTEAM QUALITY BY PASS CONTROL VALVE Y-STRAINER FINAL FILTER ` "MESH MICRON 0 O kPa kPa "c

,,;,~ ISOLATION BLOCK VALVES BLOW DOWN OR VENT VALVE O OTHER

NOTES

54

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 1s0 3977-3:2004

Table A.5 -- Data Sheets -- Generator
Iasic Detaila fanufacturar Mel `ype Iasic Data tated Output ~owarFactor 10.of Poles `haaaa Ioltage `requency ;ynchronouaSpeed %closure Type rotal Temperature >verspeed daximum Stator Temperature tiaximurnField Temperature Mater IsolationSystem >oolingSystem `erforrnance Data 3utput Povmr %atorCurrent %tciancy %wer Facfor Reactance SynchronousReactance TransientReactance Sub-transientReactance Negative Sequence Reactanca Zero Sequence Reactance ArmatureWhdinq TransientField Time Constant Sub-transientTime Constant ArmatureDC Time Constant Short CircuifRatio Mechanical Data Baaa Torque FulLLoadTorque Rotor Inertia Dimensions Length Width Height Net Height Heaviest Component UtilitvReauireman@ AC Water/Glycol Bearing Oil Flow Rate (each) Oil ViscosityGrade .......................................................... Phase(s)................................... V ......................................... Hz . . . ...................... ... . . . ........................... . .. . ...................................... Iiis ...................................... iitrads ..................................... ............ . .................................... ....... ....... ...... ......... ...................... . ........... . ... .... ... . ...... . . .......... .. . .. . .. . .. ............................ ....... mm . .. ....... ..............mrr ............... . . .. ......... ... .. ......... . . . .................. ......... . . ............................. ....... . . . . . ............. . . ................................................................................................ . ......................................... ............................................................................................. ...................... ..................................................................................................................................!.... ...................... ................................................................................................................................................ ............. ................ ....... ............ . .. . ... ... .... ... ... . .. . ...... ..... . ............ . . . .. .............. ........ W . ........................ ............. ............................... .................... . . . ............ . ................. ... ...................................... . .............................. ....... ..... ........... ......... .............. . ........................................ .............. ......... ...... ....... . ....... . ....... . .............. ............

...................................................................................................................................................... ....... ....................................................................................................................................... ...................... ....................................................................................................................................... ................... v ......................... .. ................................................ . .. . .................................................. ........ Hz ................ ....... . ............ . . . ............................................................................. rlmin . . .. . . ............ . ........................................ ....... . . . . ........................ ............ . .................................... . . ............ . ........................ . . ............................... FIB ............ . ............ ............ .. . ............ . . . .......................... ..... rlmin ........................................................................................................................................................."C .........................................................................................................................................................0C ......................................... . . . . . . .. .................... . .. .. ..................... ............. ........................ .. . . . . ............ . . . ............................ . ......................................... ............. 100% ...................... ... .................. .. . .................. . ............... .. ..... ... ... . ......................... . 75
Y.

50%

25%

........... ..... ....... . .............. ........ kw . . .... .. .................................... A .... ..................... .... ... . .. ............................. ......... % .. ....... . ............... .................... .............

. .. . .

. .. . ........................ .

. .................................................................................... ............ .

...................................................................................................................................................... ....... ....................................................................................................................................... ...................... ................. .................. . . ................. ...... . . . . . ............ . . . . .............. ............ .

............................................................. . . .. ............................................................................... N.m ............ . . . . ........................ .. .................................... . .. . .. ......................... ...... N.m .............................. . . . ............................................................ ............. kgm~

.... ....... ......... . . .............. ....... mm .......................................................... D~ ........................................... Operating.............................kg .. .. ............ .. ......... .................................... ......... kg

....................... .. .......... . . ............. .......... ...... ..... ...............

55

IS 15666 (Part 3) :2006 Fso 3977-3:2004
Table A.6 -- Data Sheets -- Controls and Instrumentation
JOB No. ITEM DATE
No.

SO 3977 DATA SHEETS

P.O. No. INQUIRY

BY DATE

REVISION

NFORMATION TO BE COMPLETED BY ) PURCHASER O PACKAGER + PACKAGER IF NOT BY PURCHASER

1 > + 3

UNINTERRUPTABLE POWER SUPPLY (UPS) BY PURCHASER UNINTERRUPTABLE POWER SUPPLY (UPS) BY PACKAGER AC TIME FOR UPS TO BE MAINTAINED DC (SPECIFY VOLTAGE) hours

JNIT CONTROL PANEL LOCATION 3 CABLE LENGTH FROM TURBINE BASE -- (m~res) O CABLE SEGREGATION REQUIRED (SPECIFY)

-IAZARDOUS AREA CLASSIFICATION 3 3 D SAFE ENVIRONMENT DUSTY HUMIDITY O O O ZONE I O ZONE II --"cto -- "c

AMBlENT TEblPERATURE RANGE ANTI-VIBRATION MOUNTS REQUIRED

+

SIMPLEX

+

FAULT TOLERANT DESIGN

+

OTHER (SPECIFY)

`.. !

D O

BLACK START CAPABILITY MANUAL LOADING O AUTOMATIC LOADING

STARTING INITIATION O O O AUTOMATIC (CLOSING CONTACT) LOCAL AT UNIT PANEL (MANUAL) OTHER LOCATIONS (SPECIFY)

PACKAGE INSTRUMENTS O O + SUPPLIED BY PURCHASER SUPPLIED BY PACKAGER SPECIFY NUMBER& TYPE No. TYPE

MONITORS O O SUPPLIED BY PURCHASER SUPPLIED BY PACKAGER

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977:3:2064
Table A.6 (continued)
GAB DETECTION MONITORING (&4.4 and if applicable 6.10.8) ~ACKAGE INSTRUMENTS 3 D + SUPPLIED BY PURCHASER SUPPLIED BY PACXAGER SPECIFY NUMBER& TYPE No, - TYPE

MONITORS D SUPPLIED BY PURCHASER

D SUPPLIED BY PACKAGER . ,,. ... -* ., .,.. . ..... .,, $,.,......**. .. ,.

.,= .,..

`.

VENriLATIQN end PURGING{6.5)

,

.

.

D

NATIONAL REGULATION APPLICABLE

[SPECIFY) - ., D GAS FUEL O .LIQUID FUEL ,;,., *i+, ;..? -., O ~~ DUAL FUEL (GAS/GAS) O DUAL FUEL (GAS/LIQUID) O DUAL FUEL (LIQUIO/LIQUID)

DUAL FUEL (OTHER) SPECIFY BI-FUEL OPERATION - METHOD OF CONTROL, e.g. MANUAL, GAS SUPPLY PRESSURE (SPECIFY)

O O O

LOW NET SPECIFIC ENERGY GAS FUEL OPERATION STARTING GAS FUEULIQUID FUEL AVAILABLE VARIABLE NET SPECIFIC ENERGY GAS FUEL OPERATION

SPECIFY NET SPECIFIC ENERGY RANGE

O o

PROCESS CONTROL SIGNAL INPUT

GOVERNOR SPEED ~NGE REQUIRED (SPECIFY)
@AIW#SHUTbOWN ANNUNCIATION (6.12.3)

+ + +

MONITOR BASED (SEE 6,12.3) ALARM LAMP BOX ANNUNCIATOR SHUTDOWN LAMP BOX ANNUNCIATOR TURBINE SPEED & TEMPERATURE INDICATION (6.12.5)

+ + +

MONITOR BASED ANALOG METERS DIGITAL METERS

57

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004

0

SEISMIC TYPE

o

SHAFT DISPLACEMENT

I I I

GEAR BOX + + SEISMIC (velocityor acceleration) SHAFT-DSPIACEMENT

DRIVEN UNIT + + SEISMIC (velocityor acceleration) SHAFT DISPLACEMENT

-PERFORMANCE MONITORING (6.12.6) O PERFORMANCE INSTRUMENTS AND MONITORING REQUIRED
." ., ,.

..'

,,.

.

.,

.

@l@ONS

MONITORING (6.dj

,.

.%

O

EMISSIONS INSTRUMENTS AND MONITORING REQUIRED

TYPE O O MONOCHROME MONITOR COLOUR MONITOR (SPECIFY SIZE)

LOCATION O O O O DESKTOP PANEL MOUNTED BOTH COLOUR MONITOR (SPECIFY SIZE) I I I

FEATURE REQUIRED O O 10 UNIT MIMICS TREND DISPWYS (GENERAL) TREND DISPUYS (PERFORMANCE) ALARM ANNUNCIATOR OTHERS (SPECIFY) +. .", ,.:)', ?, . . .. .. . . .. . .... ,, ,: `e.: -., M -.. . ,..,, ,.},.,4 ..-,..., ,. !:" ,!.~. ,' .,.,.... . ", m.*&%%$PMF?fl?j~@@"l~?~L O TRENDDISPUYS~lBWTION) O TREND DISPLAYS (EM,SS,ONS)

`~

I
I

I

O O

" .'""

.,

"-

"""

"

:

O

SPECIFY ANY LOCAL, NATIONAL OR INTERNATIONAL STANDARD APPLICABLE

W!Www): ". .
0 0 REQUIRED TYPE e.g. SERIAL RS232 (MODBUS RTU PROTOCOL) (SPECIFY) FEATURES O 10 DATA ONLY DATA PLUS CONTROL

-:

,-

I

58

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004
Table A.6 (continued)

k
o

UNIT CONTROL PANEL TESTING O WITNESS FUNCTIONAL FACTORY ACCEPTANCE TEST

WITNESS HARDWARE FACTORY ACCEPTANCE TEST

CONTROLINSTRUMENT LIST

I
I

@ = Indicatesthat the specification definea a mandatoryrequirement O = Optional� this must be completedby the purchaserif required (1) refera to adjacent to the gas tutilne (2) refers to controlpanel location CONTROL I I I (2) 0

I
3
7

DESCRIPTION

==4+i%-t
., .,
o @ m @ @ @ rda o c-l o o o nla B m 0 @ @

1. 2.

Start selector, 2 position Start sequence, enable Emergency shutdown Stonseauence enable Ready to load Hour meter
"..,. , .",

--. 1=
4. 5. 6. ,". 11.a 11.b 11.c 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. f8. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25.

=E=
(1)
o 0 rl @ l% @ @ nla rr/a

n/a
nla tia

. Ivu,rsmeter IeTR=s rt counter
Peak

o l@l
I o @ @ @ @ @ o 63 o o @ o o @ o @ @ B @ I

0 Ol@l
o o o o o nla 0 0 0 0 @ 0 0 8 0 I

0
0 o 8 @ @ n/a 0 @ 0 0 o 0 0 @ 0

rda

n/al
nla 0 nla nla n/a o n/a n/a nla nla n/a nla -o nla 0

nlal

lmpt counter -sledor, W--U SELECT Ilaoius aUto/manual llb orllc

I

rtla @ rr/a n/a nla @ n/a rda rrla n/a nla nla 0 nla 0 .S

Speed, gas generator Speed, power turbhe Speed, gasturbine (single ahaft) Speed, raise/lower Speed demand,-set point Hot gas path temperature Hot gas path temperature spread Bearing temperature Fuel supplypressure Fuel supplytemperature Wash system, compressor Lub. oil supplypressure Lub. oil heater Lub. oil pumprunning,standby Lub. oil pumprunning,emergency Resefflamptest Horn silence

o o
nla rda

@ @
@ n/a

o o
o

0 0
a

o

@

59

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 tso 3977-3:2004
Table A.6 (continued)

CONTROL INSTRUMENT LIST @ =Indicatesthat the specificationdefines a mandatoryrequirement
O = Optional� this must be completedby the purchaserif required (1) refera to adjacent to the gas turbine r DESCRIPTION MANDATORY REQUIREMENT SHUTDOWN LOCATION OF ALARM FUNCTION INDICATOR (1) . 1. Emergencyshutdown 2. Fail to turn 3. Fail to start 4. Fail to ignite SELECT 5a and 5b or 5C 5.a UnderaDead.aas aenerator r turbine s turbhe (single shaft) w @ (2) @ 0 m @ 0 0 0 u (-1 w 8 @ (2) refers to controlpanel location

`ARN'NG

0
@ @

0

@ o @ @ o 0 0 A u

o 0 o o 0 0 0 u

o o o 1
I n

0 0 0 1
I
n

.
#.=

I I

I

I

-.-....."-.

."

I
I

E====

Jverapeed, gas generator k-- ~d.Dowerturbine turbine (single shaft) up 1temperature gas turbhe I 10. Hot gas path temperature spread 11 ure GovernorfailL. a. 1%,~~ SELECT 12a and 12b", 12.a Vibration,gas generator 12.b Vibration,po~r tu~ne 12.c Vibration,gas turbine (single ( shaft) 13. Vibrationmonitorfailur re 14. tilal displacementhia Jh 15. Bearingtemperatun e 16. Fuel supplypressure low v 17. lh Fuel-supplypressure hig[. 18. Fuel supplytemperature low 19. Fuel --- valve .. ... faih .. ...Ira .. ). Lub oil suoplypressure IOW Lub oil resenmir level, Iow dischargetemperature high 1 -h tel, high failure Enci;sure temperature, high Fire ex-thguishant system disabled

o 0 P
@

0

0 o

I

0 o 0
o

I

@

@

o 0
I @ @ @

o 0 @
@ a

0 0 @
@ @

o 0
o o

@ o @ 0 0
@ @

o 0 0 0 0
n
I

o 0 0 0 0
I
u

n @

V

.

I @

n v
u

0 0 0 0 0

o 0 o o o 0
I u I

@ 0 0 0 0
o
u

u

@

0
@ @

o
@ @

0
@ @

o 0
o o

o @
o w @

I

o
@

0 o
@

0 0
@

@ 0
@

o
@

@ 0 0 o
1 I o 0 0 @

o 0 0 0
0 0 0 o

36. 37. 38.

Jre Trip to minimumseif-suatahing speed Trip to minimumgoveri `nor speed Rotorover temperature e Enclosureheat detectors

o 0 o @ o 0 0 0
0 o 0 m 1

0 0 o 0 0 0 @ 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 (-1

0 0 @ @ 0 @ @ 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 m

1

,

1

1

60

IS 15666 (Part 3): 2006 1s0 3977-3:2004 Annex B (informative) List of national or International Standards applicable in context

APPLICATION Practica for helical and Herringbonegear spaad reducers alnd increasers P ractica for highspaad helical alnd herringbonegear units s teal and alloy pipe flanges

INTERNATIONAL (ISO or IEC)

USA AGMA 420

GERMANY (DIN)

(::1)

FRANCE (AFNOR)

JAPAN (JIS)

AGMA 421 1s0 7005-1 ASME B 16,5 DIN 2543 DIN 2544 DIN 2545 DIN 2546 DIN 2547 DIN 2546 DIN 2549 DIN 2550 DIN 2551 DIN 910 Bs 4504 NF E29-203 NF E29-204 02220 B 2239

F( wgad fittings c ode for pressure piping

ASME B 16,11 ASME B 31.1 ASME B 31.3 ISO 10438-1, -2,-3, -4 API STD 614 ASTM D424q-83 API STD 616 API STD 671 ISO 228-3 ASME BI ,20.1

ES 3799 BS 1600

N E29-600 08270

LIubncationsystems
G,as turbhas for refinery services .pacial purposecouplings s G kmarel purposepipa threads

DIN 24425

BS 4807

BS 2779 (seal on gasket) BS 21 (seal on thread) DIN EN 288-3 BS EN 288-3 NF EN 208-3

B0202 B0203

B loiler and pressurevessel code w valdingand brazing

ASME Section lx

Z3040
Z3801 Z3881 Z3891

zIinc (hot galvanized) coatingson moducts fabricatedfrom rolled, P ]ressad and fotged steel shapes, P )Iates, bare and strip P :arbon and alloy steel nutsfor c mlts for high-pressureand highb b emparature sewica c >upolamalleatde iron :arbon steal externally threaded c ;tsndardfasteners .s Uafionalelectriccoda h Wtomaticfire detactots A Sulfide stress cracking resistant s netsllicmaterials oilfield n quipmant e IEC 60079

ASTM A 123

ASTM A 194

DIN 17440

BS 4882 BS 1506

G4051 G4303 G5702

ASTM A ~97 ASTM A 307 NFPA 70 NFPA 72E NACE MR 0f75

61

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

61S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of /ndkm Standards Act, 1986 topromote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

61S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these form without the prior permission in writing of 61S. This does of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed Review of Indian Standards

publications maybe reproduced in any not preclude the free use, inthecourse as symbols and sizes, type or grade to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : ET 15 (5692).
Amendments .

Issued

Since

Publics-tion Text Affected

Amend No.

Date of issue

."

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Website : www.bis.org.in
Regional Offices : Telephones 23237617 [ 23233841 23378499,23378561 [ 23378626,23379120 2603843 [ 2609285 2254 [ 2254 1216, 2254

Central

: Manak Bhavan, 9 f3ahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 11 OOO2 : 1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme Vll M, V. 1. P.. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 160022 600113

Eastern Northern Southern Western

: C. 1. T. Campus,

2519.2254

1442 2315

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

28329295,28327858 [ 28-327891,28327892

Branches:

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PUNE. RAJKOT. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO, PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press, Kluxja, India

