**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n f im^NS ^g^iss^i ra^g^^uiKS a raaa^ 



IS 3877 (1967) : Wax Knife, Dental [MHD 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Dentistry] 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 3877 - 1967 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WAX KNIFE, DENTAL 

UDC 616-314-089-28: 615-472 




© Copyright 1967 by 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 1 

M^WRtfrty *P'tt 1967 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 1968 

TO 

IS: 3877-1967 SPECIFICATION FOR WAX 
KNIFE, DENTAL 

Addendum 

( Page 5, clause 8.1, line 4 ) — Introduce the following new matter 
after the first sentence: 

' In either case, the blade may be given a coating of plastipeel, if so 
desired by the purchaser. ' 



( CPDC 21 ) 



Printed at Neelkamal Printers, Delhi 6, India 



IS : 3877 - 1967 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WAX KNIFE, DENTAL 



Dental Instruments Sectional Committee, CPDG 21 



Chairman 

Col N. N. Bbby 

Members 

Shbi D. A. Bond 

Capt S. Bbatt 

Db Rat an H. Dootob 



Representing 

Ministry of Health ft Family Planning 



Shbi P. N. Davkb ( Alternate ) 



Dental Products of India Ltd, Bombay 
Dental Council of India, New Delhi 
Indian Dental Traders, Bombay 



Db M, S. N. Ginwaixa 

Shbi H. S. Hbbbebt 

Shbi D. N. Vio ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. N. Vio ( Alternate ) 

Bbio Kabtab Singh 

Shbi L. V. Kini 

Shbi V. Kbishnamoobthy 



Db A. M. Malaowalla 
Shbi V. V. S. Mubthy 
Shbi K. L. Talwab 
Shbi A. B. Rao, 
Direotor ( Consr Prod ) 



Nair Hospital Dental College, Bombay 
ULTRADENT Private Ltd, Bombay 



Ministry of Defence ( DG AFMS ) 

Kini Surgical ft Engineering Works, Manipal 

Directorate General of Technical Development 

( Ministry of Industrial Development ft 

Company Affairs ) 
Dental Council of India, New Delhi 
Indian Drugs ft Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Ne* Delhi 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officlo Member ) 



Secretary 

Shbi Pbatap Singh 

Assistant Direotor ( Consr Prod ), ISI 

Dental Pliers and Prosthetic Instruments Subcommittee, CPDG 21 : 3 

Convener 
Db A. M. Malaowalla Dental Council of India, New Delhi 

Members ^ 
Shbi Kailash Baqapiya 
Pb K, Bhaboava 



Db Batak H. Dootob 
Db M- R. Joam 

Shbi R, Suvdabaohablu 



Dr Bagadiya ft Sons, Ahmedabad 

Government Dental College ft Hospital, Ahmeda- 
bad 

Indian Dental Traders, Bombay 

Government Dental College ft Hospital, Ahmeda- 
bad 

Indian Drugs ft Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi 



rNtHAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI I 



IS J S877 - W67 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WAX KNIFE, DENTAL 

0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 30 January 1967, after the draft finalized by the Dental 
Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer 
Products Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standard specifications for 
prosthetic dental instruments and has been formulated at the instance 
of the Advisory Committee for Development of Surgical Instruments, 
Medical Equipment and Appliances of the Government of India. 
Other specifications published so far in this series are: 

IS : 3875-1966 Hot plate, wax levelling, dental 
IS : 3876-196*7 Plaster knife, Rental 
IS : 3878-1967 Plaster shears, denial 
IS : 3879-1967 Wax spatula, dental 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for wax knife. 

2. MATERIALS 

2.1 Blade — The blade of the knife shall be made from stainlefii steel or 
carbon steel* The stainless steel shall conform to designation 30Crl3 



♦Rules for rounding o& numerical values ( rf vised), 

% 



IS:3877-J967 

of Schedule V and the carbon steel to designation T80 of Schedule VI of 
IS : 1570-1961*. 

2.2 Handle Scales — The handle scales shall be made of wood or ebonite. 
The wood used shall be well seasoned, straight grained and free from 
knots and cracks. 

2.2.1 The wood shall be choosen from any of the following species 
and the moisture content shall not exceed 12 percent: 

Botanical Name Standard Trade Name 

Dalbergia latifolia Roxb. rosewood ( blackwood ) 

Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. sissoo 

Tectona grandis Linn. f. teak 

2.3 Rivets — The rivets shall either be made from mild steel or a 
suitable aluminium alloy. 

3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The wax knife shall conform to shape and dimensions as shown in 
Fig. 1. 

4. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

4.1 The cutting edge of the wax knife shall be properly sharpened to 
an angle of 25° ± 4°. ^11 edges except the cutting edge shall pe smooth 
and rounded. The cutting edge shall be free from burrs, feathers, nicks 
and waviness. The riveting shall be firm, secure and sound. * 

4.2 When the blade is made of stainless steel, it shall bip suitably 
passivated and finished bright all over. In case the blade i| made of 
carbon steel, it shall be plated chromium over nickel, except {he cutting 
edge. Tljfc thickness of the plating shall be as follows: 

Finish Minimum Thickness 

Nickel 15 /*m 

(^Ifromium 0'15 /*m 

4.2.1 Tht plating shall be tvejti and uniform throughout and shall be 
bright. The plated surfaces s^all be free from visible plating defects, 
such as unplated spots, erapks, stains or blisters. The plating shall be 
non-porous, firm and shall hot peel off. In other respects, the plating 
*h*li conform to IS : 106M958f. 



'Setydulee for "wrought steels for general engineering purpose*. 

f Specification for copper, nickel and chromium electroplated coatings. 



IS : 3877 - 1967 





1 



^ 



^; 



■h. 



) 



■y — 



i i 



1 g 

.a | 

f * 

S3 

* i 



6 



IS: 3877- 1967 

5. HEAT TREATMENT 

5.1 The blade shall be uniformly hardened and tempered to 400 to 
450 HV. 

6. TEST FOR CORROSION RESISTANCE 

6*1 The knife with stainless steel blade shall be tested for corrosion 
resistance as given in 6.1.1. 

6.1.1 Copper Sulphate Test — The knife shall be scrubbed with soap 
and warm water, rinsed in hot water followed by a dip in ethyl alcohql 
( 95 percent ) and dried. The knife then shall be immersed in copper 
sulphate solution at room temperature for 6 minutes and then washed 
with fresh water or wiped with wet cotton wool. The copper sulphate 
solution shall be made up as follows: 

Copper sulphate ( CuS0 4 '5H,0 ) 40 g 

Sulphuric acid ( H|S0 4 ) ( sp gr 1 -84 ) 10*0 g 

Water ( H,0 ) 900 ml 

There shall be no red stains or spots on the knife blade after the 
test, but the polished surface becoming dull may be permitted. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 The instrument shall be legibly and indelibly marked with the 
manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark and the country of manu- 
facture. In case of stainless steel, the word * SS ' shall also be marked 
on the blade. 

7.1.1 Each knife may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the previsions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the pules and 
Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products coveted by sn 
Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply 
with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, 
testing andjjguality control during production. This system, which is devised and 
supervised Dy ISI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that 
the products as actually marketed are continuously oheoked by ISI for conformity 
to the standard. Details of conditions, under whioh a licence for the use of the 
ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors* may be , 
obtained from the^Indian Standards institution. 

8. PACKING 

8*1 The carbon steel blade shall be coated with a thin film of a solution 
containing corrosion inhibitors and wrapped in wax paper, while stain- 
less steel blade knife shall be wrapped either in a polyethylene bag or 
wax paper. Each knife, then, shall be packed in cartons in accordance 
with best trade practice. The cartons shall bear the name of the 
instrument, manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark and country of 
manufacture* 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

The Indian Standards Institution ( ISI ), which started functioning 
In 1947, Is the national standards organization for India. Its principal 
object is to prepare standards on national and international basis and 
promote their general adoption. 

The overall control of ISI, which Is run and financed jointly as a 
non-profit making body by the Government and private enter- 
prise, is exercised by the General Council, composed of representa- 
tives of Central and State Governments; leading trade, scientific and 
technological organizations; and subscribing members. The Union 
Minister of Industry is the ex-offlcio President of ISI. 

The present technical activity of ISI Is carried out through 8 
Division councils for Agricultural and Food Products; Chemical; Civil 
Engineering; Consumer Products; Electrotechnical; Mechanical 
Engineering; Structural and Metals; and Textile. All technical work 
relating to the formulation and revision of standards is done by 
committees appointed by and under the direction of their respective 
Division Councils. These committees consist of experts drawn from 
manufacturing units, technical institutions, purchase organizations 
and other concerned bodies. 

To make available benefits of Indian Standards to the common 
man, ISI has introduced its Certification Marks Scheme under the Indian 
Standards Institution I Certification Marks ) Act, {952, as amended by 
the Amendment Act, 1961. According to this Act, quality goods con- 
forming to Indian Standards can carry the ISI Certification Mark. This 
Mark Is a third-party guarantee of quality of marked goods. Licences 
to use the ISI Certification Mark are granted to manufacturers using 
reliable methods of quality control subject to overall inspec- 
tion by ISI. 

In the international field, ISI represents India on the International 
Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) and the International Electro- 
technical Commission ( IEC ). ISO and IEC respectively link 54 and 
40 countries, and function through 1 18 and 58 technical committees; 
ISI participates in 83 technical committees of ISO and all the technical 
committees of IEC. The committees and subcommittees of IEC and 
ISO for which ISI holds the secretariat deal with: EUctrlc Fans, Lac, 
Mica, Pictorial Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measure- 
ments in Open Channels, Procedures for Inter-conversion of Values* 
Spices and Condiments, and Stimulants. 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



INDIAN STANDARDS 



Over 3 500 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following main heads, 
have been issued so far: 



Agriculture & Food 

Chemical 

Civil Engineering 

Consumer Products 



Electrotechnical 
Mechanical Engineering 
Structural & Metals 
Textile 



Of these, the standards belonging to the Consumer Products Group, at present, 
fall under the following categories: 



Coir and Coir Products 

Domestic Hardware 

Medical Instruments and Hospital 
Equipment 

Oil Burning Appliances 

Safety Matches 



Sports Goods and Gymnasium Equip- 
ment 

Umbrellas 

Utensils and Cutlery 

Writing Aids 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) 

Single Copy 

Annual Subscription 
Annual Reports ( from 1948-49 Onwards ) 
Handbook of 1ST Publications, 1966 ... 



Rs 

2*00 
15*00 
2-00 to Z'OO eaoh 
5-op 



Available from 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 

Ttlapbontit 27 36 11- 20 TtUgramt Manaktanttba 

Branch Offices 

Telegrams Manaksamtha 

S34 Sardar Vallabhbhai Paul Road 
8 Chowriagbta Approach 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 
U Ctatral PatUrt Road 



Bombay 7 


TaUpboaa 3570 27 


Calcutta 13 


23- IS 23 


Kanpur 


3 7695 


Madraf 2 


S727S 



Printed at Standard Printing Works, New Delht-1, India 



