«тте WAH IS 16393 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


чарга — swude wer iei Ñ 
sere spes — Габе 


Geosynthetics — Geotextiles Used 
in Subsurface Drainage Application 
— Specification 


ICS 59.080.70 


O BIS 2015 


тя unes s 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF тыя, 9 Tags AHL HM, Ae 1110002 
a МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2015 Price Group 6 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Control of water is critical to the performance of buildings, pavements, embankments, retaining walls and other 
structures. Drains are used to relieve the hydrostatic pressure against underground and retaining walls, slabs and 
underground tanks and to prevent loss of soil strength and stability in slopes, embankments and beneath pavements. 
In transportation applications, if the base course does not drain rapidly enough, stress from the traffic loadings is 
transferred to the subgrade with little or no reduction, resulting in accelerated road failure. The removal of water 
shall be performed in a controlled fashion. Otherwise, severe erosion, piping, or settlement of soils may result in 
undermining adjacent structures. To accomplish this task the drainage system should fulfill two criteria: 


a) Have maintained permeability by providing relatively unimpeded flow of water; and 
b) Filtration of base soil by preventing the migration of soil fines into the drain. 


These criteria can be met by using several layers of specially graded aggregates. This often proves to be extremely 
expensive requirement to meet. The same result can be achieved at a fraction of the cost by using selected 
geotextiles, which act as filters around the aggregate drainage system. The introduction of geotextile lined drainage 
systems has enhanced the technical benefits and economical application of blanket and trench drains under and 
adjacent to pavement structures. The excellent filtration and separation characteristics associated with geotextiles 
permits the use of a single layer of open graded aggregate base or trench aggregate enveloped in a geotextile. 


The stability of the subgrade soils depends on groundwater table. Some clay soils can swell or shrink as their 
water content increases or decreases, respectively. Also, most soils are considerably weaker when they have high 
water contents or have not been drained prior to loading. This means that weather-related or seasonal fluctuations 
in groundwater levels can adversely affect permanent structures founded on undrained soils. Therefore, draining 
the saturated soils can increase their strength and stability. The lower the permeability of the subgrade soils, the 
closer together the drainage layers/zones shall be to provide effective dewatering. 


The traditional methods of subgrade dewatering by digging a trench or providing a coarse aggregate drainage 
layer or a pipe system or use of fine sand as a filter are time consuming and costly and provide inconsistent 
properties. Geotextiles are being used in lieu of select grades of sand for effective dewatering to accept seepage 
and act as properly graded filter to prevent piping of subgrade soil because they are less expensive, provide more 
consistent properties and are much easier to install. Geotextiles have been used in toe drains of embankments 
where they are easily accessible if maintenance is required and where malfunction can be detected. 


The excellent filtration and separation characteristics associated with filtration geotextiles permits the use of a 
single layer of an open graded base or trench aggregate enveloped in a geotextile. The thin filtration geotextile 
reduces the required excavation as well as the cost of the drained structural section. The increase in service life 
of flexible pavements by 25 percent and that of rigid pavements by 50 percent has been identified by use of an 
efficient functioning edge drain system using geotextile. 


Filtration and separation fabrics are non-woven or woven polypropylene or polyester fabrics with specified 
strength characteristics used as permeable separators to restrain soil or other particles subjected to hydrodynamic 
forces while allowing the passage of fluids into or across a geotextile and to prevent inter-migration of adjacent 
soil layers of vastly different particle sizes and particle distributions. The primary geotextile characteristics 
influencing filter functions are opening size (as related to soil retention), flow capacity and clogging potential 
which are indirectly measured by the apparent opening size, permittivity and gradient ratio test. The geotextile 
shall also have the strength and durability to survive construction and long-term conditions for the design life of 
the drain. Additionally, construction methods have a critical influence on geotextile drain performance. 


(Continued to Third Cover) 


IS 16393 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GEOTEXTILES USED 
IN SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE 
APPLICATION — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies requirements for two classes 
of geotextiles used in drainage application such as 
subgrade dewatering, road base drainage and structure 
drainage by placing the geotextile against the soil to 
allow long-term passage of water into a subsurface 
drain system retaining the in-situ soil. 


1.1.1 Class 1 geotextiles are for applications where 
applied stresses are more severe, that is, very coarse 
shape angular aggregate is used, compaction is greater 
than 95 percent of maximum density as per IS 2720 
(Part 15) or depth of trench is greater than 300 mm. 


1.1.2 Class 2 geotextiles are suitable for drainage 
applications which are less severe, that is, smooth 
graded surfaces having no sharp angular aggregate, 
compaction is less than or equal to 95 percent of 
maximum density as per IS 2720 (Part 15). 


1.2 Woven slit film geotextiles (that is, geotextiles 
made from yarns of a flat, tape-like character) shall 
not be used. 


NOTES 


1 The function of the drainage in this application refers to 
including a tensile member in the form of a geotextile against 
soil to protect coarse aggregate drains or used as a geotextile 
sandwiched aggregate blanket or as a three dimensional plastic 
drainage core wrapped with a filtration geotextile. 


2 The primary function of the geotextile is filtration. Geotextile 
filtration properties are a function of the in-situ soil gradation, 
plasticity and hydraulic conditions. 

3 This is a material purchasing specification and design review 
of its use for intended applications is recommended. This is not 
a construction or design specification. Subsurface drainage is a 
site specific design issue which should be addressed by the 
engineers responsible for the drainage structure design. Design 
details for geotextile for subsurface drainage, such as geotextile 
type, structure and associated details, shall be as shown on the 
contract drawings. 

4 This standard is based on the minimum requirements of the 
geotextile to provide drainage, filtration and survivability from 
installation stress. In general, the geotextile shall be placed at 
the proper elevation, location and orientation as detailed on the 
plans and specification. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex А contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. АП standards are 


subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions and those given іп 1513321 (Part 1) shall 


apply. 


3.1 Minimum Average Roll Value (МАКУ) — The 
average value of roll minus two standard deviations. 
Statistically, it yields a 97.7 percent degree of 
confidence that any sample taken during quality 
assurance testing will exceed value reported. 


3.2 Subgrade Improvement — It is defined as the 
improvement of the bearing capacity and mitigation 
of deformation of the subgrade soil by placing a 
geotextile immediately over a soft subgrade soil. The 
goal of this application may be to reduce undercut 
requirements, improve construction efficiency, reduce 
the amount of aggregate subbase/base material 
required, provide a stiff working platform for pavement 
construction, or combination of these. 


3.3 Filtration — The long-term free flow of water from 
the subgrade through the geotextiles into a subsurface 
drain system retaining the in-situ soil solid particles. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 The geotextiles used in subsurface drainage 
applications shall be inert to commonly encountered 
chemicals, resistant to rot and mildew, and shall have 
no tears or defects which adversely affect or alter its 
physical properties. 


4.2 Polymers used in the manufacture of geotextiles, 
and the mechanical fasteners or threads used to join 
adjacent rolls, shall consist of long chain synthetic 
polymers, composed of at least 95 percent by weight 
of polyolefins, polyesters or polyamides when tested 
as per dissolution method in respective solvents as 
specified in IS 667. They shall be formed into a stable 
network such that the ribs, filaments or yarns retain 
their dimensional stability relative to each other, 
including selvedges. Recycled polyester shall not be 
used in the manufacture of geotextiles and only virgin 
polyester shall be used for manufacture of polyester 


IS 16393 : 2015 


containing geotextiles. The isophthalic acid content of 
the virgin polyester shall be nil when tested according 
to the method prescribed in Annex B. 


4.3 Geotextiles shall be dimensionally stable and able 
to retain their geometry under manufacture, transport 
and installation. Woven slit film geotextiles (that is, 
geotextiles made from yarns of a flat, tape-like 
character) shall not be used. Geotextiles used as a 
filtration and drainage material shall conform to the 
requirements specified in Table 1. Average of test 
results from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet or 
exceed the minimum values noted herein. 


NOTES 


1 All numeric values given in Table 1 except Apparent Opening 
Size (AOS), represent MARV in the weakest principal direction. 
Values for AOS represent maximum average roll values. 


2 The property values in Table 1 represent default values which 
provide for sufficient geotextile reinforcement and survivability 
under most construction conditions. 


5 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


5.1 Lot 


The quantity of the same class of geotextile 
manufactured from the same polymer under identical 
conditions and supplied to a buyer against one dispatch 
note shall constitute a lot. 


5.2 Sampling for tests shall be done in accordance with 
IS 14706 from each lot. Acceptance shall be based on 
testing of conformance samples obtained using 
procedure given in IS 14706. 


5.3 Testing of samples shall be performed in 
accordance with the methods referred to in this standard 
for the indicated requirement(s). The number of 
specimens to test shall be as specified in each test 
method. Product acceptance shall be determined by 
comparing the average test results of all the specimens 
within a given sample to the specified MARV. 


5.4 Criteria for Conformity 


The geotextile shall be tested for all the requirements 
as specified in Table 1 and 4.1 to 4.3 of this standard. 
When any individual sample fails to meet any 
specification requirement, that roll shall be rejected 
and two additional sample rolls shall be selected from 
the same lot. The lot shall be declared conforming to 
the requirements of this standard if neither of these 
two additional samples fails to comply with any part 
of this stanndard, otherwise the entire quantity of rolls 
represented by that sample shall be rejected. 


6 MARKING AND LABELLING 


6.1 The geotextile material shall be marked with the 
following by attaching the printed labels: 


a) Identification of the geotextile material as per 
manufacturer's recommendation, for 
example, polyester multifilament woven 
geotextile for subsurface drainage; 

b) Class of geotextile material, that is Class 1 or 
Class 2; 

c) Batch No., lot number and roll number; 

d) Date of manufacture of geotextile material; 

e) Any other information/instruction prescribed 
by the manufacturer or by the law in force; 

f) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; 
and 


g) The country of origin. 


6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geotextile may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


6.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers, may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


7 PACKING 


The geotextile shall be packed in rolls or as per the 
contract or order. Each roll or package shall be 
protected by wrapping it in a LDPE film of minimum 
thickness of 40 microns to prevent it from the adverse 
impact of heat and moisture, oil, grease, dirt, dust and 
other stains during shipment and storage prior to 
deployment. 


8 INFORMATION AND SAMPLES TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER 


8.1 The manufacturer shall submit to the purchaser 
the following: 


a) Geotextile product sample approximately one 
square meter or larger; 

b) Geotextile product data sheet and certification 
from himself or by third party certification 
such as the use of the Standard Mark stating 
that the geotextile product supplied meets the 
requirements of this standard; and 


c) Manufacturer's installation instructions and 
general recommendations. 


9 STORAGE AND PROTECTION 


9.1 During storage, elevate the geotextile rolls off the 
ground and adequately protect them from the 
following: 


2) 


Site construction damage; 

Excessive precipitation; 

Extended exposure to sunlight; 

Aggressive chemicals; 

Flames or temperatures in excess of 71°C; 
Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with 
and affixing to the geotextile material; and 
Any other environmental condition that may 
damage the physical property values of 
reinforcement. 


IS 16393 : 2015 


9.2 Store the geotextile material at temperatures 
above —20°С. 


9.3 Lay the rolled materials flat or vertical on ends. 


9.4 Do not leave the geotextile material directly 
exposed to sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


9.5 Each geotextile roll shall be wrapped with a 
material that will protect it from damage due to 
shipment, water, sunlight and contaminants. 


9.6 Keep geotextile dry until installation, and do not 
store directly on the ground. 


IS 16393 : 2015 


Table 1 Requirements of Geotextiles for Subsurface Drainage Applications 
(Clauses 4.3 and 5.4) 


SI Characteristic(s) Requirement(s) Method of Test, 


No. ——M—M—MM Ref to 
Class 1 Class 2 


Elongation Elongation ` “Elongation — Elongation 
< 50 percent > 50 percent < 50 percent > 50 percent 


(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (б) (7) 
A. Index Properties 
1) Type of geotextile <—Woven/non-woven—>» <—Woven/non-woven—> — 
ii) Roll length, m, Min «—50 or 100 or as agreed <—50 or 100 or as agreed-— IS 1954 
iii) Roll width, m, Min <2.0 or 5.0 or as agreed <2.0 or 5.0 oras agreed IS 1954 
iv) Grab strength, N, Min 1 100 700 800 500 IS 16342 
v) Sewn seam strength, N, Min 990 630 720 450 IS 15060 
vi) Trapezidal tear strength, N, Min 400 250 300 180 IS 14293 
vii) CBR puncture strength, N, Min 400 250 300 180 IS 16078 
viii) Burst strength, kPa, Min 2 700 1 300 2 100 950 IS 1966 (Part 2) 
B. Structural Integrity Properties 
i) In-situ soil passing 0.075 mm sieve (200 mesh sieve), IS 1670 
Percent 
a) Course < <15 > < <15 > 
b) Medium < 15-50 > < 15-50 > 
c) Fine < >50 > < > 50 > 
ii) Permitttivity, sec’, Min IS 14324 
a) Course < 0.5 > < 0.5 > 
b) Medium < 0.2 > < 0.2 > 
c) Fine < 0.1 > < 0.1 > 
iii) Apparent opening size (AOS), mm, Max IS 14294 
a) Course < 0.43 > < 0.43 > 
b) Medium < 0.25 > < 0.25 > 
c) Fine < 0.22 > < 0.22 > 
C. Durability Properties 
i) Pullout interaction coefficient, at 6 mm displacement, « 0.8 > «€ Not applicable —> IS 16380 
Normal load = 5 kPa, Min (see Notes 1 and 2) 
ii) Coefficient of direct shear at peak geotextile shear < 5 > < Not applicable—> Annex C 
strength, Normal load = 5 kPa, Min (see Notes 3 and 4) 
iii) Resistance to installation damage, percent retained «— — — 95/93/90 > < 95/93/90. » ISO 10722 
strength, SC/SW/GP (see Note 5), Min 
iv) Ultraviolet stability at 500 h, retained strength, percent 70 — 70 — IS 13162 
of original strength, Min (Part 2) 
NOTES 


1 The coefficient of interaction, С, , is the ratio between the average shear stress on the geosynthetic specimen in the pullout test and the 
mobilized shear stress in the fill material in direct shear tests under the same confining stress and shall be calculated as follows: 
= a тарен 
; 2LW(o, tanq 4 c) 
C, = coefficient of interaction, 
F, = measured pullout force, 
initial length of the geosynthetic specimen, 
initial width of the geosynthetic specimen, 
с, = applied normal stress, 
friction angle of the fill material, and 
= cohesive intercept of the fill material. 


c 
I 


о 5 
ll 


2 For pullout interaction coefficient test, rate of displacement may be increased to 125 mm/min. A graded angular base material as 
described in Table 2 shall be used in laboratory testing test sample shall be at least 0.3 m in length and 0.3 m in width. 

3 For coefficient of direct shear test, rate of displacement may be increased to 50 mm/min. A graded angular base material as described 
in Table 2 shall be used in laboratory testing. Test sample shall be at least 0.3 m in length and 0.3 m in width 

4 The coefficient of direct shear shall be determined using the peak geotextile shear strength with the shear strength of the graded 
angular base measured at the same displacement as the peak geotextile shear strength. 

5 Resistance to installation damage (loss of load capacity or structural integrity) when subjected to mechanical installation stress in 
clayey sand (SC), well graded sand (SW) and crushed stone classified as poorly graded gravel (GP). 

6 Class 2 geotextile may be specified for trench drain application based on field experience, laboratory testing and visual inspection of 
a geotextile sample removed from a field test section or when the subsurface drain depth is less than 2 m and drain aggregate is less than 
30 mm. 

7 In addition to the above default filtration property value of permittivity and AOS, site specific geotextile design may be performed if 
one or more of the following problematic soil environment is encountered: unstable or highly erodible soils such as non-cohesive silts, 
gap graded soils, alternating sand/silt laminated soils, dispersive clays and/or rock flour. 


4 


IS 16393 : 2015 


Table 2 Gradation of Base Material for Determining the Coefficient of Interaction and 
Direct Shear (Sliding) 


(Note 1 and 2 under Table 1) 


SI No. 


(1) 


Q) 


Sieve Size, mm 


Percent Passing 


(3) 


1) 

ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 


vi) 


37.5 
25 
19 

4.75 

0.425 
0.075 


NOTE — LL « 30 and PI « 10 


IS No. 
667 : 1981 


1670 : 1977 
1954 : 1990 


IS 1966 
(Part 2) : 2009/ 
ISO 13938-2 : 
1999 


2720 (Part 15) : 
1965 


6359 : 1971 
13162 (Part 2) : 
1991 


13321 (Part 1) : 
1992 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Methods for identification of textile 
fibres (first revision) 
Methods for test sieving (first revision) 
Determination of length and width of 
woven fabrics — Methods (second 
revision) 
Textiles — Bursting properties of 
fabrics — Determination of bursting 
strength and bursting distension: 
Part 2 Pneumatic method (second 
revision) 
Methods of test for soils: Part 15 
Determination of consolidation 
properties (first revision) 
Method for conditioning of textiles 
Geotextiles — Methods of test: Part 
2 Determination of resistance to the 
exposure of ultraviolet light and 
water (xenon-arc type apparatus) 
Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 
Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties 


IS No. 
14293 : 1995 


14294 : 1995 


14324 : 1995 


14706 : 1999 


15060 : 2001/ 


100 
95 — 100 
60 — 100 
30 — 60 
10-30 
3-10 


Title 
Geotextiles — Method of test for 
trapezoid tearing strength 
Geotextiles — Method for 
determination of apparent opening 
size by dry sieving technique 
Geotextiles — Methods of test for 
determination of water permeability- 
permittivity 
Geotextiles — Sampling and 
preparation of test specimens 
Geotextiles — Tensile test for joints/ 


ISO 10321 : 1992 seams by wide-width method 


IS 16078:2013 


IS 16342:2015 


IS 16380 : 2015 


Geosynthetics — Static puncture test 
(CBR test) 

Geosynthetics — Method of test for 
grab breaking load and elongation of 
geotextiles 

Geosynthetics — Method of test for 
measuring geosynthetic pullout 
resistance in soil 


IS 16393 : 2015 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2) 
METHOD OF TEST FOR ISOPHTHALIC ACID CONTENT OF THE VIRGIN POLYESTER FIBRE 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


This method is applicable to measure isophthalic acid 
content in polyethylene terephthalate sample. The 
polymer sample is digested in benzyl alcohol, 
depolymerized then esterified to dibenzyl isophthalate, 
dibenzyl terephthalate and glycol' s. Isopropyl titanate 
is added as a depolymerization catalyst. The sample is 
analyzed by gas chromatography and the peak areas 
of the two esters are used to estimate the weight 
percentage dimethyl isophthalate using an internal 
standard. 


B-2 POTENTIAL ENVIORMENT ISSUE 


B-2.1 In case of spillage, it can lead to pollution near 
the workplace area and environment hazard. After 
analysis sample is disposed as per laid down procedure. 


B-2.2 Hydrogen, nitrogen and instrument air are used 
during analysis. The hydrogen gas has no adverse 
ecological effects are expected. Hydrogen does not 
contain any Class I or Class II ozone depleting 
chemicals. However hydrogen is explosive. Gaseous 
nitrogen is an inert non- flammable gas. High 
concentration in air may cause deficiency of oxygen 
with the risk of unconsciousness and death. Chloroform 
in high concentration in air can kill most animals in 
few minutes. 


B-3 POTENTIAL SAFETY, OCCUPATIONAL 
HEALTH ISSUES 


B-3.1 Proper PPE's like safety goggles, apron, surgical 
hand gloves to be used. 


B-3.2 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


B-3.3 Leak check to be carried out while handling of 
gas cylinder. 


B-3.4 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


B-3.5 Inhalation of chloroform causes dilation pupils 
with reduced reaction to light as well as reduced 
intraocculat pressure. Irritation of mucous membrane, 
conjunctiva. If contacted with skin and eyes cause 
irritation. Seek medical advice if inhaled. 


B-3.6 Use leather hand gloves while handling hot 
apparatus and equipments. 


B-4 APPARATUS 


B-4.1 Gas Chromatograph (GC), with flame 
ionization detector. 


B-4.2 Capillary Column, 60 m length and 0.53 mm 
ID MXT 9-1 


B-4.3 Dispensette or Pipette, 2 ml, 5 ml and 10 ml. 
B-4.4 Volumetric Flask, 100 ml, 500 ml. 


B-4.5 Beaker 
B-4.6 Funnel 


B-4.7 50 ml Flask 


B-4.8 Heating Mental, to maintain temperature 
of 250°С 


B-4.9 AR Grade Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) 
B-4.10 AR Grade Benzyl Alcohol 

B-4.11 AR Grade Chloroform 

B-4.12 AR Grade Isopropyl Titnate 

B-4.13 AR Grade Dimethyl Suburate 


B-5 PREPARATION OF 
SOLUTIONS 


STANDARD 


B-5.1 Stock Dibenzyl Suburate (Internal Standard) 
Solution 


Take 1.0 + 0.01 g of dimethyl suburate (DMS). Add 
100 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 500 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. 
Dimethyl suburate will get converted into dibenzyl 
suburate (DBS). Mark the stock solution as DBS per 
2ml x X-XXXX mg 


B-5.2 Stock Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) Solution 


Take 0.2 + 0.01 g of dimethyl isopthalate (DMI). 
Add 40 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of 
isopropyl titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool 
up to room temperature then make the volume to 
100 ml by carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl 
alcohol. This will be converted to dibenzyl 
isopthalate (DBI). Mark the stock solution as DBI 
per 2 ml = X-XXXX mg. 


B-5.3 Standard Solution for Response Factor 


Take 2 ml of solution prepared in B-5.1 and 2 ml of 
solution prepared in B-5.2. Add 10 ml of chloroform. 


B-5.4 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Stock Solution 


Weigh out accurately 0.200 + 0.005 g of pure DMI 
powder into round bottom flask, add 30 ml of benzyl 
alcohol and 3 drops of isopropyl titante, reflux the 
solution for 5 h reagent and dilute to 100 g by isopropyl 
alcohol, calculate actual DMI concentration by 
considering its purity and label the flask with actual 
weight taken. Consider this weight during calculation 
of IPA by GC. 


B-5.5 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Solution for GC 
Injection 


Take 2.0 ml IPA stock solution and add 2 ml internal 
standard (see B-5.1) and further add 10 ml of 
chloroform, same bottle to be labelled as 2.0 percent 
IPA Inject 1 ul in GC. 


B-6 CALIBRATION FOR PERFORMANCE 
CHECK - TWICE /MONTH STANDARD CHIPS 


B-7 ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 


Inject 1 ul of standard solution for response factor (see 
B-5.3) and calculate response factor. Inject 1 ul of 2 
percent standard IPA solution. If value of 2.0 percent 
standard IPA solution is varying in the range of 0.01 
percent, then there is no need for change in response 
factor. If there is deviation in value then rerun standard 
solution for response factor (see B-5.3). Weight 0.2 + 
0.02 g of chips into the round bottom flask. Add 2 ml 
of benzyl alcohol. Add 3 drops of isopropyl titanate. 
Digest the solution for 1 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature. Add 10 ml of chloroform. Add 2 ml of 
internal standard solution that is solution prepared 


IS 16393 : 2015 


in B-5.1 and shake vigorously. Inject 1 ul of sample 
solution into gas chromatograph. 


B-8 CHROMATOGRAPH SETTINGS 


Injector temperature : 300°C 
Detector temperature : 320°C 
Oven temperature : 270°С 
Gas flow rates 
Nitrogen : 20 psig 
Hydrogen : 30 + 10 ml/min 
Air : 300 + 20 ml/min 
Attenuation :-4 
Range 11 
B-9 CALCULATION 
A, xW, 


Response factor (RF) = 4 xw 
2 1 


where 
А, = area of dibenzyl suburate (DBS) (internal 
standard) solution; 
W, = weight of DBS in solution, in mg; 
A, = area of DBI in standard solution; and 


W, = weight of DBI in standard solution, in mg. 


RF x mg Internal Standard x 
Area of IPA in sample x 100 
Weight of sample, in mg x 
Area of internal standard in sample 


Percent IPA = 


IS 16393 : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.3 and Table 1) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR DETERMINING THE COEFFICIENT OF SOIL AND 
GEOSYNTHETIC FRICTION BY THE DIRECT SHEAR 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


C-1.1 The shear resistance between a geosynthetic and 
a soil, or other material selected by the user, is 
determined by placing the geosynthetic and one or 
more contact surfaces, such as soil, within a direct shear 
box. А constant normal force representative of design 
stresses is applied to the specimen, and a tangential 
(shear) force is applied to the apparatus so that one 
section of the box moves in relation to the other section. 
The shear force is recorded as a function of the 
horizontal displacement of the moving section of the 
shear box. 


C-1.2 The test is performed at a minimum of three 
different normal stresses, selected by the user, to model 
appropriate field conditions. The limiting values of 
shear stresses are plotted against the applied normal 
compressive stresses used for testing. The test data are 
generally represented by a best fit straight line whose 
slope is the coefficient of friction between the two 
materials where the shearing occurred. The y-intercept 
of the straight line is the adhesion. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Shear Device — А rigid device to hold the 
specimen securely and in such a manner that a shear 
force without torque can be applied to the specimen. 
The device consists of both a stationary and moving 
container, both of which are capable of containing dry 
or wet soil and are rigid enough to not distort during 
shearing of the specimen. The travelling container shall 
be placed on firm bearings and rack, or other 
mechanism, to ensure that the movement of the 
container encounters low friction and is only in a 
direction parallel to that of the applied shear force. 


NOTE — The position of one of the containers should be 
adjustable in the normal direction to compensate for deformation 
of the substrate and geosynthetic. The container should also be 
aligned to minimize any moment produced by non-colinear 
forces on the containers. 


C-2.1.1 Square or rectangular containers are 
recommended and they should have a minimum 
dimension that is the greater of 300 mm, 15 times the 
dz; of the coarser soil used in the test, or a minimum of 
five times the maximum opening size (in plan) of the 
geosynthetic tested. The depth of each container that 
contains soil shall be a minimum of 50 mm or six times 
the maximum particle size of the coarser soil tested, 
whichever is greater. 


NOTE — d,, is the equivalent grain diameter (mm) at which 
85 percent of the soil is finer by weight. 


C-2.2 Normal Stress Loading Device, capable of 
applying and maintaining a constant uniform normal 
stress on the specimen for the duration of the test. 
Careful control and accuracy (62 percent) of the normal 
stress is important. Normal stress loading devices 
include, but are not limited to, weights, pneumatic or 
hydraulic bellows, or piston-applied stresses. For 
jacking systems, the tilting of loading plates shall be 
limited to 2? from the shear direction during shearing. 
The device shall be calibrated to determine the normal 
stress delivered to the shear plane. 


C-2.3 Shear Force Loading Device, capable of 
applying a shearing force to the specimen at a constant 
rate of displacement in a direction parallel to the 
direction of travel of the moving container. The 
horizontal force measurement system shall be 
calibrated, including provisions to measure and correct 
for the effects of friction and tilting of the loading 
system. The rate of displacement shall be controlled 
to an accuracy of 610 percent over a displacement 
range of of at least 6.35 mm/min to 0.025 mm/min. 
The system shall allow constant measurement and 
readout of the shear force applied. An electronic load 
cell or proving ring arrangement is generally used. The 
shear force loading device should be connected to the 
test apparatus in such a fashion that the point of the 
force application to the traveling container is in the 
plane of the shearing interface and remains the same 
for all tests. 


C-2.4 Displacement Indicators, for providing readout 
of the horizontal shear displacement and, if desired, 
vertical displacement of the specimen during the 
consolidation or shear phase. 


Displacement indicators such as dial indicators, or 
linear variable differential transformers (LVDT), 
capable of measuring a displacement of at least 75 mm 
for horizontal displacement and 25 mm for vertical 
displacement are recommended. The sensitivity of 
displacement indicators should be 0.02 mm for 
measuring horizontal displacement. 


C-2.5 Geosynthetic Clamping Devices, required for 
fixing geosynthetic specimens to the stationary section 
or container, the travelling container, or both, during 
shear. Clamps shall not interfere with the shearing 
surfaces within the shear box and shall keep the 


geosynthetic specimens flat during testing. Flat jaw- 
like clamping devices are normally sufficient. Textured 
surfaces or soil shall be used to support the top and/or 
bottom of the geosynthetic. These surfaces shall permit 
flow of water into and out of the test specimens. 
Selection of the type of texture surface should be based 
on the following criteria: 


C-2.5.1 The gripping surface shall be able to prevent 
the outside surface of the geosynthetic being sheared 
from slipping to the extent that the geosynthetic fails. 


C-2.5.2 The gripping surface shall be able to 
completely transfer the shear stress through the outside 
surfaces into the geosynthetic. 


C-2.5.3 The gripping surface shall not damage the 
geosynthetic and should not influence the shear 
strength behaviour of the geosynthetic. 


C-2.6 Soil Preparation Equipment, for preparing or 
compacting bulk soil samples. 


C-2.7 Miscellaneous Equipment, as required for 
preparing geosynthetic specimens. A timing device and 
equipment required for maintaining saturation of the 
geosynthetic or soil samples, if desired. 


C-3 GEOSYNTHETIC SAMPLING 


C-3.1 Take a minimum of three specimens for shearing 
in a direction parallel to the machine (or roll) direction 
of the laboratory sample and three specimens for 
shearing in a direction parallel to the cross-machine 
(cross-roll) direction. The specimens should be 
sufficiently large to fit snugly in the container described 
in C-2.1.1 and they should be of sufficient size to 
facilitate clamping. All specimens should be free of 
surface defects, etc. Take no specimens nearer the 
selvage or edge of the geosynthetic production unit 
than 1/10 the width of the unit. 


C-4 CONDITIONING 


C-4.1 Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in 
the atmosphere for testing textiles as specified in 
IS 6359. 


C-5 PROCEDURE 


C-5.1 Place soil or rigid substrate in the lower 
container, as required. Compact the soil at the specific 
moisture content to the density desired. If soil is used, 
fill the lower container with soil so that the surface of 
the soil specimen protrudes a distance equal to one- 
half of the dg; of the soil. A protrusion of 1 mm is 
sufficient for fine-grained soils. Level the soil surface 
carefully. 


C-5.2 Place the geosynthetic specimen loosely over 
the substrate. Remove all folds and wrinkles in the 


IS 16393 : 2015 


geosynthetic. Clamp or otherwise fix the end of the 
specimen temporarily, and reset it to ensure that the 
geosynthetic specimen is in complete contact with the 
soil. Verify that the protrusion of the soil substrate is 
suitable as outlined in C-5.1. 


C-5.3 Fix the two halves of the shear box in the start 
position. Clamp or fix the upper half of the shear box 
so that it cannot move during the next step of 
preparation. 


C-5.4 Place the upper substrate or soil at the desired 
density and moisture content in a manner that 
minimizes damage to the geosynthetic specimen. 
Apply the seating normal stress. 


C-5.4.1 Apply the normal seating load. 


C-5.4.2 If the seating load does not equal the normal 
load for testing, apply the normal load for testing and 
monitor the vertical displacements until the sample 
comes to equilibrium. Verify that equilibrium is 
reached before proceeding. 


C-5.4.3 After the consolidation period, reclamp the 
geosynthetic specimen to the upper or lower container, 
as required. 


C-5.5 Place the displacement indicators and assemble 
the shear loading device. Create a gap between the 
upper box and lower box. The gap should be large 
enough to prevent friction between the boxes during 
shear but small enough to prevent soil particles from 
entering into the gap and creating friction. If necessary, 
adjust the location of the horizontal loading ram to 
minimize the induced moment. 


C-5.6 Apply the shear force at a rate of 1 mm/min. 


C-5.7 Record the shear force as a function of horizontal 
displacement. Record a minimum of 50 data points 
per test. 


C-5.8 Run the test until the applied shear force remains 
constant with increasing displacement. Displacements 
ranging from 25 to 75 mm are generally required to 
generate a constant shear force for shearing between 
geosynthetic and soil interfaces. 


C-5.9 Remove the normal stress and disassemble the 
device at the end of the test. Carefully inspect and 
identify the failure surface and the area of the clamp. 
Failures should be consistent for all tests in order for 
the test data to be comparable. 


C-5.10 At the end of the test, remove the soil specimen 
(if used) to determine the density and moisture content. 


C-5.11 Repeat the procedure for a minimum of two 
additional normal compressive stresses. 


C-5.12 Plot the test data as a graph of applied shear 
force versus horizontal displacement. For this plot, 


IS 16393 : 2015 


identify the limiting value(s) of shear force. Determine 
the horizontal displacements for these shear forces. 


C-6 CALCULATION 


C-6.1 For tests using soil, calculate the initial and final 
water content, unit weight, and degree of saturation, if 
required. 


C-6.2 Calculate the apparent shear stress applied to 
the specimen for each recorded shear force as follows: 


КЫ ы." 
А, 
where 
T = shear stress, in kPa; 
F, = shear force, in kN; 
Fœ = correction to shear force for friction, in kN; 
and 
A. = corrected area, in m?. 


C-6.2.1 For tests in which the area of specimen contact 
decreases with increased displacement, a corrected area 
shall be calculated. This will occur in test devices in 
which the stationary and travelling containers have the 
same overall plan dimensions. In this case, the actual 
contact area will decrease as a function of horizontal 
displacement of the traveling container. For square or 
rectangular containers, the corrected area is calculated 
for each displacement reading using the following 
equation: 


A 2 A, - (d x W) 


where 
A, = corrected area, in m?; 
A, - initial specimen contact area, in m?; 
d = horizontal displacement of the travelling 
container, in m, and 
W = specimen contact width in a direction 


perpendicular to that of shear force 
application, in m. 


10 


C-6.2.2 No area correction may be required for tests 
in which the stationary container is larger than the 
travelling container, provided that the horizontal 
displacement of the travelling container does not result 
in a decrease in specimen contact area. 
NOTE — For devices which apply the normal stress to the 
interface as a constant force, for example by dead weights, any 


area correction applied to the shear force shall also be applied 
to the normal force. 


C-6.3 Plot the limiting values of shear stress versus 
applied normal stress for each test conducted. Limiting 
values are typically at peak shear stress and at the end 
of the test. Other limiting values may be specified by 
the user. The shear stress and normal stress axes shall 
be drawn to the same scale. 


C-6.4 Connect the data points with a straight line. Some 
judgment and experience may be required to construct 
this line, which is referred to as the strength envelope. 
The slope of the failure envelope is the coefficient of 
friction. The angle of friction is determined using the 
following equation: 


а = апт! (wj) 


where 
d, = angle of friction corresponding to the 
limiting shear stress, in degree, and 
w, = coefficient of friction corresponding to the 


limiting shear stress. Friction angle and 
adhesion intercept are typically reported for 
the peak shear stress condition. 


C-6.5 Additionally, the coefficient of friction may be 
calculated at some condition other than peak horizontal 
force, such at a specific value of shear displacement 
or at the end of the test. The procedure given in C-6.4 
can be used to determine a friction angle and adhesion 
intercept, using the shear stress and normal stress for 
this other condition. Parameters obtained for a 
condition other than peak horizontal force should be 
clearly defined and the condition for which they apply 
defined. 


IS 16393 : 2015 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacturer Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


11 


Representative(s) 


Dn A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. К. Pati (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR СОРТА 
SHRIMATI Ritika Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MANIsH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 
Suri M. Kumaraswamy PILLay (Alternate) 


Dr SwaAPAN GHOSH 
Suri К. К. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DiRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 
Suri R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. Masoop HusAIN 
Suri Ravi BHusHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Curtis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dn RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. К. Kuastacir (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALucHamy (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
Suri SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri C. К. Jan (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KaANoOI 
Dn SaunABH Vyas (Alternate) 


IS 16393 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai Dr ManisHA MATHUR 
Shrimati Ashwini Sudam (Alternate) 
Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad SHRI JANAK NANAVATY 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai Suri S. P. BORKAR 
BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (TXD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


12 


(Continued from Second Cover) 


Survivability is defined as resistance to mechanical damage during road construction and initial operation. The 
ability of a geosynthetic to survive installation and reasonable service loads shall be assured if it is to perform as 
designed. Installation damage to a geotextile is a function of the following: 


a) Geotextile thickness, 

b) Compactive effort and lift thickness, 

c) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading, 
d) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

e) Angularity of backfill, 

f) Polymer used in the manufacture of geotextile, and 

g) Geotextile manufacturing process. 


Geotexiles normally used for drainage application are mainly made from polyester (PET) or polypropylene (PP). 
PP is lighter than water, strong and very durable. PET is heavier than water, has excellent strength and creep 
properties, and is compatible with most common soil environments. Geotextiles are mainly of two types, namely, 
woven and non-woven geotextiles. Knitted and stitch bonded geotextiles are occasionally used in the manufacture 
of specialty products. Non-woven geotextiles are highly desirable for subsurface drainage and erosion control 
applications as well as for road stabilization over wet moisture sensitive soils. Out of woven geotextiles, slit film 
fabrics geotextiles are commonly used for sediment control, that is silt fence and road stabilization applications 
but are poor choices for subsurface drainage and erosion control applications. Monofilament woven geotextiles 
have better permeability making them suitable for certain drainage and erosion control applications. High strength 
multifilament woven geotextiles are primarily used in reinforcement applications. 


The Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard referred in this standard and 
has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 


International Standard Title 
ISO 10722 : 2007 Geosynthetics — Index test procedure for the evaluation of mechanical damage under 
repeated loading — Damage caused by granular material 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1025). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branche: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


