lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

W?-GMW-TZ
In

i-Jmr MIIJI*7
$IT'T1

�thmm faFhR

Indian Standard INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
PART 1 SPECIFICATION

-- SERVICE

ICS 03.080.99:35.020

@ BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK October 2007

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 7

Software and System Engineering

Sectional

Committee,

LITD 14

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (Part 1) which is identical with lSO/l EC 20000-1 :2005 `Information technology issued by the International Electrotechnical -- Service management -- Part 1: Specification' Commission (lEC) and International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Software and System Engineering Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Information Technology Division Council. The text of lSO/lEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards, practice is to use a point (,) as the decimal marker.

the current

In this adopted standard, reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard, which is to be substituted in its respective place, is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical

LSO/lEC 20000-2 : 2005 Information technology -- Service management -- Part 2: Code of practice

IS/lSO/lEC 20000-2 : 2005 Information technology -- Service management: Part 2 Code of practice

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

Introduction
This part of lSO/lEC 20000 promotes the adoption of an integrated process approach to effectively deliver managed services to meet the business and customer requirements. For an organization to function effectively it has to identify and manage numerous linked activities. An activity using resources, and managed in order to enable the transformation of inputs into outputs, can be considered as a process. Often the output from one process forms an input to another.
Co-ordinated integration and implementation of the service management processes provides the ongoing control, greater efficiency and opportunities for continual improvement. Performing the acWities and processes requires people in the service desk, service support, service delivery and operations teams to be well organized and co-ordinated. Appropriate tools are also required to ensure that the processes are effective and efficient.

It is assumed that the execution of the provisions qualified and competent people.

of this part of lSO/lEC 20000 is entrusted to appropriately

An International Standard does not purport to include all necessary provisions of a contract. Users of
International Compliance Standards are responsible for their correct application. does not of itself confer immunity from legal obligations.

with an International

Standard

iS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

hdian Standard INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
PART 1 SPECIFICATION

-- SERVICE

1
This

Scope for a service provider to deliver managed

part of lSO/lEC 20000 defines the requirements services of an acceptable quality for its customers. It may be used:

a)
b) c) d) e)

by businesses that are going out to tender for their services;
by businesses that require a consistent approach by all service providers in a supply chain;

by service providers to benchmark as the basis for an independent by an organization requirements; and which

their IT service management;

assessment; to demonstrate the ability to provide services that meet customer

needs

o

by an organization which aims to improve monitor and improve service quality.

service

through

the effective

application

of processes

to

Service Delivery Processes
CapacityManagement Swvice Continuity and Availability Management
SaNke

LevelManagement

Information Security Management Budgetingand Accounting for IT aewicea

ServiceReporting

Configuration?&magament

Release Processes
ReleaseManagement

Resolution Processes
IncidentManagement ProblemManagement

Relationship Processes
BusinaaaR&etionahlp

bfenegement
Supplier Management

Figure

1 -- Service

management

processes processes, as shown in

This part of lSO/lEC 20000 specifies a number of closely related service management Figure 1.

The relationships between the processes depend on the application within an organization and are generally too complex to model and therefore relationships between processes are not shown in this diagram.

1

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

The list of objectives and controls contained in this part of ISO/lEC 20000 are not exhaustive, and an organization may consider that additional objectives and controls are necessary to meet their particular business needs. The nature of the business relationship between the service provider and business will determine how the requirements in this part of lSO/lEC 20000 are implemented in order to meet the overall objective. As a process based standard this part of lSO/lEC 20000 is not intended for product assessment. However, organizations developing service management tools, products and systems may use both this part of lSO/lEC 20000 and the code of practice to help them develop tools, products and systems that support best practice service management.

2

Terms

and definitions
the following terms and definitions apply,

For the purposes of this document, 2,1 availability ability of a component

or sewice

to perform its required function at a stated instant or over a stated period of

time
NOTE Availability is usually expressed as a ratio of the time that the setvice is actually available for use by the business to the agreed service hours. 2.2 baseline snapshot of the state of a service or individual 2.3 change record record containing details of which configuration authorized change 2.4 configuration item (Cl) component of an infrastructure

configuration

items at a point in time (see 2.4)

items (see 2.4) are affected and how they are affected by an

or an item which is, or will be, under the control of configuration

management

NOTE Configuration items may vary widely in complexity, size and type, ranging from an entire system including all hardware, software and documentation, to a single module or a minor hardware component. 2.5 configuration management database (CMDB) database containing all the relevant details of each relationships between them 2.6 document information

configuration

item

and

details

of the

important

and its supporting

medium

NOTE 1 In this standard, records (see 2.9) are distinguished from documents by the fact that they fimction as evidence of activities. rather than evidence of intentions. NOTE 2 Examples of documents include policy statements, plans, procedures, service level agreements and contracts. 2.7 incident any event which is not part of the standard operation of a service interruption to, or a reduction in, the quality of that service NOTE This may include request questions such as "How do l...?" calls.

and which

causes

or may cause

an

2

ls/iso/lEc

20000-1

2005

2.8 problem unknown underlying 2.9 record document

cause of one or more incidents

stating results achieved

or providing evidence of activities performed

NOTE 1 In this standard, records are d!stmgulshed from documents by the fact that they function as evidence of actwlttes, rather than evidence of intentions NOTE 2 Examples of records include audit reports, requests for change, incident reports, mdwidual tralnmg records and Invoices sent to customers 2.10 release collection of new and/or environment together

changed

configuration

items

which

are

tested

and

introduced

into

the

live

2.11 request for change form or screen used to record details of a request for a change to any configuration infrastructure 2.12 service desk customer facing support group who do a high proportion 2.13 service level agreement (SLA) written agreement between a service provider levels

item within a serwce or

of the total support work

and a customer

that documents

services

and agreed service

2.14 service management management of services to meet the business requirements 2.15 service provider the organization aiming to achieve lSO/lEC 20000

3

Requirements

for a management

system
and a framework to enable the effective

Obiective: To provide a management system, includinq policies ma-nagement and implementati& of all lT-services. -

3.1 Management

responsibility

Through leadership and actions, top/executive management shall provide evidence of its commitment to developing, implementing and improving its service management capability within the context of the organization's business and customers' requirements Management a) b) shall: policy, objectives and plans; the service management

establish the service management communicate improvement; the importance

of meeting

objectives and the need for continual

3

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

c)

ensure that customer satisfaction;

requirements

are determined

and are met with the aim of improving

customer

d) e)

appoint a member of management

responsible

for the co-ordination

and management

of all services; service delivery and

determine and provide resources to plan, implement, monitor, review and improve management e.g. recruit appropriate staff, manage staff turnover; manage risks to the service management conduct reviews of service management, and effectiveness. organization at planned and services; and intervals, to ensure continuing

f) 9)

suitability,

adequacy

3.2 Documentation

requirements
and records to ensure effective planning, operation and control of

Service providers shall provide documents service management. This shall include: a) b) c) d) documented documented documented service management

policies and plans;

service level agreements, processes and procedures required by this standard; and

records required by this standard. review, approval, maintenance, disposal

Procedures and responsibilities shall be established for the creation, and control of the various types of documents and records. NOTE: The documentation can be in any form or type of medium.

3.3 Competence,

awareness

and training
shall be defined and maintained together with the

All service management roles and responsibilities competencies required to execute them effectively. Staff competencies effectively. and training

needs shall be reviewed

and managed

to enable

staff to perform their role

Top management shall ensure that its employees are aware of the relevance and importance and how they contribute to the achievement of the service management objectives.

of their activities

4

Planning

and implementing

service

management

NOTE The methodology known as "Plan-Do-Check-Act" (PDCA) can be applied to all processes. PDCA can be described as follows: a) Plan: establish the objectives and processes necessary to deliver results in accordance with customer requirements and the organization's policies; Do: implement the processes; Check monitor and measure processes and services against policies, objectives and requirements and report the results, Act take actions to continually improve process performance.

b) c)

d)

4

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

a
reqwrements Customer requt rements

r

I
Manageservices

Business

I

Management

responsibility J

I

PLAN

1

~

Customer satisfaction

I

\x
ACT Centinual !Inprovwnent

~

00 Implement service

New / changed sewicas

management

1

Service

Desk

l-l

--EzE?Ezl

Figure

2 -- Plan-Do-Check-Act

methodology

for service

management

processes in clauses 4 to 10

The model shown in Figure 2 illustrates the process and process linkages presented 4.1 Plan service management (Plan) and delivery of service management, define:

Objective: To plan the implementation Service management a) b) c) d)

shall be planned. The plans shall at a minimum service management;

the scope of the service provider's the objectives the processes and requirements

that are to be achieved by service management;

that are to be executed; including the senior responsible owner, process

the framework of management roles and responsibilities, owner and management of suppliers; the interfaces co-ordinated; between service management processes

e)

and the manner

in which the activities

are to be

0

the approach to be taken in identifying, the defined objectives; the approach for interfacing the resources,

assessing

and managing

issues and risks to the achievement

of

9) h) i) j)

to projects that are creating or modifying

services;

facilities and budget necessary to achieve the defined objectives; to support the processes; and audited and improved. responsibilities for reviewing, authorizing,

tools as appropriate

how the quality of the service will be managed,

There shall be clear management direction and documented communicating, implementing and maintaining the plans. Any process specific plans produced shall be compatible

with this service management

plan.

5

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

4.2 Implement

service management

and provide the services
objectives and plan. management

(Do)

Objective: To implement The service including: a) b) c) provider

the service management the service

shall implement

plan to manage

and deliver

the services,

allocation of funds and budgets; allocation of roles and responsibilities; documenting processes; identification and maintaining the policies, plans, procedures and definitions for each process or set of

d)

and management

of risks to the service;

e)
f)

managing teams, e.g. recruiting and developing appropriate staff and managing staff continuity;
managing facilities and budget;

g)
h) i)

managing the teams including service desk and operations;
reporting progress against the plans; and co-ordination of service management processes

4.3 Monitoring,
Objective: achieved.

measuring

and reviewing
and review

(Check)
that the service management objectives and plan are being

To monitor,

measure

The service provider shall apply suitable methods for monitoring and, where applicable, measurement of the service management processes. These methods shall demonstrate the ability of the processes to achieve planned results. Management requirements: a) b) shall conduct reviews at planned intervals to determine whether the service management

conform with the service management are effectively implemented

plan and to the requirements

of this standard;

and

and maintained

An audit programme shall be planned, taking into consideration the status and importance of the processes and areas to be audited, as well as the results of previous audits. The audit criteria, scope, frequency and methods shall be defined in a procedure. The selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall ensure objectivity and impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit their own work. The objective of service management reviews, assessments and audits shall be recorded together with the findings of such audits and reviews and any remedial actions identified. Any significant areas of noncompliance or concern shall be communicated to relevant parties.

6

iS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

4.4 Continual improvement (Act)

F

Objective: To improve the effectiveness 4.4.1 Policy

and eftlciency of service delivery and management.

There shall be a published policy on service improvement. Any non-compliance with the standard or the service management plans shall be remedied. Roles and responsibilities for service improvement activities shall be clearly defined. 4.4.2 Management of improvements shall be assessed, recorded, prioritized and authorized. A plan shall be

All suggested service improvements used to control the activity.

The service provider shall have a process in place to identify, measure, report and manage improvement activities on an ongoing basis. This shall include:
a) Improvements to an individual process that can be implemented by the process owner with the usual staff resources, e.g. performing individual corrective and preventive actions; and improvements Activities across the organization or across more than one process.

b)

4.4.3

The service provider shall perform activities to: a) collect and analyse data to baseline and benchmark deliver service and service management processes; identify, plan and implement improvements; the service provider's capability to manage and

b)
c) d) e) f) g) h)

consult with all patiles involved; set targets for improvements in quality, costs and resource utilization; from all the service management processes;

consider relevant inputs about improvements measure, report and communicate

the service improvements; procedures and plans where necessary; objectives. and

revise the service management ensure that all approved

policies, processes,

actions are delivered and that they achieve their intended

5

Planning and implementing

new or changed services
and changes to services will be deliverable and manageable at the

Objective: To ensure that new services agreed cost and service quality.

Proposals for new or changed services shall consider the cost, organizational, impact that could result from service delivery and management. The implementation of new or changed services, approved through formal change management. including closure

technical

and commercial

of a service,

shall

be planned

and

The planning and implementation shall include adequate funding and resources for service delivery and management.

to make the changes needed

7

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

The plans shall include: a) the roles and responsibilities for implementing, operating and maintaining including activities to be performed by customers and suppliers; changes to the existing service management communication to the relevant patiles; and agreements requirements; e.g. users, technical support; with the new or changed service, e.g to align with the changes in business need; framework and services; the new or changed service

b) c) d) e) f) g)

new or changed contracts manpower and recruitment

skills and training requirements, processes, measures, methods

and tools to be used in connection

capacity management, financial management;
h) i) j) budgets and time-scales; service acceptance criteria; and from operating the new service expressed by the service provider in measurable terms. into the live

the expected outcomes services

New or changed environment.

shall be accepted

before being implemented

The service provider shall report on the outcomes achieved by the new or changed service against those planned following its implementation. A post implementation review comparing actual outcomes against those planned shall be performed through the change management process.

6

Service

delivery

process

6.1 Service level management
Objective: To define, agree, record and manage levels of service. The full range of services to be provided together with the corresponding characteristics shall be agreed by the parties and recorded. Each service provided (SLAS). shall be defined, agreed and documented service level targets and workload

in one or more service

level agreements

SLAS, together with supporting service agreements, be agreed by all relevant parties and recorded.

supplier

contracts

and corresponding

procedures,

shall

The SLAS shall be under the control of the change management The SLAS shall be maintained effective over time.

process. and remain

by regular reviews by the parties to ensure that they are up-to-date

Service levels shall be monitored and reported against targets, showing both current and trend information The reasons for non-conformance shall be reported and reviewed, Actions for improvement identified during this process shall be recorded and provide input into a plan for improving the service.

8

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

6.2 Service reporting
Objective: To produce communication. agreed, timely, reliable, accurate reports for informed decision making and effective

There shall be a clear description the data source. Service reports shall be produced include: a) b) c) d) e) 9 performance

of each service report including

its identity, purpose,

audience

and details of

to meet identified

needs and customer

requirements.

Service reporting shall

against service level targets; and issues, e.g. against the SLA, security breech; e.g. volume, resource utilization; following major events, e.g. major incidents and changes;

non-compliance workload

characteristics, reporting

performance

trend information; satisfaction analysis. decisions and corrective actions shall take into consideration the findings in the service reports

Management

and shall be communicated to relevant parties. 6.3 Service continuity and availability management

Objective: To ensure that agreed service continuity and availability commitments to customers can be met in
all circumstances. Availability and service continuity risk assessments. Requirements availability of system components. requirements shall be identified on the basis of business plans, SLAS and shall include access rights and response times as well as end to end

Availability and service continuity plans shall be developed and reviewed at least annually to ensure that requirements are met as agreed in all circumstances from normal through to a major loss of service. These plans shall be maintained to ensure that they reflect agreed changes required by the business. The availability environment. and service continuity plans shall be re-tested at every major change to the business

The change management continuity plan.

process

shall assess the impact of any change

on the availability

and service

Availability shall be measured actions taken.

and recorded,

Unplanned

non-availability

shall be investigated

and appropriate

NOTE Where possible, potential issues should be predicted and preventive action taken. Service continuity plans, contact lists and the configuration management database shall be available when normal office access is prevented. The service continuity plan shall include the return to normal working. The service continuity plan shall be tested in accordance with business needs. into action plans.

All continuity tests shall be recorded and test failures shall be formulated

9

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

6.4 Budgeting

and accounting

for IT services

Objective: To budget and account for the cost of service provision. NOTE This section covers budgeting and accounting for IT services, In practice, many service providers will be involved in charging for such services. However, since charging is an optional activity, it is not covered by the standard. Service providers are recommended that where charging is in use, the mechanism for doing so is fully defined and understood by all paroles. All accounting practices in use should be aligned to the wider accountancy practices of the service provider's organization. There shall be clear policies and processes for:

a)

budgeting,

and accounting for all components including externally supplied service, people, insurance and Iicences;

IT assets, shared resources,

overheads,

b)

apportioning indirect costs and allocating direct costs to services; effective financial control and authorization.

c)

Casts shall be budgeted in sufficient detail to enable effective financial control and decision making. The service provider shall monitor and report costs against the budget, review the financial forecasts and manage costs accordingly.
Changes to services shall be costed and approved through the change management process.

6.5 Capacity

management

Objective: To ensure that the service provider has, at all times, sufficient capacity to meet the current and future agreed demands of the customer's business needs. Capacity management shall produce and maintain a capacity pIan. Capacity management shall address the business needs and include: a) b) c) current and predicted capacity and performance requirements;
identified time-scales, thresholds and costs for service upgrades;

evaluation of effects of anticipated techniques on capacity;

service upgrades, requestp for change, new technologies

and

d) e)

predicted impact of external changes, e.g. legislative; data and processes to enable predictive analysis.
shall be identified to monitor service capacity, tune service performance

Methods, procedures and techniques and provide adequate capacity.

6.6 Information

security

management

Objective: To manage information security effectively within all service activities.
NOTE lSO/lEC 17799, Information technology -- Security techniques -- Code of practice for information security management provides guidance on information security management.

Management with appropriate authority shall approve an information communicated to all relevant personnel and customers where appropriate.

security

policy

that

shall

be

10

lSllSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

Appropriate

security cbntrols shall operate to: the requirements of the information security potii;

a) b)

implement

manage risks associated with access to the service or systems.

Security controls shall be documented. The documentation shall describe the risks to which the controls relate, and the manner of operation and maintenance of the controls.

The impact of changes on controls shall be assessed before changes are implemented. Arrangements that involve external organizations having access to information systems and services shall be based on a formal agreement that defines all necessary security requirements.
Security incidents shall be reported and recorded in Ime with the inadent management procedure as soon as possible. Procedures shall be in place to ensure that all security incidents are investigated, and management

action taken. Mechanisms shall be in place to enable the types, volumes and impacts of security incidents and malfuntilons to be quantified and monitored. Atilons for improvementsidentitled during this process shall be reoorded and
provide input into a plan for improving the service.

7

Relationship

processes

7.1 General Relationship processes describe the two related aspects of Supptier Management and Business Relationship Management. 7.2 Business relationship management
the service provider and the customer

Objective: To establish based on understanding

and maintain a good relationship between dcivers. the customer and their bw%iness

The service provider shall identify and document the stakeholders and customers of the services,

The service provider and customer shall attend a service review to disouss any changes to the seMce scope, SIA, contract (if present) or the business needs at least annualty and shall hold interim meetings at agreed intervals to discuss performance, achievements, issues and action plans. These meetings shall be
documented. Other stakeholders

in the service may also be invitedto the meetings.

Changes to the contract(s), if present, and StA(s) shall follow from these metitngs as appropriate. These changes shall be subject to the change management process. The service provider shall remain aware of business needs and major changes in order to prepare to respond to these needs.
There shall be a complaints process. The definition of a formal service complaint shall be agreed with the customer. All formal service complaints shall be recorded by the service provider, investigated, acted upon, repotted and formally closed. Were a complaint is not resolved through the normal channels, escalation shall be available to the customer.

The service provider shall have a named individualor individualswho are responsible for managing customer satisfactionand the whote business relationshipprocess. A process shall exist for obtaining and acting upon

11

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

feedback from regular customer satisfaction measurements. Actions for improvement process shall be recorded and input into a plan for improving the service.

identified

during this

7.3 Supplier management Objective: To manage suppliers to ensure the provision of seamless, quality services.
NOTE 1 The scope of this standard excludes the procurement of the suppliers. NOTE 2 Suppliers may be used by the service provider for provision of some part of the service. It is the service provider who needs to demonstrate conformity to these supplier management processes. Complex relationships may be present as demonstrated in the diagram below which is used as an example:

I
Suppw
4

W@of z

Led

Suppww3

Figure 3 -- Example of relationship between service providers and suppliers
The service provider shall have documented manager responsible for each supplier, supplier management processes and shall name a contract

The requirements, scope, level of service and communication processes to be provided by the supplier(s) shall be documented in SLAS or other documents and agreed by all patiles. SLAS with the suppliers shall be aligned with the SLA(S) with the business. The interfaces between processes used by each party shall be documented and agreed. All roles and relationships between lead and subcontracted suppliers shall be clearly documented. Lead suppliers shall be able to demonstrate processes to ensure that subcontracted suppliers meet contractual requirements. A process shall be in place for a major review of the contract or formal agreement at least annually to ensure that business needs and contractual obligations are still being met.
Changes to the contract(s), if present, and SLA(S) shall follow from these reviews as appropriate or at other times as required. Any changes shall be subject to the change management process.

A process shall exist to deal with contractual disputes. A process shall be in place to deal with the expected end of service, early end of the service or transfer of service to another patty. Performance against service level targets shall be monitored and reviewed. Actions for improvement identified during this process shall be recorded and input into a plan for improving the service.

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

8

Resolution

processes

8.1 Background
Incident and problem management are separate processes, although they are closely linked.

8.2 Incident management Objective: To restore agreed service to the business as soon as possible or to respond to service requests. All incidents shall be recorded. Procedures shall be adopted to manage the impact of incidents.
Procedures

shall define the recording, prioritization, business impact, classification, resolution and formal closure of all incidents.

updating, escalation,

The cwstomer shall be kept informed of the progress oftheir reported incident or service request and alerted in advance if their service levels cannot be met and an action agreed. All staff involved in incident management shall have access to relevant information such as known errors, problem resolutions and the configuration management database (CMDB).
Major incidents shall be classified and managed according to a process.

8.3 Problem management Objective: To minimize disruption to the business by proactive identification and analysis of the cause of incidents and by managing problems to closure.
All identified problems shall be recorded. They shall

Procedures shall be adopted to identify, minimize or avoid the impact of incidents and problems. define the recording, classification, updating, escalation, resolution and closure of all problems. Preventive action shall be taken to reduce potential problems, and types. e.g. following

trend analysis of incident volumes

Changes required in order to correct the underlying cause of problems shall be passed to the change management process.
Problem resolution shall be monitored, reviewed and reported on for effetilveness, information on known errors and corrected

Problem management shall be responsible for ensuring up-to-date problems is available to incident management.

Actions for improvement identified during this process shall be recorded and input into a plan for improving the

service.

13

lSllSO/IEC

20000-1:2005

9

Control processes
management

9.1 Configuration

Objective: To define and control the components of the service and infrastructure and maintain accurate configurationinformation. There shall bean integrated approach to change and configuration management planning, The service provider shall define the interface to financial asset accounting processes. NOTE Financial assetaccounting fallsoutsidethescopeof thissection. There shall be a policyon what is defined as a configurationitem and its constituent components, The information to be recorded for each item shall be defined and shall include the relationships and documentation necessary fOr effective service management. Configuration management shall provide the mechanisms for identifyhg, controlling and tracking versions of identifiable components of the service and infrastructure. It shall be ensured that th,e degree of control is sufficientto meet the business needs, risk of failure and service criticality. Configuration management shall provide informationto the change management process on the impact of a requested change on the service and infrastructureconfigurations. Changes to configuration items shall be traceable and auditable where appropriate, e.g. for changes and movements of software and hardware. Configurationcontrol procedures shall ensure that the integrityof systems, services and service components are maintained. A baseline of the appropriate configurationitems shall be taken before a release to the live environment. Master copies of digital configuration items shall be controlled in secure physical or electronic libraries and referenced to the configurationrecords, e.g. software, testing products,support documents. All configurationitems shall be uniquely identifiable and recorded in a CMDB to which update access shall be strictlycontrolled.The CMDB shall be actively managed and verified to ensure its reliabilityand accuracy. The status of configuration items, their versions, location, related changes and problems and associated documentationshall be visible to those who require it. Configurationaudit procedures shall include recording deficiencies, initiating corrective ac40ns and reporting on the outcome. 9.2 Change management Objective: To ensure all changes are assessed, approved, implemented and reviewed in a controlled manner. Service and infrastructurechanges shall have a clearly defined and documented scope.
All requests for change shall be recorded and classified, e.g. urgent, emergency, major, minor. Requests for

changes shall be assessed for their risk, impact and business benefit. The change management process shall include the manner in which the change shall be reversed or remedied if unsuccessful. Changes shall be approved and then checked, and shall be implemented in a controlled manner All changes shall be reviewed for success and any actionstaken after implementation.

14

lS/lSO/lEC

20000-1:2005

There shall be policies and procedures The scheduled

to control the authorization

and implementation

of emergency

changes.

implementation dates of changes shall be used as the basis for change and release scheduling. A schedule that contains details of all the changes approved for implementation and their proposedimplementationdates shall be maintained and communicated to relevant parties.

Change records shall be analysed regularly to detect increasing levels of changes, frequently recurring types, emerging trends and other relevant information. The results and conclusions drawn from change analysis shall be recorded.
Actions for improvement improving the service. identified from change management shall be recorded and input into a plan for

10 Release process

10.1 Release managementprocess
Objective: To deliver, distributeand track one or more changes in a release into the live environment. NOTE The relea$e management process should be integrated with the configuration and change management processes.
The release policy stating the frequency and type of releases shall be documented and agreed.

The service provider shall plan with the business the release of services, systems, software and hardware. Plans on how to roll out the release shall be agreed and authorized by all relevant parties, e.g. customers, users, operations and support staff. The process shall include the manner in which the release shall be reversed or remedied if unsuccessful

Plans shall record the release dates and deliverables and refer to related change requests, known errors and problems. The release management process shall pass suitable information to the incident management process. Requests for change shall be assessed for their impact on release plans. Release management procedures shall include the updating and changing of configuration information and change records. Emergency releases shall be managed according to a defined process that interfaces to the emergency change management process. A controlled acceptance test environment shall be established to build and test all releases prior to distribution.

Release and distributionshall be designed and implemented so that the integrity of hardware and software is

maintained during installation,handling, packaging and delivery. Success and failure of releases shall be measured. Measurements shall include incidents related to a release in the period following a release. Analysis shall include assessment of the impact on the business, IT operations and support staff resources, and shall provide input to a plan for improvingthe service.

15

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of /ndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffkmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest

amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of '61S Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions',
This Indian Standard

has been developed

from Dot: No, LITD 14 (2061) Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

Amendments Amendment No.

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones 23230131, 23233375,23239402 Website Regional Offices: Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 160022

www. bis.org. in Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499, 23378626, 23378561 23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 22542519, 22542315

Eastern :

{

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

Southern : C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113 {

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR, PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THiRUVANANTHAPU RAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printedat Power

Printers,

New

Dellli

