**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  11851  (1986) :  Method  of  evaluation  of  acceleration  of 
automotive  vehicles  [TED  4:  Automotive  Braking  Systems] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


UDC    629^13-072  18:11851-1986 


Indian  Standard  (  Reaffirmed  2002 ) 

METHOD  OF  EVALUATION  OF  ACCELERATION  OF 
AUTOMOTIVE  VEHICLE 


1.  Scope— -  Gives  the  method  of  evaluation  of  acceleration  of  automotive  vehicle  such  as  trxick,  bus, 
car,  and  jeep. 

2.  Features  of  Test  Track 

2.1  The  test  track  shall  be  b  roadway,  clear,  smooth,  dry,  covered  with  asphaft,  concrete  or  similar 
material.  The  longitudinal  slope  shall  not  exceed  1  percent  and  the  lateral  slope  shall  not  exceed 
3  percent  in  the  straight  portion.  Also  the  difference  in  attitude  between  any  two  points  on  the  track 
shall  not  exceed  one  metre. 

2.2  The  test  track  shall  allow  a  steady  speed  to  be  marntained.  It  shall  be  in  a  straight  linexjr  form  a 
closed  circuit  with  at  least  2  000  m  in  length  and  having  a  minimum  radius  of  200  m. 

2.3  The  measuring  stretch  of  track  shall  have  adequate  length  on  either  ends  for  the  purposes  of 
achieving  the  test  speed  and  stopping  the  vehicle  at  the  end  of  the  trial. 

3.  Preparation  of  Vehicle 

3.1  The  vehicle  shall  conform  in  all  its  parts,  components  and  systems  to  the  design  and/or  production 
series  as  applicable. 

3.2  The  vehicle  shall  be  run-in  as  per  the  manufacturer's  recommended  practice. 

3.3  The  adjustments  of  fuel  system;  ignition  system;  grade,  quality  and  quantity  of  lubricants  for  the 
various  moving  parts;  adjustment  of  brakes;  clutch;  idling  speed,  etc,  shall  conform  to  the 
manufacturer's  recommendation. 

3.4  Before  test  the  vehicle  including  all  its  parts,  components  and  systems  shall  have  reached  a  stable 
temperature  normal  to  the  vehicle  operation. 

3.5  All  the  fuel  enrichening  devices  other  than  those  required  for  normal  working  of  the  vehicle  shall 
be  made  inoperative. 

3.6  The  vehicle  shall  be  loaded  to  the  maximum  total  weight  specified  by  the  manufacturer  and  load 
distribution  between  the  axles  shall  be  as  per  the  manufacturer's  specification. 

3.7  The  vehicle  shall  be  fitted  with  tyres  which  have  not  covered  more  than  10  percent  of  their 
expected  life.  The  tyres  shall  be  inflated  to  the  pressure  recommended  in  IS  :  10914  (  Part  2  )-1985 
'Specification  for  pneumatic  tyres  for  automotive  vehicles:  Part  2  Truck,  bus,  light  truck  tyres  —  diagonal 
ply'  and  IS  :  10914  ( Part  3)-1985  'Specification  for  pneumatic  tyres  for  automotive  vehicles  :  Part  3 
Passenger  car  tyres —diagonal  ply'  corresponding  the  maximum  total  weight  specified  by  the  manu- 
facturer.   The  tread  depth  measurement  may  be  used  to  assess  the  tyre  life. 

3.8  During  testing  all  the  windows  of  the  cabin  shall  be  closed  and  overhead  ventilating 
system/hatches  where  provided  shall  be  lowered,  other  than  required  for  instrumentation  purposes. 

4.  Test  Conditions 

4.1  Atmospheric  Conditions  —  Shall  be  as  under: 

a)  Atmospheric  pressure  86  to  106  kPa; 

b)  Temperature  288  to  308  K; 

c)  Relative  humidity  45  to  75  percent; 

d)  Maximum  wind  speed  3  m/s  (in  any  direction);  and 

e)  Maximum  wind  speed  for  gusts,  8  m/s. 


Adopted  16  October  1986 


©  May  1987,  BIS 


Gr  2 


BUREAU      OF       INDIAN      STANDARDS 

MANAK     BHAVAN,     9     BAHADUR     SHAH    ZAFAR    MAR6 

NEW    DELHI    (110002 


IS  s  11851  -198Ji 

4.1.1  if  the  conditions  at  testing  are  different  from  those  given  in  4.1,  the  values  shall  be  corrected 
to  standard  conditions. 

4.1.2  Air  c/ens/fy  —  When  the  vehicle  is  tested  air  density  as  described  in  4,1.2.1  shall  not  differ  by 
more  than  7*5  percent  from  the  air  density  under  reference  conditions. 

4.1.2.1  The  air  density  shall  be  calculated  from  the  formula: 

where 

dr  =  air  density  at  test  conditions, 
c/q  ==  air  density  at  reference  condition  ( 0*919  7 ). 
Hj  =  atmospheric  pressure  at  test  site  expressed  in  kPa, 
Hq  =  atmospheric  pressure  at  reference  conditions  kPa, 
To  ==  temperature  at  reference  condition  298  K,  and 
T\  =  almospheric  temperature  at  the  test  site  expressed  in  Kelvin. 

4.1  Other  Condition$lFeatures  —  \t  is  recommended  that  conditions  and  safety  features  given 
in  4.2.1  to  4.2.3  shall  be  observed  during  the  test, 

4.2.1  The  head  lights,  parking  lights  and  the  emergency  flasher  lights  (where  applicable )  shall  be 
kept  operative  during  the  trial. 

4.2.2  The  test  vehicle  shall  carry  a    board    prominently    placed,   indicating    that  the  test  is  in 
progress. 

4.2.3  Fitment  and  operation   of  all   instruments  shall   be  such  as  not  to  hamper  the  visibility  or 
freedom  of  the  driver  to  have  proper  control  of  the  vehicle  at  all  times. 

5.  Evaluation  of  Acceleration 

5.1  The  acceleration  performance  shall  be  expressed  as  the  time  taken  in  seconds: 

a)  to  cover  a  distance  of  1  ODO  m  from  start  or 

b)  to  achieve  speed  of  90  kmph  or  to  the  nearest  multiple  of  10  kmph  to  the  maximum  speed, 
whichever  is  less. 

5.2  The  engine,  at  the  starting  point  of  the  measuring  strip  or  track  shall  be  run  at  the  low  idling  speed 
as  specified  by  the  manufacturer.  The  centreline  of  the  front  wheel  of  the  vehicle  shall  coincide  within 
the  starting  point  of  the  measuring  strip  if  distance  measurement  is  based  on  fixed  marks  on  the  track. 
If  instruments  such  as  fifth  wheel  or  opticle  devices  are  used  for  the  measurement  of  distance  the 
location  points  of  such  instruments  shall  be  taken  as  references  instead  of  the  front  wheel. 

5.3  Starting  gear  shall  be  as  per  manufacturer  recommendations  and  the  vehicle  shall  be  accelerated  to 
achieve  speed  in  shortest  duration  in  different  gears  and  gears  shall  be  changed  for  different  speeds  as 
recommended  by  the  manufacturer  and  shall  be  recorded  in  the  test  report. 

5.4  The  time  taken  to  cover  the  distance  or  to  achieve  the  speed  as  per  5.1  shall  be  established 
within  ±  07  percent  of  the  measured  time. 

5.5  The  test  shall  be  repeated  in  opposite  direction. 

5.8  The  acceleration  performance  shall  be  equal  to  the  arithmatic  average  of  time  taken  for  6  readings 
( 3  each  in  either  direction )  which  do  not  differ  by  more  than  ±  5  percent  from  mean  expressed  in 
seconds  rounded  off  to  the  nearest  second  place  of  decimal, 

5.7  For  the  purposes  of  detailed  analysis,  the  tests  may  be  conducted  for  distances  starting  from  100  m 
and  increased  in  steps  of  100  m  and  speeds  similarly  from  10  kmph  onwards  in  steps  of  10  kmph  each. 

2 


IS:  11851  -1986 

EXPLANATORY     NOTE 

The  overall  performance  of  an  automotive  vehicle  is  a  function  of  performance  of  its  various 
components,  systems,  instrumentation,  etc.  Acceleration  of  an  automotive  vehicle  is  an  important 
parameter  of  its  performance.  This  standard  for  evaluation  of  acceleration  of  automotive  vehicles  is  an 
attempt  to  provide  a  method  for  measuring  this  parameter  on  uniform  basis. 

For  measurement  of  accelaration  of  scooters  and   motorcycles  reference  may  be  made  to 
IS  :  10407-1983  'Method  of  evaluation  of  acceleration  performance  of  scooters  and  motorcycles'. 


Printed  at  Arcee  Press .  New  Delhi,  India 


