WaltA Ald IS 3661 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


oth ga der ar et com — fare 


( FET FRAT ) 


Bulk Milk Cooling Tanks — 
Specification 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 65.040.10 


© BIS 2023 


dit get st 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM HAF, 9 gert ME HH AMT, Ag ect - 110002 
Nee” ` MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2023 Price Group 12 


Dairy Products and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Dairy Products and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


The bulk milk cooling tank is intended to cool and store milk in chilled condition. The equipment is designed for 
bulk refrigeration of fresh raw milk and storage of refrigerated raw milk. 


This standard was first published in 1966 and covered only rectangular tank geometry. In view of the technical 
advances in the bulk milk cooling technology, the standard was revised in 2019 to incorporate a number of 
different bulk milk cooling geometries (rectangular, vertical, cylindrical, open horizontal-semi cylindrical, 
horizontal cylindrical, elliptical, etc) and capacities varying from 250 litres to 20 000 litres, which are being used 
in the industry. Also, the specifications were updated and standard was made at par with international standards. 


This second revision has been brought out to update the clauses on agitator, milk thermostat, dipstick, air 
ventilator, type of refrigerant used, switch gear, testing of electrical equipment, hygiene and CIP system, testing 
conformance for thermal resistance, cooling tests, protection by outer casing and covers against ingress of water, 
etc. Provision/clarification has been given for use of test liquid other than milk for testing certain requirements. 
References of Indian Standards have also been updated. 


The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of the standard is listed in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
BULK MILK COOLING TANKS — SPECIFICATION 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies methods of test and 
requirements for design, construction and 
performance of bulk milk cooling (BMC) tanks. It 
applies to bulk milk cooling tanks with automatic 
control intended for fixed installation in farms or at 
milk collecting points. 


1.2 It only applies to tanks for two milkings (in 24 h) 
and four milkings (in 48 h). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this Indian Standard, the 
following definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Bulk Milk Cooling Tanks — An equipment 
used for bulk refrigeration of fresh raw milk and 
bulk storage of refrigerated raw milk. 


3.2 Automatic Control — An arrangement by 
which the equipment functions without requiring 
action by the operator under normal operating 
conditions. 


3.3 Atmospheric Tanks — The tank whose inner 
vessel is designed to operate at atmospheric 
pressure. 


3.4 Agitator — A device for mixing the milk to 
promote heat transfer and ensure uniform 
distribution of butterfat and achievement of 
uniform temperature. 


3.5 Reference Position — The position for correct 
installation and operation of the tank, as stated by 
the manufacturer. 


3.6 Maximum Volumes — The volume 
(expressed in litres) to which the inner vessel can 
be filled without overflowing in its reference 
position and without agitation. 


3.7 Gross Volume — The volume (expressed in 
litres) to which the inner vessel can be filled 
without overflowing in its reference position and 
with agitation. 


3.8 Rated Volume — The volume (expressed in 
litres) of maximum permissible filling of the tank 
under operating conditions, as specified by the 
manufacturer. 


3.9 Direct Cooling System — The system in which 
the evaporator of refrigerating system is in direct 
thermal contact with the milk or the inner vessel. 


3.10 Milking — It is the quantity of milk added to 
the tank at one milking operation. 


3.11 Tank for Two Milkings — Tank is designed 
for cooling and storing its rated volume every 24 h 
and intended to be emptied for milk collection each 
day. 


3.12 Tank for Four Milkings — Tank is designed 
for cooling and storing its rated volume every 48 h 
and intended to be emptied for milk collection 
every two days. 


3.13 Normal Operating Conditions — The 
conditions when the tank is in use for the cooling 
and storage of milk in accordance with its design 
requirements and all accessories are functioning 
effectively. 


3.14 Ambient Atmosphere — The atmosphere 
surrounding the tank and in front of the air-cooled 
condenser of the refrigerating plant. 


3.15 Ambient Temperature — The average 
temperature of the ambient atmosphere. 


3.16 Performance Temperature (PT) — The 
ambient temperature when milk cooling time is 
measured. 


3.17 Safe Operating Temperatures (SOT) — 
The higher limit (range) of ambient temperatures at 
which the tank/equipment is expected/required to 
function effectively. 


3.18 Initial Temperature — The average 
temperature of the milk at the time of its entry into 
the tank. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


3.19 Storage Temperature — The average 
temperature to which the milk is reduced (cooled) 
by cooling for storage. 


3.20 Cooling Time — The time required for 
cooling a milking from initial temperature to 
TALC: 


3.21 Cooling Cycle — The time period between 
two successive milk collections. For tanks, the 
cooling cycle is 24 h for two milkings and 48 h for 
four milkings. 


3.22 Specific Energy Consumption — The 
energy consumption measured as the average 
consumption of all components (excluding 
cleaning) during a cooling cycle under the testing 
conditions appropriate to the performance class. It 
is generally expressed as watt hours per litre cooled 
milk (Wh/litre). 


3.23 Milk — The normal mammary secretion 
derived from complete milking of healthy milch 
animal without either addition thereto or extraction 
therefrom. 


3.24 Water — The water, suitable for human 
consumption which is as per the requirements 
specified in IS 10500. 


3.25 Test Liquid — The water used, in place of 
milk, for test purpose. 


NOTE — The cooling time for water is almost same as 
that for milk. 


3.26 Filling — It is measured volume of milk in the 
tank, at 4 °C. 


3.27 Temperature of the Milk — The average 
temperature of milk at a particular moment. 


3.29 Hot Point of the Milk — The maximum 
temperature of milk at a given point during storage. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Tank Construction 
4.1.1 General 


The equipment shall be designed for bulk 
refrigeration of fresh raw milk and storage of 
refrigerated raw milk. The tank shall be so designed 
that, all surfaces in contact with milk are readily 
accessible for either manual cleaning or cleaning in 
place (CIP). The tank shall consist of an inner vessel, 
an outer shell, a suitable insulation layer, a milk 
collection/receiving opening, a milk outlet, an 


agitator for agitation, a measuring device/system for 
volume and temperature of milk as basic 
requirement (see Fig. 1). 


The dimensions of the equipment shall be so 
designed that milk collection, discharge and 
inspection should not be a constraint at any 
condition. In case of such limitation with respect to 
optimum design standard, suitable arrangements 
shall be provided with the equipment to overcome 
the issues against above potential requirements. 
Stainless steel filters shall be provided at the top of 
balance tank or an inline stainless steel filter shall be 
provided between balance tank and milk pump or 
both may be provided. 


4.1.1.1 The tank and the associated equipment shall 
be designed to provide sufficient mechanical 
strength for transportation and handling and to give 
satisfactory and safe operation under normal 
condition. 


4.1.1.2 It shall be so constructed as to prevent any 
contamination of milk and any corrosion of 
materials of construction and enable cleaning, 
disinfection and inspection to be carried out without 
difficulty. 


4.1.2 Classification and Design 
4.1.2.1 The tanks are classified as follows: 
a) Based on rated capacity 


Each bulk milk tank shall be designated by its rated 
capacity. This shall be the maximum volume of milk 
for which the tank is designed to operate and shall 
be tested. 


b) Based on accessibility: 


1) Open type (see Fig. 2A) 
2) Closed type (see Fig. 2B) 


Open type bulk milk coolers shall be designed for 
manual cleaning and for closed type bulk milk 
coolers, cleaning-in-place (CIP) should be adopted. 


c) Based on construction: 


1) Vertical 
2) Horizontal 


d) Based on shape: 
1) Rectangular 
2) Cylindrical 
3) Elliptical 
4) Semicircular 
5) Polygon 


IS 3661 : 2023 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL BULK MILK COOLING TANK 


4.1.2.2 All component parts, the surfaces of which 
come into contact with milk, shall be made of 
stainless steel of designation SS 304 
(Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to IS 5522 
or IS 6911. 


NOTE — It is recommended that CIP tapping to the spray 
balls are self-drainable to prevent stagnation of milk/CIP 
chemicals in the pipelines. 


4.1.2.3 All other parts, the surfaces of which do not 


come into contact with the milk, shall also be made 
of stainless steel of designation SS 304 
(Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to IS 5522 
or IS 6911. 


4.1.2.4 Materials used for gaskets or rubber parts 
shall be non-toxic, resistant to cleaning and 
disinfecting agents under normal conditions of 
temperature and dosage and shall not impart taint to 
milk. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


FIG. 2B CLOSED TYPE BULK MILK COOLING TANK 


FIG. 2 BULK MILK COOLING TANK BASED ON ACCESSIBILITY 


4.1.3 Inner Vessel 


The inner vessel shall be so designed that the 
available volume of the tank should be 8 percent to 
10 percent more than the rated volume at which it 
shall be tested, to avoid agitation spillage. Every 
component which is permanently attached within 
the inner vessel shall be tungsten inert gas 
(TIG)/laser welded to it. The weld joints to be used 
with filler material should be compatible with the 
parent metal. All components for which it is not 
practical to weld the same to the inner vessel, shall 
be fastened so that they can be easily removed for 
cleaning. All metallic surfaces including weld joints 
of the inner vessel should be ground smooth not less 
than 150 grit (or welds shall have radii not less than 
3 mm and the angles shall be not less than 1.57 rad, 
that is 90°). If the tank is fitted with automatic or 
semi-automatic cleaning equipment, care shall be 
taken to ensure that all internal surfaces of the inner 
vessel can be cleaned effectively as per needs when 
the equipment is used in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instruction. If the tank is equipped 
with a device for measuring the volume of milk by 
reference to linear measurements in accordance with 
the regulations of the relevant authorities, the inner 


vessel shall be so constructed and supported that it 
is rigid and free from deformation under normal 
conditions of transport and use. 


4.1.3.1 Actual capacities shall be determined with 
the tank filled to a level that the sprayers and 
sprinklers for clean-in-place (CIP) provision shall 
not come in contact with the milk and milk should 
not drain outside via the washing spray system, for 
example rotary sprayer and sprinklers/spray jet with 
forks and deflector plate. 


4.1.3.2 All welded joints shall be free from porosity 
and brittleness. The joints shall be well-dressed and 
finished smooth, particularly those joints which 
come into contact with milk. 


4.1.3.3 The breast piece/cover shall be made of 
stainless steel of designation SS 304 
(Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to IS 5522. 


4.1.3.4 Any permanent attachment to the inner 
vessel shall be welded with fillet of radius not less 


than 3 mm. 


4.1.3.5 Where separate from the sheathing, the 


breast piece/cover shall be turned downwards to 
form either a lap joint or butt joint. In case of lap 
joint, the overlap shall not be less than 15 mm and 
lapping edges to be welded smoothly. 


4.1.3.6 All parts of the inner vessel shall drain 
directly to the outlet through an outlet valve. It shall 
have the following features: 


a) In vertical cylindrical tanks, the slope of 
the chord(s) from the internal corner at the 
bottom of the vertical sides shall be free 
draining. With the tank in its reference 
position and containing 40 litres of milk, at 
least 39.8 litres shall run out in 1 min by 
gravity; 

b) Rectangular tanks with shallow V-bottom 
shall have a longitudinal fall not less than 
1 in 25 combined with a transverse fall to 
the longitudinal axis also not less than 
1 in 25 to the horizontal or the slope may 
be ensured by inclining the tank/adjusting 
the feet; and 

c) All inside corners of the inner vessel which 
form an angle of less than 2.36 radians 
(135°) shall have radii not less than 25 mm. 
All other corners in the inner vessel shall 


IS 3661 : 2023 


have radii not less than 3 mm 
(see Fig. 3). 


4.1.4 Outer Casing 


The outer casing shall be rigid, shall prevent the 
ingress of water and shall be free draining. The 
distance between the outer casing of the tank and the 
floor shall be such that, the base of the tank (except 
the supports or feet and the outlet pipe) when 
installed on a horizontal floor shall be situated above 
two imaginary planes, having a gradient of | in 10 
to the horizontal. The line of intersection being 
horizontal and minimum 100 mm above the floor 
(see Fig. 4). 


4.1.4.1 The specified bottom clearance will increase 
depending upon the geometry, number of bends, 
angle of inclination and outlet length. The ground 
clearance under the outlet fitting shall not be less 
than 100 mm. 


4.1.4.2 If the tank is designed to be installed on a 
solid plinth, the above requirement does not apply, 
but precaution shall be taken to ensure that water 
shall not enter between the tank outer casing and 
solid plinth. 


FIG. 4 CLEARANCE BETWEEN TANK AND FLOOR 


IS 3661 : 2023 


4.1.4.3 The outer casing of the tank shall be made of 
stainless steel of designation SS 304 
(Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to IS 5522 
or IS 6911. 


4.1.4.4 While designing the tank, outer casing shall 
be designed with suitable number of air vents at the 
bottom for void free insulation in between inner 
vessel and outer casing. The vents to be plugged 
properly with suitable water and corrosion resistant 
non-toxic food grade material to prevent any 
insulation damage by external means. 


4.1.4.5 The outer casing of the tank shall be 
designed such that, connections for cleaning in place 
(wherever applicable), and refrigerant charging and 
agitator shaft holder shall not get damaged during 
assembly and transportation. 


4.1.4.6 The outer casing shall be constructed and 
assembled on the inner vessel in such a way that, 
inner vessel horizontal slope shall be accommodated 
with a calculated gap from one end to the other to 
prevent under insulation or over insulation 
thickness. 


4.1.4.7 The outer casing surface finish shall be 
maintained uniformly throughout the tank externals 
if designed with butt or overlap weld joints. 


4.1.4.8 Any part of the outer casing which is not 
vertical shall be designed to drain effectively. 


4.1.5 Thermal Insulation 


The insulating material shall be non-settling and 
shall not be liable to displacement during transit or 
service. The sides, ends, bottom and top of the tanks 
shall be insulated to reduce stray heat gains during 
cooling or refrigerated milk storage. The open type 
tanks shall be insulated from the sides, ends and 
bottom except top cover. 


4.1.5.1 The amount of insulation applied shall be 
such that the rise in the mean temperature of the 
content of a full tank at rated capacity initially at 
4 °C over a period of 12 h at performance 
temperature (38 °C for Class A) shall not exceed 
3 °C. 


4.1.5.2 The insulating medium to be employed shall 
be injectable polyols and isocyanides polyurethane 
foam (PUF) and shall be non-hygroscopic and non- 
settling type. 


4.1.5.3 An effective vapour barrier shall seal the 
external surfaces of the insulating medium and 
prevent the ingress of moisture. 


4.1.5.4 The insulation medium used and thickness of 
the insulation shall not create any adverse effect on 
thermo wells, thermometers, thermostats and 
temperature sensors. 


4.1.6 External Finish 


4.1.6.1 Vertical joints in the outer casing shall be 
sealed by lapping. Cover strips, where used, shall be 
overlapped by the breast piece at their upper ends by 
not less than 10 mm each side. In case of butt joint 
in outer casings, the welding bead shall be made 
smooth enough to visualize as an integral part. 


4.1.6.2 Any part of the outer casing which is not 
vertical shall drain effectively. The tank should be 
designed in such a manner that no stagnation of 
liquid shall occur on the outer shell. 


4.1.7 Inspection Openings in Breast Piece and 
Sheathing 


The tank shall be designed and constructed with an 
opening for inspection of the tank along with all 
sorts of volume and temperature control systems 
incorporated in the tank internally. These tanks shall 
have minimum one opening with dimensions at least 
400 mm x 300 mm elliptical and for small tanks with 
open type design shall have minimum one opening 
with a diameter not less than 180 mm. 


4.1.7.1 Inspection panels or apertures of sufficient 
size shall be provided to facilitate access to 
thermometer sensitive elements, thermostats or 
other components for inspection or replacement. 


4.1.7.2 Inspection opening in nearly horizontal 
surfaces in breast piece and sheathing shall be 
provided with: 


a) Up stands of not less than 10 mm, 

b) Covers with down turned edges to overlap 
the up stands by not less than 5 mm, and 

c) Covers with handles or lifting knobs. 


4.1.7.3 Inspection openings in vertical surfaces in 
the sheathing shall be provided with covers which 
shall, 


a) Be overlapped on the upper edge by 
15 mm, 

b) Overlap all edges except the upper by 
15 mm, 

c) Be provided with a suitable seal/gasket all 
around the overlap edges, and 

d) Be positively retained in position. 


4.1.8 Tank Supports 


A tank which is not designed for a mounting on a 
solid plinth shall be fitted with adjustable support of 
feet to permit a slope gradient not greater than 1 : 50 
in any direction. 


4.1.8.1 The rigid supports provided on the tank 
should be made of stainless steel of designation 
SS 304 (Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to 
IS 5522 or IS 6911 with sturdy design. The number 
and position of support/feet shall be adequate to 
carry the load. 


4.1.8.2 When the tank is installed, these supports 
shall be readily accessible, and shall be positioned 
not less than 350 mm from the nearest tank wall, 
unless the latter is curved in the vertical plane to give 
access to the underside of the tank. 


4.1.8.3 If the tank is equipped with a device for 
measuring the volume of milk by reference to linear 
measurement, the support or feet shall be so 
constructed that they can be sealed after the tank has 
been levelled. 


4.1.9 Bridge 


Any bridge or bracket or gusset required to be 
supported from the inner vessel shall be welded to 
the it, shall be provided with upturned edges not less 
than 10 mm high and shall be sloped to drain clear 
of the inner vessel. Every component which is 
permanently attached to the bridge shall be welded 
to it. 


4.1.9.1 Bridges covering one end or segment of a 
tank shall be inclined at a minimum of | in 10 to the 
horizontal with the help of an adjustable leg lift. 


4.1.9.2 All bridges and apertures therein shall be 
provided with upstanding edges not less than 10 mm 
high, except that apertures smaller than 75 mm in 
diameter may have up stands not less 5 mm high. 
Surfaces shall be sloped to discharge any 
accumulation of moisture clear of the open tank top. 


4.1.10 Main Covers for Inner Vessel 


The covers for the tank designed to be cleaned 
manually shall be lockable and so constructed that 
these can be operated sufficiently to enable all parts 
to be cleaned easily by hand. Safe support shall be 
provided for hinged covers in the open position. In 
case of open type tanks, where the breast piece act 
like a cover, it shall be so designed and constructed 
that, the cover is positioned at an elevation of 
78° to 88° to the horizontal plane without falling 
down automatically. The open type tanks shall be 
designed to keep it in opened condition to an 
elevation of 40° to 55° to the horizontal by a stopper. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


4.1.10.1 One or more close fitting covers, so 
designed as to lift off when desired, shall be 
provided for openings in the top of the tank. Covers 
shall be sloped to the outside to provide free 
drainage for any moisture and shall be turned down 
at the outer edge to overlap the up stand. 


4.1.10.2 Covers shall be provided with means to 
support them in the open position. Covers shall 
allow easy inspection and sampling of the milk and 
operation of the outlet control and dipstick (where 
provided). 


4.1.10.3 Covers shall be made out of stainless steel 
of designation SS 304 (Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) 
conforming to IS 5522 or IS 6911. 


4.1.10.4 All apertures shall be provided with 
upstanding edges, and separate removable covers 
shall be provided to fit over the apertures. The up 
stand shall be not less than 5 mm for apertures up to 
75 mm in diameter and 10 mm for all others. 
Downturned edges of aperture cover shall be not less 
than 10 mm. 


4.1.10.5 Where covers are intended to support 
strainers or hoppers for milk reception, the design 
shall be such that the whole of the body of the 
strainer or hopper is at all times completely above 
the level of the milk when the tank is filled to a level 
30 mm below the lowest point on the up stand of the 
inner vessel, and the covers shall have sufficient 
strength to support the additional loads involved. 


4.1.10.6 All handles attached to covers shall be 
external and unless of integral construction shall be 
attached by welding to provide smooth hygienic 
surfaces. 


4.1.10.7 Internal radii of covers shall not be less than 
3 mm. 


4.1.10.8 The covers for tanks designed to be cleaned 
manually shall be so constructed that they can be 
opened sufficiently to enable all parts to be cleaned 
easily by hand. Safe support shall be provided for 
hinged covers in the open position. Provisions shall 
be there to ensure the safety of the operator during 
cleaning. 


4.1.10.9 The covers for tanks designed to be cleaned 
by non-manual methods shall permit inspection of 
all parts which may come into contact with milk. 


4.1.11 Fabrication and Surface Finish 


The tank and associated equipment shall be designed to 
provide sufficient mechanical strength to allow 
transportation and handling and give satisfactory 
and safe operation under normal condition. It shall 
be so constructed as to prevent any contamination 


IS 3661 : 2023 


of the milk and any corrosion of the material 
of construction and to enable cleaning, disinfection 
and inspection. The tank shall be fabricated so as to 
enable ease of material handling and packing to 
prevent any damage during transportation, 
installation and commissioning. All metallic 
surfaces including weld joints shall be ground 
smooth not less than 150 grit (or welds shall have 
radii not less than 3 mm and the angles shall be not 
less than 1.57 rad that is 90°). 


4.1.11.1 The bulk milk cooling tank shall be 
fabricated in such a manner as to conform to the 
requirements laid down in the standard. 


4.1.12 Tank Fittings 
4.1.12.1 Outlet 


The tank shall be provided with an outlet orifice and 
the bottom of the inner vessel shall be designed so 
that all the wash water drains to the outlet. When the 
outlet is designed to be used also as a milk outlet, the 
following requirements shall apply: 


a) The tank outlet connection shall be self- 
drainable/gravity drainable to avoid 
stagnation of milk or cleaning/sanitation 
chemicals. The highest point on the inside 
of the outlet end of the outlet pipe 
(see Fig. 5) including the outlet valve, 
shall be lower than the lowest part of the 
bottom of the inner vessel. This shall be 
verified by drainability test (with the tank 
in its reference position and containing 
AO litres of test water, at least 39.8 litres 
shall run out in 1 min by gravity), 


FIG. 5 OUTLET POSITION (BROKEN LINES HORIZONTAL) 


b) The outlet pipe shall be not less than 50 mm 
diameter stainless steel pipe (see IS 3382) 
and shall be welded to the inner vessel. If 
not of one piece, the pipe shall have not 
more than one joint situated externally and 
in an accessible position. The joint shall be 
of clean-in-place (CIP) type, 


NOTE — The distance between the outlet valve seat and the 
tank should be as minimal as possible to avoid milk 
stagnation in ambient temperature. Recommended distance 
is 1.5 diameter of the pipeline. 


c) 


d) 


e) 


The bend in the outlet pipe shall have a 
mean radius of not less than 75 mm. A 
clearance of 100 mm to be maintained from 
the lowest tip of the outlet pipe to ground 
as shown in the Fig. 6, 


~ TANK SUPPORT 


FIG. 6 OUTLET POSITION 


In all cases the outlet shall terminate in a 
50 mm ring joint male end and shall be 
provided with a blank cap and nut, 


The outlet pipe shall be as short as is 
reasonably practicable. Clearance shall be 
provided to permit the use of a union nut 
spanner, and 


In case the manufacturer is using well 
design with a tank in reference position, the 
well shall be not less than 25 mm deep at 
the outlet orifice. If circular, the diameter 
shall not be less than 100 mm nor more 
than 200 mm. If elongated, the length and 
width each shall not be less than 100 mm 
nor more than 200 mm. The outer end of 
the outlet pipe shall emerge from the casing 
on an inclination as shown in Fig. 7 to drain 
the milk and wash water completely. 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


FIG. 7 DIMENSIONAL CRITERIA FOR OUTLET WELL 


4.1.12.2 Outlet control 


The outlet shall be lockable and provided with a 
control consisting either of a hygienic cock or of a 
hygienic plug and rod device. The arrangement shall 
be such that: 


a) the plug does not need to be clamped in 
position in order to seal, 

b) means are provided for retaining the plug 
and rod in the open position clear of the 
milk agitator, and 

c) there shall be no detachable components 
capable of passing down the outlet of the 
tank. 


4.1.12.3 Agitator 


The tank shall be provided with a suitable type of 
agitator (see Fig. 1) designed to promote effective 
heat transfer and thorough mixing of the milk 
without churning the milk fat, or spillage of milk at 
any filling level up to 30 mm below the lowest point 
on the up stand of the inner vessel. The product 
contact part of the agitator shall be made of stainless 
steel of designation SS 304 
(Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to IS 5522 
or IS 6911. Lubricants used in agitator assembly 
must be non-toxic and of food grade. The agitator 
shall comply with the following: 


a) The agitation device shall be so 
constructed that shaft seals shall be 
provided against any contamination of 
the milk which could enter the inner 
vessel from outside. A suitable oil 
cap/catch pan shall be provided to 
eliminate unexpected oil leak into the 
milk, 


b) All welds on agitator blades and shafts 
shall have fillet radii of not less than 3 mm. 
All surfaces of the blades and shafts shall 
be readily accessible for cleaning. Surfaces 
other than vertical shall be avoided where 
possible, 


c) The agitator shaft shall be provided with a 
retractable deflector between the drive 
units and the bridge or cover over the inner 
vessel, 


d) The deflector (see Fig. 8) shall be: 


1) Ofstainless steel (SS 304 designation) 
or non-metallic (non-toxic) material, 

2) Ofa close fit on the shaft, and 

3) So designed that in its lower position 
the aperture round the shaft is closed. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


e) Operating the agitator shall not cause milk 
to overflow when the tank contains any 
volume of milk up to 100 percent of its 
rated volume, 


f) The performance of the agitator shall be 
such as to produce throughout the content 
of the tank filled to 100 percent rated 
capacity a butterfat distribution uniform to 
within + 0.05 of butterfat percentage 
[see IS 1224 (Part 1)] after operation for not 
more than four minutes in milk that has 
been cooled to 4 °C and has then remained 
undisturbed for 6 h, 


g) The design of the shaft, deflector and 
aperture shall be such that these 
components are readily accessible for 
cleaning above and below the bridge of 
cover. The agitator shaft shall incorporate a 
coupling above the maximum milk level, 
whereby the blade assembly may be 
removed from the tank for cleaning, 


h) The agitator motor assembly shall be 
guarded so that operator can not come in 
contact with moving parts, 


j) The agitator shall be so designed that it can 
be cleaned effectively. If the tank is fitted 
with an automatic or semi-automatic 
cleaning equipment, care shall be taken to 
ensure that the agitator is cleaned 
effectively when the equipment is used in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instruction, and 


k) In case of open type tanks, the agitator 
drive unit shall be mounted on the breast 
piece, the blade of agitator shall become 
accessible when the cover is raised. 


UMBRELLA ~ 
DEFLECTOR \ 


y-NONPRODUCT 
CONTACT 


MINIMUM 3/6" 
FLANGE UPWARD 


vessel“ | 

TOP | 

! 

PRODUCT |, 

CONTACT Ay } 
SURFACE 


\-propuct 
CONTACT 
SURFACE 


FIG. 8 DEFLECTOR 


4.1.12.4 Milk thermometer 


Every tank shall be provided with an instrument to 


IS 3661 : 2023 


measure the temperature of the milk at any volume 
between 10 percent and 100 percent of the rated 
volume when filled in from 0°C to ambient 
(0 °C to 47 °C). If detachable instruments are used 
they shall be suspended above the rated maximum 
level of the milk and shall be easily accessible. The 
instrument shall be suitably protected to ensure that 
neither dust nor liquid can enter into it. The 
instrument shall not penetrate the inner vessel. The 
tank shall be provided with a suitable temperature 
transducer for sensing the temperature and 
transmitting it to the control panel for visualization. 
It shall also be capable of withstanding, without loss 
in calibration, temperature inside inner vessel from 
0 °C to 100 °C and ambient temperature from 0 °C to 
the specified safe operating temperature (SOT). In 
ambient temperature from 5 °C to the specified 
performance temperature (PT), the error of the 
instrument shall not be greater than 1 °C, between 
2 °C and 12 °C, when the milk temperature is 
changing at a rate not more than 10 °C/h. 


4.1.12.5 Milk thermostat 


The tank shall be provided with suitable thermostat 
for control of the cooling system, having external 
stem surfaces of polished stainless steel. The 
temperature-sensitive portion of the thermostat shall 
be so disposed that the instrument operates correctly 
when the tank contains 10 percent or more of its 
nominal capacity. It should provide a suitable signal 
to cut off the BMC at milk temperature of 4 °C (with 
tolerance of — 2 °C) in the ambient temperature so as 
to ensure that the temperature of any part of the milk 
does not exceed 9 °C. The operating head shall be 
robust and sealed to prevent the ingress of pest, dust 
or moisture and the minimum IP code shall be IP 23 
as per IS/IEC 60529. 


4.1.12.6 Combined milk temperature measuring 
instrument 


A tank may be designed and constructed so that the 
milk temperature measuring instrument are 
synchronized through the controls. In case of direct 
exchange type cooling systems, the 
thermometer/temperature transducer (TT) output is 
connected to refrigeration control panel to make 
condensing unit ‘ON’ or Auto cut ‘OFF’ mode 
based on the operational parameters set into the 
controlling device. 


4.1.12.7 Dip-stick 


Each tank shall be provided with a dip-stick and two 
dip-stick holders. For closed type tanks, only one dip 
stick holder may be provided with one dip stick. The 
reference position of the tank should be given by the 
height difference in millimetre read on the dipstick 
at both dipstick holders. The length of the dip-stick 


shall be such that readings may be taken at 
10 percent to 100 percent of rated nominal tank 
capacity. The surface finish of the graduated face 
shall be such that an accurate indication of level is 
given when used with water. With non-automatic or 
dipstick measuring system, each division on the 
dipstick shall represent a volume not greater than 
0.5 percent of the rated volume. Also, consequently, 
the permissible error between measured and actual 
volume should be within + 0.5 percent of the 
measured volume. 


If agreed between supplier and purchaser, the tank 
may be equipped with an automatic volume 
measuring device to show the volume of milk on the 
control panel when the milk in the tank is at + 4 °C 
to 38 °C. The automatic volume measuring device 
may be of non-contact type or contact type and the 
permissible error in volume measurement is not 
more than 0.5 percent of the rated capacity or 
0.5 percent of measured volume of the tank, 
whichever is less. The automatic volume measuring 
device should be capable of showing the volume of 
the milk to the above specification during milk 
reception and discharge also. 


4.1.12.8 Opening for cleaning 


In closed type bulk milk coolers, the tank shall be 
provided with one or more cleaning devices of 
stainless steel of designation SS 304 
(Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to IS 5522 
on the top of the tank so as to facilitate thorough 
cleaning of the tank. In open type bulk milk coolers, 
the top cover of the tank is lifted for manual 
cleaning. 


4.1.12.9 Air ventilator 


The closed type tanks shall be fitted with an air 
ventilator/breather (see Fig. 1) to remove entrapped 
gases, foul odour and air developed during the 
cleaning process and also converted during milk 
reception. The air ventilator shall be suitably 
constructed from corrosion proof material and 
mounted on the top of the tank, preferably on the 
manhole cover for easy access. The air ventilator 
shall be covered such that no foreign matter of size 
greater than 2 mm can enter into the tank from 
outside. In open type tanks, no air ventilator is 
required. 


4.1.12.10 Milk inlet 


The tank shall be provided with not less than one 
inlet pipe or with not less than one aperture or with 
both. Where an inlet pipe is part of the tank it shall 
be so designed that the formation of froth is 
prevented as far as practicable. Where an inlet 
perture for pouring milk is provided, it shall 


have a diameter of not less than 180 mm. 
4.1.12.11 Balance tank 


The balance tank (see Fig. 1), wherever required, 
shall be of sanitary design, fabricated from stainless 
steel of designation SS 304 
(Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to IS 5522. 
Outlet stainless steel cup and sufficient slope shall 
be provided at bottom of the tank for complete 
drainage of milk. The dimensions of the tank and 
fittings shall be suitable to meet milk collection 
operations at center. A stainless steel removable 
cover with handle shall be provided. Stainless steel 
filter made from stainless steel plate of adequate 
thickness with 2 mm diameter holes (removable 
type) shall be provided for placement in the balance 
tank to remove coarse suspended impurities from 
milk. Three to four ball feet shall be provided for 
height adjustment of 50 mm. All milk contact 
surfaces shall be finished to minimum 150 grit. 


4.1.12.12 Stainless steel sanitary milk pump 


The stainless steel sanitary milk pump (see Fig. 1), 
wherever required, shall be supplied for transferring 
milk from balance tank to the cooling tank and 
cooling tank to road milk tanker. Pump impeller and 
casing shall be made of stainless steel of designation 
SS 304 (Austenitic X04 Cr19 Ni9) conforming to 
IS 5522. All milk contact surfaces shall be finished 
to minimum 150 grits. The pump should be of 
sanitary design. Inlet and outlet of the pump shall 
have ends with SMS union. The pump shall be 
provided with approved make motor having E/F 
class insulation, IP 55 protection and energy 
efficient. The flanged end motor shall have stainless 
steel shaft having hygienic mechanical sealing 
arrangement to prevent leakage from pump casing to 
rotor side of the motor. Pump shall have stainless 
steel shroud with air ventilation grill for circulating 
cooling air. The pump shall have stainless steel 
adjustable ball feet. 


4.1.12.13 Clean-in-place (CIP) spray balls/spray 
nozzles for closed type tank configuration 


In case of close tanks, CIP facility shall be provided, 


IS 3661 : 2023 


which shall include removable stationary 
360 degree/self rotating spray ball system positioned 
at the top of the tank inside and piping from the 
balance tank through milk transfer pump to the bulk 
milk cooler. 


5 REFRIGERATION 


The refrigeration system shall be of direct expansion 
type. 


5.1 General 


The refrigeration system cools the raw milk from 
reception temperature to 4 °C in the period specified 
for the cooler. 


5.1.1 The TIG/Laser/more advanced welded 
evaporator(s) of the refrigeration system shall form 
a part of the milk tank body as dimpled jacket in the 
inner shell bottom to a height covering the bottom 
radius all around the rectangular type tanks to 
provide necessary heat transfer to confirm the 
performance requirement given in 5.3.1. 


5.2 Type of Refrigerant 


5.2.1 Where the refrigeration system used is of 
direct expansion type, the refrigerants listed in 
IS 16656 which are permitted under the Ozone 
Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) 
Rules, 2000 shall be used. 


5.3 Duty 


Tanks designed for cooling and storage shall have 
refrigerating equipment of capacity sufficient to 
perform the following daily duty, all in an ambient 
temperature of 38 °C with condenser: 


a) Cool 100 percent of nominal tank capacity 
from 35 °C to 4 °C; and 
b) Eliminate all stray heat gains. 


5.3.1 Tanks designed for cooling and storage shall 
have the following milk cooling performance in 
ambient temperature of 38 °C: 


Ambient Temperature 


Classification Performance Temperature (PT) Safe Operating Temperature (SOT) 
fo} °C 
A 38 43 
B 32 38 
C 25 32 


IS 3661 : 2023 


Milk Cooling Time 
Cooling Time In Hours 
Classification All Milkings Second Milking 
35 °C to 4 °C 10 °C to 4 °C 
I 2.5 1.25 
I 3 1.5 
I 3.5 1.75 


5.4 Prevention of Freezing of Milk 


When the tank is filled between 10 perecent and 
100 percent of its rated volume and is used in 
ambient temperature between 5 °C and the specified 
performance temperature (PT) ice shall not form in 
the milk under the milk level either during cooling 
or during storage. 


5.5 Control of Milk Temperature 


The milk temperature control system shall: 


a) start and stop the main milk cooling 
operation automatically; 

b) operate at any level of filling above 
10 percent of rated capacity; 

c) terminate the main milk cooling operation 
at 4 °C for any milk quantity over 
10 percent at ambient temperatures 
between 5 °C and 43 °C; and 

d) prevent the milk temperature during 
storage in 43 °C [Safe Operating 
Temperature, 43 °C for class (A) ambient 
temperature] from reaching 9 °C at any 
point, above 10 percent of rated capacity. 
For this purpose, overnight storage shall be 
assumed to be 12 h and day time storage 
6h. 


5.6 Construction 


In all cases of direct expansion evaporators, the 
connection of service pipes to the refrigerating 
jacket shall be by compression joint or screwed joint 
as appropriate to a tail, half union or socket welded 
into the jacket. Brazed, silver soldered or soldered 
joints may also be used. 


5.7 Pressure Testing 


5.7.1 Evaporators to be charged with 
dichlorodifluoromethane (CCloF2) or methyl 
chloride (CH CH shall be tested with dry nitrogen at 
a pressure 10 percent over and above the operating 
pressure of the refrigerant being used at performance 
temperature specified under 5.3.1. In cases of other 
refrigerants, the test pressure shall not be less than 
the saturated pressure at 65 °C. It is required to 
ascertain that there is no leakage on evaporator. 


5.7.2 After pressure testing the evaporator systems 
shall be cleaned, dried and sealed and it should be 
charged with 2 kg/cm? dry nitrogen. 


6 INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL 
SYSTEM 


6.1 Refrigeration Control Panel 


The refrigeration unit shall be provided with control 
panel made out of suitable corrosion resistant non- 
toxic material suitable for mounting near or on the 
unit. The panel shall be at least IP 23 degree of 
protection and provided with motor starters, 
ON/OFF push buttons and necessary MCBs, control 
wiring, line voltage controller to guard the 
compressor against the supply voltage fluctuations. 
In case more than one compressor is provided in the 
refrigeration system, the control panel shall be 
provided with a sequence controller and timer to 
start one compressor at a time to avoid power supply 
surge. The panel shall also have facility to operate 
refrigeration unit on auto/manual mode. In the auto 
mode, as soon as the milk temperature reaches to 
pre-set value, the compressor should be switched off 
to avoid freezing of milk. 


6.2 Milk Tank Control Panel 


The milk tank shall be provided with a wall mounted 
or tank mounted control panel (see Fig. 1) with timer 
to control the intermittent operation of the agitators 
and a digital temperature indicator to indicate the 
milk temperature to one decimal place with least 
count of 0.1 °C on continuous basis. It shall include 
suitable switch gears or Printed Circuit Board (PCB) 
etc as required for switching and protection. The 
agitator shall have interlocking arrangement with 
top cover opening limit switch. The limit switch 
shall put off the agitator as soon as the top cover 
opens up. Panel shall have provision for presetting 
temperature of BMC tank (not below the milk 
temperature 4 °C) for starting/stopping refrigeration 
compressors. Suitable battery backup is to be 
provided so that temperature can be indicated when 
there is no electric supply. 


This can also be integrated with refrigeration control 
panel. 


6.3 Switch Gear 


Not less than one duty selection switch 
incorporating a marked OFF position shall be 
provided. Except where the milk agitator is designed 
to operate continuously during cooling and storage 
or where automatic delay is provided, the milk 
agitator and the condensing unit of a direct cooling 
system, shall normally operate together and shall be 
controlled automatically by the milk temperature 
controller. 


An over-riding manual switch shall also be 
provided. Except where the tank is intended for 
direct pick-up without extra agitation before 
sampling, a time switch shall be provided to operate 
the milk agitator independently from other 
components for a period of not less than 2 minutes. 


A periodic time switch may be fitted to operate the 
milk agitator for pre-set periods at pre-set intervals 
independently from other components. Provision 
may be made to operate the milk agitator during 
automatic cleaning. 


6.4 Duty 


Besides the controls required for completely 
stopping and disconnecting the machine from 
energy, at least the following control functions shall 
be incorporated: 


a) ‘Standby’: cooling, agitation and cleaning 
‘OFF’; 

b) Cooling-automatic: automatic operation for 
cooling and agitation; 

c) Cooling-manual: cooling and agitation by 
manual control; and 

d) Agitation-manual: 
control; 


agitation by manual 


A separate/in-built controlling unit, shall be 
provided for automatic cleaning purpose, if supplied 
with the tank. 


6.4.1 Periodic Timer/Programmable Controller 


To ensure permanently the homogeneity of the milk, 
a periodic timer shall be fitted to operate the milk 
agitator for pre-set periods at pre-set intervals of not 
more than one hour independently from other 
functions. However, the agitator motor can also be 
controlled as per requirement, shall be provided with 
a manual mode as an alternative. 


7 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 


7.1 General 


The electrical equipment shall be capable of 


IS 3661 : 2023 


ensuring continuous operation of the refrigerating 
equipment of the bulk milk cooling tanks. 


7.1.1 Electrical Security 


The manufacturer of bulk milk cooling tanks shall 
monitor each and every individual unit: 


a) Leakage current : Leakage current 

b) Resistance grounding connections : 
Resistance of earthing connections 

c) Dielectric rigidity : Dielectric strength. 


The test must be done on each and every completely 
assembled bulk milk cooling tank along with 
electrical equipment on the manufacturing line and 
not only on prototype alone. 


8 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
8.1 General 
Machinery shall comply with the safety 


requirements and/or protective measures of this 
clause. 


8.2 Mechanical hazards 
8.2.1 Lids and Covers 


For open tanks, the open and closed positions of the 
lid shall be stable. The opening and closing 
operations shall require an intentional action hinged 
lids of open tanks shall have a mean to keep them in 
the open position (for example, spring, hook and 
bracket) or the center of gravity of the lid shall be at 
least 15° over the balancing position. 


For closed tanks having one or more manholes, the 
locking of the cover of this manhole(s) in the closed 
position shall require an intentional action. 
Furthermore, it shall be clearly and visibly marked, 
adjacent to the manhole(s), that before the closing of 
the cover, it shall be checked that nobody is in the 
vessel; before entering the tank, it shall be necessary 
to read the instruction handbook. For reasons of 
hygiene, the design should avoid as much as 
possible the need to enter the tank. 


8.2.2 Agitators 


Access to the agitator attached to the lid of open 


tanks shall be safeguarded by interlocking the lid 
with the agitator movement. When the lid is opened, 
the agitator shall stop within 2 s. For agitators not 
attached to the lid (closed tanks), a warning sign 
close to the manhole(s) or inspection 
opening(s) shall warn for the possible automatic 
start of the agitator. 


IS 3661 : 2023 
8.2.3 Refrigerating System 


The refrigerating system shall comply with IS 16678 
(Parts 1 to 4). 


8.2.4 Stability 


Tanks shall be stable independent of the level of 
filling. If not stable by itself, the manufacturer shall 
define the fixing mode. Tanks with a mass of 75 kg 
or more when empty shall be so constructed that 
under normal operating conditions, it shall not tilt 
when subjected to an external horizontal force of 
750 N applied in any direction at any accessible 
points by a suitable device. If the tank is equipped 
with a step or a platform, it shall not tilt when 
subjected to an external vertical force of 1 200 N 
applied on this step or platform. The manufacturer 
shall submit self-declaration of stability. 


8.3 Electrical Hazards 


Electrical hazards, in the form of shocks, burns, 
injury, fire and explosion etc, should be 
avoided/managed effectively which may threaten 
the safety of people and property. 


8.4 Thermal Hazards and Hazards Generated by 
Materials and Substances Used 


As far as technically possible, the design of 
automatic cleaning equipment shall ensure that no 
cleaning products and hot water can be splashed or 
sprayed against an operator either during ‘pick up’ 
of concentrated product or during the cleaning cycle 
(e.g. hoses tightened (for example spanner) or tubing 
fastened (clips), shields over product dispensing 
units). The temperature of the touchable outside 
walls shall conform to 4.2.1 of ISO 13732-1 for a 
time of contact 1 s. If it is not technically possible to 
achieve this for specific parts, safety sign(s) shall 
warn about the remaining hazards and the 
instruction handbook shall give advice on the use of 
proper protective wear (see 15.2.3). 


8.5 Hygiene 
8.5.1 Prevention of Milk Contamination 


8.5.1.1 The following parts shall be considered to be 
in the food area: 


a) Inside surfaces of the inner vessel; 

b) Outside surfaces of components inside the 
inner vessel; 

c) The inner part of the lid(s); and 

d) The inner part of the outlet including valve 
and connections. 


NOTE — The manufacturer shall define adequate 
solutions for cleaning and disinfection. 


8.5.1.2 The following parts shall be considered to be 
in the splash area: 


a) outside parts of the equipment at the 
proximity of manholes, and 
b) other openings where splashing can occur. 


NOTE — The manufacturer shall define the size of this 
area on a basis of a risk assessment. The inner parts of the 
cleaning circuit shall comply with the requirements for 
splash areas. 


8.5.1.3 Materials in contact with cleaning water and 
chemicals shall be resistant to cleaning and 
disinfecting agents in normal conditions of dosage 
and temperature so that they shall not impart a taint 
to milk. 


8.5.2 Cleaning 


The inner vessel shall be designed to be cleanable. 
If access to the inner vessel is made by manhole, 
equipment shall be provided for efficient cleaning 
without entering the vessel. The automatic cleaning 
equipment for closed shape coolers with manhole, 
shall comply with Annex B. 


8.6 Ergonomics 


Covers shall be so designed and constructed that 
during the opening and closing operations the 
ergonomic requirements of EN 1005-3 are fully met. 
For closed tanks, if the height of the rim of the 
manhole from the floor is more than 1.35 m, the 
manufacturer shall provide appropriate means of 
safe access: 


a) a platform shall be fixed to the tank, and 
shall comply with the following 
requirements: 


1) the height from the platform to the rim 
of the tank shall be not less than 1 m 
and not more than 1.35 m; 


2) the platform dimensions shall be at 
least 300 mm wide and 250 mm deep; 


b) ifthe distance from the floor to the platform 
is more than 450 mm, step(s) shall be 
provided; and 


c) for platforms height above 1.20 m, 
platform and step(s) shall be in accordance 
with IS 16809-2 and IS 16809-3. 


If access to the rear inlet is needed by the user, 
the requirements above shall apply. However, in 
casethe man hole is accessible from the steps/ 
ladder, platform may not be provided. 


8.7 Provisions for Maintenance 


As the tank is provided to operate under automatic 
control, the hazard due to unexpected start-up exists 
only during maintenance operations. Then it shall be 
able to be safely disconnected from electrical 
supply. If the electrical disconnecting device is not 
visible from the maintenance operating points, it 
shall be lockable. If the lockable disconnecting 
device is not a part of the tank, information shall be 
given in the instruction handbook 


8.8 Other General Requirements for Tanks 
8.8.1 Temperature Resistance 


The tank and associated equipment shall be 
designed and constructed to withstand the 
following temperatures: 


a) operation from + 5 °C to SOT 

b) storage and transport under 
temperature conditions 

c) cleaning water up to + 90 °C for 2 min up 
to + 70 °C continuously. 


ambient 


NOTE — This requirement may be verified by ensuring 
that the bulk milk cooling tank and associated equipment 
do not undergo any physical deformity under the above 
conditions 


9 PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS AND 
TESTS 


9.1 Performance 
For performance requirements, refer 5.3.1. 
9.1.1 Milk Cooling Rate 


If a tank for two milking is either empty or contains 
50 percent of its rated volume of milk at 4 °C, and 50 
percent of the rated volume of milk at 35 °C is added 
in one batch, all of the milk shall be cooled to 4 °C 
in not more than the specified cooling time. 


Ifa tank for four milkings is either empty or contains 
25 percent, 50 percent or 75 percent of the rated 
volume of milk at 4 °C, and 25 percent of the rated 
volume of milk at 35 °C is added in one batch; all of 
the milk shall be cooled to 4 °C in not more than the 
specified cooling time. 


If the volume of milk corresponding to the second 
milking is added to the tank, the total volume of milk 
shall be cooled from 10 °C to 4 °C in not more than 
the specified cooling time. The above requirements 
shall apply at ambient temperatures between 5 °C 


IS 3661 : 2023 


and the specified performance temperature (PT). 


NOTE — As a design validation, during manufacturing of 
BMC, cooling test may be done with water periodically and 
also if there is any design change; thereafter same shall be 
checked with milk at site. 


9.2 Storage of Milk 


Under normal operating conditions, the mean 
temperature of the milk between cooling periods 
shall not be higher than 4 °C for tanks for four 
milkings and 5 °C for tanks for two milkings and 
none of the milk shall exceed 9 °C. This requirement 
shall apply at ambient temperatures between 5 °C 
and the specified performance temperature (PT). 


The tank shall be provided with thermal insulation 
the efficiency of which shall be such that at the 
specified performance temperature (PT) the rate of 
rise of the mean temperature of the milk, initially at 
about 4 °C, shall not exceed 1 °C in 4 h when the 
rated volume is allowed to stand undisturbed. 


9.3 Cooling Tests 
9.3.1 Fundamentals 
9.3.1.1 Ambient temperature 


Measure the ambient temperature with a precision of 
+0.5 °C. 


a) Meanof the temperatures 


The temperature at each point measured 
shall remain constant within + 2 °C 
throughout the period of the test. The 
mean of the temperatures measured shall 
remain equal to specified ambient 
temperature within +1 °C throughout the 
test. The mean temperature shall include all 
temperatures measured at points round the 
tank and in front of the condenser(s). 


b) Location of measuring points 


Halfway up the outer casing, at a distance 
of 100+ 10 mm from the tank walls evenly 
spaced out over the tank periphery. 

At a distance of 100+ 10 mm in front of 
the air cooled condenser and evenly spaced 
out over its intake surface area. 


c) Number of measuring points 


1) When the greatest external dimension 
of the tank is less than or equal to 2 m: 


IS 3661 : 2023 


d) 


i) at least one measuring point for 
each side wall; or, 

ii) at least four measuring points 
equally distributed ` around 
cylindrical tanks. 


2) When the greatest external dimension 
of the tank is between 2 m and 3 m: 


i) at least one measuring point for 
each of the smaller walls; or, 

ii) at least two measuring points 
about a meter apart for each of 
the larger walls. 


3) When the greatest external dimension 
of the tank is greater than 3 m: 


i) at least one measuring point for 
each of the smaller walls; or 

ii) at least three measuring points 
about a meter apart from one 
another for each of the larger 
walls. 


Vertical temperature gradient — 2 °C/m, 
Max. 


9.3.1.2 Air movement 


The tank and condensing unit shall be sited within 
the test area so that the velocity of air through the 
condensing unit shall not be influenced by 
external factors. The velocity of air touching the 
outer wall of the tank, the condensing unit being 
inoperative, shall not exceed 0.5 m/s. 


9.3.1.3 Electricity supply 


The supply voltage shall be within + 5 percent of 


that stated in the instructions 


for use or on the 


identification plate of the tank. The frequency shall 
be the nominal frequency within +1 percent. 


9.3.1.4 Precision of measurement of volume 


Measure the volume of each ‘milking’ with a 
precision of + 0.5 percent. 


9.3.1.5 Temperature of the test liquid 


a) 


For open types tanks 


1) During storage and before mixing, 
measure the temperature at a point 
within 5 mm of the surface and also 
within 40 mm of the outlet and at 
other points deemed necessary by the 
testing station for open type tanks; 
and 


16 


b) 


2) During cooling and mixing after 
storage, measure the milk temperature 
at one or more points situated at least 
20 mm from the walls, bottom and 
surface level and not less than 
100 mm from the cooling surface. 


For closed type tanks 


During cooling and mixing after storage, 
measure the test liquid temperature from 
man hole at test liquid surface top, middle 
and close to bottom surface. 


9.3.1.6 Frequency of measurement 


If a continuous recorder is not used make 
the following measurements: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


During cooling of a milking 


Frequency — At least once every 10 min 
with a minimum of eight observations 
during the cooling of one milking. 


Quantities to be measured — Ambient 
temperature, milk temperature and reading 
of the kilowatt hour meter. 


In the interval between cooling of 
successive milkings 


Frequency — not less than once every 
30 min. Quantities to be measured: ambient 
temperature and milk temperature. 


Materials construction and finish 


1) General — Check the tank against the 
requirements for materials, 
construction and finish. The results of 
the examinations described below may 
be supplemented by reliable data 
supplied by the manufacturer or 
applicant for the test. 


The finish and operating 
characteristics shall be assessed by at 
least two representatives of the 
testing station, one of whom shall be 
the person who has had the major 
share in operating the tank during the 
testing. Special attention shall be paid 
to the tank’s suitability for operation, 
for inspection of the amount of ice, for 
sampling and for cleaning. The 
suitability of the construction and 
support of the inner vessel, relative to 
measurement of the volume of milk by 
reference to linear measurements may 


2) 


3) 


4) 


5) 


be assessed by the relevant authority. 


Quality of the welds — Examine the 
quality of the welds visually or by 
other suitable means. 


Surface finish — Assess surface 
finishes by means of a surface 
roughness measuring device or by 
using comparison plates. 


Radii — Check the radius of the 
corners using suitable gauges. 


Cleanability — If a tank is fitted 
with automatic or semi-automatic 
cleaning equipment check the 
effectiveness of cleaning by means 
of either a field test or a laboratory 
test or both. Check at least that when 
the equipment is used in 
accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions all surfaces inside the 


inner vessel are wetted by the 
cleaning solution. The testing 
method shall be described in full 


detail in the test report. The use of 
internationally accepted methods 
for the examination of samples is 
recommended. 


6) Dimensions — Check the following 
dimensions: 


7) 


i) distance between the tank and 
the floor; 

ii) distance between 
fitting and the 

iii) size of the covers; 

iv) distance between the agitator 
coupling and the maximum 
milk level; 

v) diameter of milk inlet aperture; 

vi) diameter of milk outlet; 


the outlet 


floor; 


vii) length of the thermometer 
scale; and 

viii) height of the figures if the 
thermometer has digital 
indication. 


Protection by outer casing and covers 
against ingress of water — First check 
compliance with the requirements 
stated in 4.1.1, 4.1.10 and 4.1.12.3 and 
then carry out the tests on electrical 
equipment or ensure the electrical 


IS 3661 : 2023 


equipment are certified with at least 
IP 23 described in IS/IEC 60529. 


8) Agitator — Measurement of 
circumferential force — Measure this 
speed at the top of the blade using a 
suitable instrument. 


9) Discharge of test liquid — Static 
drainage test: Test must be done in 
triplicates. Measure indirectly the 
volume of test liquid which drains in 
1 min by determining the balance of 
milk remaining in the tank. Proceed as 
follows: 


Ensure that the tank is mounted in its 
reference position. Wet the interior 
walls of the tank with (40 0.5) litres 
of test liquid at a temperature of 2 °C 
to 20 °C. Allow the outlet to remain 
open for (5 + 0.5) min and then close 
it. Measure 40.0 litres of ‘test liquid’ 
with a precision of 0.1 1 and at a 
temperature of 2 to 20 °C and add to 
the tank. Allow the outlet to remain 
open for (1.0 + 0.02) min and then 
close it. Measure with a precision of 
+ 0.005 litres the volume of test liquid 
which discharges from the tank in 
(5 + 0.5) min when the outlet is again 
opened. This volume should not be 
greater than 0.2 litres. 


9.4 Controls 
9.4.1 Milk Temperature Control 


Check the correct operation of the thermostat, for 
example the temperature differential and the 
consistency of cut-out and cut- in. This may 
conveniently be done during the cooling and 
storage tests. 


9.4.2 Measuring Equipment 
Check that the instrument for measuring milk 
temperature is operating correctly. This may 


conveniently be carried out during the cooling and 
storage tests. 


9.5 Refrigerating Equipment 
9.5.1 General 


Check that the refrigerating 
complieswith IS 16678-1. 


equipment 


IS 3661 : 2023 


9.5.2 Type of Refrigerant 


The manufacturer's assurance that the refrigerant 
used in the refrigerating system during the tests 
will be identical with that in each unit to be 
installed on farms may be accepted or check the 
type of refrigerant in the unit(s) by measuring at 
the same point both the temperature and the 
absolute pressure simultaneously at not less than 
one point in the saturated vapour phase of the 
refrigerating system when vapour and liquid are 
in equilibrium. 


Measure the refrigerant temperature on the outer 
surface of the pipe with a precision of + 0.5 °C 
whilst ensuring that the measuring point is 
adequately insulated from the ambient 
atmosphere. Measure the pressure with a precision 
of + 10 kPa(0.1 bar) by connecting a manometer 
to a suitable connection to be provided by the 
manufacturer. 


9.6 Electrical Equipment 


Inspect the electrical equipment generally to ensure 
that no obvious faults are present. 


9.7 Cooling Tests 
9.7.1 General 


9.7.1.1 Locate the milk tank and the condensing unit 
in a room in which the ambient temperature is 
maintained continuously at the specified 
performance temperature (PT). 


9.7.1.2 Carry out all tests in duplicate. 
9.7.1.3 Liquid to be cooled: ‘test liquid’ 


9.7.1.4 Filling: measure the daily refrigerating 
capacity and cooling rate using a test which 
represents the daily operation. The test for tanks for 
four milking differs from the test for tanks for two 
milkings only in the quantities of milk which are 
cooled (25 + 0.5) percent and (50 + 0.5) percent of 
the rated volume respectively. 


9.7.1.5 Temperature of the milking to be added: 
(35 + 0.1) °C. 


9.7.1.6 As soon as the temperature of the milk has 
been reduced to (4 + 0.1) °C, switch off the 
refrigerating plant. 


9.7.1.7 Before draining the milk, cool it to a 
temperature which is the mean of the milk 
thermostat cut-in and -out temperatures at 
100 percent filling. It will therefore be 
necessary to measure these temperatures 
during or before the cooling tests. 


18 


9.7.1.8 Measure the consumption of electricity using 
a kWh meter during the first and the duplicate 
cycles. 


9.7.1.9 If the operation of the equipment is not 
satisfactory, additional measurements may be made 
in order to locate the source of trouble, for example 
refrigerant pressures, chilled water temperature 
around the inner vessel by measuring inlet and outlet 
temperatures. The manufacturer shall be responsible 
for the correction of faults. 


9.8 Direct Cooling Systems 


9.8.1 Before adding the first ‘milking’ to the tank 
maintain the ambient temperature at the 
performance temperature (PT) for 24 h immediately 
prior to and throughout the period of the test. 


9.8.2 Immediately prior to adding a new milking 
ensure that the temperature of the milk already in the 
tank is 4.0 °C. 


9.8.3 In order to reduce labour costs by working 
normal hours, the usual procedure of cooling 
successive milking every 12 h may be changed. In 
such cases, instead of directly measuring the total 
electricity consumption using a kWh meter, this 
total may be derived by adding together the 
consumptions relating to the following periods: 


9.8.3.1 Cooling times 


Use a kilowatt hour meter to measure the power 
consumption of the complete installation during the 
cooling time for each milking. 


9.8.3.2 Periods between cooling times 


Calculate the total of periods between cooling 
times by subtracting the total of cooling times 
from the cooling cycle. Calculate the temperature 
rise of the milk during this (total) period using the 
mean temperature rise during the thermal insulation 
test (see 11). Calculate the electricity consumption 
required to compensate 80 percent of the above 
calculated temperature rise when cooling 
100 percent of the rated volume of milk using the 
cooling curve (see 9.7.1) and especially that part 
from 4 °C to the mean cut-in and cut-out 
temperature. 


NOTE — The need for this usage of electricity results 
from the temperature rise following absorption of heat 
from the surroundings. The figure of 80 percent is chosen 
because during the operating cycle the tank is not filled all 
the time to 100 percent of its rated volume. 


9.8.3.3 Cooling below 4 °C 


For the last milking only, calculate the electricity 
consumption required to cool the appropriate 


filling from 4.0 °C to the mean of the thermostat cut- 
in and cut-out temperatures when the tank is 
filled to 100 percent of its rated volume. 
The mean temperature is the usual temperature 
of milk when delivered. 


NOTE — The above applies only to the last milking 
because the energy consumed when cooling a previous 
milking to below 3.5 °C is compensated by cooling the next 
milking. 


9.8.3.4 Periodic agitation 


Calculate the electricity consumed during periodic 
agitation from the power input of the agitator motor 
and the time that the motor is running excluding the 
cooling time. 


10 SAFE OPERATING TEMPERATURE 
(SOT) 


The tank shall be able to cool any milking as detailed 
in above, under automatic control, when the 
equipment is operated at the specified SOT. To 
check that the equipment continues to function at 
the safe operating temperature (SOT) cool a first 
milking of (50 + 0.5) percent or (25 + 0.5) percent 
of rated volume for 2 milkings and 4 milkings 
respectively from 35 °C to 4 °C using automatic 
control. 


11 THERMAL INSULATION TEST 


The tank shall be provided with thermal insulation 
the efficiency of which shall be such that at the PT 
the rate of rise of the mean temperature of the milk, 
initially at about + 4 °C, shall not exceed +3 °C in 
12 h when the rated volume is allowed to stand 
undisturbed, without agitation nor refrigeration. 


11.1 Locate the tank, in a room in which the ambient 
temperature is maintained at the specified 
performance temperature (PT) + 1.0 °C for a period 
of not less than 12 h before the test begins and 
throughout the test period. 


11.2 Fill the inner vessel of the tank to its rated 
volume to normal working level, with water at 
(4.0 + 0.5) °C. 


11.3 Bring the contents of the inner vessel to a 
uniform temperature of (4.0 + 0.5) °C measured with 
a precision of + 0.1 °C. Place all covers in position 
and leave the equipment undisturbed for 
(12 + 0.1) h. 


11.4 During this 12 h period, measure the hot point 
of the milk (see 3.29) at a position decided by the 
test station in the light of experience. Make not less 


IS 3661 : 2023 


than one measurement at a position which is less 
than 40 mm from the outlet. 


11.5 At the end of the 12 h test period, bring the 
water in the tank to a uniform temperature measured 
with a precision not less than + 0.1 °C and calculate 
the mean temperature rise of the water in the tank. 


11.6 Storage of milk under normal conditions: If a 
hot point greater than 9 °C is observed during the 
thermal insulation test, check if it is still present 
under normal operating conditions at the specified 
performance temperature (PT). 


12 FREEZING OF MILK 


12.1 This test may be omitted if it is known from the 
construction and/or operation of the tank that ice can 
not form in the milk. 


12.2 The test may be carried out using either water 
or raw milk. The water test is included because it is 
both simpler and cheaper but it should be 
appreciated that if freezing occurs, this will need to 
be checked by repeating the test using milk. 


12.2.1 In an ambient temperature of 5 °C, fill the 
tank to (10 + 2) percent of its rated volume with 
water at (35 + 1) °C and commence cooling. As 
soon as cooling is stopped by the operation of the 
milk temperature control, drain the water from the 
tank, and at the same time check for the presence of 
ice by means of a stick or by another method. Note 
the areas where ice has formed and then melt it off. 
Repeat the test if no ice forms. 


12.2.2 If ice forms during test as per 12.2.1, repeat 
the test using milk in place of milk in place of water. 
Ice forms less readily in milk than in water. 


12.2.3 If there are indications that ice may form at a 
higher ambient temperature and/or with more milk 
in the tank, repeat the test at this ambient 
temperature and/or filling. For example, if the 
equipment is fitted with a control designed to reduce 
cooling capacity at a certain ambient temperature 
repeat the test in an ambient temperature slightly 
above that at which the control is set to operate. 


13 AGITATION OF MILK 


13.1 Operating of the agitator shall not cause milk to 
overflow when the tank contains any volume of milk 
up to 100 percent of its rated volume. The shall be 
capable of producing a uniform distribution of the 
fat throughout the milk, so that the fat content 
agitator of samples, randomly selected from the 


IS 3661 : 2023 


tank, does not differ by more than 0.1 g of fat per 
100 g of milk. This requirement shall be achieved 
by operating the agitator for not more than 2 
min, when the tank contains any volume of milk 
between 10 percent and 100 percent of its rated 
volume at + 4 °C and after allowing to stand 
unagitated for 1 h. For tanks utilizing a 
continuous agitation system, this 
requirement shall be achieved by operating the 
agitator for not more than 10 min. These 
requirements shall be achieved without the 
formation of froth or butter. The milk used for these 
agitation tests shall be bulk raw whole milk with fat 
content of (4 + 0.5)g per 100 g of milk at a 
temperature of (4 + 1) °C. 


NOTE — During manufacturing of BMC, agitation test 
may be done with water and; thereafter same shall be 
checked with milk at site. 


13.2 The test shall be done as below: 


13.2.1 The milk shall be sampled in accordance with 
the guidelines set out in Annex C. 


13.2.2 Fill the tank to 100 percent rated volume with 
milk. 


13.2.3 Agitate the milk for a period of 2 min. 


13.2.4 Take samples of the milk, in accordance with 
the guidelines set out in Annex C. 


13.2.5 Store the milk for a period of 60 min, without 
any agitation or cooling. 


13.2.6 Agitate the milk for a period of 2 min, for 
tanks designed for continuous agitation for a period 
of 10 min. 


13.2.7 Take samples of the milk in accordance with 
the guidelines set out in Annex C. 


13.2.8 Repeat the test with the inner vessel filled to 
10 percent rated volume. 


13.2.9 If there is an indication that there may be 
incomplete agitation at an inner vessel volume 
different to 100 percent and 10 percent, then carry 
out a test at this volume. 


13.2.10 During these milk mixing tests check that 
there is no formation of froth or butter. 


13.2.11 Ifa tank is fitted with a continuous agitation 
system, the samples shall be taken 10 min after the 
60 min standing period. In addition the tank shall be 
left to operate in a normal manner for a period of 
6 h to ensure that froth or butter are not formed. 


20 


14 CALIBRATION OF TANK 


14.1 For design qualification, after its calibration at 
manufacturing unit is completed, the BMC in its 
reference position shall be filled with water at its 
nominal volume and emptied once per day for 
continuously 20 days. The condensing unit shall 
operate under normal utilization conditions. BMC 
will be full of water for at least 10 h per day 
everyday and then water is removed and filled again 
every day. The level of water shall be measured by 
the dipstick at each filling. The measured levels due 
to tank deformation shall not vary more than 1 mm. 
One sample is to be tested for one design/model. 


14.2 For routine qualification while manufacturing, 
after its calibration at manufacturing unit is 
completed, the BMC tank in its reference position 
shall be filled with water at its nominal volume and 
emptied once per hour for continuously 3 times. 
BMC will be full of water for at least 1 h and then 
water is removed and filled again for every trial. The 
level of water shall be measured by the dipstick at 
each filling. The measured levels due to tank 
deformation shall not vary more than | mm. 


15 TEST REPORT 
15.1 General 


The test report shall include the following: 


a) Name and address of the applicant for the 
test (for example, manufacturer, buyer, 
agent, etc.); 

b) Manufacturer’s name and trade name; 

c) Type and serial number; 

d) Performance class(es); 

e) Description of the model of the tank; 

f) Overall dimensions ofthe tank, including 
the agitator and the condensing unit if 
separate; 

g) Appropriate technical information and 
manufacturer's names or trade names for 
major component parts relating to 
materials, construction and dimensions, as 
well as means for identifying separate 


components; 

h) Type and charge of refrigerant used in the 
tests; 

j) Material and method of thermal 
insulation; 

k) Nominal information for each electric 
motor; 


m) Date and duration of the test; 

n) Results of the tests; 

p) Average cooling performance in kilojoules 
per hour or in kilowatts for each cooling 
cycle; 


q) A completed summary of test report 
according to Annex D. This shall include an 
English text; and 

r) Name and address(es) of the testing 
station(s) which carried out the test. 


15.2 Useful Information and Instructions 
15.2.1 General 


General Information for use shall be provided as 
required in the present clause. 


15.2.2 Warning Signs 


At least the following specific safety signs shall be 
provided: 


a) A waterproof label adjacent to the manhole 
stating the following: 


“Before entering the tank: Isolate the tank 
electrically and take the complementary 
precautions as described in the instruction 
handbook. 


Before closing the cover: It must be 
checked that nobody is in the tank.” 


b) Where relevant, a warning sign for hot 
surface temperature as below should be 
given as per IS 16451. 


Warning sign IS 16451 — W017: Warning; Hot 
surface 


c) If the risk of contact with hazardous 
cleaning products cannot be completely 
excluded by design, appropriate warning 
signs (depending on the specific products 
and the process). The safety signals shall 
comply with IS 16503 (Part 1). 


15.2.3 Instruction Handbook for the User 


The instruction handbook shall meet the 
requirements and advice of 6.4.5 of IS 16819. The 


21 


IS 3661 : 2023 


following specific information shall be included: 


a) Details of general construction, including 
dimensions and the mass; 

b) Identification of the major components; 

c) Detailed operational guide, including an 
explanation of any marking using a 
symbol; 

d) Details of any user maintenance required 
together with frequency; 

e) The limits that shall be respected and the 
measures to be taken for ensuring stability 
during use, transportation, assembly, 
dismantling when out of service, testing or 
foreseeable breakdowns; 

f) Information on how to deal with a 


breakdown; 
g) Safety precautions concerning the 
significant hazards as e.g., cleaning 


products handling; recommendation about 
the cleaning products to be used and not to 
be used; unexpected start-up; 


h) Safety precautions for maintenance and 
similar interventions, and for exceptional 
cases when the user needs to enter the inner 
vessel: 

1) Measures for bringing the equipment 
to zero energy state like disconnect the 
machine from all the energy sources; 


precautions against unintended 
reconnection; neutralisation of 
residual energy (e.g., capacitors); 


verification of the safe state; 

2) Information on means to get into the 
tank and to get out of the tank in safe 
and easy conditions (e.g.,a ladder); 

3) Means for ensuring the safety of the 
intervention itself (including the use of 
protective extra low voltage (PELV) 
where relevant). 

j) Elements of training to be given to 
operators; and 

k) Draw attention for arrangements to be 
made by the user to ensure that the cards 
giving instructions for daily check list for 
operation and milk collection are made 
available to the operator. 


15.2.4 Instructions Check List 


15.2.4.1 Instructions check list for day to day 
operation 


The manufacturer shall supply a card with simple 


and clear instructions, at the time the tank is 
installed, detailing the safe operational and effective 
cleaning procedures required. The above 
instructions shall include at least the following: 


IS 3661 : 2023 


a) mode of operation, including inspection 
requirements prior to commencement of 
milking; 

b) the limits that shall be respected and the 
measures to be taken for ensuring stability 
during use, transportation, assembly, 
dismantling when out of service, testing or 
foreseeable breakdowns; and 

c) method of tank cleaning, including details 
of chemicals and maximum/minimum 
cleaning water temperatures recommended 
by the manufacturer, together with 
recommended quantities. 


This card shall be durable and waterproof and shall 
be placed either on the tank or near the tank in a 
prominent position. 


15.2.4.2 Instructions check list for milk collection 


The user at the time the tank is installed shall be 
supplied with a card giving simple and clear 
instructions detailing the correct collection 
procedure to be followed to ensure accurate and 
rapid milk collection. When the tank is equipped 
with an automatic cleaning system, a clear 
procedure to start the system shall be indicated. This 
card shall be durable and water proof and shall be 
placed either on the tank or near the tank in a 
prominent position. 


15.2.5 Installation and Maintenance Instructions 


A warning shall indicate that it is essential to stop 
and isolate the agitator before entering the inner 
vessel. The installer shall be supplied with a set of 
instructions detailing the correct installation, 
handling and maintenance procedures. 


The following information shall be supplied: 


a) the information detailed on the main 
components; 

b) the limits that shall be respected and the 
measures to be taken for ensuring stability 
during use, transportation, assembly, 
dismantling when out of service, testing or 
foreseeable breakdowns; 

c) the information detailed on the tank data 
plates/labels; 

d) information on equipotential bonding; 

e) ifthe tank is fitted with a time clock for 
the control of the condensing unit(s), 
instruction for programming it; 

f) safety precautions before entering the 
inner vessel: 

1) Measures for bringing the equipment 
to zero energy state: 

2) Disconnect the machine from all the 
energy sources; 


22 


3) Precautions unintended 
reconnection; 

4) Neutralisation of residual energy (e.g. 
capacitors); and 


5) Verification of the safe state. 


against 


g) information on means to get into the tank 
and to get out of the tank in safe and easy 
conditions (e.g. a ladder); 

h) information on how to move the tank into 
the required position; 

j) Information on any special requirements 
that have to be carried out prior to the 
installation of the tank, that is. floor plates, 
drains, doorways. This information shall 
also be supplied to the farmer to enable the 
necessary work to be carried out prior to 
the installation: 


1) that sufficient clearance is provided 
around the tank to allow the outer 
casing to be periodically cleaned in 
accordance with hygiene regulations. A 
clearance of 500 mm is recommended; 

2) that the head room above the tank or 
platform is sufficient to permit the user 
and tanker driver to carry out their 
duties safely and without difficulty. A 
head clearance of not less than 2 m 
above any platform is recommended; 

k) Details on how to level the tank to the 
required slope; 

m) Special requirements on sitting the 
condensing units and sitting/sizing of 
refrigerant pipe work, 

n) Layout schematics, 
refrigeration system; 

p) Electrical wiring 
schematics; and 

q) Details of the water supply requirements 
necessary to ensure correct operation of 
the cleaning system; 

r) Details of the required procedures for 
checking the tank cooling and cleaning 
systems; and 

s) Trouble shooting charts detailing the most 
common faults likely to occur and the 
recommended correction procedures. 


including the 


diagrams and/or 


15.2.6 Dismantling Instructions 


The user and installer shall be supplied with a set of 
instructions, at the time the tank is installed detailing 
the procedures required to allow the tank and all 
associated components to be safely dismantled. 


15.2.7 Minimum Marking 


15.2.7.1 All individual electrical components shall 
be provided with data plates/labels permanently 


secured to the components. The data shall allow 
individual identification of the components. 


15.2.7.2 The tank shall be fitted with data 
plates/labels carrying at least the following 
information: 


a) The business name and full address of the 
manufacturer and, where applicable, his 
authorized representative; 

b) Designation of the machinery; 

c) Designation of series or type, if any; 

d) Serial or identification number, if any; 

e) Tank serial number; 

f) Tank model and type code; 

g) The year of construction, that is the year in 
which the manufacturing process is 
completed; 

h) Rated volume expressed in liters; 

j) Relevant performance classes; 

k) Designation number of the refrigerant; 

m) Refrigerant charge in kilograms; 

n) Maximum allowable pressure, on high and 
low pressure side of the refrigerating 
system; 

p) Rated voltage; 

q) Rated frequency; and 

r) Full load current. 


15.2.7.3 The tank shall be permanently marked with 
the individual serial number as noted in 15.2.7.2. 


15.2.7.4 The marking shall be adjacent to the 
manhole or normal inspection position, on a 


23 


IS 3661 : 2023 


permanent part of the body of the tank or inner 
vessel and carried out in digits not less than 4 mm 
high. 


15.2.7.5 The main controls of the tank and cooling 
system shall be marked so that it is obvious how the 
equipment is to be operated. If symbols are used 
their meaning shall be explained in the main 
instructions. 


16 MARKING 


16.1 The tank shall be marked legibly and 
permanently with the following particulars: 


a) Manufacturer’s name or trade-mark or 
initials; 

b) Manufacturer’s identification; 

c) Capacity of the tank; 

d) Refrigerating capacity on condensing unit 
shall be stated in kcal/h or TR or kW at a 
saturated suction temperature designated by 
the manufacturer; and 

e) Relevant performance temperature(s) as per 
5.3.1. 


16.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


IS No./Other 
Publications 


IS 1224 (Part 1) : 


1977 


IS 3382 : 1965 


IS 5522 : 2014 


IS 6911 : 2017 


IS 10500 : 
2012 


IS 16451 


2018/1SO 7010 : 


2011 


IS 16503 (Part 1) 


: 2017/ TEC 
61310-1 : 2007 


IS 16656 : 
2017/1SO 817 : 
2014 


IS 16809 


(Part 2 : 
2018)/ISO 
14122-2 : 2016 


(Part 3 : 
2018)/ISO 
14122-3 : 2016 


IS 16678 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Determination of fat by 
gerber method: Part 1 Milk 
(first revision) 


Specification for stainless 
steel milk pipes and fittings 


Stainless steel sheets and 
strips for utensils — 
Specification (third revision) 


Stainless steel plate, sheet 
and strip — Specification 
(second revision) 


Drinking water — 
Specification (second 
revision) 


Graphical symbol — Safety 
colours and safety signs — 
Registered safety signs 


Safety of machinery — 
Indication marking and 
actuation: Part 1 
Requirements for visual, 
acoustic and tactile signals 


Refrigerants — Designation 
and safety classification 


Safety of machinery — 
Permanent means of access 
to machinery 


Working platforms and 
walkways 
Staris, stepladders and 


guard-rails 


Refrigerating systems and 
heat pumps — Safety and 
environmental requirements 


IS No./Other 
Publications 


(Part 1 : 2018)/ 
ISO 5149-1 : 
2014 


(Part 2 : 2018)/ 
ISO 5149-2 : 
2014 


(Part 3 : 2018)/ 
ISO 5149-4 : 
2014 


(Part 4 : 2018)/ 
ISO 5149-4 : 
2014 


IS 16819: 
2018/ISO 12100 
: 2010 


IS/IEC 60529 : 
2001 


ISO 1211 :2010 


ISO 13732-1 : 
2006 


EN 1005-3 : 
2002 


Title 


Definitions, classification 
and selection criteria 


Design, construction, testing, 
marking and documentation 


Installation site 


Operation, maintenance, 
repair and recovery 


Safety of machinery — 
General principles for design 
— Risk assessment and risk 
reduction 


Degrres of protection 
provided by enclosures (IP 
Code) 


Milk — Determination of fat 
content — Gravimetric 
method (Reference method) 


Ergonomics of the thermal 
environment — Methods for 
the assessment of human 
responces tocontact with 
surfaces Part 1: Hot surfaces 


Safety of machinery — 
Human physical 
performance — 
Recommended force limits 
for machinery operation 


IS 3661 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 8.5.2) 


TEST FOR CLEANABILITY AND CLEANING PERFORMANCE 


B-1 INTRODUCTION 


This annexure describes a standard test for the 
assessment of the cleanability and cleaning 
performance of a tank with automatic cleaning 
equipment or manual cleaning 


B-2 DEFINITIONS AND 
TEST 


STEPS FOR THE 


B-2.1 Standardized Soiling Procedure 
Soiling with naturally coagulated raw milk. 
B-2.2 Cleaning 


Cleaning by automatic or manual cycle according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions in the instruction 
handbook. 


B-2.3 Evaluation of Cleaning Results 


Evaluation for the cleaning of the inner surfaces of 
the refrigerated milk tank and other specified parts 
of the tank e.g., outlet, agitator and dipstick which 
includes: 


a) An examination of chemical residues 
(see B-12). 

b) A visual inspection using a bright light 
(see B-8 and B-10); and 

c) A measurement of the residual bacterial 
pollution; 
1) for the tank outlet: 

i) by rinse procedure (see B-9.2); 
2) for internal surfaces and equipment two 
methods are used: 


i) By rinsing procedure (see 
B-9.3.1); and 

ii) By swabbing procedure (see 
B-9.3.2). 


B-2.4 The criteria for acceptable cleanability when 
assessed by this annex are as follows: 


a) chemical residues: less than acceptable 
concentration; 
b) milk residues: not detectable; and 
c) microbiological contamination (Max.): 
1)Tank outlet: Aerobic plate count 
5 000 colony forming units per milliliter 
(cfu/ml) of rinse water; and Coliform 
count 100 colony forming units per 
millilitre (cfu/ml) of rinse water; 


25 


2) Tank surfaces: Aerobic plate count 
5000 colony forming units per 
900 square centimetre (cfu/cm’); and 
Coliform count 100 colony forming units 
per 900 square centimeter (cfu/cm’). 


B-3 INSTALLATION OF THE TANK TO BE 
TESTED 


B-3.1 Connection and Installation of the Tank in 
its Reference Position 


B-3.1.1 Install the tank in its reference position. 


B-3.1.2 Connect the tank to the water(s) supply. 
Install a device in order to allow samples of the 
water (s) feeding the tank. 


B-3.1.3 Check the real dimension of the internal 
surface of the tank. 


B.3.1.4 Measure the exact volume of the outlet 
drainage pipe, as follows: 


a) Install the measuring equipment; 

b) Ensure that the pinchcock is closed and that 
the outlet valve of the tank is opened; 

c) Fill the volume of the outlet with water (as 
far as the upper edges of the outlet inside 
the tank); 

d) Closed and open the outlet valve, if any, to 
make this measurement very precise; and 

e) Open the pinchcock and collect the water; 

f) Record this volume (V1). 


B-3.2 First Automatic or Manual Cleaning Cycle 


B-3.2.1 Carry out the automatic or manual cleaning 
cycle once. 


B-3.2.2 When the automatic or manual cleaning 
cycle is running, make a full check to see that it 
operates in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions/operating manual with respect to the 
following details: 


a) Initial rinses preferably with potable water 
— Number and volume of rinses; to 
remove all loosely attached milk residues 
and other deposits, if any. 

b) Wash stage — Detergent/formulated food 
grade cleaning chemical concentration, 
volume of wash solution, wash 
temperature (initial and final) and time 


IS 3661 : 2023 


and duration of wash cycle; with 
details: 

1) In case of manual cleaning, rub the 
surface using long handled hygienic 
nylon or any other suitable food grade 
brush to loosen the residues stuck on 
the walls. 

2) In case of automatic CIP, circulation 
with adequate flow rate considering 
tank design and connected pipelines 
(including milk loading lines and the 
transfer pipelines) diameter to meet 
turbulence requirement of more than 
1.5 m/s. 

c) Intermediate rinses preferably with 
potable water — Number and volume; to 
remove all chemical residues. 

d) Disinfection stage — Formulated food 
grade sanitizing chemical or hot water 
(80 °C for 15 minutes), volume, 
concentration and contact time. 

e) Final rinses with potable water (see 
IS 10500) — Number and volume of 
rinses, to remove the disinfectant residues. 


NOTE — Where potable water is not available, 
formulated food grade chemical (specially formulated 
for this purpose) may be added to final rinse water to 
maintain the sanitary conditions of water. 


B-3.2.3 Measure the volumes of water (s) with a 
limit deviation of + 5 percent. 


B-3.3 After a Complete Automatic or Manual 
Cleaning Cycle 


After the complete automatic cleaning cycle, leave 
the tank at rest with all the covers and outlets opened 
until the beginning of the soiling procedure as 
described in B-5, at least 12 h. 


B-4 PREPARATION 
(SOLUTION A) 


OF SOILING MILK 


B-4.1 Use bulk raw whole milk of the following 
composition: 


Fat with a mass fraction of > 3.0 percent; 
SNF with a mass fraction of > 8.0 percent; 


NOTE — The mass fraction is the number of grams of 
solute (solid) in 100 g of product. 


B-4.2 Add 1.5 percent bromocresol purple 
(0.1 percent concentration) to the total volume milk. 


NOTE — The volume fraction is the number of grams of 
solute (solid) in 100 ml of product. 


B-4.3 Incubate at 30 °C — 35 °C until colour of the 
milk changes to clear yellow (pH 4.6). 


26 


B-4.4 Prepare a quantity of the solution A of at least 
0.5 litres/m? of the internal surfaces of the tank to be 
tested, with a minimum of 4 litres in any case, 
increased by the necessary quantity to feed the 


spraying pump. 


B-4.5 Take a sample for bacteria counting (cfu/ml) 
of the solution A (see B-11.1). 


B-4.6 Store the solution A at 3 °C to 5 °C until 
required time for soiling to the internal tank surfaces 
(maximum storage time: 24 h). 


B-5 SOILING OF THE TANK 
B-5.1 Use one of the sterilized spraying equipment. 
B-5.2 Close the outlet and switch on the agitator. 


B-5.3 Spray the solution A continuously on all the 
parts of the internal surfaces. If complete and even 
coverage is not obtained. Collect the solution A to 
drain from the tank. Collect this drained solution 
(solution B). 


B-5.4 Take a sample for bacteria counting (cfu/ml) 
of the solution B (see B-11.1), in order to make sure 
that bacteria are still alive. 


B-5.5 Close all the covers/openings except the outlet 
which remains opened. 


B-5.6 Leave the solution A in contact with the tank 
internal surfaces for 4 h to 4 %h. 


B-6 AUTOMATIC OR MANUAL CLEANING 
OF THE TANK 


B-6.1 Carry out the automatic or manual cleaning 
cycle using one of the manufacturer’s recommended 
products or product combinations (see B-3.2.2). 


B-6.2 In the case when the instruction handbook sets 
out a postponed disinfection, this disinfection will 
be done according to the instruction handbook just 
after the end of the automatic or manual cleaning 
cycle. 


B-6.3 Prepare a reference solution(s), as follows: 


a) To prepare a reference solution for the 
automatic or manual cleaning cycle, 
solution Lı, mix alkali or products or 
product combinations used for the 
automatic cleaning cycle with the water(s) 
used for the automatic cleaning cycle in the 
same proportion as automatically done 
during the cleaning cycle (to obtain the 


b) ‘wash solution’, (see B-3.2.2). For the 
volume of solution Lı to prepare, (see 
B-12.3.1). 


c) To prepare a reference solution for the 
postponed disinfection, if any, solution L2, 
mix disinfected products or product 
combinations used for the postponed 
disinfection with the adequate water(s) 
used for the postponed disinfection in the 
same proportion as automatically done 
during the postponed disinfection. For the 
preparation of the volume of solution Lo, 
(see B-12.3.2). 


NOTES 

1 Postponed disinfection means that after the cleaning 
cycle, the disinfection is deliberately delayed for a defined 
period, for example, 8 h to 16 h. 

2 All the 3-way plug valves shall be opened and cleaned on 
daily basis prior to CIP activity. 

3 Two butterfly valves may be used in place of 3 way valves 
for better hygienic engineering. 


B-7 TANK REST PHASE 


Leave the tank at rest during (16 + 1) h after the 
cleaning cycle. 


B-8 VISUAL ASSESSMENT OF INTERNAL 
TANK SURFACES AND EQUIPMENT 


B-8.1 Carry out a visual assessment carefully, 
avoiding any contact or contamination which can 
affect subsequent microbiological evaluation. 


B-8.2 Inspect all internal tank surfaces using a bright 
light source, noting the presence of any areas having 
visible residues of soil deposits. 


B-8.3 Note in the test report the location of trace(s), 
if any. 


B-8.4 Complete this examination after the swabbing 
procedure, (see B-10). 


B-9 TESTING METHOD FOR 
BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS 


B-9.1 Solutions and equipment used for 
bacteriological examinations. 


B-9.1.1 Solutions and equipment used for the rinsing 
method. 


B-9.1.1.1 Use the required equipment which is 
described in Annex B. Sterilise all the laboratory 
equipment used to sample and to prepare the 
solutions, for 15 min at 121 °C. 


B-9.1.1.2 Prepare the following solution S1, as given 
in B-9.1.1.2.1 to B-9.1.1.2.4. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


B-9.1.1.2.1 Prepare the volume V2 of distilled or de- 
ionised water which shall be the addition of: 


The volume V; required to fill the outlet (see 
B-3.1.4). 


a) The volume required to be sprayed on 
each part of the internal surfaces of the 
tank (calculated with the rate of 0.5 I/m’); 

b) The volume provided to prime and rinse 
the pump; 

c) The volume to prepare the dilution of 
solutions L: and L2 (see B-12.3); and 

d) The volume used for the swabs (see 
B-9.3.2.1). 


B-9.1.1.2.2 Mix with V2 a neutralizing buffer 
solution in the following proportions (quantities are 
given in grams per 1): 


Monopotassium phosphate : 0.0425 

Sodium thiosulphate : 0.16 
Polyoxyethylene sorbitan monooleate: 
(C12H10CINO3) sl 
Sodium hydroxide : 0.008 
Suitable commercial preparation allowing the 
preparation of this solution by dissolving the 
preparation in distilled or de-ionised water should be 
used. 


B-9.1.1.2.3 Mix also V2 with the necessary number 
of Ringer tablets in order to get a Ringer solution 
diluted at one quarter which is equivalent to the 
following ingredients (quantities are given in grams 
per litre): 


Sodium chloride : 2.250 
Potassium chloride : 0.106 
Anhydrite calcium chloride : 0.120 
Sodium hydrogen-carbonate : 0.050 


B-9.1.1.2.4 Sterilise the solution Sı for 15 min at 
121 °C. 


B-9.1.2 Equipment Used for the Swabbing Method 


Sterilize or sanitize all the laboratory equipment 
used to swab and to prepare solutions, for 15 min at 
121°C. 


B-9.2 Assessment of the Tank Outlet 


B-9.2.1 Separate the tank outlet pipe from the 
cleaning system and fit the equipment, ensuring the 
pinchcock is closed and the outlet is opened. 


B-9.2.2 Pour the volume Hu (see B-3.1.4) of sterile 
solution S; into the outlet. Allow the solution S, to 
stand inside the outlet for 30 min and during this 


IS 3661 : 2023 


time if there is an outlet valve in this part of the 
system, close it and open it once. 


B-9.2.3 Open the pinchcock and collect the rinse 
(solution F1) in a suitable sterile container. Mix it. 


B-9.2.4 Take a sample for bacteria counting (cfu/ml) 
of the solution F; (see B-11.1). 


B-9.3 Assessment of the Internal Tank Surfaces 
and Equipment 


B-9.3.1 General 


This assessment shall be done by two different 
methods: by rinsing method and by swabbing 
method. 


B-9.3.2 Rinsing Method 


B-9.3.2.1 Remove the equipment used for the 
assessment of the tank outlet. Leave the outlet open. 
Install a suitable container in order to collect all 
sprayed water (see B-9.3.2.3) via the outlet. 


B-9.3.2.2 Use the second 
equipment. 


sterilized spraying 


B-9.3.2.3 Run the pump to spray solution Sı. Leave 
at least (2 + 0.5) 1 of the solution S flowing as far as 
its required rate. Take a sample of this sprayed 
solution for bacteria counting (solution S2), in order 
to be sure that the solution Sı is not polluted by the 
spraying equipment (see B-11.1 for the storage of 
the solution S2). 


B-9.3.2.4 Open the manhole and spray the solution 
Sı continuously on all parts of the internal tank 
surfaces and equipment 


B-9.3.2.5 Note the total volume of solution Ai 
sprayed into the tank (named V3). 


B-9.3.2.6 Leave the tank at rest 5 min time. 


B-9.3.2.7 Note the volume (named V4) of the 
collected rinse solution (solution F2). Mix it. 


B-9.3.2.8 Take a sample for bacteria counting 
(cfu/ml) of the solution F2 (see B-11.1). 


B-9.3.2.9 Take a sample of at least 50 ml of solution 
E: for chemical examination. 


B-9.3.3 Swabbing Method 
B-9.3.3.1 Put inside each test tube with swab, 5 ml 


of solution Sı. Apply the plastic mask on provided 
location. 


28 


B-9.3.3.2 Extract the swab from the test tube 
containing the solution Sj, eliminate the excessive 
solution Sı by pushing the swab against the internal 
wall of the test tube and by twisting the swab in the 
air, to obtain a wet swab. 


B-9.3.3.3 Press the swab on the surface to be tested, 
in the free area of the plastic mask. Move the swab 
from one side to the opposite forming parallel lines. 
On the whole surface to be tested. Avoid rotation 
with the swab. More than one way on the same line 
is not necessary. 


B-9.3.3.4 Use the opposite face of the swab and 
press it on the same surface. Move the swab from 
one side to the opposite forming parallel lines angled 
90° to the lines formed in B.9.3.3.4. 


B-9.3.3.5 Put the swab back to its test tube and shake 
it by hand in order to mix the potential bacterial 
pollution with the neutral solution S1. 


B-9.3.3.6 Repeat the same procedure on the 
7 different locations, designated as G; to G7. 


B-9.3.3.7 Take a sample for bacteria counting 
(cfu/ml) of each of the solution in the test tubes, 
designated solution G; to G7 (see B-11.1 for the 
storage of these solutions). 


B-10 VISUAL ASSESSMENT OF INTERNAL 
TANK SURFACES AND EQUIPMENT 


B-10.1. Inspect all internal tank surfaces using 
bright light source noting the presence of any areas 
having visible residues of soil deposits. 


B-10.2 Record the place of the traces, if any. Take 
swabs on these areas by following safety 
precautions. 


B-11 BACTERIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION 


B-11.1 Store each sample for bacteria counting 
(samples of solution A, B, Fi, F2, Gi to G7 and S2) in 
ice water until tested inside a period of maximum 
24 h after the sample. 


B-11.2 Shake 20 times each sample. 

B-11.3 Prepare a diluent containing peptone | g and 
sodium chloride 8.5 g for 1 000 ml of water. Sterilise 
the diluent at 121 °C for 15 min. 

B-11.4 Prepare for each sample dilution to 1/10 and 
a dilution to 1/100 using the diluent prepared in 
B-11.3. 


B-11.5 Plate in triplicate 1 ml of each sample and 


1 ml of each dilution of each sample in milk plate 
count agar. Use only sterile equipment to transfer 
solutions. 


B-11.6 Add a suitable quantity of the following 
nutritional environment, mixed at 45 °C, inside each 
plate: 


Yeast : 2.5¢ 
Truptone : 5.0g 
Glucose : 1.0g 
Skimmed milk powder : 1.0 g 
Agar-agar : 15.0g 


Water for 1 000 ml of solution. 


B-11.7 Leave the plates incubated at (30 + 1) °C for 
(72 +2)h. 


B-11.8 Count colonies inside each plate. If less than 
the quarter of the surface of the plate is covered by 
intrusive colonies, count colonies on the part with 
non-intrusive colonies and calculate the 
corresponding number for the whole plate. If more 
than the quarter of the plate is covered by intrusive 
colonies, do not take this plate into account. 


B-11.9 Use the result of plates containing between 
10 colonies and 300 colonies. Calculate the number 
of microorganisms per millilitre as follows: 


AC 
1.n, + 0.1.n2 + 0.01.n3.d 


where 
= number of intrusive colonies counted on 

the plate; 

nı= number of counted plate for the original 
solution; 

m= number of counted plate for solution with 
dilution 1/10; 

n3= number of counted plate for solution with 
dilution 1/100; 

D = solution from the first obtained counting. 


B-11.10 Rinsing Method 


Determine the final result per square metre of 
internal surface of the tank by determining the ratio 
between the number of microorganisms inside the 
total volume of the sprayed solution and the whole 
internal surface of the tank which has been sprayed. 


B-11.11 Swabbing Procedure 


Determine the final result per square metre of 


29 


IS 3661 : 2023 


internal surface of the tank by determining the ratio 
between the number of microorganisms inside the 
solutions G; to G7 and the surface under test. 


B-12 CHEMICAL EXAMINATION 

B-12.1 Use a pH metre of 1/100 reading. 
B-12.2 Measure the pH of the solution Fo. 
B-12.3 Prepare reference solutions, as follows: 


B-12.3.1 Mix solutions Sı and L; in order to obtain 
the following concentration of solution Lı: 


a) A volume fraction of 1 percent of 
the solution Li; 

b) A volume fraction of 0.5 percent of the 
solution Li; 

c) A volume fraction of 0.3 percent of the 
solution Li; 

d) A volume fraction of 0.2 percent of the 
solution Lu: and 

e) Avolume fraction of 0.1 percent of the 
solution Lu 


B-12.3.2 Measure the pH for each of these different 
concentrations in order to obtain a curve to read the 
concentration of Lı (volume fraction) according to 
the pH. 

B-12.3.3 Do the same operation for the solution La 
B-13 INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 

B-13.1 Chemical Evaluation 

The maximum concentration of chemical product in 
the solution F2 shall be a volume fraction of 
0.5 percent. 

B-13.2 Bacteriological Evaluation 

The bacteria contamination of the tank outlet and of 
the tank surfaces shall be less than the acceptable 
criteria given in B-2.4. The solution S2 shall contain 
less than 10 cfu/ml. 

B-13.3 Visual Evaluation 


No visible traces shall appear. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 13.2.1, 13.2.4 and 13.2.7) 


SAMPLING METHODS FOR MILK MIXING TESTS 


C-1 At least six samples of milk shall be taken at 
each of the two sampling times. 


C-2 At least three of these shall be taken from the 
top layer of the milk surface. Not less than 
90 percent of each sample shall be taken from the 
top 20 mm layer of the milk. 


C-3 These three samples shall be taken from: 


a) Close to the agitator; 

b) As far as possible from the agitator; and 

c) Ata place where the agitation of the milk 
seems to be least. 


30 


C-4 At least another three samples shall be taken 
from the bottom of the inner vessel. Not less than 
90 percent of each sample shall be taken from milk 
within 50 mm of the bottom of the inner vessel. One 
of these samples shall be from the area adjacent to 
the outlet. 


C-5 Samples shall be taken with a ladle or suitable 
stain less steel milk sampler. 


C-6 Samples shall be checked in accordance with 
the requirements of ISO 1211. 


IS 3661 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
[Clause 15.1, Item (q)] 


SUMMARY OF TEST REPORT ON A REFRIGERATED BULK MILK TANK 
1) TANK DETAILS 


Marta betr e Sine Mee Ae deet 


2) TECHNICAL DATA 


a) Condensing Unit: 
Manufacturer(s) or trade name(s): 


E TEE 
Position of condensing unit with regard to tank `. 


Material outer gees eietgeder SEET Eden eebe de 
Dimensions: 
Maximum length outside: ..........cceeseecceecesseeeeeeeeeeeeeneeenees mm 
Maximum width outside : ....cccec ceeseeseceseeeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees mm 


Number-atid type isnin eerie rede eerie cena! 
Number of blades per agitator `. 
Length of blades? sss) istene ann e e Eege mm 
SPCC EE r/min 
Continuous/periodic agitation `. min every ............ hour 


Ice bank: controllers: eege Zeen, AE Bes eS ee 


Chilled water pump `... 


g) Supply voltage: ow... V; Frequency: ......... Hz; Rated electrical input: ......... kVA 


31 


IS 3661 : 2023 


3) RESULTS 


Cooling times to 4 °C after filling with milk at 35 °C to rated volume: 


Ambient Milkings 
Test No. Temperature Ist 2nd 3rd Ath Ir 2nd 
°C milkings 
10 °C to 4 °C 
h h h h h 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
a) Specific energy consumption ` oo... eeeeceeseesecseeseceeeteceecesecesceeeeereneeenes Wl milk 
b) Freezing of milk at a filling of 10 percent of rated volume......................... did not/did occur 


c) Rise in temperature of rated volume during insulation test for 12 h in ambient temperature of ............. 


WAS oe ceeeeeees SE 
d) Maximum temperature in the milk during storage (hot point) was above/below 9 °C. 


4) AGITATION 
a) Effective mixing of the milk was found with... percent of rated volume 
b) Mixing capacity was unsatisfactory With oo... eee eters percent of rated volume 


c) Further remarks on agitation : ....cccccecceescesseescessecsecesecseceseeneceeceseceseeeceseseeceseeneeeneeeseeaees 


Results of cleaning tests (if applicable): .............0.. cece satisfactory/unsatisfactory 


32 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


IS 3661 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Dairy Products and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 19 


Organization 


National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 


All India Food Processors Association, New Delhi 


Bihar State Cooperative Milk Producers Federation Ltd., 


(COMPFED), Patna 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Centre for Analysis and Learning in Livestock and Food 


(CALF), Anand 


Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 


Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


Envirocare Labs Pvt Ltd., Thane 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, New Delhi 


Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation Ltd., Anand 


IDMC Ltd., Anand 


Indian Dairy Association, New Delhi 


Indian Stainless Steel Development Association, Gurgaon 


Jupitor Glass Works, New Delhi 


Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, New 
Delhi 


Mother Dairy Fruit and Vegetable Ltd, Delhi 


33 


Representative(s) 
DR DHEER SINGH (Chairperson) 
DR MANMOHAN SINGH CHAUHAN (Former 


Chairperson) 


DRK. L. GABA 
SHRI VIJAY GAUR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR 
SHRI RUPESH RAJ (Alternate) 


MS VARSHA YADAV 
DR ANIRUDHA CHHONKAR (Alternate) 


MS NEHA AGGARWAL 
Ms ARTI GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR RAJESH NAIR 
DR RAJEEV CHAWLA (Alternate) 


DR D. M. GOVIND REDDY 
SHRI RAHUL SINGH (Alternate) 


DR J. S. REDDY 
SHRI KUMAR NARENDER (Alternate) 


DR NILESH AMRITKAR 
DR PRITI AMRITKAR (Alternate) 


DR MONICA PUNIYA 


SHRI SAMEER SAXENA 
SHRI SAYAN BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDER GUPTA 
SHRI PRAKASH MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


DRG. S. RAJORHIA 
DR SATISH KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI ROHIT KUMAR 
SHRI RAJAT AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI KARAN NANGIA 
SHRI AMREEK SINGH PURI (Alternate) 


SHRI GOUTAM KUMAR DEB 


SHRI AJIT KUMAR K. (Alternate) 


DR NITA SEN 
SHRI SHAILENDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


IS 3661 : 2023 


Organization 


National Dairy Development Board, Anand 


National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and 
Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat 


National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 


Punjab State Coop. Milk Producers’ Federation Ltd 
Rajasthan Co-op Dairy Federation (RCDF) Ltd, Jaipur 


Tamil Nadu Co-op Milk Producers' Federation Ltd, Chennai 


Tetra Pak India Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Vimta Labs Ltd, Hyderabad 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRIS. D. JAISINGHANI 
SHRI SURESH PAHADIA (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK SHARMA 
DR RAJESH KUMAR BAJAJ (Alternate) 


DR P. K. NEMA 
DR B. SANTOSH KUMAR 
DR SYLVIA FERNANDEZ RAO (Alternate) 
DR SANJEEV KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI J. D. SINGH 


SHRIS. R. SANKAR 
SHRIS. JEYACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SHASHIKANT RAMNATH SURUSE 
SHRI SAMEER SINGH SUHAIL (Alternate) 


DR JAGADEESH KODALI 
DR MUNI NAGENDRA PRASAD POOLA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


DR BHAWANA 


SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Panel for Indian Standards on Dairy Equipment, FAD 19/Panel V 


Organization 


Mother Dairy Fruit and Vegetable Private Limited, Noida 


Lactalis India, Chennai 

Indian Dairy Machinery Company Limited, Anand 

Indian Stainless Steel Development Association, Gurugram 
National Dairy Development Board, Anand 


National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 


34 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SHAILENDER KUMAR (Convener) 
SHRI A. SUBRAMANI 

SHRI PRAKASH MAHESHWARI 

SHRI ROHIT KUMAR 

SHRI S. D. JAISINGHANI 


SHRI ANKIT DEEP 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 19 (18126). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` ` 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


