(Reaffirmed 2000)

IS : 11495 - 1986

Indian Standard
CODE FOR DESIGN OF SURFACE FARM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Farm
Chairman DR A. M. MICHAEL Members DR A. K. BEATTACRARYA( Alternate to Dr A. M. Michael ) DR M. C. A~ARWAL Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar Tocklai Experimental Station, Jorhat DRBHUPAL SIN~H G. B. Pant University of Agricultural and DR H. S. CHAUHAN Technology, Pantnagar DR SEWA RAM ( Aftcrnalc ) CHIEF ENQINEER PWD Irrigation ( North ), Belgaum SUPERINTENDINQENQINEER DIREC~o~~ONS ) ( Alternate ) Irrigation Research and Development, Pune EXECUTIVE ENQINEER( Alternate ) DIRECTOR( FCM ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi SHRI V. S. HX~DE Hulgul Group Cooperative Society, Sirsi SHRI N. G. JOSHI Indian Hume Pipe Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. D. KHEPAR Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR SITA RAM SINGE ( Alternate ) SHRI V. PATTABRI Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI A. K. GUPTA ( Allcrnatc ) University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore DR H. PURNAPRAUNACHAR DR R. K. RAI Rajendra Agricultural University, Patna DR T. K. SARKAR Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta SERI G. K. SRINIVASAN Wavin India Limited, Madras SRHI K. R. RAN~ARAJAN ( Alternale ) \-SERI V. VASUDEVAN Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Bombay SHRI B. P. SRIVASTAVA( Alternate ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojicio Member ) Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SHRI R. N. SHARYA Joint Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Drainage

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC

47

Representing Indian Agricultural New Delhi Research Institute ( ICAR ),

@ Copyrighl 1986
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS: 11495-1986

Indiun Standard
CODE FOR DESIGN OF SURFACE FARM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Farm Drainage Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Surface drainage system design criteria are based on the assumption that all lands to be drained will be suitable for agricultural use after drainage. Design shall consider construction and maintenance needs and irrigation requirements where applicabie. The rate of water removal, in terms of depth per unit of time, to be provided by the drainage system,depends on several inter related factors, such as rainfall For most row characteristics, soil properties and cropping patterns. drainage system are able to provide complete removal of crops, surface excess water from the soil surface within 24 hours after rainfall ceases. 0.3 While formulating IS : 11494-1986*, a need was felt to prepare an Indian Standard indicating the guidelines for desi_gning the surface drainage~system. This standard is intended to fuliil this need. 0.4 In preparation of this standard, ASAE EP 302.2-1973 `Design and systems on farms in humid areas', cultural Engineers, USA. assistance has been derived from construction of surface drainage issued by American Society of Agri-

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated -expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-19601.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
drainage system.
drainage systems.

provides

guidelines

for

designing

of

surface

farm

`Code for construction and maintenance of surface farm TRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

2

IS : 11495 - 1986 2. GENERAL
2.1 The intensity of drainage desired is expressed in terms of drainage curve. These curves are developed from a large number of field measurements of drainage flow rates and observations of adequacy of drainage. Excess run off will be discharged as overland flow temporarily flooding adjacent lands. 3. DITCH DESIGN

3.1 Field drains are located at the lower ends of field rows, through surface depressions, above barriers that trap run off, and where required to divert run off from lower areas. Drains located at or near soil changes provide locations for field roads, permitting the soils to be managed Field drains need not be designed differently during farming operations. to contain the quantities of flow indicated on the drainage curves, as their primary purpose is to remove residual surface water after volume run off has passed out of the field. Recommended design grades are from 0.10 to 0.30 percent, and should never be less than 0'05 percent. Grades may be uniform or may increase or decrease. Abrupt changes to flatter grades may result in excessive sedimentation. Recommended dimensions of drains are given in Table 1 ( see also Fig. 1 ) for guidance.
TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED DIMENSIONS AND FIELD DRAIN DEPTH In (3) o.a9+ 0.15 to 0.3 vee 0.15 to 0.3 0.23 to 0.45 OF ROW DRAIN

TYPE i%. (1) i) ii) iii) iv) Vee One-half *Horizontal +Minimum, Trapezoidal (2) Row drain

BOTTOMWIDTH m (4) 0 0 2'4 15

SIDE%OPE H: V* (5) 10: 1 or flatter?

: 1 or flatter

8 : 1 or flatter

: Vertical. 0.06 m below row middles for row crops.

3.1.1 Row drains are acceptable field drains provided they have adequate grade and topography permits the disposal of spoil without restricting drainage into the row drains as well as adequate maintenance is provided.
3.1.2 Vee field drains with side slopes steeper than 10 : 1 are easily constructed and maintained with blade equipment. These drains are difficult to cross with ~farm machinery, fill rapidly with sediment, and must be re-established yearly. They are not recommended under normal conditions. 3

IS : 1149.5 - l-986 3.1.3 Vee field drains, flatter side slopes, are terminate at or near the these field drains will road side slopes are not that are 0.15 to 0'3 m deep with 10 : 1 or excellent when crop rows on one or both sides Field roads adjacent to centres of the drains. not interfere with mechanized operations if field steeper than 10 : 1.

3.1.4 One-half vee field drains are not crossed by farm machinery. Machinery turns within the cross sections without crossing the bottoms of the drains. Turn areas must be smooth and any obstructions at the bo:toms of the drains removed. There are no restrictions on the side slope opposite the field other than that it must be stable. 3.1.5 Trapezoidal field drains are satisfactory in some areas. Where soils are not erosive, trapezoidal field drains can be constructed to grade without uniform depths and can be expected to have long lives with little maintenance. Where soils are erosive and field drains are not vegetated, trapezoidal field drains with the recommended depths will fill quickly with eroded material. 3.1.6 Double field drains are recommended only on ungraded land for use in wide and shallow depressions where run off enters from both sides and the excavated soil must be placed between the twin drains, Recommended minimum distance between the centre lines of the twin fie!d drains is 15 m for drains 0.15 m deep, plus 3 m for each additional 0'03 m of depth. Lesser distances may be necessary at the outlet ends because of construction requirements. 3.2 Subsurface drains are located adjacent to field drains in some areas where subsurface drainage is effective. The installation of subsurface drains lowers water tables, aids tillage and reduces maintenance requirements. 3.3 Field indicated productive be spaced dimensions guidance. laterals shall be designed to di&arge the Field by the appropriate drainage curves. land and are costly to construct and maintain. as widely apart as field conditions permit. of field laterals are given in Table 2 ( see rates of Bow laterals occupy They shall Recommended ulso Fig. 2 ) for

-3.3.1 The design cross sections of field laterals shall meet the combined requirements for capacities, erosion control, depths, side slopes, Minimum maintenance and, if needed, allowance for sedimentation. field lateral depths, regardless of design capacities, shall be 0.3 m. 3.3.2 The water surface elevations used in the design of field laterals shall be as near natural ground surfaces as practical to hold ditch depths Flat side slopes to a minimum at row drain and field drain entrances. and, for trapezoidal sections, wide bottom widths can he used to reduce depths. 4

MINIMUM

DEPTH

.09 m BELOW

ROW MIOOLE

1A

ROW

DRAIN
SECTION

StDE SLOPE 10~1 ---I-__
TURN

DEPTH

ALTERNATE 0.15 TO 3 m

ROW

OR FLATTER

18
TURN w

VEE
AREA

FIELD

DR~AIN

E SLOPE
TERNAT E

STABLE
SECTICBN

SIDE SLOPE OR FLATTER

1

1C

HALF

-VEE

FIELD

DRAIN'
0.23 TO O.b5 m

DEPTH I

--I
1 DTRAPEZOIDAL

BOTTOM I--WIDTH 2.4 m

FIELD
FIELD DRAINS

DRAtN

FIG. 1

SLOPE AWAJ FROM

WATER SuRFAC E

LOW LEVEE (`SPOIL REMOVFD)

2A

VEE

FIELD

LATERAL

SIDE SLOPE-ANGLE. b+ REPOSE 3:l.MAX SHAPEti SPOIL (ALTERNATE 1\ 7 LOW LEVEE (SPOhL dEblOVED r-

0.3 m OR

2.9:1

TOG:1

SOT TOM WlOTH

2 B TRAQEfCttQAL
FIG. 2

FlELO

LATERAL

FIELD LATERALS

IS : 11495- 1986
TABLE 2 RECOMMENDED DIkiENSIONS ( Clause 3.3.6 )
CROSS hX'I@N/ TYPE Vee DEPTH, 111 0.3 to 0.6 bCOB1MENDED SIDE SLOPE MXNIBIU~X SIIJE SLCPE

OF FIELD

LATERALS

it:. i)
ii) iii) iv)

6: 4:l 4: 2.5:

1 1 1

3: 3: z: I:1

1 1 1

Vee Trapezoidal Trapezoidal

0.61 and over 0.3 to 0.9 0'91 and over

3.3.3 The spoil from field laterals should, in most cases, be spread or When spoil is removed, tillable low levees prevent water removed. Spoil banks are usually recommended entry except at planned inlets. only as an undesirable alternate but may be preferred in some locations, 3.3.4 Shaped spoil banks should have side slopes on the field sides of The area which 6 : 1 or flatter to permit operation of farm equipment. contributes run orT to the channel side slopes should be kept to a minimum for erosion control purposes. For this reason, sides lopes on the channel sides can be as steep as the angle of repose of the spoil material and should he no flatter than the channel side slopes. Shaped spil banks ordinarily should not exceed 1.0 m in height. When rs:d, 3.3.5 When spoil is shaped, berms may not be required. berms should be adequate to satisfy the intended purpose and, in no case should be less than 0.6 m wide. 3.3.6 When spoil is dumped and berm widths are shown in Table 3.
TABLE 3 RECOMMENDED
AVERAQE DEPLW

left

unshaped,

the

recommended

BERM

WIDTHS MI~IUUX

FOR

UNSHAPED

SPOIL

OB DTTCH
m

BER~I W~TII*
m

0.6 to 1-Z l-3 to l-8 l-9 to 2.4 Over *In locations where 2.4 soils are not stable, wider

Depth

of ditch 2.4 30 4.5

berm

widths

may te necessary.

3.3.7 Field laterals with their spoil can be hazardous, therefore side slopes, berm widths, etc, should be choosen to provide maximum safety iu maintenance operations. 7

IS : 11495 - 1986 3.4 Farm mains shall be designed to carry the colume of flow indicated on the drainage curves. Where discharge into swamps, marshes or lakes is contemplated, high water marks shall be checked to determine whether gravity flow will be adequate. Pump drainage may be necessary. Specifications for the design and construction of farm mains usually require free board added to the design depths but are generally the same as for field laterals.
4.

DESIGN FOR LAND SURFACE MODIFICATION

to eliminate minor depressions usually may be directed in the field without detailed surveys or plans. However, surveys may be required in critical portions of some fields when visual observations do not provide the accuracy required. 4.2 Land grading for drainage may be planned with row~grades and cross slopes that are uniform or that vary within limits imposed by soils topography and economics. Areas to be graded shall be planned for a minimum number of field drains with the drains located, where possible, normal to field laterals and crop rows.

4.1 Land smoothing

4.2.1 Surface drainage will be adequate if all reverse row grades that form depressions are eliminated. Minimum grade limits should include a tolerance in construction that will permit the elimination of all depression either in original construction or by post construction touchup. Reverse row grades can be eliminated with relative ease on fields designed with 0'2 percent minimum grades. Unusual precision in construction is required with 0.1 percent and flatter grades.
4.2.2 Land is frequently graded for both irrigation drainage. In these cases, design limits to meet irrrgation may take precedence over those for drainage. and surface requirements

4.2.3 Economic considerations and the requirements for efficient mechanized operations may justify exceeding the recommended maximum row grade and cross slope limits. When the recommended limits are exceeded, provisions should be made to control erosion and sedimentation. 4.2.4 Recommended row grades range may be uniform, or increase or decrease. from 0.1 to 0'5 percent. Grades

4.2.5 Cross slopes normally should not exceed 0.5 percent. cross slopes are satisfactory provided field drains have the required grades and drainage outlets are adequate. 4.2.6 Lengths of rows shall be determined topography, irrigation and erosion control costs.

Reverse minimum

by soil changes, soil depths, requirements, and grading

8

IS :11495 - 1986 4.2.7 The maximum allowable depth of cut depends upon soil and costs. Soil data shall be used for determining maximum allowable depth of cut.
4.3 Water levelling shall be planned to increase the size and improve the The conventional vertical shape of the areas between contour levees. spacing between levees shall be increased-and levee alignment shall be Straight, parallel levees are preferred. improved. 4.4 Bedding shall be designed so that the beds are parallel to the Field laterals oriented normal to direction of the greatest land slope. the dead furrows should be spaced at interval that will provide adequate outlets. 4.5 Crowning shall be designed as precision drainage systems. Crowns may slope from the centre to both sides or in only one direction. Minimum cross slopes shall be 0 3 percent. Row drains shall be installed at all points where there are reverse row grades. Field drains or row drains are required at the ends of the rows.`]Field laterals shall be located parallel to the crowns to provide outlets for the row drains, and also normal to the crowns at intervals as needed to conduct flow to farm mains.

9

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )
UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole UNIT radian steradian SYMBOL m kg S A K cd mol SYMBOL rad sr

QUANTITY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance

190pp1ementrry units
QUANTITY

Plane angle Solid angle
Derived Units

QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure,stress

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYYBoL N .I W Wb T Ha S V Pa

DEBINITION 1 N = 1 J1 W = 1 Wb = 1 T= 1 Hz = 1 s = 1 V = 1 Pa = 1 kg.m/s* 1 N.m 1J/s 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms 1~Cl.s (9-S) 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/m'

