NAT HIAF IS 15325 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


wiga aaia soar Uae nean iA AY 
Wet HEN Woes A fega Bie 
Georg — tft Har 


( Teel JAGO ) 


Design and Installation of Fixed 
Automatic High and Medium 
Velocity Water Spray System — 
Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2020 Price Group 13 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


The term ‘Water Spray’ refers to the use of water in a form having a pre-determined pattern, particle size, velocity 
and density discharged from specifically designed nozzles or devices. 


Water spray systems are usually applied to special fire protection problems since the protection can be specifically 
designed to provide for effective fire control, extinguishment, prevention or exposure fire protection. These systems 
may be independent of or supplementary to other forms of protection. Water spray systems are most commonly 
used to protect processing blocks, processing equipment, structures, flammable liquids and gas vessels, piping and 
equipment, such as transformers, oil switches and some combustible solids, cable trays, cable racks, etc. 


In situations where oil and flammable liquids are stored and/or used in such quantities and in such manner that the 
value of the standard sprinklers in the event of fire is open to question, medium and/or high velocity sprayers may 
be employed in lieu of or in conjunction with sprinklers. This standard is intended to provide a guide as to when 
such systems should be installed, details of their design and performance. 


This standard was first published in 2003 with a view to providing minimum requirements for fixed water spray 
systems based upon sound engineering practices and with assistance from the then Tariff Advisory Committee. 
The earlier version of this standard covered the provision of water supplies, components to be used, installation 
and testing of the system, maintenance, and the extension of existing systems. 


This revision has been take up to include various new technologies that have been developed in the last few years 
and to make it at par with the international practices. All the principles of 2003 version have been retained in this 
version as well, while amplifying the details with due regard to latest technological innovations and improvements 
in the last decade in process technology, storage in case of plants and also in firefighting methodologies. 


The major changes in this revision include the following: 
a) Provisions on drawings and documentation depicting layout of water spray system including water supply 
have been detailed. 
b) Initial considerations for arriving at the number, system and type of water spray technique have been 
included in detail. 
c) New provisions on selection and types of spray nozzle have been included. 
d) New provisions on components of spray system installation have been included. 
e) Water supply requirements for spray systems and necessary pumping arrangements have also been 
included in detail. 
Nothing in this standard prevents introduction of new concepts and technologies, when such systems are at least 


equivalent to various provisions of this standard and backed up by successful full scale fire testing in recognized 
test laboratories where the design criteria and test results have been fully documented. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of the standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF FIXED AUTOMATIC 
HIGH AND MEDIUM VELOCITY WATER SPRAY 
SYSTEM — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies minimum requirements for 
design, installation and maintenance of fixed automatic 
water spray systems in general areas of plants/industrial 
buildings (high hazards, in general), various types of 
storage tanks (containing flammable liquids) in the open 
tankage areas, cable cellars in power stations and large 
power houses, material carrying conveyors, etc. 


1.2 This standard covers only the types of water spray 
nozzles specified in 6 (see 6.2 and 6.3 in particular for 
details). 


1.3 The requirements of this standard are also applicable 
to any addition, extension, repair or other modification 
to an existing water spray system. 


1.4 The requirements of this standard are also applicable 
to the water spray systems also known as deluge 
systems. It is not the intention of this standard to cover 
other types of systems like automatic sprinkler system, 
foam sprinkler system, vapour mitigation system, etc. 


1.5 The requirements are not valid for certain specific 
applications like those on ships, in aircrafts, on vehicles 
and for below ground systems in the mining industry 
and the like. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards . 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Automatic Detection Equipment — Equipment 
which will automatically detect one or more 
components directly related to combustion, such as 
heat, smoke, flame and other phenomenon, and cause 
automatic actuation of alarm and protection equipment. 


3.2 Automatic Spray System — A special fixed pipe 
system connected to a reliable source of fire protection 
water supply and equipped with water spray nozzles 
for specific water discharge and distribution over 
the surface or area to be protected. The piping 
system is connected to the water supply through an 
automatically actuated deluge valve, which initiates 
flow of water. 
NOTE — Automatic actuation is achieved by operation of 
automatic detecting equipment installed along with water 
spray nozzles. High velocity and medium velocity systems are 
the types. Spray systems designed to actuate when a sensor 
detects a fire; and no interface operation or action by personnel 
is required. 


3.3 Class A Liquid — Liquids having flash point 
below 23°C. 


3.4 Class B Liquid — Liquids having flash point of 
23°C and above but below 65°C. 


3.5 Class C Liquid — Liquids having flash point of 
65°C and above but below 93°C. 


3.6 Combined System — A system of piping that 
connects both hydrant or sprinkler system with the 
water spray system (also called tapped system) and is 
supplied by a common piping and actuation valve. 


3.7 Control of Burning — Application of water spray 
to the source of the fire or fuel surface to reduce the rate 
of burning and heat release from a fire until the source 
of fuel can be shut off, the fire can be extinguished or 
the fuel is all consumed. 


3.8 Deluge Valve — A quick opening system actuation 
valve which allows water to flow into a piping system 
to discharge from all open pipes or spray nozzles. A 
deluge valve can be opened automatically, in response 
to a detection system installed in the area being 
protected or by manual operation in an area remote 
from the fire area. 


3.9 Density — The unit rate of water application to an 
area or surface expressed in litres/min/m? (Ipm/m’). 


3.10 Distribution Pipes — A pipe feeding either a 
range pipe directly or a single sprinkler on a non- 
terminal range pipe more than 300 mm long. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


3.11 Electrical Clearance — The air distance between 
the water spray equipment, including piping and 
nozzles, and un-enclosed or un-insulated live electrical 
components at other than ground potential. 


3.12 Envelope — The three-dimensional space 
enclosing the fire. 


3.13 Exposed Equipment — Equipment subject to fire 
damage, usually from a source other than the equipment 
being protected. 


3.14 Exposure Protection — The absorption of heat 
through application of water spray to structures or 
equipment exposed to a fire or radiant heat from a fire, 
or heat buildup due to sunrays in extreme hot weather to 
limit surface temperature to a level that will minimize 
damage and prevent failure. 


3.15 Extinguishment — Occurs when combustion is 
no longer present. 


3.16 Fire Barrier — A fire barrier is a continuous wall 
or floor that is designed and constructed to limit the 
spread of fire. 


3.17 Fire Proofing — The application of a fire resistant 
material to minimize the effects of fire exposure by 
flame impingement, to reduce the rate of temperature 
rise of the material and to delay heat-induced structural 
failure. 


3.18 Flash Point — The minimum temperature at 
which the liquid gives so much vapour that this vapour, 
when mixed with air, forms an ignitable mixture and 
gives a momentary flash on application of a small pilot 
flame under specified conditions of test. 


3.19 Gauge 


3.19.1 ‘A’ Gauge — Pressure gauge connected to a 
town main connection between the supply pipe stop 
valve and the non-return valve. 


3.19.2 ‘B’ Gauge — Pressure gauge connected to and 
on the same level as an deluge valve, indicating the 
pressure on the upstream side of the valve. 


3.19.3 ‘C’ Gauge — Pressure gauge connected to and 
on the same level as an deluge valve, indicating the 
pressure on the downstream side of the valve. 


3.20 Impingement — The striking of a protected 
surface by water droplets issuing directly from 
projectors and/or sprayers. 


3.21 Insulated Equipment — Equipment, structures 
and vessels provided with insulation which for the 
expected duration of exposure, will protect steel from 
exceeding a temperature of 454°C (850°F) for structural 
members and 343°C (650°F) for vessels. 


3.22 Manual Spray Systems — Spray systems that 
must be actuated by a person. 


3.23 Non-absorbing Ground — Earth or fill that is 
not readily permeable or absorbent to large quantities 
of flammable or combustible liquid or water or both. 


3.24 Pilot Sprinkler — An automatic sprinkler or 
thermostatic fixed temperature release device used as 
a detector to pneumatically or hydraulically release the 
system actuation valve. 


3.25 Range Pipes — Pipes on which sprinklers are 
attached either directly or through short arm pipes, 
which do not exceed 300 mm in length. 


3.26 Run Down Coverage — A protective water 
film flowing down by gravity onto lower portions 
of equipment (such as vessels or towers) from water 
applied to higher portions 


3.27 Slippage — The horizontal component of the 
travel of water along the surface beyond the point of 
contact caused by the momentum of water. 


3.28 Spray Nozzle — A normally open water 

discharging device which, when supplied with water 

under pressure, will distribute the water in a special 

directional pattern peculiar to the particular device. 
NOTE — Nozzles used for high velocity water spray systems 
are called ‘projectors’ and nozzles used for medium velocity 
water spray systems are called ‘sprayers’. Both these nozzles 
are made in a range of orifice sizes with varying discharge 
angles so that designed water density can be achieved for 
optimum protection. 


3.29 Water Wastage — The discharge from water 
spray nozzles that does not impinge on the surface 
being protected. 


4 DOCUMENTATION 


4.1 Preparation of Drawings 


Drawings shall be prepared in accordance to the 
following: 


a) Drawings shall be clear, contain all required 
details including scale and point of compass and 
shall be dated. 


b) Drawings of new installation shall show the entire 
compound; all buildings therein, with their door 
and window openings, and the boundary walls. 
Buildings under construction and future extension 
envisaged shall be indicated by dotted lines. 


c) Drawings of extensions to approved existing 
installations need not show the rest of the 
compound but sufficient details shall be given 
of the existing installations, in correlation to the 
extension, to enable the authorities concerned to 
check the plans and offer comments. 


d) In case of storeyed buildings, drawings submitted 
shall include plans of each storey together with 
sectional elevations. 


e) Drawings shall be on white paper or ammonia 
paper or ferro prussiate paper. 


f) Drawings shall generally be prepared in 
accordance with SP 46, shall not exceed 850 mm x 
1200 mm in size and shall be drawn to a scale 
of 1 : 500 or 1 : 1 000. In the case of very large 
compounds with more than one building, it is 
advisable to submit separate drawing for each risk 
with a key plan showing the relative situation of 
the various buildings, etc, in the compound. 


4.2 Drawings Illustration 


Drawings illustration shall also depict the following 
details: 


a) Pucca walls to be shown by double lines, doors 
and windows being clearly marked. 


b) Iron or other non-masonry walls to be shown by a 
thin line and nature of construction indicated. 


c) Fire walls to be indicated by the sign ‘fire wall’ 
at each end of the wall alongside or across them 
at regular intervals and marked in distinctive 
colours. 


d 


wa 


Fireproof doors and/or shutters to be marked as 
follows: 

1) Single fireproof door and/or shutter : ‘SFD’; 
and 


2) Double fireproof door and/or shutter : ‘DFD’ 
Skylights to be marked ‘sky lights’ or ‘SL’. 


f) Boiler to be shown by a rectangular figure marked 
‘boiler’. 


e 


<~ 


a 


Sprayer mains to be shown by a green line, the 
diameter, length and number of pipes being 
marked alongside and specials and reducers to be 
clearly indicated, such as ‘mm dia’, lengths of ‘m 
each’. 


8 


h) Sprayer pumps to be clearly marked, and the 
capacity and head to be indicated in each case. 


j) Pump(s) suction piping to be shown dotted and 
diameter to be indicated. 
k) Fire service water tanks and reservoirs to be 
shown to scale. 
m) Sprayer trunk mains to be shown by a green line, 
the sizes being marked alongside. 
n) Fire alarm bells to be shown by a green line, the 
sizes being marked ‘F.A.B.’ 
p) Sprayed blocks to be marked ‘SP’. 
q) Electric cable(s) for the fire pump(s) to be shown 
in green line(s). 
r) Material specifications of equipment and 
components of the installation, indicating the 


IS 15325 : 2020 


name of manufacturers and Indian Standards 
specifications, if any. 
s 


wm 


In the case of internal appliances, details of 
the areas of the various compartments, their 
occupation, and the quantities and types of 
appliances proposed. 


t) In the case of sprayer and hydrant installations, 
fully dimensioned plans in duplicate shall be 
submitted. 


4.3 In addition to the above, the following details would 
be necessary in the case of sprayer installation: 


a) Drawings showing layout of the entire sprayer 
system incorporating material specifications, 
different sizes of mains, etc. 


b) Each sprayer layout drawing shall indicate the 
details of sprayers used like, number of sprayers, 
type, K-factor, etc. 


c) Number of sprayers on each deluge valve set. 


d) Height of highest sprayer on each deluge valve 
set. 


e) Type(s) of installation(s) and the nominal 
diameter(s) of the main deluge valve. 


f) Number or reference of each deluge valve set. 


g) Layout of pump house showing clearly the suction, 
delivery and priming (if any) and freeboard 
arrangements. 


h) Details of water storage tanks giving particulars of 
compartmentation and common sump, details of 
inflow and levels for tappings for suction, inflow, 
overflow and free board levels. 

j) Sub-station location in relation to other blocks if 
the pump is electrically driven. 

k) Route of cable from substation to fire pump house. 

m) Schematic circuit line diagram showing electric 
feed to fire pump. 

n) A statement that the system will comply with this 
specification including details of any deviations 
from its recommendations with the reasons for the 
deviations. 

p) A list of the components suitable for sprayer 
use included in the system, each identified 
by manufacturer’s name and model/reference 
number. 


4.4 Installation Layout Drawings 


4.4.1 General 


The scale shall be not less than 1 : 100. Layout drawing 
shall include the following information: 

a) North point indication. 

b) Class or classes of installation according to hazard 


class including stock category and design storage 
height. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


c) Constructional details of floors, ceiling, roofs and 
exterior walls, and walls separating sprinkler/ 
sprayer protected and non-sprinkler/sprayer 
protected areas. 


d 


wn 


Sectional elevations of each floor of each building 
showing the distance of sprayers from ceiling, 
structural features, etc, which affect the sprayer 
layout or the water distribution from the sprayers. 


e 


<~ 


Location and size of concealed roof or ceiling 
voids, offices and other enclosures sealed at a 
level lower than the roof of ceiling proper. 


f) Indication of trunking, staging, platforms, 
machinery, fluorescent light fittings, heaters, 
suspended open cell ceilings, etc, which may 
adversely affect the sprinkler/sprayer distribution. 


a 


Sprinkler types(s) and temperature ratings(s), 
sprayer types. 


8 


h) Location and type of main control/deluge valves 
and location of alarm motors and gongs. 


j) Location and details of any water flow and air or 
water pressure alarm switches. 


k) Location and size of any tail-end air valves, 
subsidiary stop valves and drain valves. 


m) Drainage slope of the pipe work. 
n) Location and specification of any orifice plate. 


p) A schedule listing the numbers of sprinklers, 
medium and high velocity sprayers, etc, and the 
area of protection. 


q) A key to the symbols used. 


4.4.2 Hydraulically Calculated Pipe Work 


For hydraulically calculated pipe work, the following 
shall be given with detailed calculations, either as 
purpose designed work sheets or as a computer print- 
out: 
a) For each design area of operation: 

1) Area identification. 

2) Hazard class. 

3) Specified density of discharge (lpm/m’). 

4) Area covered per sprayer (in m°). 

5) Detailed and dimensioned working drawings 

showing the following: 

i) Node or pipe reference scheme used 
to identify pipes, junctions, sprayer 
heads and fittings which need hydraulic 
consideration; and 

ii) Height above datum of each point of 
identified deluge valve. 

b 


wm 


For each operating sprayer: 

1) Sprayer node or reference number; 

2) Sprayer nominal K-factor and discharge angle; 
3) Flow through the sprinkler (in l/min); and 


4) Inlet pressure to the sprinkler or sprayer 
assembly (in bar). 


c 


wm 


For each hydraulically significant pipe: 
1) Pipe node or other reference; 
2) Pipe nominal bore ( in mm); 
3) Hazen-Williams constant (C or K-factor) for 
the pipe; 
4) Flow through pipe ( in l/min); 
5) Nominal fluid velocity (in m/s); 
6) Length of pipe ( in m); 
7) Numbers, types and equivalent lengths of 
fittings; 
8) Static head change in pipe (in m); 
9) Pressures at inlet and outlet of pipe, in bar; 
10) Friction loss in pipe ( in bar); and 
11) Indication of flow direction. 
NOTE — A line diagram of the pipe layout should be prepared 
showing the following: 
a) node or pipe reference numbers: 
b) distribution pipes, 
c) range pipes, and 


d) sprayer heads under consideration. 


4.5 Water Supply Drawings 


The drawings shall show water supplies and pipe 
work therefrom upto the installation control valves. 
The drawings shall be on an indicated scale of not less 
than 1 : 100. A key to the symbols shall be included. 
The position and type of stop and check valves and 
any pressure reducing valve, water meter, water lock, 
orifice plate and any connection supplying water for 
other services shall be indicated. 


5 INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS 


5.1 Consultation 


Where a spray system or an extension or alteration to 
a spray system is being considered for new or existing 
facilities, the authorities concerned shall be consulted 
at an early stage. 


5.2 Outline Design 
Consideration should be given to any benefits that 
might be gained by changes in building design, work 
procedures, etc, when preparing the outline design. 
In planning site layout and building/tankage design, 
particular consideration should be given to the 
following: 

a) Occupancy which determines the water discharge 

density and water supply pressure, and flow; 

b) Siting of any main water supply connection(s); 

c) Siting of any water supply tank(s) or reservoir; 

d) Siting of any pump house; 


e) The maximum quantity of water available from 
the supply source compared with the system 
requirements 


f) Location of deluge valves together with the access 
thereto; indication of position of valves; and the 
disposal of drainage and water after any test; 


g) Source and means of supply of electric power, etc; 
and 


h) Protection of deluge valves(s), pipe work within 
and outside the plant/tankage facilities against 
accidental damage. 


5.3 It is important to consider building design in the 
context of fire protection, for example, choice of 
materials, support of spray pipe work having regard 
to the load imposed on building structure/tankage by 
the weight of spray pipe work and the contained water, 
need for inbuilt drainage, etc. 


5.4 Design Objectives 
The following objectives shall be considered in the 
design: 
a) Protection with water spray systems shall be 
considered as best option in case of following: 
1) Fire extinguishment, 
2) Control of burning, 
3) Exposure protection, and 
4) Fire prevention. 
b 


wm 


A study shall be made of the physical and chemical 
properties of the materials for which the water 
spray protection is being considered to determine 
the advisability of its use. 

c) The flash point, specific gravity, viscosity, 
miscibility, and solubility and permeability of 
the material, temperature of the water spray, 
and the normal temperature of the hazard to be 
protected are among the factors that shall be given 
consideration. 


d) Where water spray can encounter confined 
materials at a high temperature or with a wide 
distillation range, the slop-over or frothing hazard 
shall be evaluated. 


5.5 Supplementary Information 


The following supplementary information may also be 
considered, as applicable: 


a) Where protecting water soluble materials such as 
alcohol, systems shall be permitted to be designed 
for extinguishment by control, extinguishment 
by dilution or extinguishment by an adequate 
application rate and coverage. 


b) Each water soluble material shall be tested under 
the conditions of use to determine the applicability 
of a water spray system, unless design supportive 


data is available. 


wm 


IS 15325 : 2020 


c) Water spray shall not be used for direct application 
to materials that react with water, such as metallic 
sodium or calcium carbide, which produce violent 
reactions or increase hazardous products as a 
result of heated vapour emission. 


d 


wm 


Water spray shall not be used for applications 
involving liquefied gases at cryogenic temperatures 
(such as liquefied natural gas), which boil violently 
when heated by water. 


e) An evaluation shall be conducted, given the 
possibility of damage, distortion or failure of 
equipment operating at high temperatures due to 
water spray application. 


5.6 Interaction with Other Fire Protection Measures 


Account shall be taken of possible interaction between 
spray systems and other fire protection measures. 
Examples of possible adverse interactions between 
spray protection and other fire protection measures, 
which need specific considerations, are: 


a) Water damage to an inadequately shielded fire 
alarm control panel in a spray protected area 
with consequent possible failure of the fire alarm 
system. 


b 


wm 


Operation or failure of smoke detectors in zones 
adjacent to one in which water discharge has taken 
place because of the water spray mist travelling to 
adjacent zones. 


c 


wm 


It is possible that water spray protection for plant/ 
equipment is independent through dedicated 
pumping facilities or tapped from hydrant 
protection already available in the premises. 
While the design of the system in either case 
shall remain same with regard to provision of 
sprayers, piping, etc pumping capacity and water 
storage requirements for the hydrant system shall 
be suitably increased to take care of additional 
load. 


Determining the need for water spray protection 
at various locations, particularly in petrochemical 
plants, refineries, bottling plants, etc, includes an 
evaluation of the extent and capabilities of other 
types of fire protection both active and passive 
ones. Various options are available to protect 
equipment and shall be explored to determine the 
most suitable approach for a specific hazard or 
area. Major factors to be evaluated include but are 
not limited to the following: 


d 


wm 


1) Fire separation spacing between various plant 
units, equipment, etc. 

2) Fireproofing of building structures and also 
flammable storage tanks inside and outside 
plant battery. 

3) Vertical height of columns and equipment 
where other fire protection measures are not 
possible. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


4) Safe shutdown systems, both manual and 
automatic shutdown. 


5 


wa 


Access to the cluster of equipment due to 
radiant heat, obscured visibility, lack of access 
to hose streams, etc. 


6 


wm 


Safe blow down of flammable liquids and 
vapour phase contents of the plants to blow 
down drums, pits or sumps and/or flare or any 
other safe location. 


7) Response times and capabilities of plant and 
other fire brigades. 
8) Fire hydrant system with pumps, fixed 


monitors, portable monitors and hose streams, 
and foam systems. 


9 


wa 


Prolonged water application facilities to 
facilitate safe shutdown and removal of 
flammables. 
10) The availability of portable and mobile 
firefighting equipment and personnel to 
operate it. 


11 


wm 


Drainage facilities for flammable liquids/ 


hydrocarbon from a spill area. 
12) Hold-up of flammable liquids/hydrocarbon 


inside plants, temperature, and volatility. 
13 


wa 


Protection with passive as well as active 
systems for most critical equipment. 


14 


wa 


Public liability to the adjoining surroundings 
arising out of leakage of flammable and toxic 
chemicals 


e) Such possible interactions need careful 


considerations. 
6 SPRAY NOZZLES 


6.1 General 


Water spray systems are usually applied to special fire 
protection problems beyond the capability of a standard 
sprinkler system. They are specifically designed for 
fire control, extinguishment, prevention or exposure 
protection. These systems typically require that water 
be applied rapidly and uniformly to all protected 
surfaces at the same time, an objective that may not be 
possible with closed nozzles. 


In addition, to protect specific surfaces, the use 
of special nozzles with directional discharge is 
employed. The placement of these nozzles to provide 
proper coverage is often in conflict with the required 
placement to ensure prompt operation where automatic 
nozzles are used. Thus, the standard suggests that open 
nozzles will normally be employed and that a separate 
detection system will be used to actuate the system. 


There are cases, however, where it is desirable to use 
closed nozzles to limit the discharge of water to prevent 
equipment damage (such as when water spray is used 


for local protection of sensitive equipment like turbine 
bearings) or there are environmental concerns. 


Automatic nozzles shall only be used where open 
nozzles present such problems and the position of the 
nozzles can meet both the coverage and response time 
as required under design objectives. 


6.2 Selection of Nozzles 


Nozzles shall be always of open type. Automatic 
(closed) nozzles shall be permitted where positioned 
and located so as to provide satisfactory performance 
with respect to activation time and distribution. The 
selection of the type and size of spray nozzles shall be 
made with proper consideration given to such factors 
as discharge characteristics, physical character of the 
hazard involved, ambient conditions, material likely to 
be burning, and the design objectives of the system. 


Where acceptable to the Authority having jurisdiction, 
sprinklers shall be permitted to be used in water spray 
systems and installed in positions other than anticipated 
by their listing to achieve specific results where 
special situations require. Water spray nozzles can 
be permitted to be placed in any position, within their 
listing limitations, necessary to obtain proper coverage 
of the protected area. The positioning of water spray 
nozzles shall include an evaluation of all the following 
factors: 


a) Shape and size of the area to be protected; 


b) Nozzle design (end connection and material of 
construction) and characteristics of the water 
spray pattern to be produced; 


c) Effect of wind and fire draft on very small drop 
sizes or on large drop sizes with little initial 
velocity; 


d) Potential to miss the target surface and increase 
water wastage; 


e) Effects of nozzle orientation on coverage 
characteristics; and 

f) Potential for mechanical damage. 
6.2.1 Nozzles shall be of the type that has been tested 
and listed for use in water spray systems. The selection 
of specific spray involves consideration of the following 
factors: 

a) Characteristics of the equipment to be protected; 

b) Purpose of the system; 

c) Discharge characteristics of the nozzle; 

d) Possible wind or thermal draft conditions; 

e) Equipment and 
requirements; 


configuration spacing 
f) Corrosive water or atmospheric conditions; 


g) Water flow rate requirements versus availability; 
and 


h) Drainage. 


The effective range of the spray is determined by the 
velocity and the size of the water droplets. Because of 
differences in orifice size, nozzle characteristics, and 
discharge patterns, one type of nozzle cannot ordinarily 
be substituted for another without proper analysis. 


6.3 Type of Nozzles 


Three types of nozzles namely, high velocity, medium 
velocity and drencher type (window and curtain) are 
covered as per this standard, and each of them has 
their own application in protection with water spray 
systems. Design requirements for the same are covered 
in detail in 7 and 8. Nozzles used for high velocity water 
spray systems are called ‘projectors’ and nozzles used 
for medium velocity water spray systems are called 
‘sprayers’. Both these nozzles are made in a range 
of orifice sizes with varying discharge angles so that 
discharge can be controlled for optimum protection. 


6.3.1 Medium Velocity Water Spray System 


Nozzles are generally used for spray angles between 
60° and 140°. They are recommended for usage in 
various applications with different K-factors between 
18 and 100. These nozzles are used in the protection 
of high hazard plant areas, horizontal tanks like 
bullets, spheres, vertical atmospheric fixed and floating 
roof type tanks, conveyors, cable cellars and similar 
applications. 


6.3.2 High Velocity Water Spray System 


Nozzles are generally used for spray angles between 
65° and 150°. They are recommended for usage in 
applications with different K-factors between 18 and 
110. These nozzles are generally used for oil filled 
equipment like transformers and other types of oil 
tanks. 


6.3.3 Drencher Type (Window and Curtain) Nozzles 


Water curtain nozzle distributes water in a flat curtain 
extending all the way to the ground. Water curtain 
nozzle, when mounted in pendent position, acts as a 
window, spray nozzle to protect interior walls, windows 
and other opening of the building which are affected 
by fire. The nozzles, when mounted in horizontal 
position with flow towards ground, a flat water curtain 
are produced to segregate the area which is under fire. 
They are generally used in applications with different 
K-factors, between 20 and 140. 


There are restrictions in choosing K-factor and sprayer 
angle for various types of protection and the same are 
incorporated under each application. 


7 HIGH VELOCITY WATER SPRAY SYSTEMS 


7.1 General 


High velocity water spray systems are installed to 
extinguish fires involving liquids with flash points 


IS 15325 : 2020 


of 65°C (150°F) or higher. Three principles of 
extinguishment are employed in the system, namely, 
emulsification, cooling and smothering. The result 
of applying these principles is to extinguish the fire 
within a few seconds. Guidelines for protection of the 
following are covered hereunder: 


a) Transformers, oil filled equipment of power 
stations; 


b) Turbo-alternators; and 
c) Oil-fired boiler rooms and oil quenching tanks. 


7.2 Transformer Protection 
7.2.1 General 


7.2.1.1 Transformer protection shall contemplate 
on essentially complete impingement on all exterior 
surfaces except the underside, which may be protected 
by horizontal projectors. 


7.2.1.2 Transformers present particular design problems 
for water spray protection, primarily due to their 
irregular shape and necessary clearances to be provided 
for the high voltage equipment. Generally speaking, 
there is much more interference with the water flow 
on the sides of the transformer than at their top. Due 
to this reason, the protection usually involves a large 
number of small capacity projectors than a few bigger 
ones. Often it will be necessary to put more water on 
the transformer than required to achieve complete 
impingement and total envelopment. 


Hence, it is necessary to submit the following 
information with detailed drawings to check the design 
of spray system of a transformer: 

a) Length of the transformer; 

b) Width of the transformer; 

c) Height of the transformer; 

d) Location and height of bushings; 

e) Size and location of oil conservator tank; 

f) Location of switch boxes, tap changing gears and 
other equipment that obstruct and interfere with 
water distribution; 

g) Specification, such as kVA rating, voltage rating, 
oil quantity, etc; 

h) Details showing the direction of incoming and 
outgoing cabling and ducting; 

j) Details of flooring on which the transformer is 
installed and nature of floor around the transformer 
such as concrete, asphalt, pebble filled, etc; 

k) Elevation of transformer above the grade; 

m) Size and location of fire barrier walls; 

n) Siting of radiators and cooler banks in relation to 
the transformer and the surrounding ground level; 

p) Protection and detection piping in different 
colours; and 


IS 15325 : 2020 


q) Projector characteristics showing the ‘K’ factor, 
cone angle, discharge in litres per minute and 
effective reach. 


7.2.1.3 The drawings shall clearly show top, sides 
and bottom of the transformer and also isometric 
views showing all the above details. Also the piping, 
explosion vents, flanges, etc should be clearly shown. 


7.2.1.4 The projection from the surfaces like ribbings, 
tap changers, cable boxes, etc, would ‘roof off’ the 
downward flow of water and hence ‘run down’ cannot 
be automatically considered. Such ‘roofed off’ areas 
will require specific spray coverage with additional 
projectors. 


7.2.2 Electrical Clearance 


All system components shall be so located as to maintain 
minimum clearances from live parts as shown in 
Table 1. ‘Clearance’ is the air distance between 
water spray equipment including piping nozzles and 
detectors and, uninsulated live electrical components at 
other than ground potential. The minimum clearances 
specified in Table 1 are under normal conditions. 
During the operation of water spray system, they are 
intended for use as safe. The values stated are as per 
requirements of SP 30. 


Table 1 Minimum Clearances 


( Clause 7.2.2 ) 
SI Maximum Minimum Minimum 
No. RMS Value Distance of Distance of 
of Rated Installation Installations 
Operation Subject to Protected 
Voltage Over-voltages Against Over- 
kV mm voltages or 
Connected to 
Cables 
mm 
(1) (2) 6) (4) 
i) 10 150 150 
ii) 20 215 160 
iii) 30 325 270 
iv) 45 520 380 
v) 60 700 520 
vi) 110 1 100 950 
vii) 150 1 550 1 350 
viii) 220 2 200 1 850 
ix) 400 3 500 3 000 


7.2.3 Strainers (see also 9.14) 


Pipeline strainers shall be of approved type for use in 
water supply connections. Strainers must be capable 
of removing from the water all solids of sufficient size 
to prevent the spray nozzles from clogging (normally 
3.2 mm perforations are suitable). In addition, the 
strainer must be capable of continuous operation 


without serious increase in head loss, for a period 
estimated to be ample when considering the type of 
protection provided, the condition of the water and 
similar local circumstances. Also, pipeline strainers 
must incorporate a flush out connection. Individual 
strainers for spray nozzles where required must be 
capable of removing from the water all solids of 
sufficient size to obstruct the spray nozzle they serve. 


7.2.4 General Layout and Design 


7.2.4.1 Transformers shall be protected using rings of 
nozzles there around with the top of transformer and 
subsequently rings for every 3 m from top to bottom 
thereof and beneath each continuous obstruction. The 
rings shall not be located at more than | m of the 
transformer. 


7.2.4.2 Projectors shall be employed to spray water 
horizontally at the bottom if the transformer is at more 
than 300 mm above ground level. 


7.2.4.3 In case of transformers surrounded by concrete 
or asphalted surfaces, projectors must be employed in 
such a way as to wash off flammable liquids away from 
transformers. 


7.2.4.4 Piping network shall be planned with more 
flanged connections in such a way that removal of 
transformer is smoothly enabled by removal of very 
few connections. This also will be helpful in restoring 
the protection to the transformer (after servicing) 
without delay or downtime. 


7.2.4.5 Projectors 


a) Projectors shall not be less than 6 mm orifice, 
in size; 

b) Projectors protecting the top shall be aimed at an 
angle so that all of the water impinges upon the 
transformer, the spray pattern targeting either the 
top of the transformer or partly the top and partly 
the sides; 


c) Projectors protecting the vertical sides and the 
bottom of the transformer shall point directly on 
the surfaces to be protected; 


d) Projectors protecting irregular areas shall be 
located for the best coverage; 


e) Projectors protecting the space between 
transformers and radiators and/or space between 
radiators shall be so located as to spray directly 
into the open space; 


f) Where the components of the transformer create 
spaces greater than 400 mm, such surfaces shall 
be individually protected as far as possible; 


g) As far as possible, water spray piping shall not be 
routed across the top of the transformer tank or 
across the face of the transformer cabinet. When 
it is difficult to achieve this, piping shall be routed 


across the top and face of the cabinet subject 
to maintain requisite distance from the live 
electrical components; 


h) Projectors shall cover the conservators, oil pipe 
joints and flanges, and pumps, if any; and 

j) Direct impingement of water spray on energized 
bushings and/or lightning arresters shall 
be permitted only when authorized by the 
manufacturer or by the electrical inspectorate. 


7.2.4.6 Fire barrier walls (Baffle walls) 


Fire barrier walls shall be constructed between the 
transformers/equipment when the aggregate oil 
capacity of the transformer or bank of transformers 
exceed 2 000 | and these walls shall be of either 
355 mm thick brick or 200 mm thick RCC and carried 
at least 600 mm above the highest point of equipment 
to be protected. 


Fire barrier wall shall be constructed between the 
transformers/equipment, which are not spaced at 
distances mentioned in Table 2. 


Table 2 Separating Distances 
( Clause 7.2.4.6 ) 


SI No. Oil Capacity of Individual Distance 
Clear Separating m 
Transformers 
litre 
() (2) (3) 
i) Upto 5 000 6.0 
ii) Between 5 001 and 10 000 8.0 
ili) Between 10 001 and 20 000 10.0 
iv) Between 20 001 and 30 000 12.5 
v) Over 30 000 15.0 


7.2.4.7 System design 


For control mode, water shall be applied at a rate of not 
less than 10.2 Ipm/m? of the surface area of the entire 
transformer including the bottom surface, radiators, 
conservators, etc. For suppression mode, the density 
applicable shall not be less than 15 Ipm/m’. Density 
may be reduced to 6.1 lpm/m* for spills on the expected 
non-absorbing ground surface area of exposure. The 
following shall also be taken care of: 


a) Projectors on the rings shall be located at not less 
than 500 mm and not more than 800 mm from the 
transformer/equipment surface. 


b) The horizontal distance between the projectors 
shall be maintained in such a way that their spray 
patterns intersect on the surface of transformer/ 
equipment which, in any case, shall not be more 
than 1.5 m. 


Obstructed or ‘roofed off’ portions (see 7.2.1.4) 
of the transformers shall be protected by separate 


c 


wa 


IS 15325 : 2020 


projectors. For this purpose, it will be permissible 
to extend pipes from the nearest ring by means of 
a nipple. The terminal pipes extended from the 
ring mains shall need separate supports if they are 
600 mm or longer. 

d) Where radiators or cooler banks are located at 
more than 300 mm from the surrounding ground 
level, undersides shall be protected by projectors 
pointing upwards. 

e 


wm 


Where radiator/cooler bank are spaced more 
than 300 mm apart and where the transformer is 
separated at a distance of more than 300 mm from 
the radiator/cooler bank, projectors shall be so 
arranged to spray into the space. Projector angles 
shall be so selected that the cone diameters at the 
entrance of space is equal to or slightly larger than 
the space. 


f) For unobstructed vertical surface, the maximum 
vertical distance between projectors shall be 2.5 m. 
However, for obstructed surface the distance shall 
be governed by the nature of obstruction. 


wa 


Nozzles shall be positioned such that the water 
spray does not envelop energized bushings or 
lightning arresters by direct impingement. 


8 


h 


wm 


The system shall be hydraulically so designed 
that the pressure at the hydraulically most remote 
projectors in the network is not less than 3.5 bar in 
case of an outdoor transformer and 2.8 bar in case 
of an indoor transformer. However, the maximum 
pressure in any projector within a network shall 
not exceed 5 bar. The velocity in the feed pipes 
shall not exceed 10 m/s. 


7.2.5 Detection System for Transformers 


Automatic detection equipment shall be so located and 
adjusted as to operate reliably. The location of detectors 
shall be based on several factors, such as nature 
of hazard, air velocity, temperature variations, and 
configuration of the hazard, indoor or outdoor, open or 
closed structures and other variables. For transformers 
the detector sprinklers shall be as close to the shell as 
possible at all places subject to electrical clearance. 


7.2.5.1 Outdoor transformers 


There shall be a ring of detectors around the top of 
the transformer and a second ring around the base. 
The detectors shall be spaced at a maximum of 
2.5 m intervals. The detectors shall be as close to 
the transformer as possible and shall in no case be 
farther than 300 mm therefrom. Additional detectors 
shall be required for specific known hazard points, 
such as tap changers, cable boxes, vents, oil piping, 
etc. Coolers and radiator banks associated with the 
transformer shall also be provided with detectors at 
two levels. The flanges of oil pipes shall be within 
300 mm from detectors. The conservator tanks shall 
be provided with detectors at 2.5 m spacing. It is 


IS 15325 : 2020 


sufficient to install detectors under the conservator 
tanks. 


Piping shall be individually supported as far as 
possible. Transformer ribbings may be used to support 
the piping. In no case, shall the piping be supported on 
body of transformer. Terminal pipes (other than those 
for projectors protecting ‘roofed off’ portions) longer 
than 300 mm shall be supported separately. Piping 
shall be individually supported as far as possible. 
Transformer ribbings may be used to support the 
piping. In no case shall the piping be supported on the 
body of the transformer. 

NOTE — Pipe work is likely to be affected by stray magnetic 


fields that can produce inductive heating if there is a continuous 
metallic ring. Hence, continuous ring mains shall be avoided. 


7.2.5.2 Indoor transformers 


Where the transformer cubicle is open fronted, the same 
shall be treated as an outdoor transformer with detectors 
as per 7.2.5.1. Where the transformer cubicle is more 
than 6 m in height, the detectors shall be positioned 
as close to the transformer as possible to the top of 
the transformer. Where the transformer cubicle is less 
than 6 m in height, the detectors shall be positioned in 
accordance with IS 15105, that is, ata maximum spacing 
of 4 m with an area coverage of not more than 12 m’. 


7.3 Miscellaneous Protection 


7.3.1 High velocity water spray systems are also 
provided for the protection of following areas in power 
stations: 


a) Inside turbo alternator sets; 

b) Clean and dirty oil tanks, paraffin tanks; 
c) Inside turbo alternator sets; and 

d) Hydrogen cooling and seal oil systems. 


7.3.2 The protection is normally localized and hence 
deemed as ‘spot’ protections as only equipment are 
protected and not the whole area where the equipment 
is installed. The details of design for protection of 
above areas shall be submitted to concerned authorities 
in advance showing the layout of equipment, their 
configuration, location of projectors and detectors, etc, 
along with detailed drawings for prior approval. 


8 MEDIUM VELOCITY WATER 
SYSTEMS 


SPRAY 


8.1 General 


8.1.1 Medium velocity water spray systems are installed 
to control the burning and to provide cooling and/or 
exposure protection to such risks where extinguishment 
is always not possible or even desirable, for example, 
fires involving flammable fluids having flash points 
below 65°C (150°F). These systems are also used 
sometimes for power station applications in coal 
conveyors, cable galleries, etc. 


10 


8.1.2 Guidelines for protection of the following areas 
by medium velocity water spray system are covered 
hereunder: 


a) General area protection (working plants like LPG 
bottling plants, chemical/petrochemical plants 
where flammable solvents are stored and/or used, 
etc); 

b) Horizontal storage vessels (for example, LPG 
bullets, etc); 

c) Vertical storage vessels (for example, benzene, 
xylene and toluene tankage); 

d) Spherical storage vessels (for example, LPG 
bullets, spheres, etc); 

e) Spot protection (protection of selective areas/ 
equipment); 

f) Material carrying conveyors for coal, coke, etc; and 

g) Cable cellars, cable galleries in large power plants 
and power stations. 


8.2 General Area Protections 


8.2.1 Definition 


A process plant where flammable liquids are contained 
in vessels and/or pipes forming a large or small complex 
of the plant either in a room or outdoors or under a 
roof with open sides would be classified as a ‘general 
area’. A plant wherein more than 1 000 | of flammable 
liquids/solvents are stored in small containers would 
also be classified as a ‘General area’. 


8.2.2 General Information 
The density of water application shall depend upon the 
type of flammable liquids handled in the plants and also 
upon the object of protection and site conditions. The 
examples include: 

a) Controlled burning of spilt liquid; 

b) Exposure protection of plant and its structure; 

c) Ceiling height of the risk; 

d) Area of the fire involved; and 

e) Type of containers holding the flammable liquid. 


8.2.3 General Requirements 


8.2.3.1 Sprayers installed at ceiling level shall provide 
general area protection for spill fires and of un-insulated 
structural steel columns/trusses upto 3 m from the 
ceiling sprayers. 


8.2.3.2 If the ceilings or roofs are of either A.C. sheet 
or G.I. sheet and the like or combustible materials, 
additional open type sprinklers shall be provided 
exclusively to protect them with a degree of wetting. 


8.2.3.3 Where the height of ceiling/roof of the plant 
exceeds 13 m from the flooring below, conventional 
open type sprinklers shall be employed instead of 
sprayers. 


8.2.3.4 Vessels, drums, pumps, valves, manifolds and 
flammable liquid pipes inside the plant shall need to be 
protected by sprayers installed at a lower level. 


8.2.3.5 If there are obstructions extending below the 
ceiling sprayers and they are more than | m in width, 
undemeath of such obstructions shall be protected by 
local sprayers. 


8.2.3.6 Structural steel work supporting access 
platforms, catwalks, ladders, etc, may be protected by 
separate sprayers. 


8.2.3.7 As far as possible, the sprayers installed at 
lower levels (see 8.2.3.4, 8.2.3.5 and 8.2.3.6) shall be 
provided with baffle plates. 


8.2.3.8 Full detailed drawings of the following shall be 
submitted along with the proposal: 


a) Plan and sectional views of the risk, floor wise, 
showing the dimensions of the block, equipment 
layout, nature of floors/roof, minimum and 
maximum ceiling height, etc. 

b) Columns, beams and trusses of the supporting 
structure. 

c) Working details of sprayers, sprinklers, detectors, 
their piping, their spacing, zone division, etc; 

d) Location of deluge valves, piping, detector piping 
and their sizes. 

e) Typical mounting arrangements of sprayers, 
sprinklers, detectors, etc. 


y 4 


IS 15325 : 2020 


f) Separate drawing showing the various nodes only 
for hydraulic calculation; 


g) Characteristic curves of sprayers and sprinklers 
showing their pattern, orifice size, K-factor, spray 
angle, discharge in lpm, etc; 

h) Full details of the liquids handled indicating their 
quantity, chemical properties etc. 


j) Up-to date block plan showing clearly the 
distances between various blocks, underground 
tank, mains and their size, detector mains, deluge 
valves, pump house, water reservoir, etc. 


k) A detailed note on the protection scheme 
elucidating the design philosophy. 


8.2.4 Design Density 


8.2.4.1 Design application rates are based on the 
intended exposure protection, control of burning or 
extinguishment objectives. Various clauses in this 
section provide more specific guidance based on the 
actual equipment or structure being protected. These 
parameters shall be discussed and agreed to by the user 
and authorities having jurisdiction. 


8.2.4.2 The density of water application depends upon 
the flash point of the liquids handled and also the 
ceiling height of the building/structure. The correct rate 
of density shall be derived from Fig. 1. 


8.2.4.3 The density obtained from Fig. 1 shall be loaded 
by the fire area factor calculated as below where ‘a’ is 


T T 
34567 8 9 


80 


60 


40 


20 


0 


-20 


-40 


-60 


-80 


0 5 10 15 20 


-l 


25 30 35 40 45 x 


NOTE — The ceiling height to be used in determining the density shall be the minimum distance between the floor level 


of the plant and the ceiling. 


Control curves for the application of water on petroleum product spill fires based on flammable liquid flash point versus 


design density for various roof heights 
X Axis 
Y Axis 


: Density, in Ipm/m? 


3, 4, 5,6,7,8 and 9 : Respective height of the roof, in m 


: Flash point of flammable liquid handled, in °C 


Fic. 1 Design DeENsITY REQUIREMENTS 


IS 15325 : 2020 


the longer side and ‘b’ is the shorter side of the fire area 
measured, in metres. If the risk is circular in shape ‘a’ 
may be treated equal to ‘b’ and same if it is square. If it 
is rectangular and ‘a’ is more than ‘30’, it shall be taken 
as equal to ‘3b’ irrespective of the dimensions. 


; b (a+b 
Fire Area Factor = a + 0.33 
NOTES 
1 If the factor calculated is less than 1, the same may be taken 
as 1. 


2 After loading the basic density with the fire area factor, if the 
density works out to be greater than that of close control needs, 
the same may be taken as that of the latter. 


3 Attention is drawn to 8.2.6 


8.2.5 Layout of Protection Network 


8.2.5.1 The discharge cone angles of sprayers shall be 
selected from Fig. 2, which relates height of risk with 
the required angle. Any angle within shaded area is 
deemed acceptable. 


NOTES 
1 It is preferred to use wider angled sprayers at the roof 
according to increase in heights beyond 5 m but within 13 m. 


2 Where heights of less than a metre are encountered, sprayers 
with discharge cone angles of 100° shall only be installed. 


3 If the height of the risk exceeds 13 m, conventional sprinklers 
(open type) shall be installed. 


8.2.5.2 The discharge cone angles of the sprayers shall 
be selected from Fig. 2 which relates height of the risk 
with the required angle. Any angle within the shaded 
area is deemed acceptable. 


8.2.5.3 There shall be at least one sprayer for each 9 m? 
floor area. 


8.2.5.4 The distance adjoining sprayers shall not exceed 
3 m anywhere. 


8.2.5.5 The distance between the last sprayer and the 
external wall or limits of the area shall not exceed 
1.5 m anywhere. 


8.2.5.6 The sprayer piping shall be installed along 
the slope of the roof (in case of sloping roof) but the 
sprayers shall discharge water on the risk in a vertical 
pattern. 


8.2.5.7 In case of grating floors or perforated floors, 
the general area protection as per Fig. 1 shall be 
provided under the lowest floor. Under other floors, the 
sprayers shall be provided to discharge the floor below 
equipment, structural steel, etc at a rate of not less than 
10.2 Ipm/m?. 


NOTE — Incase of R.C.C. floors, each floor shall be protected 
at the same density as determined in 8.2.4.1. 


8.2.5.8 Equipment protection 


If the tops of the vessels are more than 5 m below the 
ceiling and/or platform, individual local protection shall 


12 


be provided by sprayers at a density of not less than 
10.2 Ipm/m? to cover top and sides thereof. Any 
obstructions below the ceiling sprayers, if exceeding 
1 m in width, shall be protected underneath by 
individual sprayers at the same density. 


Similarly, under surface of vessels and equipment, if 
raised 300 mm above the floor level, shall be wetted by 
individual sprayers at the same density. Highly exposed 
critical pipe racks, fin fan coolers, control equipment, 
valves, manifolds and other protuberances shall be 
totally wetted by local sprayers at the 10.2 Ipm/m/?. In 
case of fin fan coolers, nozzles shall be provided at the 
bottom of the fans also, spraying water upwards. 


8.2.5.9 Pumps and compressors 


Pumps that handle flammable liquids or combustible 
liquids at temperatures elevated above their flash 
points and also hot pumps handling hydrocarbons at 
and above 90 percent of their auto-ignition point which 
are located within process structures shall need to be 
protected when following conditions exist: 


a) Liquid being handled is at a temperature that is 
significantly above its flash point and/or is at a 
temperature equal to or above its auto-ignition 
point; 

b) Considered pump is in close proximity to 

other equipment (including adjacent pumps) or 

structures that could be quickly damaged by the 
pump fire; and 

c) Pump is located where protection by monitors or 

hose streams would be difficult or impractical. 


The water spray system should be designed to envelope 
the entire pump including the shaft, seals and other 
critical parts. Optionally, the spray envelope may be 
extended 750 mm beyond the pump periphery, and 
includes suction and discharge parting flanges, check 
valves, gauge connections, block valves, balance lines 
and lubrication connections. 


The application rate should be not less than 
20.4 Ipm/m? of the projected envelope area at grade 
level. Spray nozzles shall be so placed as to cover 
the entire envelope as stated above and the deflectors 
shall not be at more than 1 m from the pump and allied 
equipment. Protection to the compressors handling 
flammable gases shall follow the same philosophy as 
of pumps stated above. 


8.2.5.10 Structural protection 


In all cases, the load bearing structural steelwork for 
the plant and the roof, at levels exceeding 3 m below 
the sprayer at ceiling level, shall be wetted at a rate of 
not less than 10.2 Ipm/m? over the surface area of the 
structural members. 


Columns and beams shall be wetted on each side of 
the steel sections by staggering the sprayers. Any other 
structural steel work (whether load bearing or not) 
which can be subjected to flame impingement shall also 


IS 15325 : 2020 


A 


Fic. 2 LAYOUT OF PROTECTION NETWORK 


13 


200 
Graph relating sprayer discharge angle to the height above the protected surface 
(not applicable for the curved surface) 
B 
150 
3 
B 
5 
4 
100 
TWN 
B 
7 
50 
A = Height (m), B = Sprayer discharge angle, 3 = Max. discharge angle allowable, 
4 = Min. discharge angle allowable, 5 = Sprayer selection angles, 
6 = Limit that is, only sprinklers in this height, 7 = Below 1m height, only 100°sprayer 
m angle |__| 
B 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 


IS 15325 : 2020 


be wetted at not less than 10.2 Ipm/m?. The density can 
be halved in case of structure being built entirely of 
R.C.C or fire-proofed structures. 


NOTE — Uninterrupted ‘run down’ upto 3.7 m below the level 
of sprayers is permissible. 


8.2.5.11 Roof protection 


To provide wetting for the roof, conventional open type 
sprinklers (preferably) or sprayers shall be installed in 
such a way that there is at least one sprinkler/sprayer for 
every 9 m° area of the roof. Layout of such sprinklers/ 
sprayers shall be in accordance with those for sprayers 
as stated in 8.2.5.2 and 8.2.5.3. Sprinklers/sprayers 
shall be installed normal to the roof and piping shall be 
laid along the roof (in case of sloping roof). 


8.2.5.12 Miscellaneous protection 


Design densities for certain other high hazard 
occupancies shall be as per the following: 


a) LPG bottling plants see 8.2.4.2 
and 8.2.4.3 

b) LPG pump house 20.4 Ipm/m? 

c) LPGcylinder storage 10.2 Ipm/m? 
(empty, filled, cold repair) 

d) LPG tank, truck/tank, 10.2 Ipm/m? 
wagon, loading/unloading 
gantries 

e) Hydrocarbon truck/rail 10.2 Ipm/m? 
loading/unloading racks 

8.2.6 System Hydraulics 


For the protection of large areas, it is permissible to 
divide the building/area into several zones of not less 
than 6 m and not more than 8 m in width and all zones 
in plan view of the risk falling within 6 m from any 
point within a zone shall operate simultaneously. Each 
zone shall be controlled by an individual deluge valve 
and flow through the valves shall not be more than what 
is specified in 9.9.3 and Table 7. Each zone shall be 
so designed that the pressure at the hydraulically most 
unfavourable sprayer/sprinkler is not less than 1.4 bar 
and that at the most favourable sprayer/sprinkler is not 
more than 3.5 bar, and that the velocity in distribution 
pipes shall not exceed 5 m/s. 


Detailed hydraulic calculations in support of the above 
shall be submitted to the Authority for each zone. Orifice 
plates, if required, shall be fitted just above the deluge 
valves to keep pressures within the above limits. The 
aggregate pumping capacity shall be determined by the 
largest demand arising out of combination of deluge 
valves when zones concerned operate simultaneously. 


8.2.7 Detection System (see also 9.15) 


The installation and layout of detection system shall 
be governed by the layout of the water spray system. 


14 


The detection network shall be similar to the sprayer 
network and there shall be same number of detectors as 
there are number of sprayers. The detection piping shall 
be independently supported as far as possible and care 
shall be taken not to support other pipes on detection 
network. Where the building is divided into several 
zones, there shall be a cross zoning of detectors to 
enable simultaneous operation of all zones (see 8.2.6). 


8.2.8 Supporting methods for pipes in case of both the 
detection and sprayers shall preferably be in accordance 
with 9.4 in all respects. 


8.2.9 Pumping Capacity 
Flow requirements as calculated in 8.2.6 shall be 
considered as total pumping discharge requirement and 


pump parameters shall be accordingly determined as 
per 10.1 (c) and Table 8. 


8.2.10 Strainers 
See 7.2.3 and 9.14. 


8.2.11 Water Supply 
See 11.1 and Table 9. 


8.3 Horizontal Cylindrical Storage Tanks 


8.3.1 Proposal for the protection of horizontal vessels 
shall be accompanied by full detailed dimensional 
working drawings showing the following: 


a) Plan, elevation and end view; 

b) Site plan showing the location of all vessels, their 
spacing, etc; 

c) The protuberances, such as valves, drains, 
manholes, flanges, ladders, supporting legs, etc; 


d) Bund area and product pipes within; 


e) Protection and detection piping in different 
colours; and 


f) Sprayers’ characteristics showing the K-factor, 
cone angle and discharge, in lpm. 


8.3.2 General Requirements 


8.3.2.1 The complete exposed area of the horizontal 
storage vessel shall need to be protected at a uniform 
density of water application. 


8.3.2.2 It is also necessary to protect the supporting legs 
and the product pipes within the bund area (if provided) 
by sprayers. 
NOTES 
1 Supporting steel members need not be protected if they are 
300 mm or shorter in height. 
2 Where tankage area is not provided with bund walls, product 
pipes within 15 m of tank shell shall be protected by the sprayers. 
3 Also other occupancies, such as pump house, loading shed, 
etc falling within 15 m of the tank shell shall be protected by 
the sprayers. 


8.3.2.3 The protection network shall be fabricated in 
the form of horizontal rows of sprayers connected by 
piping in rings. The number of rows required shall be 
governed by the diameter of the vessel in accordance 
with Table 3. 


Table 3 Tank Diameter versus Number of Rows 
( Clause 8.3.2.3 ) 


SI No. Tank Diameter No. of Rows 


m Required 
() (2) (3) 
i) 1.5 to less than 2.5 4 
ii) More than 2.5 to less than 3.5 5 
iii) More than 3.5 6 


8.3.2.4 Sprayers shall be installed normal to the 
surface of the vessels so that their deflectors are at pre- 
determined distances of either 0.45 m or 0.55m or 0.65m 
from the skin of the vessels (see 8.3.2.3 and Table 4). 


Table 4 Sprayer Selection 
(Spray Angle versus K-Factor) 


( Clause 8.3.2.4 ) 


SI Distance Rows Sprayer K-factor 
No. Between Angle Range 
Deflector and degree 
Shell Surface 
m 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 0.65 4 90 26 
95 26-30 


15 


IS 15325 : 2020 


SI Distance Rows Sprayer K-factor 
No. Between Angle Range 
Deflector and degree 
Shell Surface 
m 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) 
ii) 0.55 4 100 26-28 
105 26-35 
110 30-42 
115 35-50 
120 42-60 
125 52-75 
5 105 28-32 
110 32-38 
115 40-48 
120 48-62 
125 60-75 
6 105 26-28 
110 32-35 
115 38-45 
120 48-55 
125 52-72 
iii) 0.45 4 115 26-35 
120 30-45 
125 35-55 
5 110 26-28 
115 28-35 
120 35-42 
125 42-50 
6 115 28-30 
120 32-38 
125 42-50 
NOTES 


1 For a chosen angle, if a sprayer with a matching K-factor is 
not available, next available K-factor shall be used. 

2 Sprayer angle less than 90° and K-factor less than 26 shall 
be used only for local protections such as supporting legs, 
protuberances, etc. 


3 Sprayers need not be installed normal to the surface for 
protecting the ends of the vessels. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


8.3.2.5 The sprayers shall not be less than 6 mm 
in orifice size and shall normally have cone angles 
between 90° and 140°. 


NOTE — Sprayers with cone angles below 90° and with 
K-factors less than 26 are permissible for local protections 
such as supporting legs, protuberances, etc. 


8.3.2.6 Minimum and maximum pressures in the 
network shall be 1.4 bar and 3.5 bar, respectively. 


8.3.2.7 ‘Run down’ 
horizontal vessels. 


shall not be considered for 


8.3.2.8 Adequate provision shall be made to promptly 
and effectively dispose of water discharged for 
firefighting, cooling, etc away from the vessels by any 
suitable means (see 9.10) 


8.3.2.9 Vessels shall be spaced at more than 15 m 
from each other. In such cases, the water demand 
for the largest vessel shall determine the pumping 
and water requirements. If this is not followed, the 
aggregate water demand for all such vessels falling 
within the prescribed distance of each other shall be 
the determining factor. 


8.3.3 Sprayer Network Design 


8.3.3.1 Water shall be applied at a minimum density 
of 10.2 Ipm/m? of the exposed area of the vessel. The 
supporting legs and product pipes within the bund shall 
also receive water at the same density. 


NOTES 


1 Supporting steel members need not be protected if they are 
300 mm or shorter in height. 


2 Where tank age area is not provided with bund walls, product 
pipes within 15 m of tank shell shall be protected by the 
sprayers. 

3 Where high wind velocity is expected, for example, near 
sea coasts, the sprayers protecting the tankages shall be 
necessarily installed at 0.45 m from the surface of the vessels 
(see 8.3.2.4). 


8.3.3.2 Number of rows shall depend on the diameter of 
the vessel and they shall be distributed equally around 
the circumference of the vessel (see 8.3.2.3). 


8.3.3.3 Distribution of sprayers on each row 


a) Sprayers in horizontal rows shall be spaced at 
distances as detailed in Table 5 according to the 
angle selected (see also 8.3.2.3). 

b) As the sprayer application is based on distance 

between the defelecter and the shell surface, 

number or rows, sprayer and and K-factor range, 
the data available in Tables 3 and 4 shall be 


suitable used. 


16 


c) To provide adequate protection to the ends of the 
vessels (varying types), the methods stated below 
shall be adopted. 


Table 5 Longitudinal Spacing of 
Sprayer of Various Discharge Angles 


[ Clause 8.3.3.3 (a) | 


SI No. Angle Distance From Tank 
degree m 
A. 
am s 
0.65 0.55 0.45 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 60 0.90 0.80 0.70 
ii) 65 1.00 0.85 0.70 
iii) 70 1.05 0.90 0.70 
iv) TS 1.15 1.00 0.85 
v) 80 1.25 1.05 0.90 
vi) 85 1.35 1.15 1.00 
vii) 90 1.45 1.25 1.05 
viii) 95 1.60 1.35 1.15 
ix) 100 1.70 1.45 1.20 
x) 105 1.85 1.60 1.30 
xi) 110 2.00 1.70 1.45 
xii) 115 2.20 1.90 1.55 
xiii) 120 2.40 2.05 1.70 
xiv) 125 2.65 2.25 1.90 
3.3.4 Flat ended vessels 
a) Up to 5 m dia The ends shall be 
(see Fig. 3) adequately covered 
by half the flow from 
each end sprayer of all 
rows. 
b) More than 5 m Arrangement as above 


dia (see Fig. 4) plus an additional 
sprayer shall be located 
to aim on to the centre 


of the vessel. 


8.3.3.5 Hemispherical ended vessels 


a) Up to 3.5 m dia 
(see Fig. 5) 


b) More than 3.5 m 
dia (see Fig. 6) 


The ends shall be 
adequately covered by 
half the flow from each 
end sprayer of all rows 
plus one additional 
sprayer located to aim 
on the centre of the 
vessel. 


Arrangement as 
above, plus additional 
sprayers to provide 
correct density. 


Fic. 3 FLAT ENDED VESSELS-COVERAGE OF 
TANK Enps (Up To 5 m DIAMETER) 


Fic. 5 HEMISPHERICAL ENDED VESSELS 
(Up To 3.5 m DIAMETER) 


17 


a) 


b) 


c) 


IS 15325 : 2020 


8.3.3.6 Dished ended or average curved ended vessels 


The ends shall be 
adequately covered by 
half the flow from each 
end sprayer of all rows. 


Up to 3.5 m dia 
(see Fig. 7) 


Between 3.5 m 
and 5 m dia (see 
Fig. 8) 


Arrangement as above 
plus an additional 
sprayer shall be located 
to aim on to the centre 
of the vessel. 


More than 5 m 
dia (see Fig. 9) 


Arrangement as in (b) 
above plus additional 
sprayers to provide 
correct density 


Fic. 4 FLAT ENDED VESSELS-COVERAGE OF 
TANK Enps (ABovE 5 m DIAMETER) 


Fic. 6 HEMISPHERICAL ENDED VESSELS 
(ABovE 3.5 m DIAMETER) 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Fic. 7 AVERAGE CURVED ENDED TANKS 
(Upto 3.5 m DIAMETER) 


Fic. 8 AVERAGE CURVED ENDED TANKS 
(ABovE 3.5 m AND Up To 5 m DIAMETER) 


ADD SUFFICIENT SPRAYERS 
TO COVER ENTIRE AREA 


Fic. 9 AVERAGE CURVED ENDED TANKS 
(ABovE 5 m DIAMETER) 


8.3.3.7 Separate sprayers shall be installed to provide 
wetting of all protuberances from the vessel, such as 
manholes, vents, flanges, relief valves, ladders, etc, in 
addition to the sprayers in rows and ends. 


8.3.3.8 Un-encased steel supports for the vessels 
if exceeding 300 mm in height shall be wetted by 
individual sprayers. 
NOTE — Concrete and encased steel supports need not be 
wetted separately as they are likely to be wetted by the splash 
of water spray for the vessels. 


8.3.3.9 Spacing of sprayers for product pipes within the 
bund shall not exceed 3 m and sprayers shall be at a 
distance of not more than 800 mm from the pipes. 


8.3.4 Piping Layout and Supports 


8.3.4.1 The main feed pipes from the deluge valve 
feeding the network shall be supported at every 3.5 m 
of its run. 


18 


8.3.4.2 Vertical feed pipes shall be provided to establish 
flow from bottom rings to top rings at intervals not 
exceeding 3.5 m along the vessels. These pipes may 
also be used as supporting pipes for the network. 


8.3.4.3 To ensure mechanical stability, good appearance 
and hydraulic gradient, the rings of pipe-work shall be 
of uniform size throughout each ring. 


8.3.4.4 Where it is not possible to independently 
support the protection pipe-work, support can be 
arranged from the protected vessel if plate thickness of 
the vessel is adequate. In such case, synthetic elastomer 
insertion shall be provided beneath the base of support 
to accommodate curvature of the vessel and to prevent 
corrosion. 


8.3.4.5 The sprayers in the bottom ring shall point 45° 
upwards and water in the pipe-work shall never drain 
through the sprayers. 


8.3.4.6 Where vertical feed pipes are used for supporting 
the network, the pipes shall be braced together suitably 
at mid-heights to prevent buckling. 


8.3.4.7 All vertical support pipes shall be fitted with 
non-ferrous or stainless steel cooling/drain/orifice 
plugs. The orifice diameter of hole in the plug shall not 
be less than 3 mm. 


8.3.4.8 Vertical feed pipes, when used as supporting 
pipes, shall be flanged at the, base and bolted securely 
to the ground. 


8.3.4.9 For vessels longer than 10 m in length, the 
network piping shall be so arranged that there is one 
feed pipe into the lower ring from the deluge valve for 
every 10 m and part thereof. It shall be ensured that 
each such segment serve an equal amount of protection 
for hydraulic balance. 


8.3.5 System Hydraulics 


The system shall be so designed that the hydraulically 
most unfavourable sprayer operates at a pressure of not 
less than 1.4 bar and the most favourable sprayer at a 
pressure of not more than 3.5 bar. Calculations along 
with nodal drawings shall be submitted to substantiate 
the above (see also 8.3.2.9). 


8.3.6 Detection System 


8.3.6.1 Detectors shall be installed in horizontal rows 
along the vessels and there must be same number of 
rows as for the sprayers. 


8.3.6.2 Spacing of detectors on rows shall not exceed 
2.5 m. 


8.3.6.3 The detectors shall be located at not more than 
1 m from the shell. 


8.3.6.4 Separate detectors shall be provided for 
protuberances from the shell like manholes, flanges, 
etc. 


8.3.6.5 Detectors shall be so positioned that they will 
not interfere with the spray pattern of the sprayers 
anywhere. 


8.3.6.6 One central row of detectors shall be allowed 
for two vessels with longitudinal axes parallel provided 
guidance as in 8.3.6.3 is adhered to. However, the vessels 
concerned shall be wetted simultaneously during a fire. 


8.4 Vertical Cylindrical Storage Tanks 


8.4.1 Proposals for the protection of vertical vessels 
shall be accompanied by full detailed dimensional 
working drawings showing the following: 

a) Plan, elevation and end view. 


b) Site plan showing the location of all vessels, their 
spacing, etc. 


19 


IS 15325 : 2020 


c) The protuberances, such as valves, drains, 
manholes, flanges, ladders, supporting legs, etc. 


d) Bund area and product pipes within. 


e) Protection and detection piping in different 
colours, 


f) Sprayers’ characteristics showing the K-factor, 
cone angle and discharge, in Ipm. 


8.4.2 General Requirements 


8.4.2.1 The complete exposed area of the vertical 
storage vessel shall need to be protected at a uniform 
density of water application. 


8.4.2.2 It is also necessary to protect the product and 
pipes within the bund area (if provided) by sprayers. 


NOTES 

1 Where tankage area is not provided with bund walls, product 
pipes within 15 m of tank shell shall be protected by the 
sprayers. 

2 Also other occupancies such as pump house, loading shed, 
etc, falling within 15 m of the tank shell shall be protected by 
the sprayers. 


8.4.2.3 The protection piping network shall be 
fabricated in the form of horizontal rings at regular 
intervals and vertical feeder mains. 


8.4.2.4 In case of vertical obstructions like wind 
girders, separate ring(s) shall be provided, if deemed 
necessary. 


8.4.2.5 The conical/flat roof shall also be protected 
by water spray system. For this purpose, sprayers 
shall be connected through an explosion relief valve 
assembly, which enables sprayer piping on top of the 
vessels to be blown off in the event of an explosion 
without obstructing the sprayers cooling on the 
vertical sides. 


8.4.2.6 Vertical mains shall be solely used as feeder 
mains only and sprayers shall be installed on the 
horizontal rings. 


8.4.2.7 The sprayers shall not be less than 6 mm in 
orifice and shall normally have cone angles between 
90° and 125° for vertical sides. For the conical roof/ 
flat roof, wider angle sprayers with higher K-factor is 
recommended to reduce the number of sprayers and 
consequently the weight of piping over the tank. 
NOTE — Sprayers with cone angles less than 90° and 
K-factors less than 26 are permissible for local protection such 
as protuberances. For product piping, it is permissible to use 
wide-angled sprayers more than 125°. 


8.4.2.8 Minimum and maximum operating pressures in 
the network shall be 1.4 bars and 3.5 bars, respectively. 


8.4.2.9 ‘Run down’ shall be considered provided there 
are no obstructions on the sides. For this purpose, 
sprayers with reduced orifice size shall be acceptable in 


IS 15325 : 2020 


the lower rings subject to maintaining uniform density 
all over (see also 8.4.2.4). 


8.4.2.10 Sprayers shall be installed normal to the 
exposed area of the vessel and positioned at a distance 
of not less than 450 mm or more than 650 mm from the 
surface. 


8.4.2.11 Vessels shall be located in individual dykes 
and spaced 15 m (or the diameter of the largest tank if 
the same is more than 15 m) apart. In such cases, the 
water requirement of the largest vessel shall determine 
the pumping and storage requirements. 


However, if a number of tanks are located in a common 
dyke, the tanks located in a common dyke which have 
the largest aggregate shell surface area shall determine 
the pumping and storage requirements. 


In case of tanks located in separate dykes, but within 
a distance of 15 m (or diameter of the larger tank is 
less than 15 m) of each other, the shell surface area of 
all such tanks shall determine the pumping and storage 
requirements. 


NOTES 


1 In case occupancies like pump house, loading sheds, etc, 
exist within 15 m (or the diameter of the largest tank as the 
case may be) of the vessels, such occupancies shall also be 
protected by sprayers. 


2 Normally tanks with Class A and Class B liquids shall need 
to be protected with water spray systems. However, tanks 
containing other types of liquids if, located in a cluster along 
with tanks containing class A/class B liquids, shall also need to 
be protected with water spray system. 


8.4.3 System Design 


8.4.3.1 Density of discharge 


Water shall be applied at a rate of not less than 
10.2 Ipm/m? of the exposed area of the tank shell and 
the roof. The product pipes within the bund shall also 
receive water at this density. 


NOTES: 

1 Supporting legs, if any, shall also receive water at the same 
density irrespective of whether they are insulated or not. 

2 See 8.4.2.2. 


8.4.3.2 Distribution of sprayers 


Sprayers shall be spaced at not more than 2.5 m in the 
rings when measured along the curved surface of the 
vessels. There shall be a ring for every 3.5 m height 
of the shell (see also 8.4.2.4). Due diligence shall be 
exercised about the presence of wind girders and if 
there are more wind girders, at least one ring shall be 
available between the girders subject to 3.5 m distance. 


Sprayers in each successive ring shall be staggered for 
better coverage. Sprayers protecting the roof must be 
located in such a way that the extremities of their spray 
pattern shall at least meet. Separate sprayers shall be 
installed to provide wetting of all protuberances from 
the vessels, such as manholes, flanges, ladders, vents, 


20 


etc. Spacing of sprayers for product pipes within the 
bund shall not exceed 3 m and sprayers shall be at a 
distance of not more than 800 mm from the pipes (see 
also note under 8.4.2.7). 


8.4.4 Piping Layout and Supports 


The main feed pipes from the deluge valve feeding 
the network shall be supported at every 3.5 m of its 
run. The number of vertical feeders for the sprayer 
network depends upon the size of vessel and its height. 
As a good practice, minimum of two such feeders shall 
be provided. However, for the vessels less than 10 m 
diameter and height, one feeder shall be accepted. The 
top ring shall be installed just below the top of the vessel 
and the bottom ring shall be installed at not more than 
2 m from the ground level. The rings may be supported 
on the vessel if plate thickness of the vessel is adequate. 


The vertical feed mains shall also be used as supporting 
pipes. These pipes shall be flanged at the base and 
bolted securely to the ground. The sprayers at the 
bottom ring shall point slightly upwards and water in 
the pipe work shall never drain through the sprayers. 
All support pipes shall be fitted with non-ferrous or 
stainless steel cooling/drain orifice plugs. The orifice 
size of the hole in the plug shall not be less than 3 mm. 


8.4.5 System Hydraulics 


The network shall be hydraulically so designed as 
to provide a minimum running pressure of 1.4 bar at 
the hydraulically most un-favourable sprayer and not 
more than 3.5 bar at the hydraulically most favourable 
sprayer in the network (see also 8.4.2.11). The velocity 
in the feeder pipes shall not exceed 5 m/s when sprayers 
discharge at their nominal rates. 


Detailed hydraulic calculation along with nodal 
drawings shall be submitted supporting the design. 
Orifice plate shall be provided, if required, above 
the deluge valves to meet the conditions as above. 
Flow through the cooling/draining pipes shall also be 
considered for the hydraulic calculation. 


8.4.6 Detection System 


Detectors shall be installed in horizontal rings 
supported on the spray network if necessary. Provision 
of detectors in rings shall comply with the following: 


a) Fixed roof tanks located in separate dykes — 
There shall be at least two rings of detectors, one 
at the top where the conical roof rests and one at 
the bottom within | m from the bottom of the tank 
plate. 


b) Fixed roof tanks located in a cluster within a single 
dyke — There shall be an additional ring over and 
above what is suggested in (a) in the centre of the 
tank height. 


c) Floating roof tanks containing class A liquids — 
There shall be at least two rings of detectors one 


near the top of the tank and one at the bottom 
within 1 m from the bottom of the tank plate 
subject to the condition that detection of fire from 
the mandatory automatic foam system (rim seal 
protection), triggers the water spray system also 
through alarm system interface. 


d) Floating roof tanks containing other than class 
A liquids — There shall be at least three rings of 
detectors, one each at the top of the tank, one at the 
bottom of the tank plate and it is strongly advised 
to provide one at the centre of the tank height (see 
Note 2 under 8.4.2.11) 


e) Fixed and floating roof tanks — In all the cases 
discussed above, spot detectors shall be provided 
for all the protuberances where applicable like, 
manholes, vents, flanges, relief valves, etc, on the 
conical roof as well on vertical sides. 


The spacing of detectors in rings shall not be at more 
than 3 m when measured along the curved surface of the 
vessel. For conical roof the detector shall be installed 
on 9 m’ area basis. The detectors shall be located at not 
more than | m from the shell. Separate detectors shall 
be provided for protuberances like manholes, flanges, 
etc. Detectors shall be so positioned as not to interfere 
with the sprayer pattern of the sprayers anywhere. 
Floating roof tanks storing class A and B liquids shall, 
in addition to the detectors as stated above, shall be 
provided with suitable detection facilities at the floating 
rim seal like linear heat sensing cables as per IS 2189. 


8.5 Protection of Spherical Vessels 
8.5.1 Drawings 


8.5.1.1 Proposals for the protection of vertical vessels 
shall be accompanied by full detailed dimensional 
working drawings showing the following: 


a) Plan, elevation and end view; 

b) Site plan showing the location of all vessels, their 
spacing, etc.; 

c) Protuberances, such as valves, drains, manholes, 
flanges, ladders, supporting legs, etc; 

d) Bund area and product pipes within; 


e) Protection and detection piping in different 
colours; and 


f) Sprayers’ characteristics showing the K-factor, 
cone angle and discharge in lpm. 


8.5.1.2 Spherical vessels are almost certain to be 
pressure vessels. The complete exposed area sphere 
shall need to be protected at a uniform density of water 
application. 


8.5.1.3 It is also necessary to protect the supporting 
legs and the product pipes (for a distance of at least 
15 m from the surface of the sphere) by the water spray 
system at the same density. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


8.5.1.4 The protection network around such vessels 
shall be fabricated in the form of horizontal and/or 
vertical rings at regular intervals. 


8.5.1.5 The sprayers shall not be less than 6 mm in 
orifice size for spheres upto 12 m diameter and more 
than 6 mm for those having diameters more than 12 m. 
The sprayers shall normally have cone angles between 
90° and 125° for covering the spherical surface. 
NOTE — Sprayers with cone angles less than 90° and 
K-factors less than 26 are permissible for local protection such 
as protuberances. For product piping, it is permissible to use 
wide-angled sprayers, than 125°. 


8.5.1.6 Minimum and maximum pressures in the 
network shall be 1.4 bar and 3.5 bar, respectively. 


8.5.1.7 ‘Run down’, shall not be considered. 


8.5.1.8 Sprayers shall be normal to the exposed 
surface of the sphere and shall be installed at not less 
than 550 mm or more than 650 mm from the surface. 


8.5.1.9 Spheres shall be spaced at a distance of 
minimum 15 m from each other. In such cases the water 
demand for a larger sphere shall determine the pumping 
and storage requirements. If the spheres are spaced 
less than 15 m apart, the aggregate water demand of 
all the spheres falling within the prescribed distance of 
each other shall be the determining factor for hydraulic 
calculations. 


8.5.2 System Design 
8.5.2.1 Density of discharge 


Water shall be applied at a minimum density of 
10.2 Ipm/m? of the exposed area of the sphere. The 
supporting legs and the product pipes within the bund 
area shall also receive water at the same density. Where 
bund is not provided, the product pipelines up to a 
distance of 15 m from the surface of the sphere shall 
receive water at the same density. 


NOTES 
1 If the supporting legs are encased with 50 mm thick RCC, the 
water density, therefore, can be reduced to 5.1 Ipm/m?. 


2 Selection of sprayers and pipe sizes shall be in such a way 
as to avoid overspray on the sphere surface and the achieved 
density should be preferably within 20 percent of the design 
density as above. 


8.5.2.2 Distribution of sprayers and layout of piping 
The following considerations shall be made: 


a) No sprayer shall be farther than the distance ‘S’ 
indicated in Fig. 10, from anyone of the nearest 
8 sprayers. The distance between sprayers shall 
be measured along the arcs between the points 
of impingement of the sprayers on the tank 
surface. 


b) The spacing ‘S’ between the sprayers for various 
diameters of the sphere for different cone angles of 


IS 15325 : 2020 


c 


d 


e 


8 


wa 


wa 


wa 


a 


Fic. 10 SPACING OF SPRAYERS 


sprayers shall be selected based on the following 
parameters: 


1) Manufacturer’s recommendation and the spray 
pattern provided by them. 


2) Total exposed surface area of the sphere 
shall be impinged without any possibility of 
hotspots. 


3) The spray pattern shall overlap on the surface 
of the sphere by at least 5 percent. 


Obstructed or ‘roofed off’ portions of the spheres 
shall be protected with separate sprayers in 
addition to the requirements under 8.5.2.2 (b) 
above at a density of 10.2 lpm/m’. 


Number of horizontal and/or vertical rings shall 
be governed by the spacing of the sprayers 
[see 8.5.2.2(b)]. 


The system shall be hydraulically designed in such 
a way that the pressure at the hydraulically most 
unfavourable sprayer shall not be less than 1.4 bar 
while that at the hydraulically most favourable 
sprayer shall not exceed 3.5 bar. The difference in 
height between the top and bottom sprayers may 
be compensated for by reducing sprayer office 
and/or other means to achieve even distribution of 
water on the surface. The velocity produced in the 
feeder pipes shall not exceed 10 m/s. 


Cooling system for protecting the sphere against 
solar heating shall take the form of minimum two 
rings of sprayers at the top of the spheres upto 
10 m diameter and three rings of sprayers at the 
top of the sphere exceeding 10 m diameter at a 
density not less than 2 Ipm/m/?. 
NOTE — It is not considered necessary to wet the surface of 
the sphere below the horizontal centre line when considering 
solar protection. 
Spacing of sprayers for the product pipelines shall 
not exceed 3 m and sprayers shall be at a distance 
of not more than 800 mm from the pipes (see 
also 8.5.1.5). 


22 


8.5.3 Pipe Support 


8.5.3.1 The pipe work on the top of hemisphere of the 
vessel shall rest on the surface and an adequate number 
of support points shall be required to distribute the 
weight uniformly on the surface. 


8.5.3.2 The pipe work below the hemisphere shall 
be supported separately from the ground or the legs 
supporting the sphere. The legs shall be designed to 
take care of this load. 


8.5.3.3 Where supports rest on the surface of the 
sphere, synthetic elastomer insertion shall be provided 
beneath the base of the support and the sphere surface 
to accommodate the curvature of the sphere as well as 
to prevent corrosion. 


8.5.3.4 Where the vessel is insulated, supports shall 
have to either penetrate the lagging or provided on the 
lagging itself. In either case, greater care shall have to 
be taken to adequately spread the load and efficiently 
seal the penetrated area of the lagging after supports 
are installed. 


8.5.4 Detection System 


8.5.4.1 It is not necessary to provide detector sprinklers 
for the whole surface of the sphere. Detectors at three 
levels shall suffice as follows: 


a) Aminimum of three under the lower pole adjacent 
to product piping. 

b) A ring of detectors at the equator or just below. 
The detectors shall be installed at not more than 
2.5 m of the circumference of sphere. 


c) Aminimum of three detectors at the upper crown 
of the sphere in the advantageous position near 
relief valves, vents, etc. 


d) All protuberances on the sphere shall be separately 
provided with individual detectors. 


8.5.4.2 The detector shall be suitably supported, if 
required on sprayer piping. 


8.5.4.3 The detector shall, in any case, be installed at 
not more than 300 mm from the surface protected. 


8.5.4.4 Detectors shall also be installed near the product 
pipes at every 2.5 m and at least up to 15 m from the 
shell surface of the sphere. 


8.5.5 Pumping Capacity 


The aggregate pumping capacity shall be determined by 
the largest demand arising out of one or more of deluge 
valves when vessels concerned operate simultaneously 
[see 11.1 (c) and Table 9]. 


8.5.6 Water Supply 
See 11. 


8.6 Tunnels, Cable Galleries and Cable Cellars 
8.6.1 General 


8.6.1.1 Where cable fires are concerned, the greatest 
hazard usually arises from the effects of fire on the 
power station plant. However, a feature of practically 
all cable fires has been that several units, if not the 
whole station, has been seriously affected by a single 
fire. A major portion of cable fire incidents stem from 
external sources such as combustion of un-cleaned 
flammable debris, accumulation of PVC tailing ends, 
cardboard packages and from uncontrolled spillages, 
over spray of fuel and lubricating oils. 


8.6.1.2 PVC is not readily flammable but will burn 
freely in temperature conditions high enough to 
bring the plasticisers into a volatile state. Burning 
PVC produces copious quantities of dangerous 
hydrochloride toxic gases, which are heavier than air 
and tend to form layers at lower levels. These gases are 
corrosive and present a major toxic hazard to operating 
and firefighting personnel. When PVC is burnt, heavy 
black smoke, mostly consisting of carbon particles, 
is given off which could affect electrical equipment 
some distance from the fire and there is some evidence 
that PVC smoke can de-sensitise smoke detectors of 
ionisation chamber type. 


8.6.1.3 Cables are normally protected such that they 
do not catch fire if electrical faults develop in them. 
However, the energy released when a fault occurs in 
a cable may ignite other combustible materials in the 
vicinity thereof. 


8.6.2 Design Density 


Water shall be applied at a minimum density 
of 10.2 Ipm/m? of the exposed area of the cable racks. 


NOTE — For the purpose of the above, three cable trays of a 
rack shall be reckoned as a single tray unless the trays are not 
of the same width in which case the area of the widest tray shall 
be taken (see also 8.6.4.5 ). 


23 


IS 15325 : 2020 


8.6.3 Pressure Requirement 


In order to achieve a better penetration, a minimum 
pressure of 2.1 bar shall be achieved at the hydraulically 
remotest point. 


8.6.4 Distribution of Sprayers and Layout of Piping 


8.6.4.1 The sprayers shall be installed in rows at ceiling 
level in between and at the centre of aisle space along 
the cable trays and spaced at not more than 3 m. 


8.6.4.2 The distance between walls and/or limits of the 
protection shall not exceed 1.5 m. 


8.6.4.3 Where the distance between two rows of 
sprayers above the aisles exceeds 4 m, additional row 
of sprayers shall be provided (see 8.6.4.1). 


8.6.4.4 Where the height of the cable trays (that is, 
distance between topmost and bottom tray) exceeds 
2.5 m, sprayers shall be provided below the lowest 
tray. 


8.6.4.5 When the cable racks contain more than three 
trays, system protection shall be designed as follows 
(see also 8.6.2): 


a) Protection shall be extended to cover every three 
trays (below the top three) or part thereof by 
dropping pipes from the sprayer network at roof 
level. 


b) Sprayers shall be so installed that their pattern 
covers all the three trays and water can penetrate 
inside to provide adequate protection to the cables. 


c) Sprayers shall be spaced at a minimum of 2.5 m 
along the longitudinal side of the cable racks. 


d) Sprayers and the piping shall be suitably supported 
to avoid oscillation and protected against possible 
mechanical damage. 


8.6.5 System Hydraulics 


8.6.5.1 Installation of piping shall be carried out, in 
general, as detailed in 9.3 to 9.7. 


8.6.5.2 It is permissible to divide the protection area 
into several zones, each of which shall be fed by an 
individual deluge valve. Each zone shall not exceed 
30 m length. The flow through the deluge valve shall 
be limited to the values in Table 7. The system shall 
be designed in such a way that at least two zones shall 
operate simultaneously in the event of fire. 


8.6.5.3 Each zone in the system shall be hydraulically so 
designed that a minimum pressure of 2.1 bar is available 
at the remotest sprayer and maximum pressure in the 
installation shall not exceed 3.5 bar. Velocity produced 
in the feeder pipes shall not be more than 10 m/s. 


8.6.5.4 Detailed hydraulic calculations along with nodal 
drawings in support of the above shall be submitted for 
each zone. Orifice plates, if required, shall arise out of 


IS 15325 : 2020 


combination of deluge valves when zones concerned 
operate simultaneously. 


8.6.6 Detection System 


8.6.6.1 As the cable galleries and tunnels are normally 
unmanned, it is imperative that a quicker detection is 
mandatory to ensure extinguishment. Various types of 
detectors are available for installation in the tunnels. 
The following methods of detection in the order 
mentioned are generally accepted. The installation 
shall comply with various provisions of IS 2189 and 
IS 15105, where applicable: 


a) Linear heat sensing cables; 


b) Smoke detectors; and 
c) Sprinkler heads. 


8.6.6.2 Full details of the proposal shall be submitted 
to the authorities concerned in advance along with 
detailed drawings showing the location and layout of 
the detection network. 


8.6.6.3 The fire alarm system and panel shall be of 
approved type and in compliance with IS 2189 and 
IS 15908, where applicable. 


8.6.6.4 Authorities concerned can accept other types 
of detectors, which may be subject to verification of 
the proposals submitted in advance. 


8.6.7 Pumping Capacity 


The aggregate pumping capacity shall be determined by 
the largest demand arising out of combination of deluge 
valves when zones concerned operate simultaneously. 


8.6.8 Water Supply 
See 11. 


8.7 Conveyors 
8.7.1 General 


8.7.1.1 Fires on conveyors are infrequent but the fire 
potential is considerable. In incidents which have 
occurred, the damage has been severe, particularly 
where conveyor fires have reached and enveloped the 
destination for example, boiler house, coal bunkers 
as in case of thermal power stations. The design of 
conveyors is that the wind tubular or chimney effect 
is an inherent feature on inclined conveyors and this 
causes rapid spread of fire through the conveyors. 


8.7.1.2 The major risk of fire is for example, from the 
ignition of coal dust and deposits in case of thermal 
power stations, on the internal surface, walkways, etc, 
of the conveyors or from the conveyor belt. Fire caused 
by friction of a defective part such as jammed roller, 
idlers resulting in subsequent localised overheating of 
the belt. Thus fires in the conveyors may arise from 


24 


either of two main causes: 


a) Failure of part of the mechanism, usually on the 
idler or pulley can lead to localised overheating 
of the belt and eventually to ignition of the 
combustible dust or conveyor belt; and 


b) From the ignition ofa quantity of split combustible 
dust either by self-ignition or other causes. 


8.7.1.3 Should the belt catch fire, it can spread the fire 
rapidly to other areas. Certain fires generate a large 
volume of smoke, particularly when the fire is in an 
advanced state conveyors can be protected by automatic 
sprinkler system installation or medium velocity water 
spray system with linear heat sensing (LHS) cables, 
sprinkler bulbs, thermocouples, etc, and the following 
provisions cover requirements for water spray system 
only. 


8.7.2 Design Density 


Water shall be applied at a minimum density of 
10.2 Ipm/m? of the exposed area of the conveyor. 


8.7.3 Pressure Requirement 


A minimum pressure of 1.4 bar shall be achieved at 
the hydraulically remote sprayer. However, pressure at 
the hydraulically favourable sprayer shall not exceed 
3.5 bar. 


8.7.4 Distribution of Sprayers and Layout of Piping 


8.7.4.1 The sprayers shall be installed in rows at the 
ceiling level above the centre of each conveyor belt and 
spaced at not more than 4 m. 


8.7.4.2 The distance between walls and/or limits of the 
protection shall not exceed 2 m. 


8.7.4.3 Where the distance between two rows of sprayers 
above the centre of belts exceeds 4 m, additional rows 
shall be provided. 


8.7.4.4 Sprayers shall be provided for the protection 
of the bottom side of the conveyors and these shall be 
spaced at 4 m on either side of the conveyor. Staggering 
of sprayers is recommended. 


8.7.4.5 Area covered by each sprayer shall not be more 
than 12 m? or less than 9 m?’. 


8.7.5 System Hydraulics 


8.7.5.1 Installation of piping shall be carried out in 
general as detailed in 9.3 to 9.7. 


8.7.5.2 It is permissible to divide the protection area 
into several zones, each of which shall be fed by an 
individual deluge valve. The flow through the deluge 
valve shall be limited to those given in Table 7. The 
system shall be designed in such a way that at least two 
adjacent zones shall operate in the event of fire. 


8.7.5.3 Each zone in the system shall be hydraulically 
so designed that a minimum pressure of 1.4 bar is 
available at the remotest sprayer and that nowhere in 
the system exceeds 3.5 bar. The velocity produced shall 
not exceed 10 m/s. 


8.7.5.4 Detailed hydraulic calculations along with nodal 
drawings in support of the above shall be prepared for 
each zone. Orifice plates, if required, shall arise out of 
combination of deluge valves when zones concerned 
operate simultaneously. 


8.7.6 Pumping Capacity 


The aggregate pumping capacity shall be determined by 
the largest demand arising out of combination of deluge 
valves when zones concerned operate simultaneously. 


8.7.7 Water Supply 
See 11. 


8.7.8 Detection System 


8.7.8.1 Detection of conveyor fires poses peculiar 
problems as the fires are not always stationary. 
Detection of moving fires shall be achieved without 
delay. The detectors upon sensing the fire shall trip the 
conveyor motor first and thus make the fire stationary. 
This fire has to be detected and the detectors shall 
trigger the firefighting operations. Hence, there 
are two levels of detection for the conveyor fires. 
The following methods of detection are generally 
acceptable: 


a) Liner heat sensing cables for stopping conveyor, 
and 


b) Sprinkler bulbs. 


8.7.8.2 Full details of the protection shall be submitted 
to authorities concerned in advance along with detailed 
drawings showing the location and layout of the 
detection network. 


8.7.8.3 The fire alarm system and panel shall be 
of approved type in accordance with IS 2189 and 
IS 15105, where applicable. 


8.7.8.4 Authorities concerned reserve their right in 
accepting other types of detectors, which is subject to 
verification of the proposals well in advance. 


9 COMPONENTS OF SPRAY SYSTEM 
INSTALLATION 


9.1 Piping 


9.1.1 Underground Pipes 


The pipe used in the spray system (from the pump 
house to the deluge valves) shall be laid underground 
or in masonry culverts with removable covers of 


25 


IS 15325 : 2020 


incombustible construction and shall be of any one of 
the following types: 


a) Cast iron double flanged class ‘A’ pipes conforming 
to the following standards: 


SI Title IS No. 
No. 
i) Horizontally cast iron pipes IS 7181 
ii) Vertically cast iron pipes IS 1537” 
iii) Centrifugally cast (spun) iron IS 1536 
pipes 
iv)  Centrifugally cast (spun) iron IS 1536 
pipes, class A with rubber 
gasket (Zyton) joints 
v)  Centrifugally cast (spun) IS 8329 
ductile iron pipes 
vi) Electric resistance welded IS 3589 
(ERW) steel pipes Heavy 
grade” 
vii) Wrought or mild steel pipes IS 12392” 
(non-galvanized) of heavy 
grade 
viii) Wrought or mild steel pipes IS 10748» 


(galvanized) of heavy grade 


D Where the nominal diameter of the pipe exceeds 
300 mm or where the pump delivery pressure exceeds 
7 bar, class B pipes would be necessary. 

» Welding permissible with welded joints and coated 
and wrapped as per IS 10221. At least 10 percent of all 
the welded joints shall be radiographically tested and 
half of the joints radiographed shall be field joints. It is 
strongly recommended to subject the pipes to cathodic 
protection to ensure longevity of the piping installation. 


») No welding is permissible. 


9.1.2 Above Ground Pipes 


a) Electric resistance welded IS 3589 
(ERW) steel pipes of heavy 
grade 

b) Wrought or mild steel pipes IS 1239 
(non-galvanized) of heavy (Parts 1 
grade and 2) 

c) Wrought or mild steel pipes IS 10748 


(galvanized) of heavy grade 


9.1.3 The pipe used in the spray system (from the pump 
house to the deluge valves) can also be laid above 
ground in case of piping materials as per 9.1.2 with 
welded [except in case of 9.1.2(c)], threaded or flanged 
or grooved joints subject to following conditions: 


a) Pipes shall be laid in exclusive steel supports and 
shall not run in pipe racks with other utility piping. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


b) The pipes shall be run at minimum distances as 
stated below: 


1) Light hazard 
2) Ordinary hazard 
3) High hazard (including open storage) : 15 m 


:6m 


:6m 


9.1.4 Pipes shall not be laid under buildings or plant 
areas or storage areas. As far as possible, pipes shall not 
be laid under large open storage, railroads and roads 
carrying heavy traffic. 


9.1.5 Underground pipes shall be laid not less than 1 m 
below ground level. Pipes running under roads shall 
be routed through home pipes to avoid damage to the 
pipes due to traffic and vehicle movement. 


9.1.6 Underground pipes in case of materials in 9.1.1 
shall be provided with masonry or equivalent supports 
and thrust blocks (where necessary) at regular intervals. 


9.1.7 Where soil conditions are unsatisfactory, masonry 
or equivalent supports shall be provided at regular 
intervals for all other pipes also. 


9.1.8 Pipes shall not traverse on ground, which is not 
under the control of the owner of the installation. Pipes 
shall also not pass through public roadways. 


9.1.9 The installation piping (from the pump house 
upto deluge valve and also the installation piping with 
sprayers above the deluge valve) shall be capable of 
withstanding for 2 ha pressure equivalent to 150 percent 
of the maximum working pressure. 


9.1.10 All bolt holes in the flanges shall be drilled. 
Drilling of each flange shall be in accordance with the 
relevant Indian standards. 


9.1.11 Flanges shall be faced and have jointing of 
rubber insertions or asbestos compound. 


9.1.12 Welded joints of any type shall not be permitted 
for pipes having diameter less than 50 mm. 


9.1.13 It is not permissible to run the spray system 
pipes through a building or occupancy (not protected 
by sprinkler or spray systems) and where it is not 
practicable, the supply pipeline shall be installed at 
ground level and enclosed in brick trenches covered 
with removable RCC precast slabs. 


9.1.14 All installation pipework above ground shall be 
installed at a slope not less than 1 : 500 for horizontal 
run of pipes. Normally the pipework should slope 
through the deluge valve. If the pipework is trapped 
(below the level of the deluge valve for example, in 
the basements), arrangements shall be made to provide 
drain cocks at the bottom of such pipes to drain the 
trapped water. 


26 


9.1.15 Sprayer pipes shall not be embedded in concrete 
floors or ceilings of any building. 


9.2 Fittings 


9.2.1 Fittings installed underground shall be of cast 
iron heavy grade conforming to IS 1538 whereas 
those installed over ground shall be of medium grade 
wrought or mild steel conforming to IS 1239 (Part 2) 
or malleable iron fittings conforming to IS 1879 or 
IS 9523 for ductile iron fittings. 


9.2.2 All fittings shall be able to withstand at least a 
pressure of 150 percent of the maximum working 
pressure. 


9.2.3 Welded fittings according to the laid down 
welding procedure are permitted. Welded parts shall be 
galvanized or suitably coated after welding as per the 
requirement of the areas to be protected by the system 
that is, chemical and electrolytic corrosion. 


9.2.4 Welded joints shall not be permitted for fittings of 
less than 50 mm diameter. 


9.2.5 Grooved couplings including their gaskets used 
in water spray systems shall be approved for use in dry 
systems. 


9.3 Joining of Piping and Fittings 


9.3.1 Threaded Pipes and Fittings 


a) All threaded pipes and fittings shall have threads 
cut as per relevant Indian Standards. 


b) Steel pipes with thicknesses less than schedule 
30 (size 200 mm or more) and those of schedule 
40 (size less than 200 mm) shall be permitted to be 
jointed only with threaded fittings. 


c) Joint compound or tape shall be applied only to 
male threads. 


9.3.2 Welded Pipe and Fittings 


Pipes meant for spray installation shall only be shop 
welded, unless permitted by the authorities or agencies 
responsible for approval of the spray system. Welding 
shall be done under supervision as per proper approved 
procedures through qualified welders. Necessary 
records shall be maintained with regard to work 
completed, defects observed, re-work and clearance, 
etc. Also details of radiography test for the welded 
pipes duly signed by the protocol shall be maintained. 


9.3.3 Groove Joining Methods 


Pipes joined with grooved couplings shall be joined by 
approved couplings, gaskets and groove dimensions. 
Grooved connections of fittings and valves and 
grooves cut and rolled on pipe shall be dimensionally 
compatible with the couplings. 


9.4 Pipe Supporting Methods (Above Deluge Valve) 


9.4.1 General (Building or General Area Protection) 


Sprayer pipes shall be supported from the building 
structure which, itself shall be capable of supporting 
the water filled pipework and shall not impair the 
performance of sprayers under fire conditions. Pipework 
shall not be used to support any other loads except 
where primary support is designed for the suspension 
of the piped service. Distribution/range pipes shall not 
be supported from ceiling sheathing or cladding or 
from any other associated suspension systems. Pipes 
below obstructions, such as, ductwork shall be either 
supported from the building structure or from the steel 
members supporting such obstructions. Such members 
shall be capable of supporting the weight of water filled 
pipes too. 


Hangers shall not be welded or fastened directly to the 
pipework. The supports on which the pipework rests 
shall be secured firmly in position. The thickness of 
all parts of pipe supports shall not be less than 3 mm. 
Wherever possible, pipes shall be supported from non- 
combustible building elements. Pipework in corrosive 
areas shall be of either stainless steel or suitably 
protected against corrosion. The distance between the 
pipe supports measured along the line of connected 
pipes (whether the pipes run horizontally, vertically or 
at angles) shall not be less than that given in Table 6. 


Table 6 Distance Between Pipe Supports 
( Clause 9.4.1) 


SI No. Pipe Diameter Spacing 
mm m 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 65 4 
ii) More than 65 and up to 100 6 
iii) More than 100 and up to 250 6.5 


9.4.2 Distribution Pipes 


The first support on a nominally horizontal distribution 
pipe shall not be at more than 2 m from the main 
distribution pipe. The last support on a nominally 
horizontal distribution pipe shall not be more than 
450 mm from the end. Drop or rise pipes shall be 
secured to the building structure either directly or 
indirectly at the adjacent nominally horizontal part of 
the pipe within 300 mm of the drop or rise. 


27 


IS 15325 : 2020 


9.4.3 Range Pipes 
At least one support shall be provided for: 
a) each pipe run connecting adjacent sprinkler, and 


b) the pipe run connecting the distribution pipe and 
the first sprinkler on the range pipe. 


9.4.3.1 Pipe supports shall not be closer than 150 mm 
to any sprinkler axial central line. The first support 
on a range pipe shall not be more than 2 m from the 
distribution pipe. The last support on a range pipe shall 
not be located more than 1.5 m from, 


a) the range pipe end; 


b) where there is a horizontal arm pipe of 450 mm or 
longer, the arm pipe end; or 


c) where there is a drop or rise exceeding 600 mm, 
the drop or rise pipe end. 


9.4.4 Outgoing mains from the installation valve to the 
system shall be supported at every 3.5 m of its run. 


9.4.5 The thickness of all components used in pipe 
supports shall not be less than 3 mm anywhere. 


9.4.6 Some of the typical supporting arrangements are 
shown in Fig. 11. 


9.5 Protection against Fire and Mechanical Damages 


Piping shall be installed in such a way that the pipes 
are not exposed to mechanical damage. Where pipes 
are installed above gangways with low headroom or 
at intermediate levels or in other similar situations, 
precautions shall be taken against mechanical damage. 


Where it is unavoidable for water supply pipework to 
pass through a building or occupancy (not protected 
by sprinkler or spray systems), it shall be installed at 
ground level and shall be enclosed to protect against 
mechanical damage, with appropriate fire resistance. 


9.6 Painting 


Non-galvanized ferrous pipework shall be painted if 
environmental conditions make itnecessary. Galvanized 
piping shall be painted wherever the coating has been 
damaged for example, by threading. 


9.7 Drainage (Pipelines) 


Means shall be provided to enable all the pipework to 
be drained. Where this cannot be done through the drain 
valve at the deluge valve, extra valves shall be fitted 
as specified in 9.9.3. Range pipes shall have a slope 
towards the distribution pipe of at least 0.4 percent 
and distribution pipes shall have a slope towards the 
appropriate drain valve of at least 0.2 percent. Range 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Solid ring 


Solid swivel ring Split swivel ring 


YR; 


Clivies hanger 


y 


Y 


Band Hanger 


Band hanger 


Saddle bracket 


Bracket 
Ceiling flange 


cwe Uo CS 


Driven fastner 


cea ® 


C-clamp with retaining 
Clamp(beam) strap or locknut 


Expansion shields 


oe 


CT 


Clamp(riser) Clamp(beam) 


Fic. 11 TYPICAL SUPPORTING ARRANGEMENTS 


28 


pipes shall only be connected to the side or top of 
distribution pipes. 


9.8 Valves 
9.8.1 General 


The various types of valves used in the installation are 
stop valves, drain valves, and deluge valves. All stop 
valves which may cut off water supply to the sprinkler 
installation shall, 


a) close in the clockwise direction; 


b) be fitted with an indicator that clearly shows 
whether it is in the open or closed position; and 


c) be secured in the right position by a strap and 
padlock or secured in an equivalent manner. 


Butterfly valves, if used, shall be of the gear operated 
type for sizes more than 150 mm and motor operated 
if more than 300 mm (see IS 13095). Valves which 
interlock when closed shall be positioned in a 
conspicuous place where the key is obtrusive when the 
valve is closed. 


9.8.2 Main Stop Valves 


Where spray systems are fed by a ring main supply 
pipe arrangement on the premises stop valves shall be 
installed to isolate the ring into sections in such a way 
that no section shall include more than 3 deluge valves. 
The main stop valve(s) shall be at a fire brigade access 
level and readily accessible when responding to a fire 
alarm. Where the working pressure of the installation is 
more than 7 kg/cm? cast iron valves with PN 1.6 rating 
(nominal pressure) shall be provided. However, cast 
steel valves of class 150 shall suffice for installation 
under all pressure conditions. 


9.8.3 Drain Valves 


Drain valves sized as below shall be fitted to allow 
drainage from: 


a) Immediately downstream of the installation alarm 
valve or, if fitted, its downstream stop valve; 

b) Immediately downstream of any stop valve; 

c) Any pipe other than drop pipes to single sprayers 
which cannot be drained through another drain 
valve; 


d 


wn 


Valves shall be fitted at the lower end of permanent 
pipework. The outlet shall be not more than 3 m 
above the floor and shall be fitted with a brass 
plug; and 

e) Where it is not possible to drain the water from 
a distribution or range pipe, drain pipes shall be 
provided as stated below: 


1) Trapped distribution pipes : 40 mm 


2) Trapped range pipes :25 mm 


29 


IS 15325 : 2020 


9.9 Deluge Valves 


9.9.1 A deluge system is a fixed fire protection system 
which totally floods an area with pressurized water 
through a system of piping with open nozzles and/ 
or sprinklers. The system piping is empty until the 
controlling valve is activated by pneumatic or other 
types of release systems. Such controlling valves 
which are quick opening in nature are called ‘deluge 
valves’. The deluge valve assembly consists mainly of 
the following: 


a) In line strainer; 
b) Isolation valve; 
c) Deluge valve; 
d) Drain valve; 


e) Pressure gauges (above and below the deluge 
valve); 


f) Alarm assembly (consisting of gong or sounder); 
and 


g) Actuator/pilot assembly. 


9.9.2 Varieties of deluge valves with different working 
principles are available and hence it is necessary that the 
valves shall have approval from national/international 
approving bodies. 


9.9.3 Principle of Operation 


The deluge valve has an inlet, outlet and priming 
chamber. The inlet and outlet are separated from the 
priming chamber by the valve chamber and diaphragm. 
In the ‘SET’ position, pressure is applied to the priming 
chamber through a restricted prime line. The pressure is 
trapped in the priming chamber and holds the clapper/ 
diaphragm on the seat due to the differential design. In 
the set position, the clapper/diaphragm separates the 
inlet from the outlet keeping the system piping dry. 
When the pressure is released from priming chamber 
faster than it is supplied through the restricted priming 
line, the clapper moves and allows the inlet water 
supply to flow through the outlet into the system and 
associated alarm device. 


The mode of actuation of deluge valve can be pneumatic 
or hydraulic type or a combination of both. 


9.9.4 Requirements of Installation 


The following lists the necessary requirements to 
ensure proper installation: 


a) Deluge valve shall be installed outside of but 
adjacent to the protected area as close to the risk 
as possible but at not less than 6 m from the plant 
and/or equipment to be protected. 


b) Masonry enclosures shall be provided around 
the deluge valve in the form of barrier walls in 
such a way that the valve is not exposed to any 


IS 15325 : 2020 


impact due to flying bodies or projectiles from the 
plant and/or equipment in the vicinity and also for 
weather protection. 


c) Isolating valves shall be provided below the 
deluge valves to enable servicing thereof and 
cleaning strainers at regular intervals. 


d) Isolating valves shall be provided above the 
deluge valve in addition, for testing purposes. 


e) The isolating valves shall be strapped and locked 
in open position by leather straps or nylon chains 
and pad locks under normal operating condition. 


f) Emergency manual override facility shall be 
provided for actuating the deluge valve. 


g) It is permissible to provide a manually operated 
bypass line with an isolating valve for emergency 
requirements. Such valves shall always be kept 
locked in closed position. 


h) The load on the deluge valve shall not exceed the 
limits mentioned in Table 7. 

j) Indicators shall be provided to show the open and 
closed positions. 

k) Facility shall be provided to prime the space above 
the deluge valve seat with water. 

m) It must be ensured that there is no possibility of 
water leaking back into the instrument air supply 
in the event of diaphragm failure. 


n 


wm 


A suitable, durable, robust and clearly visible 
instruction plate shall be permanently secured 
to each assembly and shall detail clearly and 
concisely the following procedures: 


1) Start up (or operation), 
2) Test, 

3) Shut down, or 

4) Drain. 


9.9.5 Deluge valve shall not be subject to a working 
pressure of more than 12 bar. 


Table 7 Maximum Allowable Flow Through 
Deluge Valves 


[ Clauses 8.2.6, 8.6.5.2, 8.7.5.2 and 9.9.4 (h) ] 


SI No. Deluge Valve Size Maximum Flow 

mm Ipm 

a) (2) (3) 

i) 50 900 

ii) 80 1 850 

iii) 100 4 000 

iv) 150 11 500 

v) 200 19 000 


30 


9.10 Drainage Provisions (Protection Areas) 


Adequate provisions shall be made to promptly and 
effectively dispose of all liquids from the fire area 
during operation of all systems in the fire area. Such 
provision shall be adequate for, 


a) water discharged from fixed fire protection 
systems at maximum flow conditions; 


b) water likely to be discharged by hose streams; 
c) surface water; and 
d) cooling water normally discharged to the systems. 


9.10.1 There are four methods generally adopted for 
disposal and/or containment that is, grading, dyking, 
trenching, underground or enclosed drain systems. 


The method used in drainage shall be governed by, 
a) the extent of the hazard; 
b) clear space available; and 
c) the protection required. 


Where the hazard is low, the clear space is adequate 
and degree of protection required is not great, grading 
is acceptable. Where these conditions are not present, 
consideration shall be given to dykes, trenches or 
underground or enclosed drains. Where grading is 
employed, a slope of not less than 1 percent shall be 
necessary. Concrete surfacing is mostly desirable, 
however, other hard surfacing are acceptable 


Where dyking is employed, the drainage arrangements 
thereof shall conform to Indian Petroleum Rules in all 
respects. Where trenching, underground or enclosed 
drains are employed necessary approval of the 
Authority may be taken. 


9.11 Alarms and Alarm Devices 


Each deluge valve set shall be provided with a water 
motor alarm suitable for spray service located as close 
as possible to the deluge valve. Electrically operated 
alarm shall also be accepted. Alarm gong shall go into 
operation within a maximum of 90 s of opening of 
deluge valve. Water motor alarm gong shall comply 
with various provisions of IS 15105. 


Each water motor/electric alarm gong shall be 
prominently marked with the number of the installation 
to indicate the building/area protected by the deluge 
valve. The water motor shall be installed with its gong 
on the outside of an exterior wall and with its centre 
line not higher than 6 m above the point of connection 
to the deluge valve. A strainer, readily accessible for 
cleaning, shall be fitted between the motor nozzle and 
the deluge valve connection. The water outlet shall be 
positioned so that any flow of water can be seen. 


The pipework to the water motor alarm gong shall 
be galvanized, medium grade steel complying with 
IS 1239 (Parts 1 and 2). The equivalent length of pipe 


between the deluge valve and the water motor shall 
be not more than 20 m assuming an equivalent length 
of 3 m for each change of direction. The nominal size 
shall be not less than, 


a) 15 mm for equivalent lengths less than or equal to 
6 m; and 


b) 20 mm for equivalent lengths greater than 6 m. 


Any device to reduce the frequency of false or 
intermittent alarms fitted to the spray installation shall 
be suitable for spray system service. 


9.12 Pressure Gauges 


9.12.1 General and Specification 


Pressure gauges fitted in the installations shall comply 
with relevant Indian Standards. 


The scale subdivision shall not exceed: 


a) 0.2 bar for a maximum scale value upto and 
including 10 bar. 


b) 0.5 bar for a maximum scale value of more than 
10 bar, up to and including 16 bar. 


The maximum scale value shall be twice the maximum 
pressure. 


9.12.2 Application of Pressure Gauges 


a) Deluge valves — A pressure gauge shall be fitted 
at each of the following points: 


1) Main control valve, 


2) Immediately downstream of the deluge valve 
(designated the ‘C’ gauge), and 


3) Immediately upstream of the main control stop 
valve (designated the ‘B’ gauge). 


b) Water supply connections — Each pump supply 
shall be fitted with a damped pressure gauge on 
the supply pipe immediately downstream of the 
outlet check valve and upstream of any outlet stop 
valve. 


c) Removal — Means shall be provided to enable 
each pressure gauge to be removed readily 
without interruption of the water or air supply to 
the installation. 


9.13 Pressure Regulating Valves (PRVs) 


Pressure regulating valves shall be used to restrict 
unwarranted pressure in the installation and piping, 
particularly in high rise installations. In any case, PRVs 
shall be provided where the system pressure is in excess 
of 12 bar. Pressure gauges shall be provided on the inlet 
and outlet sides of each PRV. A relief valve shall be 
provided of size not less than 15 mm on the discharge 
side of the PRVs so as to relieve excess pressure. Means 
shall be provided downstream of all PRVs for flow tests 
at spray system demand. 


31 


IS 15325 : 2020 


9.14 Strainers 


Main pipe line strainers shall be provided for spray 
systems utilizing nozzles and projectors with waterways 
less than 10 mm and for any system where the water 
is likely to contain obstructive material. Main pipeline 
strainers shall be so installed as to be easily accessible 
for flushing and cleaning. 


Individual or integral strainers shall be provided at each 
nozzle/projector where waterways smaller than 5 mm 
are used. Strainers shall be capable of removing from 
the water all solids of sufficient size to prevent the spray 
nozzles from clogging (normally 3 mm perforations 
are suitable). Strainers shall be normally located just 
upstream of the system deluge valve and shall be 
downstream thereof, if any. Strainers shall be capable 
of allowing continued operation, without seriously 
increasing the head loss, for a period estimated to be 
ample considering the type of protection provided, the 
condition of the water, and other local circumstances. 


In some cases, a bypass may be warranted to facilitate 
periodic cleaning of the strainer at intervals based on 
water quality and strainer obstruction experience. 


9.15 Detection System 


Detection systems are designed to detect one or more 
of three characteristics of a fire that is, smoke, heat 
and radiation. No one type of detector is most suitable 
for all applications and final choice will depend on 
individual circumstances. 


In any automatic fire detection system, a detector 
has to discriminate between a fire and the normal 
environmental conditions. The overall objective of 
the system is intended not only to enable a fire to be 
detected at an early stage of its occurrence but also 
to extinguish the fire without extensive property 
damage. 


Water spray systems (manual or automatic) shall 
be provided with an audible alarm at the protected 
premises to indicate that the system has been actuated. 
When a water spray system is in a remote area, a 
system for monitoring the alarm should be in place. 
This monitoring should be at an attended location such 
as a control room. 


Systems shall be automatic for all types of application 
except certain areas where application is localized or 
where an efficient detection system cannot be provided. 
Nevertheless, automatic actuation is still considered a 
preferred approach for remote or unstaffed locations 
needing fire protection. IS 2189 shall be referred for 
additional installation requirements for detection 
systems that are intended to operate water spray 
systems. 


Automatically operated systems can help minimize 
damage by providing faster operation of the system as 


IS 15325 : 2020 


well as provide an alarm for quicker action by facility 
personnel. Automatic detection can be accomplished 
by the use of fire and/or gas detection systems installed 
within the protected area. Fire detection can include all 
types of electronic or pneumatic systems (discussed 
in detail in IS 2189), or may use a fixed temperature 
sprinkler system in accordance with provisions of this 
standard. 


In case of water spray systems, detection systems 
are required for activating the deluge system for the 
following applications: 


a) General area protection (indoors); 

b) Horizontal and vertical vessels (outdoors); 
c) Spherical vessels (outdoors); 

d) Transformers (outdoors and indoors); 


e) Spot protection such as oil tanks, turbo-alternator 
sets, pipe lines, etc (outdoors and indoors); 


f) Cable galleries; and 
g) Conveyors. 


For most of the above protections, sprinklers are found 
in extensive application in view of their suitability. 


Sprinklers are not fast enough for certain applications, 
for example, general areas like, open-sided bottling 
plants for LPG and the like, open-sided chemical plants 
handling low flashing solvents, etc, where a quick 
detection is required to avoid an inferno. 


Other types of detectors, such as flame detectors (either 
infrared or ultra violet types or combination of both), 
gas detectors, video detectors, etc, are options for much 
quicker detection and in this regard, provisions in 
IS 2189 shall be complied with for installation of such 
detection systems. 


The design of detection system by sprinklers varies 
from application to application in case of water spray 
systems. Hence all the methods have been separately 
covered under each section. However, following 
requirements are common to all types of application 
and these requirements are listed below: 


1) Sprinkler piping shall not be less than 25 mm 
diameter anywhere; 


2) Total pipeline volume shall not be less than 
10 1 (0.01 m°); 


3) Pressure in the detection system shall, in no case, 
exceed 3.5 bar; 


4) Detection piping shall slope to drain at least 1 in 
250 with drain valves provided at the lowest point; 
and 


5) For pneumatic, separate air compressor shall 
be provided for the detection system. The air 
compressor shall be installed in the fire pump 
room. Where it is not possible, the air compressor 


32 


room shall be separated from the occupancies 
adjoining therewith as per 10.3(c). 
6) Wherever possible, in case of pneumatic systems, 
standby air compressor may be installed or 
supplies from process and utility compressors 
may be connected as an alternate supply to the 
detection system. 


7 


x 


As far as possible, the detection piping shall be run 
alongside the underground spray mains but run 
independently of other pipes, either underground 
or aboveground. The piping shall be suitably 
protected against impact damage in the case of the 
latter. 


8 


wa 


Detection piping shall not traverse underneath or 
through any working/storage blocks or tank farms/ 
materials stored in open. 


9) Temperature rating of the detector sprinkler 
shall be at least 30°C above the highest ambient 
temperature at the site of installation. 


10) Detection piping and equipment installed in 
corrosive areas shall be applied with protective 
coatings. 


11) Detection piping and equipment shall be supported 
independently as far as possible. 


12) Detection piping/equipment shall be laid away 
from hot sources, such as heat exchangers, 
furnaces, ovens, etc in order to avoid possible 
false alarms. 


13) Sprinkler heads shall be provided with guards in 
areas where they are susceptible to mechanical 
damage and care shall be taken to see that the 
guards do not interfere with the spray pattern in 
the vicinity. 


14 


NS 


Detection system shall be designed to cause 
actuation of the deluge valve within 20 s under 
expected exposure conditions. 


15) It is recommended to provide baffle plates for 
detectors where situation warrants. 


10 PUMPSETS 


10.1 Pumping Capacity Requirement 


a) To determine the actual pumping capacity required 
for the system, individual demands of various 
detached buildings/equipment within the complex 
shall be determined based on the design details 
given in the previous sections. 


b 


wm 


The pumping capacity required shall be equivalent 
to the highest of the demands thus calculated in (a) 
above. 


c) Suitable pump shall then be selected to match with 
the duty parameters as shown in Table 8. 


10.2 General Requirements 


The following requirements are applicable: 


a) 


Pump sets shall be exclusively used for the spray 
systems and shall be of an approved type and shall 
be one of the following types: 


1) Electric motor driven centrifugal pumps; 


2) Compression ignition engine driven centrifugal 
pumps; and 
3) Vertical turbine submersible pumps. 


In all the above cases, pumps shall be automatic in 
action. 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


NOTE — Tappings from the hydrant system to feed water 
spray systems for smaller installations may be permitted by the 
Authority. Pump selection and capacity in such cases shall be 
as per IS 13039. 

Pumps shall be direct coupled except in the case 
of engine driven vertical turbine pumps wherein 
gear drives shall be used. Belt driven pumps shall 
be avoided. 


Parts of pumps like impeller, shaft sleeve, wearing 
ring, etc, shall be ofnon-corrosive metal preferably 
of brass or bronze. 


Where seawater is used or where the quality of the 
water necessitates the use of special metals and 
alloys, the use of such metals and alloys shall be 
insisted upon. 


The rating and design of motors and switchgear 
shall conform to the relevant Indian Standard 
specifications. The motor shall be of continuous 
rating type and its rating shall be equivalent to 
the horse power required to drive the pump at 
150 percent of its rated discharge. Pumps shall be 
chosen with minimum duty parameters as stated in 
Table 8. 


In case of electrically driven pumps, it is required 
to provide a compression ignition engine driven 
stationary pump of similar capacity be installed as 
a standby; and vice versa. 
NOTE — Notwithstanding the above, if power to motorized 
fire pumps is obtained from two sources, one of which is a 
captive generating plant located in a block either 6 m away 
from all surrounding building or, where this is not feasible, 
fire separated from adjoining buildings in a manner indicated 
in 10.3, more than one pump may be of the electrically 
driven type. 
In case of jockey pumps in such systems to take 
care of minor leakages, the capacity thereof shall 
not be less than 3 percent and normally not more 
than 10 percent of the installed pumping capacity. 


Each pump shall be provided with a pressure gauge 
on delivery side between the pump and non-return 
valve and a plate giving delivery head, capacity 
and the number of revolutions per minute. 


33 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Table 8 Minimum Duty Parameters 
for Selecting Pumps 


[ Clauses 10.1 (c) and 10.2(e) ] 


Protection Type Pumping Capacity 


lpm (m3/h) 


Delivery 
Pressure 
bar 


(2) (3) (4) 


ii) 


ili) 


)) 


k) 


m) 


7.0/8.8 
7.0/8.8 


High velocity 2 850 (171) 


4 550 (273) 


7.0/8.8 
7.0/8.8 
7.0/8.8 


Medium velocity 2 850 (171) 
4 550 (273) 


6 750 (410) 


7.0 
7.0 


Drenchers/curtains 2 850 (171) 


4 550 (273) 


Each pump shall be provided with independent 
suction pipe with flooded suction and further 
provided with sluice or cut off valves. The net 
positive suction head (NPSH) available at site 
exceeds the required NPSH by at least 1 m at 110 
percent of the duty point as per the manufacturer’s 
curves. 


Suction piping shall be laid either horizontal or 
with a continuous slight rise towards the pump to 
avoid the possibility of air locks forming in the 
pipe. No butterfly valves are allowable in suction 
pipelines. 

The diameter of the suction pipe shall be such that 
the rate of flow of water through it is based upon a 
rate of flow of 120 m/min (Max). 


10.3 Pump Room Location 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Pumps shall not be installed in the open. The 
pump room shall be so located as to be both easily 
accessible and where any falling masonry and the 
like from other buildings occasioned by fire or 
other causes, cannot damage the pump room. 


Normally, pump rooms shall be located 6 m away 
from all surrounding buildings and overhead 
structures. 


Where this is not feasible, they may be attached to 
a building provided a fire wall having a rating of 
at least 2 h is constructed between the pump room 
and attached building, the roof of pump room is 
of RCC construction at least 100 mm thick and 
access to the pump room is from the outside. 


The pump rooms shall normally have brick/ 
concrete walls and non-combustible roof, with 
adequate lighting, ventilation and drainage 
arrangements. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


e) The pump room shall be located 30 m clear of the 


equipment/vessels handling or storing flammable 
liquids/solvents and/or gases. 


10.4 Requirements for Electrical Pumps 


a) The 


b 


c 


d 


e 


wm 


wa 


wa 


wn 


sub-station(s) and/or DG __ house(s) 
supplying power to the fire pump(s) shall be of 
incombustible construction and shall be located 
at least 6 m away from all surrounding buildings. 
Where this is not feasible, all door and window 
openings of the surrounding buildings within 
6 m of the sub-station(s) and/or DG house(s) 
shall be protected by single fire doors and 6 mm 
thick wired glass in steel framework, respectively. 
Likewise, roof eaves, if any of the surrounding 
buildings falling within 6 m of the sub-station(s) 
and/or DG house(s) shall be cut and wall raised 
as a parapet. The above provision shall also apply 
when the substation(s) and/or DG house(s) are 
within 6 m of each other. 


Where the sub-station(s) and/or DG house(s) are 
attached to buildings, a fire wall(s) having a rating 
of at least 2 h shall be constructed to segregate 
the substation(s) and/or DG house(s) from the 
attached buildings and where the attached building 
is storeyed, the roof of the sub-station(s) and/or 
DG houses shall be of RCC construction of at least 
100 mm thickness. 


Transformer cubicles inside these substations 
shall be separated from HT/LT cubicles and from 
each other by blank brick/stone/concrete walls 
of 355 mm thickness or of RCC of 200 mm with 
door openings, if any, therein being protected by 
single fireproof doors with fire rating of at least 
2 h. The sub-station(s) and DG houses shall also 
be separated from each other as above. 


Transformers installed outdoors which are 
supplying power to fire pump(s), shall also be 
located at least 6 m away from all the surrounding 
buildings [(including sub-station(s) and/or DG 
house(s)]. 


Where this is not feasible, all door and window 
openings of the surrounding buildings [(including 
sub-station(s) and/or DG house(s)] within 6 m 
of the of the transformers shall be protected by 
single fire doors and 6 mm thick wired glass in 
steel framework, respectively. Likewise, roof 
eaves, if any of the surrounding buildings falling 
within 6 m of the transformers shall be cut and 
wall raised as a parapet. 


Blast walls of bricks/stone/concrete blocks of 
355 mm thickness or of RCC of 200 mm thickness 
shall be constructed between two transformers 
and these walls shall be extended horizontally by 
600 mm beyond the extremities of the transformers 
and vertically 600 mm above the highest point of 
the transformers. 


34 


wa 


8 


h) 


© 


j 


k) 


m) 


n 


wm 


wm 


P 


q) 


NOTE — For high hazard occupancies, substation(s) supplying 
power to fire pumps shall, in addition to complying with the 
above provisions, be located 30 m clear of all equipment where 
flammable fluids having a flash point below 65°C are handled 
and/or stored. 

Overhead feeders to sub-station(s) supplying 
power to the fire pump(s) are not permitted within 
a horizontal distance of: 


1) 15 m of any process building/plant or tanks 
containing flammable liquids, or 


2) 6 m of any other building or tanks containing 
non-flammable liquids or of storage in open. 


In case the feed to such sub-station(s) is by means 
of underground cables, the cables shall not pass 
under any building or permanent structure. 


Sufficient spare power shall always be available 
to drive pumping set(s) at all times throughout the 
year. 


The electric supply to the pumping set(s) shall be 
entirely independent of all other equipment in the 
premises that is even when the power throughout 
the entire premises is switched off, the supply to 
the pump shall continue to be available interrupted. 
This can be achieved by taking the connection for 
the pump(s) from the incoming side of the main 
LT breaker. 


However, in cases where two or more transformers 
and/or sources of supply are connected to a 
common bus bar or where there is provision of 
a bus coupler between the bus bar sections, the 
connection may be taken through the bus bars. 


The fire pump circuit shall be protected at the 
origin by an automatic circuit breaker so set as 
to permit the motor to be overloaded during an 
emergency to the maximum limit permissible 
by the manufacturers. Further, the under voltage 
release/no volt coil of the circuit breaker shall be 
removed. 

NOTE — Where cable lengths are long enough to warrant 
back-up protection, Authorities may insist on provision for 
such a protection. 

It is recommended that telltale lamps which could 
continuously glow when power is available to the 
fire pump(s) circuit be provided and fixed in a 
prominent position, both in the substation and in 
the pump room. 


A direct feeder without any tappings, shall be laid 
from the substation to the pump house. The feeder 
shall be laid underground and shall not pass under 
any building or permanent structure. 


Where there is more than one source of power for 
the operation of pumping set(s) every electrical 
circuit shall preferably be so designed as to ensure 
that when necessary the set(s) continue to operate 
without the manual operation of an emergency 
switch. 


r) The pumping set(s) shall be securely mounted on 


S 


t 


u 


Ww 


y 


Z 


aa 


bb 


cc 


dd 


wma 


) 


ww 


a 


a 


) 


wn 


wm 


wa 


wn 


a robust bedplate, if of the horizontal type, and 
shall be free from vibration at all variations of 
load. 


The rating and design of motors and switchgear 
shall conform to the relevant Indian Standard 
specifications. The motor shall be of continuous 
rating type and its ratings shall be equivalent 
to the horse power required to drive the pump 
at 150 percent of its rated discharge. 


The motor shall be of totally enclosed type or 
drip proof type, the latter having their air inlets 
and outlets protected with meshed wire panels to 
exclude rodents, reptiles and insects. 


The motor(s) shall be wound for Class B insulation 
preferably for Class E and the windings shall 
be vacuum impregnated with heat and moisture 
resisting varnish and preferably glass fibre 
insulated to withstand tropical conditions. 


Motor(s) wound for high tension supplies shall 
have a suitable fixed warming resistance to 
maintain the motor windings in a dry condition 
at all times and particularly under monsoon 
conditions. The resistance shall be connected to 
the lighting or other equivalent circuit. Also pump 
motor and the switchgear inside pump house 
shall be housed in an enclosure with a degree of 
protection not less than IP 65. 


Heating apparatus shall also be provided when 
necessary for medium tension motor where 
they are located below ground level, in order to 
maintain the motor windings in a dry condition. 
Adequate drainage arrangements shall also be 
provided in the pump house in such cases. 


The incoming cable to the fire pump room 
shall terminate in an isolating switch fuse unit 
incorporating the HRC fuses and where necessary 
provided with a distribution system. 


The starting switchgear for the fire pumps shall 
be suitable for direct on line starting but other 
alternative arrangements are subject to prior 
approval of the authorities concerned. It shall also 
incorporate an ammeter with a clear indication of 
the motor full load current. 

NOTE — Remote controlled starting arrangements are subject 
to prior approval of the authorities concerned. 

Cables for motors and switchgears shall be 
armored or enclosed in heavy gauge screwed steel 
conduit according to conditions. 

It is recommended that the equipment throughout 
be painted fire red (shade no. 536 as per IS 5) and 
suitably marked for identification. 

Necessary spare parts including a set of fuses (in a 
glass fronted box) shall be kept in readiness at all 
times in the pump house. 


35 


IS 15325 : 2020 


NOTE — The wiring for the fire pumps in all installations shall 
be done in accordance with SP 30. 


10.5 Compression Ignition Engine Driven Pumps 


a) Pump room — The pump room shall be artificially 


b 


c 


d 


e 


) 


wm 


© 


nN 


heated, if necessary to maintain the temperature 
of room above 10°C. Adequate ventilation shall 
be provided for the air required for aspiration and 
to limit the temperature rise in the room to 10°C 
above the ambient temperature when the engine is 
on full load. 


Engine — The engine shall be of the compression 
ignition mechanical direct injection type, capable 
of being started without the use of wicks, 
cartridges, heater plugs or ether, at an engine 
room temperature of 7°C and shall accept full load 
within 15 s from the receipt of the signal to start: 


1) Naturally aspirated, supercharged or 
turbocharged and either air or water cooled. In 
case of charged air cooling by means of a belt 
driven fan or of a belt driven auxiliary water 
pump there shall be multiple belts such that 
should half the belts break, the remaining belts 
would be capable of driving the fan or pump. 


2 


a 


Capable of operating continuously on full load 
at the site elevation for a period of 6 h. 


3 


wa 


Provided with an adjustable governor to 
control the engine speed within 10 percent of 
its rated speed under any conditions of load up 
to the full load rating. The governor shall be set 
to maintain the rated pump speed at maximum 
pump load. 


4) Provided with an in-built tachometer to 


indicate the rpm of the engine. 


wa 


5) 
6) 


Provided with a time totalizer (hour counter). 


Any manual device fitted to the engine which 
could prevent the engine starting shall return 
automatically to the normal position. 


Engines, after correction for altitude and ambient 
temperature shall have bare engine horsepower 
rating equivalent to the higher of the following 
two values: 


1) 20 percent in excess of the maximum brake 
horsepower required to drive the pump at its 
duty point; or 

2) Brake horsepower required to drive the pump 
at 150 percent of its rated discharge. 

The coupling between the engine and the pump 

shall allow each unit to be removed without 

disturbing the other. 

Cooling System — The following systems are 

acceptable: 

1) Cooling by water from the discharge of fire 
pump (taken off prior to the pump discharge 
valve) direct into the engine cylinder jackets 


IS 15325 : 2020 


via pressure reducing device to limit the 
applied pressure to a safe value as specified by 
the engine manufacturer. The outlet connection 
from this system shall terminate at least 
150 mm above the engine water outlet pipe 
and be directed into an open tundish so that the 
discharge water is visible. 


2 


wa 


A heat exchanger, the raw water being supplied 
from the fire pump discharge (taken off prior 
to the pump discharge valve) via pressure 
reducing device, if necessary, to limit the 
applied pressure to a safe value as specified 
by the engine manufacturer. The raw water 
outlet connection shall be so designed that 
the discharged water can be readily observed. 
The water in the closed circuits shall not be 
less than that recommended by the engine 
manufacturer. If the auxiliary pump is belt 
driven there shall be multiple belts so that 
should half the belts break, the remaining belts 
shall be capable of driving the pump. 


3) A frame or engine mounted air cooled radiator 
with a multiple belts driven fan from the engine. 
When half the belts are broken the remaining 
belts shall be capable of driving the fan. The 
water in the closed circuit shall be circulated 
by means of the auxiliary pump driven by the 
engine and the capacity of the closed circuit 
shall be not less than that recommended by the 
engine manufacturer. 


4) Direct air cooling of the engine by means of 
multiple belts driven fan. When half the belts 
are broken the remaining belts shall be capable 
of driving the fan. 


NOTE — Incase of systems described above, a failure actuated 
audio-visual alarm shall be incorporated. 


f) Air filtration — The air intake shall be fitted with 
the filter of adequate size to prevent foreign matter 
entering the engine. 


Exhaust system — The exhaust shall be fitted with 
a suitable silencer and the total back pressure shall 
not exceed the engine maker’s recommendation. 
When the exhaust system rises above the engine, 
means shall be provided to prevent any condensate 
flowing into the engine. 


a 


8 


h) Engine shutdown mechanism — This shall be 
manually operated and return automatically to the 
starting position after use. 

j) Fuel system 
1) Fuel — The engine fuel oil shall be of quality 

and grade specified by engine makers. There 
shall be kept on hand at all times sufficient 
fuel to run the engine on full load for 3 h, in 
addition to that in the fuel tank. 


2) Fuel tank — The fuel tank shall be of welded 
steel construction relevant to Indian or 


36 


International Standard for mild steel drums. 
The tank shall be mounted above the engine 
fuel pump; to provide gravity feed unless 
otherwise recommended by the manufacturers. 
The tank shall be fitted with an indicator 
showing the level of fuel in the tank. The 
capacity of the tank shall be sufficient to allow 
the engine to run on full load for: 


i) Light hazard > 1h 
ii) Ordinary hazard > 2h 
iii) High hazard > 3h 


NOTE — Where there is more than one compression 
ignition engine driven pump set, there shall be separate 
fuel tank and fuel feed pipe for each engine. 


3) Fuel feed pipes — Any valve in the fuel feed 
pipe between the fuel tank and the engine shall 
be placed adjacent to the tank and it shall be 
locked in the open position. Pipe joints shall 
not be soldered and plastic tubing shall not be 
used. 


k) Auxiliary Equipment — The following shall be 


m 


har] 


provided: 

1) Sludge and sediment trap, 

2) A fuel level gauge, 

3) An inspection and cleaning hole, 


4) A filter between the fuel tank and fuel pump 
mounted in an accessible position for cleaning, 
and 


5) Means to enable the entire fuel system to be 
bled of air. Air relief cocks are not allowed; 
screwed plugs are permitted. 


Starting Mechanism — Provision shall be made 
for two separate methods of engine starting, 
namely: 


1) Automatic starting by means of a battery 
powered electric starter motor incorporating 
the axial displacement type of pinion, having 
automatic repeat start facilities initiated by 
a fall in pressure in the water supply pipe to 
the spray installation. The battery capacity 
shall be adequate for ten consecutive starts 
without recharging with a cold engine under 
full compression. 

2) Manual starting by crank handle, if engine size 
permits or electric starter motor. 

NOTE — The starter motor used for automatic starting may 


also be used for manual starting provided there are separate 
batteries for manual starting. 


n) Battery charging — The means of charging 


batteries shall be by a 2-rate trickle charger with 
manual selection of boost charge and the batteries 
shall be charged in position. Where separate 
batteries are provided for automatic and manual 
starting the charging equipment shall be capable of 


P 


q 


) 


ma 


trickle charging both the batteries simultaneously. 
Equipment shall be provided to determine the 
state of charge of the batteries. 

Tools — A standard kit of tools shall be provided 
with the engine and kept on hand at all times. 
Spare parts — The following spare parts shall be 
supplied with the engine and kept ready: 

1) 
2) 


Two sets of fuel filters, elements and seals; 


Two sets of lubricating oil filters, elements and 
seals; 


3 
4 


wa 


Two sets of belts (wherever used); 


wa 


One complete set of engine joints, gaskets and 
hoses; 


5 
6 


wa 


Two injector nozzles; 


wm 


One complete set of piston rings for each 
cylinder; and 


7) One inlet valve and one exhaust valve. 


r) Engine exercising — The test shall be for a 


S 


wm 


period of at least 5 min each day. Where closed 
circuits cooling systems are used, the water level 
in the primary system shall be checked at the 
time of carrying out each test and, if necessary, 
water shall be added during the course of test 
procedure. 


A written declaration shall be given that the 
following conditions will be strictly complied 
with to: 


1) 
2) 


Test the engine at least once a week; 


Maintain the temperature of the engine room at 
not less than 4.5°C at all times; 


3 


wa 


Maintain the minimum quantity of fuel oil 
required as desired in these clauses; 

4) Use a good grade of fuel oil equivalent in 
quality to that specified by the engine maker; 
and 

5) Keep on hand the spare parts required as 
specified in 10.5 (q). 


10.6 Other Requirements for Pumps 


a) Where there is more than one pump set installed, 


b 


c 


wm 


wa 


the suction pipes shall be interconnected through 
a common header. 


Where a redundant system is required, the full 
flow demand of the system shall be met by a main 
pump set and a reserve pump set having the same 
capacity. 

Two pressure sensing devices shall be provided 
to start each pump set. They shall be connected 
in series such that opening the contacts of either 
switch will start the pump set with normally 
closed contacts. 


37 


d) 


e) 


wa 


8 


h 


Sa 


j 


k) 


n) 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Means shall be provided for testing pump set 
starting with each pressure sensing device. 


If any isolating valve is installed on the connection 
between trunk main and any pump set starting 
pressure sensing device, a non-return valve shall 
be installed in parallel with the isolating valve so 
that a fall in pressure on the trunk main will be 
transmitted to the pressure switch even when the 
isolating valve is closed. 


The first pump set shall start automatically when 
the pressure in the system falls to a value that 
shall be indicated in the manufacturer design and 
installation manual. 


Where two pump sets are installed, the second ones 
shall also start automatically at the same pressure 
as the first one and a delay shall be provided to 
avoid simultaneous starting of both units. 


Once the pump set has started, it shall continue to 
run until stopped manually. 


The following conditions shall be monitored 

(electric pump): 

1) power available to the motor and, where a.c. 
on all three phases; 


2) pump on demand; 
3) pump running; and 
4) start failure. 


Allmonitored conditions shall be visually indicated 
individually in the pump room. They shall also 
be visually indicated at a location permanently 
attended by responsible personnel. Pump running 
and fault alarms shall also be audibly indicated at 
the same place. 


Starter alarm indication (engine driven pump set). 


The following conditions shall each be indicated 
both locally and at a responsibly manned location: 


1) Use of any switch which prevents the engine 
starting automatically; 


2) Failure of the engine to start after the six 
attempts; 


3) Pump running; and 
4) Diesel controller 


When commissioning an installation the 
automatic starting system of the diesel engine 
shall be activated with the fuel supply isolated for 
the six cycles each of no less than 15 s cranking 
and no more than 15 s or less than 10 s rest. After 
completion of the six starting cycles the fail to 
start alarm shall operate. The fuel supply shall 
then be restored and the engine shall start when 
the manual start test button is turned on. 


IS 15325 : 2020 


11 WATER SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS FOR 
SPRAY SYSTEM 


11.1 Water Supply 


a) When more than one water based fire protection 
system complying with respective Indian 
Standards exist for one complex, water capacity 
shall be provided, considering the aggregate 
requirements for all such systems. 

b) Water for the spray system shall be stored in 

any easily accessible surface or underground 

reservoir or above ground tanks of steel, concrete 
or masonry. The effective capacity of the reservoir 

(above the level of suction puddle flange or the 

level of top of the pump casing whichever is higher 

by a height equivalent to three times the diameter 
of the suction pipe in case of positive suction) 
for various classes of occupancies of sprinkler 

installations shall be as indicated in Table 9. 


11.2 Multiple Installations 


For designing systems for multiple classifications, that 
is, mix of high velocity and medium velocity water 
spray systems, water supply requirements and duration 
of water supply shall comply with following: 


a) Water supply shall be worked out for each system 
and highest requirement shall be determined. 


b) Water supply shall be adequate to cater to the 
highest requirement within the system. 


11.3 Water requirements for drencher/curtain system 
shall be independent and water requirements shall be in 
addition to what is calculated in 11.2. 


11.4 Other Requirements 


A higher capacity of reservoir that required as per 
Table 9 may be stipulated by the Authorities where 
considered necessary. Water supplies for the spray 
installations shall be free from suspended, fibrous or 
other matters, which may accumulate in the system 


c) If spray system protection is also backed up b ; vee 
) pray sy P p OY pipe work, and it is recommended to use filtered water 
an independent up-to-date hydrant system as per 
À for the system. 
IS 13039, water requirement for spray system 
shall comply with Table 9. The use of salt or brackish water is not normally 
d) If spray system protection is not backed up by -i DEDE D A a waste d ba PIM 
an up-to-date hydrant system, water requirement is anie pi er pr en n ion - 
for spray system shall need to be loaded for a ee euse 9 i : d AY ee £ 
supplementing the protection with hose streams as E ES AA OTS TOTAA CAE OREA A TERSA 
detailed below: Combined reservoirs for other fire fighting systems 
1) High velocity system -20 m? such as, hydrant system, sprinkler systems, etc, along 
: . with water spray system are permissible provided: 
2) Medium velocity system : 50 m° ED i E } p p 
; 3 a) All the suction inlets or foot valves are at same 
3) Drencher/curtain system : 50m 
level, and 
Table 9 Water Storage Requirement for Various Types of Protection 
[ Clauses 8.2.11, 8.5.5, and 11.1(b), (c) and 11.4 ] 
SI No. Protection Type Exclusive Water Storage 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) High velocity Spray a) Transformer protection — Shall not be less than 40 min run for the aggregate pumping capacity 
for the spray system for control mode (see 7.2.4.5). For suppression mode, 20 min run for the 
aggregate pumping capacity is acceptable. 

b) Other local applications — Shall not be less than 10 min run of the aggregate pumping capacity. 

ii) Medium velocity Spray a) For tankage and spheres: 

1) 90 min ofthe installed pumping capacity if the aggregate hold-up of flammable fluid/solvent 
in vessels/tanks at one location is less than 200 MT. 
2) 150 min ofthe installed pumping capacity if the aggregate hold-up of flammable fluid/solvent 
in the vessels/tanks at one location is more than 200 MT. 
NOTE — For the purpose of the both the above, all storage vessels within 50 m of each other 
shall be considered as one location. 
b) Cable galleries — 40 min run of the installed aggregate pumping capacity. 


c) 
a) 


iii) Exposure protection 


38 


Conveyors — 60 min run of the installed aggregate pumping capacity. 


Drencher/curtain spray — Not less than | h run for the aggregate pumping capacity 


b) Aggregate capacity of the reservoir is equal to the 
total requirement of all the systems put together. 


Reservoirs of and over 225 m° capacities shall be in 
two independent but interconnected compartments 
with a common sump to facilitate cleaning and repairs. 
The construction and arrangement of the reservoir and 
the common sump shall be in accordance with the 
provisions in IS 13039. 


Level indicator shall be provided for measuring the 
quantity of water stored at any time. The indicator 
shall preferably be graduated to read directly in m° of 
water. Water reservoir shall be cleaned at least once in 
two years or more frequently if necessary to prevent 
contamination and sedimentation. It is advisable to 
provide adequate inflow into the reservoir so that 
the protection can be re-established within a short 
period. 


12 PRE-COMMISSIONING 
NANCE REQUIREMENTS 


AND MAINTE- 


12.1 Pre-Commissioning and Acceptance Tests 


All new system piping up to the deluge valve shall 
be hydrostatically tested to a pressure equivalent to 
150 percent of the designed head of the fire pump 
and the system shall be capable of withstanding that 
pressure for at least 2 h. The coating and wrapping of 
the underground wrought or mild steel pipes shall be 
carried out and also subjected to ‘Holiday test’ as per 
IS 10221. The entire system piping shall be flushed 
thoroughly before commissioning in order to remove 
foreign materials which might have entered/be present 
in the system piping during the course of installation 
or which may have been present in existing piping at 
maximum flow rate available to the system under fire 
condition. When planning the flushing operations, 
consideration shall be given to disposal of the water 
discharged during flushing. 


Full discharge test with water shall be made as a means 
of checking the nozzle layout, discharge pattern, 
spray coverage and obstructions and determination of 
relation between design criteria and actual performance 
and to ensure against clogging of the smaller piping and 
discharge devices by foreign materials. 


The maximum number of systems (deluge valves) 
that may be expected to operate in case of fire shall 
be in full operation simultaneously in order to check 
the adequacy and condition of water supply. The 
detection system shall be designed to cause actuation of 
special water control valve within 20 s under expected 
exposure conditions. Under test conditions the heat 
detector systems, when exposed to a standard heat 
source, shall operate within 40 s. Under test conditions 
the flammable gas detector system, when exposed to 
a standard test gas concentration, shall operate within 
20 s. 


39 


IS 15325 : 2020 


NOTE — One method of testing heat detectors is to use a 
radiant heat surface at a temperature of 150°C and a capacity 
of 350 W held at a distance of 25 to 30 mm from the nearest 
part of the detector. This method of testing with electric test set 
should not be used in hazardous locations. Other test methods 
may be employed but results shall be related to those obtained 
under these conditions. 
All operating parts of the system including manual over 
ride like emergency pull switch of the deluge valve 
shall be fully tested to ensure that they are in operating 
condition. The discharge pressure at the highest, most 
remote nozzle and the lowest nozzle close to the 
deluge valve shall be measured which should be within 
the designed limits of the system. For this purpose 
provisions shall be made for test gauges at appropriate 
places. 


The proper functions of the alarm gong associated 
with the deluge valve and its level of audibility shall 
be checked. An audibility level of 85 dB above the 
background noise level is recommended. 


12.2 Periodical Testing and Maintenance 


12.2.1 General 


Water spray systems require competent and effective 
care and maintenance to assure that they will perform 
their purpose effectively at the time of fire. Systems 
shall be serviced and tested periodically by personnel 
trained in this work. An inspection contract with a 
qualified agency for service, test and operation at regular 
intervals is recommended. Operating and maintenance 
instruction and layouts shall be available or can be 
posted at control equipment and at the fire station of 
the plant. Selected plant personnel shall be trained 
and assigned the task of operating and maintaining the 
equipment. 


At weekly, or other frequent, regular scheduled plant 
inspection, equipment shall be checked visually for 
obvious defects, such as broken or missing parts, 
external loading or other evidence of impaired 
protection. At least once a week the system shall be 
visually checked and the reading of various pressure 
gauges of each deluge valve installations shall be 
recorded. A trained pump man shall be available on all 
shifts and at all hours to operate the pump or whenever 
required. 


12.2.2 Fire Water Reservoirs/Tank 


It shall be ensured that fire water tank reservoirs are 
always full and free from any foreign materials. The 
water level shall be recorded weekly. Depending upon 
quality of water, reservoirs shall be cleaned once 
in a year or two years and sludge formation shall be 
prevented. 


12.2.3 Fire Pumps 


All the fire pumps shall be run at least 5 min every day. 
During testing water level of priming tank, delivery 


IS 15325 : 2020 


pressures of pumps, speed, and also other parameters 
are to be checked and recorded. All pump glands shall 
be maintained in good working conditions and checked 
weekly. The bearing grease caps shall be checked once 
every week and refilled with fresh grease, if necessary. 
Starter contacts shall be cleaned every week. 


Insulation resistance of pump motors shall be examined 
once in every six months and record shall be maintained. 
Starting mechanism of diesel engine must be checked, 
the battery charger and also the batteries must be 
maintained in effective conditions and the engine shall 
be run at least for 5 min every day. 


12.2.4 Spray System Installations 


All piping shall be examined at intervals to determine its 
conditions. Frequency of inspections will be dependent 
upon local conditions and shall be at intervals of not 
more than one year. All the deluge valve installations 
and automatic detection equipment shall be serviced 
and tested annually by qualified personnel. 


Full discharge test of sprayers shall be made at least 
quarterly. After each operation, projectors/nozzles 
equipped with individual strainer shall be removed 


and cleaned, unless observations under flow conditions 
indicate this is not necessary. Manual tripping devices 
shall be operated at least twice annually. 


When normally opened valves are closed following the 
system operation or test, suitable procedures shall be 
instituted to ensure that they are reopened and that the 
system is promptly restored to full normal operating 
condition. All projectors/nozzles shall be inspected for 
proper positioning or test, external loading, corrosion 
and cleaned if necessary, based on experience but at 
least once in three months. 


The entire system shall be flushed at least once a year. It 
is important to ensure that the sprinkler bulbs (detectors) 
are kept free from paint or dust (otherwise it may not 
function correctly) and that the bulbs are accessible 
and clearly identified for maintenance purposes. All 
the equipment pertaining to the spray system shall 
be painted at least once in two years. Spares to the 
extent of at least 10 percent of each type of sprayers/ 
projectors /sprinklers /detectors shall be kept in stock 
for quick replacement. 


12.3 Periodical Testing and Maintenance Chart 


SLI No. Subject Activities Duration 
i) Reservoir Level checking Weekly 
Clearing Once in two years 
ii) Pump Running test Daily 5 min 
Test flow Annually 
Lubrication Quarterly 
GI and packing Weekly 
Overhaul Once in two years 
iii) Engine Running Once in day (5 min) 
Lubrication Quarterly 
Battery Status weekly 
Load test Annually 
Overhaul Once in two years 
Fuel tank check Daily 
iv) Motor Lubrication Weekly 
Starter contact checking Weekly 
Insulation resistance check Half yearly 
v) Main piping Flushing Once in two years 
Gauge pressure Check daily 
vi) Sluice valves Operation Monthly 
Gland packing Monthly 
Lubrication Quarterly 
vil) Deluge valves Operation Weekly 
Alarm check Weekly 
Overhaul Annually 
Cleaning Quarterly 
vill) Sprayers Cleaning Quarterly 
Flow test Quarterly 


40 


IS 15325 : 2020 
SI No. Subject Activities Duration 
ix) Detectors Performance Six monthly 
x) Spray installation Performance Quarterly 
Physical checkup of piping Monthly 
for seeing dislocation of 
support, wrong orientation, 
over-loading, etc. 
xi) Pressure gauges Calibration Annually 
xii) Painting Painting of entire installation Every two years 


12.4 Hydraulic Calculations — General 


a) Summary Sheet 


The summary sheet should contain the following 
information: 


1) 
2) 
3) 
4 
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 


wa 


10 
11) 


~~ 


Date; 

Location; 

Name of owner and occupant; 
Building or plant unit number; 
Description of hazard; 

Name and address of contractor; 
Design purpose (type of system); 
Minimum rate of water application; 


Total water requirement as calculated 
including allowance on the hydrant system, 
where applicable; 

Water supply information in detail; and 

Risk wise details showing the total discharge 
and pressure at the top of deluge valve. 


b) Detailed Working Sheet 


The detailed working sheet should contain the 
following information: 


1) 
2) 


Identification of calculation covered; 


Description and discharge constant (K) for 
each type of nozzle; 


41 


10) 
11) 


12) 
13) 


14) 


15) 


Hydraulic design reference points; 

Flow, in lpm; 

Pipe size, in mm; 

Pipe lengths, in m, and details of fittings; 
Equivalent pipe lengths for fittings and devices, 
in m; 

Friction loss, in bar/m; 

Total friction loss between reference points, 
in bar; 

Elevation head in bar between reference 
points; 

Required pressure in bar at each reference 
point; 

Design details of orifice plates; 


Velocity pressure and normal pressure if 
included in calculations; 


Notes to indicate starting points with reference 
to other sheets or to clarify data shown; 


Where extending existing system, hydraulic 
calculations are to be furnished indicating 
the previous design, flow and pressure at 
points of connection and adequate additional 
calculations to indicate the effect on existing 
system; 


IS 15325 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title 
5 : 2007 Colours of ready mixed paints and enamels (sixth revision) 
1239 Steel tubes, tubulars and other wrought steel fittings — Specification 
(Part 1) : 2004 Steel tubes (sixth revision) 
(Part 2) : 2011 Steel pipe fittings (fith revision) 
1536 : 2001 Centrifugally cast (spun) iron pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage — 
Specification (fourth revision) 
1537 : 1976 Specification for vertically cast iron pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage (first 
revision) 
1538 : 1993 Cast iron fittings for pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage — Specification 
(third revision) 
1879 : 2010 Malleable cast iron pipe fittings — Specification (third revision) 
2189 : 2008 Selection, installation and maintenance of automatic fire detection and alarm 
systme — Code of Practice (fourth revision) 
3589 : 2001 Steel pipes for water and sewage (168.3 to 2540 mm outside diameter) — 
Specification (third revision) 
7181 : 1986 Specification for horizontally cast iron double flanged pipes for water, gas and 
sewage (first revision) 
8329 : 2000 Centrifugally cast (spun) ductile iron pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage — 
Specification ( third revision) 
9523 : 2000 Ductile iron fittings for pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage — Specification 
(first revision) 
10221 : 2008 Coating and wrapping of underground mild steel pipelines — Code of Practice 
(first revision) 
10748 : 2004 Hot rolled steel strip plates for welded tubes and pipe — Specification (second 
revision) 
12392 : 1988 Code of practice for design, manufacture and testing of metallic recuperators 
13039 : 2014 External hydrant systems — Provision and maintenance — Code of Practice (first 
revision) 
13095 : 1991 Butterfly valves for general purposes 
15105 : 2002 Design and installation of fixed automatic sprinkler fire extinguishing systems — 
Code of Practice 
15301 : 2003 Installation and maintenance of fire fighting pumps — Code of Practice 
15908 : 2011 Selection, installation and maintenance of control and indicating equipments for 
fire detection and alarm system — Code of Practice 
SP 30: 2011 National Electrical Code 2011 (first revision) 
SP 46 : 2003 Engineering drawing practice for schools and colleges (first revision) 


42 


IS 15325 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety 
(DIFR), New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 
Chhatariya Rubber & Chemicals Industries, 


Mumbai 
Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 
Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 
Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Goa 
Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 
F. M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


Fire & Emergency Services, J & K, Srinagar 


Fire & Security Association of India, Mumbai 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Chennai 
H. D. Fire protect Pvt Limited, Thane 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri D. K. Sunamı (Chairman) 
SHRI D. BALACHANDRAN 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
Suri P. K. DESHMUKH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Dr R. S. CHIMOTE 
SHRI SUVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
Suri N. H. Rout (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Sarı D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. SHARMA 
Suri M. K. Jan (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIWALA 
Suri H. S. HAVELIWALA (Alternate) 


CoL V. V. KADAM 
CoL N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
Suri NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


DR SANJAY SHARMA 
Suri A. K. Dusey (Alternate) 


Suri R. B. BHUTDA 
SHRI Viran GoEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KrisHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR SHAH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
PRESIDENT 


SHRI S. P. GARG 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR KALKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


Suri HARISH N. DHARAMSHI 
Suri K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


43 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 

Johnson Controls India Ltd, Gurugram SHRI SANTHOSH MuzuMDAR 

SHRI Nitin Rastoai (Alternate) 
K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, SHRI RAsesH H. SABADRA 

Navi Mumbai Suri Upay K. Surorr (Alternate) 
Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, Suri K. U. RAMESH 
Bengaluru SHRI K. Srinivasa (Alternate) 

Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai DIRECTOR 

SHRI S. S. WaARICK (Alternate) 
Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai SHRI P. S. RAHANGDALE 

Sarı H. D. Paras (Alternate) 
NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi SHRIMATI SUNITA PURSWANI 

Suri R. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi SHRI S. K. NANDY 
Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 

SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 
RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad Suri Rouit V. SHAH 
Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 

SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 
Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad SHRI MuKesH M. SHAH 


SHRI ABHAY D. PurANDARE (Alternate) 
State Bank of India, Mumbai SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 
Surex Production and Sales Private Limited, Kolkata SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


Swastik Synergy Engineering Pvt Ltd, Mumbai SHRI MukKesH D. SHAH 
SHRI KUNAL ZATAKIA (Alternate) 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services SHRI S. VIJAYASEKAR 
Department, Chennai SHRIMATI N. PRIYA (Alternate) 
UL India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru SHRI JAGDISH V 
Suri S. P. Tey Kumar Benara (Alternate) 
Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow SaRI P. K. RAo 
SHRI AMAN SHARMA (Alternate) 
West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
Kolkata SHRI KAMAL Nanpy (Alternate) 
In personal capacity (B-152, Ist Floor, East of SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 
Kailash, New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, Suri S. K. DHERI 
New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman Suri R. C. SHARMA 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (274, Tapovan Senior Citizen Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
Foundation, Karadimadai Road, Coimbatore 
641010) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT , SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
ScienTIsT ‘D’ (CIvIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


44 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Fire Fighting Equipments Including Water Fittings Subcommittee , CED 22:2 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (4-45, Sector 70 Noida 201301) 
ASKA Equipment Ltd, New Delhi 


Ceasefire Industries Limited, Noida 


Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety (DIFR), New 
Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corp. Limited,Chennai 


Chhatriya Rubbers Chemicals Industries, Mumbai 


Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 


Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 


Directorate of Fire & Emergency Services, Goa 


G. K. Engg. Co. Limited, New Delhi 
Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Chennai 


H. D. Fire protect Co., Thane 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 


K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt. Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Kochi Refineries Limited, Ernakulam 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Mumbai 


Newage Industries, Surendranagar 


Nitin Fire Proetection Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Peter Autokits Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


S & P Safety Products Pvt Limited, Kolkata 


Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 


Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad 


Surex Production and Sales (P) Limited, Kolkata 


45 


Representative(s) 
Dr H. S. Kaprwan (Convener) 


SHRI ASHOK H. GARG 
SHRI NAvpDEEP GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT KUMAR BAJPAI 


Dr K. C. WADHWA 
SHRI PANKAJ CHAWLA (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. Hepat 


Suri S. A. HAVELIWALA 
Suet H. S. HAvVELIWwALA (Alternate) 


Cot V. V. KADAM 
CoL N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
Suri NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. DHAWAN 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIK N. DHARAMSHI 
Suri K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Suri H. M. SABADRA 
SHRI RAJESH H. SABADRA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. Das 
Suri D.K. SHAMI 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK M. SHAH 


Suri NITIN M. SHAH 
SHRI Kuna N. Saan (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. SHAH 
SHRI PARESH JosHi (Alternate) 


SHRI TUNIR CHAKRABARTI 


SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDEEP SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri MukesH M. SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY D. PURANDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI TARIT SUR 
SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


IS 15325 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 


Topaz Fire Systems Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru SHRI LIAQUT ALI KHAN 


In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, New Delhi) Suri S. K. DHERI 


In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman Vihar, New Suri R. C. SHARMA 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior Citizens Foundation, Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
Coimbatore 641 010) 


46 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (7960). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


