NAT Alan IS 3674 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


AGE — mara & Wt — MAMAS 
HTA ATA HAT 
( TEAM FRAT ) 


Textiles — Cotton Fibres — 
Determination of Micronaire Value 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.060.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2020 Price Group 5 


Physical Methods of Tests Sectional Committee, TXD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Physical Methods of Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1966. This revision is based on the advancement in technology and the 
prevalent practice followed in the Indian textile industry. In the present revision, the following major changes 
have been made: 


a) Accuracy of the specimen weight has been modified in line with the corresponding ISO standard. 
b) Additional method of test by rapid instrument testing machine like HVI tester has been included. 


c) Source of calibration cotton to be used has been modified. Accordingly, use of ICAR-Central Institute 
for Research on Cotton Technology (ICAR-CIRCOT) calibration cotton and its quality parameters 
have been specified. 


Fineness is one of the important characteristics of cotton fibre. The determination of fineness of cotton fibre by 
the gravimetric method as prescribed in IS 234 : 2013 “Textiles — Method for determination of linear density 
of textile fibres (gravimetric and vibroscope method) — Specification (second revision)’ is time consuming. 
Therefore, several instruments using airflow method have been designed to determine the fineness values of 
cotton fibre indirectly. 


The airflow instruments, generally prescribed for this method, operate on the principle that the rate of airflow, 
through a plug of cotton fibre of fixed weight contained in a container of definite dimensions and subjected to a 
constant pressure head is related to the fineness of the cotton fibre. 


Much work has been done by ICAR-CIRCOT to develop and make available a range of cottons for the calibration 
of airflow instruments. By use of these calibration cottons and application of the procedures prescribed in this 
standard, it is possible to achieve agreement between two laboratories within + 0.2 micronaire units in the fineness 
measurement of the usual commercial sample of cotton. 


In formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 2403 : 2014 “Textiles — Cotton 
fibres — Determination of micronaire value”. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised y. 


IS 3674 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — COTTON FIBRES — DETERMINATION 
OF MICRONAIRE VALUE 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes a method for the determination 
of micronaire value of loose disorientated cotton fibres 
by means of airflow instruments. This standard is 
applicable to cotton taken from bales, laps, slivers or 
other sources of lint cotton. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of these 
standards. 


IS No. Title 
4952 : 1968 Methods for sampling of cotton — 
Bales, slivers and rovings 
6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following definition 
shall apply. 


3.1 Micronaire Value — A measure of the air 
permeability of a mass of cotton fibres under specified 
conditions expressed in terms of an arbitrary scale, 
called micronaire scale. The micronaire scale is based 
on a range of cottons to which micronaire values have 
been assigned by international agreement. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


Air, under a specified pressure, is passed through 
a specimen of cotton of known weight confined to a 
space of known volume. The mass and volume of the 
specimen may be either constant or varied in relation to 
each other according to the type of instrument used. The 
resistance of the specimen to the flow of air is related to 
the average fineness of the fibres in the specimen. The 
rate of flow of air through the specimen, or the pressure 
difference across the specimen (according to the 
instrument used), is indicated on a scale graduated in 
either arbitrary units of micronaire value or appropriate 
absolute units. 


5 SAMPLING 


5.1 Gross Sample 


Take samples at random from different portions of the 
bulk sample to make up a gross sampleweighing from 
250 to 1 000 g. 


NOTE — If the bulk sample weighs less than 250 g, the whole 
of it shall constitute the gross sample. 


5.2 Test Sample 


Spread the gross sample evenly on a level surface in the 
form of about 1 x 1 m square. Over this, place a metallic 
frame work of 1 x 1 m (inside dimensions) divided into 
25 equal sub-squares. From each of these sub-squares, 
pull out at random approximately equal bunches of 
fibres so as to get a sample weighing about 100 g. This 
shall constitute the test sample (see IS 4952). 


5.3 Sampling for Cotton Bales for Rapid 
Instrument Testing Machine (HVI Tester) 


For sampling of the bales for rapid instrument testing 
machine (HVI tester), the sampling procedure given in 
F-1 shall be followed. 


6 ATMOSPHERE FOR CONDITIONING AND 
TESTING 


6.1 The test sample shall be conditioned in standard 
atmosphere at 65 + 5 percent relative humidity and 
27 + 2 °C temperature for 4 h in moving air 
(or alternatively for 12 h in still air) or for a shorter 
time if the change in mass in a 2 h period does not 
exceed 0.25 percent before weighing and testing of 
the specimen (see IS 6359). Preconditioning is not 
required. 


6.2 Weigh and test the specimen in the standard 
atmosphere at 27 + 2 °C temperature and 65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity. 


7 APPARATUS 


7.1 Balance 


The balance shall be of sufficient capacity to weigh 
the specimen required for the airflow instrument used 
and capable of weighing thespecimen to an accuracy of 
10 mg. 


IS 3674 : 2020 


7.2 Airflow Instrument 
It shall consist of the following principal parts: 


a) Compression cylinder with perforated ends for the 
admission and discharge of air. The cylinder may 
be either of a known fixed volume or of variable 
volume but adjustable to known volume, and in 
either case, it shall have such dimensions that, 
with the prescribed weight of the specimen, each 
cubic centimetre of cylinder shall contain between 
0.16 to 0.30 g of cotton when compressed. 


b) An air pump or other means for producing the 
required air pressure applied to the specimen, 
or the required pressure difference across the 
specimen. 


c) One or more valves or other means for regulating 
and controlling the flow of air through, or the air 
pressure difference across the specimen. 


d) A gauge or other means for measuring the 
resistance of the specimen to the airflow, or of 
the air pressure difference across the specimen. 
For example, a combination of a manometer 
for maintaining the air pressure applied to the 
specimen and a flowmeter for indicating the rate 
of airflow through the specimen may be used. 


7.3 ICAR-CIRCOT Calibration Cotton Standards 
(see Annex A). 


8 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 


8.1 Open the test sample with the fingers, breaking up 
lumps if any, and eliminating as much of the extraneous 
matter as possible. Condition the test sample as 
prescribed in 6.1. 


NOTE — If required by the buyer the opening of the test 
sample may be done by machine opening. 


8.2 Spread the opened, cleaned, and conditioned test 
sample and divide it into 25 approximately equal 
groups. Extract small bunches of loose fibres from each 
group. Remove the pieces of non-fibrous material from 
fibres so collected and weigh at least two test specimens 
as specified in 8.3. 


8.3 The test specimens shall be of the size prescribed 
for the instrument being used. In instruments having 
compression cylinders of fixed volume, the weight of 
the specimen shall be within + 0.2 percent of specimen 
weight appropriate for the instrument. In instruments 
having compression cylinders with adjustably varied 
volume, the weight of the test specimen used shall be 
known with an accuracy of + 0.2 percent. 


9 PROCEDURE 


9.1 Make the necessary preliminary adjustments 
appropriate to the instrument used (see Annex B, C, 
D, E and F). Calibrate (see Annex A) the instrument 
by testing at least three specimens from at least three 
calibration cottons. 


9.2 The instrument shall be considered to be in 
calibration, if it reads the calibration cottons within 
+ 0.1 micronaire value of the established values for 
the corresponding calibration cotton. If the instrument 
does not read within these limits, either (a) re-adjust 
the instruments and repeat the calibration procedure, or 
(b) use an appropriate correction factor based on 
the ratio established during the calibration of the 
instrument. 


9.3 Place the test specimen in the fibre compression 
cylinder, a small portion at a time, taking care that all 
the fibres are placed inside. Insert the compression 
plunger in position in the fibre compression cylinder 
and lock it. Cause the air to flow through the specimen 
and read the airflow or the difference in pressure on the 
scale to an accuracy of half a division of the scale. 


9.4 Remove the test specimen from the fibre 
compression cylinder. Open out the specimen and 
re-pack it into the fibre compression cylinder, taking 
care that all the fibres are placed inside. Determine 
one more test value of the specimen in the manner 
prescribed in 9.3. 


9.5 Take the other test specimen and determine the test 
values in the manner set out in 9.1 to 9.4. 
NOTE — If the deviation of any individual reading is more 
than 0.2 from the mean value, prepare two more test specimens 


as prescribed in 8 and find out the test values by the procedure 
prescribed in 9.1 to 9.5. 


10 CALCULATION AND EXPRESSION 
RESULTS 


OF 


10.1 In instruments in which the scale is graduated in 
micronaire units, find the average of the test values 
to the nearest 0.1 micronaire unit and report it as the 
micronaire value of the cotton fibre in the lot. 


10.2 For instruments in which the scale is graduated in 
units other than micronaire, convert the direct reading 
to micronaire units either from a previously prepared 
graph or by previously fitted curve (see A-3.1). Find 
the average of the values thus obtained to the nearest 
0.1 micronaire unit and report it as the micronaire value 
of the cotton fibre in the lot. 


NOTE — Aconversion curve or a conversion equation shall 
have to be prepared for all instruments not having a micronaire 
scale in order to make full use of the calibration cottons 
referred to in Annex A. 


11 REPORT 


The test report shall include the following: 


a) the average value calculated as the micronaire 
value of the lot; 


b) the type, make and model of instrument used; and 


c) the average value calculated from minimum 
fourspecimen readings as the micronaire value of 
the lot. 


IS 3674 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 7.3, 9.1, Note under 10.2, B-3.1, C-2.1, D-2.1 and E-2.1 ) 
METHOD OF CALIBRATING AIRFLOW INSTRUMENTS 


A-1 CALIBRATION COTTONS 


A-1.1 Calibration of airflow instruments is based on 
samples of a series of ICAR-CIRCOT calibration 


cottons (see Note). Quality characteristics of 
ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cottons are given 
in Table 1. 


Table 1 Quality Characteristics of ICAR-CIRCOT 
Calibration Cottons 


( Clause A-1.1) 


SI No. Code Micronaire Value 
(1) (2) 6) 
i) S-4 4.8 
ii) L-3 3.6 
iii) EL-3 2.8 
iv) Tolerance +0.10 
NOTE — ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cottons are 
available from the ICAR-Central Institute for Research 
on Cotton Technology, 5, Adenwala Road, Grant 
Road West, Matunga, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400019, 


e-mail : circotcalibcot@rediffmail.com. 


A-1.2 For calibration purposes use the full range of 
calibration cottons available. They approximately 
cover the range of micronaire values of the world’s 
commercial cottons. 
NOTE — The routine checking and adjusting of the instrument 
in relation to a section of the instrument’s scale is to be 
distinguished from the more elaborate determination of the 
locations of numerous points along the full-scale range of 
the instrument when it is being calibrated. Routine checking 
for daily use is described in 9.1 and 9.2. Calibration of an 
instrument, such as at the factory or upon receiving it at the 
laboratory or occasionally under other special circumstances at 
the laboratory, is described in the following subclauses of this 
Annex. 


A-1.3 For each calibration cotton, make a minimum of 
two test determinations on each of three test specimens. 
The difference between the test values for the first and 
second determinations shall not exceed 0.10 unit. If a 
greater difference is obtained, discard the result and 
make two determinations on a fresh test specimen. 


Take the average of the first readings on each of the 
three test specimens for each calibration cotton. 
NOTE — The scale from which the readings are noted can 
already be graduated in micronaire values (as with most 
commercially available instruments). For a new instrument, it 
can be a uniformly graduated scale. 


A-2 CALIBRATION OF INSTRUMENTS WITH 
SCALE GRADUATED IN MICRONAIRE UNITS 


For instruments already fitted with a scale graduated in 
micronaire values, determine the difference between the 
average scale reading and the corresponding established 
value for each cotton. If none of these differences 
exceeds 0.10 unit, regard the previous calibration of 
the instrument as satisfactory. If greater differences 
occur, make appropriate checks and adjustments to 
bring the instrument performance into compliance 
with the above requirements. Alternatively, a series of 
appropriate scale corrections can be calculated. 


A-3 CALIBRATION OF INSTRUMENTS WITH 
SCALE GRADUATED IN OTHER THAN 
MICRONAIRE UNITS 


A-3.1 For instruments fitted with a scale graduated 
in other than micronaire values, either plot a graph 
showing the average instrument readings as abscissae 
and the corresponding established values as ordinates 
and draw a smooth curve to pass evenly through the 
points or determine statistically the relation between 
average instrument readings and corresponding 
established values in the form of an equation. The 
deviations between average scale readings and 
established micronaire value shall not be greater than 
the equivalent of 0.10 units, as indicated by the graph 
or by the statistically established relation, as in A-2.1. 


A-3.2 Use the calibration curve, or the corresponding 
statistically relation, to convert final test values yielded 
by cotton samples into micronaire values. Alternatively, 
fit the instrument with a scale graduated in micronaire 
values, the marking of which are obtained from the 
calibration curve or from the statistical relation. 


IS 3674 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 9.1) 
OPERATION OF THE MICRONAIRE AIRFLOW INSTRUMENTS* 


B-0 GENERAL 


There are several models of the micronaire instrument 
which vary only in details of construction and operation 
intended to increase safety, ease and speed of operation. 
For any other operational or constructional details not 
given here, the manufacturer’s instructions supplied 
with the instrument shall be consulted 


B-1 MICRONAIRE MODEL I 


B-1.1 Adjust and calibrate the instrument mechanically 
as follows. 


B-1.1.1 Set the primary air regulator to give a pressure 
of 1.76 kg/cm? (172 kPa) and open the shut-off valve 
that admits air to the instrument. Check the reading 
after the air flows through the instrument and make a 
re-adjustment if necessary. 


B-1.1.2 Insert the manometer plug in the compression 
cylinder, allow the air to enter and adjust the secondary 
air regulator so as to obtain a pressure of 0.42 kg/cm? 
(41.4 kPa) in compression cylinder. Again, if necessary, 
after the air flows through the instrument, re-adjust the 
regulating valve. 


B-1.1.3 Insert one of the master orifice plugs, allow the 
air to enter, and if necessary, turn the calibration screw 
to bring the float to the position on the curvilinear scale 
corresponding to the designation of the orifice plug. 
Repeat these operations, using the other orifice plug or 
disc. 


NOTES 

1 Instead of two calibration discs, each with its bore one disc 
with two different bores may be used. If the latter is used, close 
one of the bores with a finger at the lower scale value of 2.81, 
the bore to be closed being especially marked. 

2 The scale readings 2.8 and 6.2 respectively correspond to 
flow rates of 21.1 + 0.8 litre/min and 49.3 + 1.4 litre/min. 


B-2 MICRONAIRE MODEL II 


B-2.1 Adjust and calibrate the instrument mechanically 
as follows. 


B-2.1.1 Operate the foot valve and see that the air 
pressure behind the filter is between 4.22 kg/cm? 
(413 kPa) and 8.79 kg/cm? (862 kPa). 


B-2.1.2 Open the pressure regulator and the upper and 
lower adjusting valves, as far as possible. 


B-2.1.3 Insert the control disc in the test chamber, open 
the foot valve. Operate the pressure regulator so that 
the mercury column rises to 0.31 kg/cm? (30.3 kPa). 


The air shall pass through both bores of the control 
disc without hindrance. Operatethe valve several times 
consecutively. The mercury shall always rise to the 
same height. 


B-2.1.4 Adjust the upper edge of the float against 
micronaire value of 4.6 by regulating the lower 
adjusting valve. 


B-2.1.5 Adjust the upper edge of the float approximately 
to micronaire value of 6.0 (upper check mark) by 
regulating the upper adjusting valve. 


B-2.1.6 Tightly close the upper opening of the control 
disc with one finger. The float will then fall to about the 
level of lower check mark. 


B-2.1.7 In order to make an exact adjustment, while 
alternately opening and closing the upper opening of 
the control disc, alternately change the lower and upper 
adjusting valves. Do this until the upper edge of the 
float corresponds with the two check marks located at 
about micronaire values of 2.9 and 6.0. 


B-2.1.8 Turn the pressure regulator until the mercury 
column stands at 0.33 kg/cm? (32.4 kPa). 


B-2.1.9 By opening and closing the upper opening of 
the control disc, check whether the upper and lower 
positions of the float still correspond with the two 
adjustment marks even after the change of the mercury 
column from 0.31 kg/cm? (30.3 kPa) to 0.33 kg/cm? 
(32.4 kPa). If this does not occur, repeat the procedure 
as given in B-2.1.7. 


B-2.1.10 Open and close the upper opening of the 
control disc several times. If the adjustments were 
correctly made, the float position shall correspond to 
both marks without further changes of the adjusting 
valves. 

NOTE — If manufacturer’s instruction are different from 


those given above, adhere to the principles of these (standard) 
instructions as closely as possible. 


B-3 CALIBRATION AND TESTING 


B-3.1 After adjusting the instrument mechanically 
(B-1.1.1 to B-1.1.3 or B-2.1.1 to B-2.1.10, depending 
upon the instrument used), check theinstrument with 
at least three ICAR-CIRCOT calibration cottons 
(see Annex A). Repeat the check with the calibration 
cottons at frequentintervals. 


B-3.2 Follow the instructions given in 5, 6 and 8 for 
sampling, conditioning of samples and preparation of 
specimens to be tested. 


NOTE — The test specimen shall weigh 3.24 g + 0.2 percent. 


B-3.3 Follow the instructions given in 9.1 to 9.5 for 
loading the specimen, closing the compression cylinder, 
and reading the gauge. 


IS 3674 : 2020 


B-3.4 Follow the instructions given in 10 and 11 for 
calculating and reporting the test result. 
*Mention of the name of a specific (or proprietary) instrument 


is not intended to promote or give preference to the use of that 
instrument. 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 9.1 ) 
OPERATION OF THE W.LR.A. FINENESS METER (COTTON MODEL)* 


C-0 GENERAL 


There are three models of the W.I.R.A. Fineness meter 
(cotton model) described as the “old model”, ‘2nd’ 
and ‘new model” respectively. They differ primarily in 
the scale units and size of test specimen used. The old 
model is graduated in litres per minute and measures a 
specimen weighing 6.0 g. The 2nd model is equipped 
with a scale graduated in micronaire units and measures 
a specimen weighing 2.5 g and the new model measure 
a specimen weighing 4 g. For any other constructional 
or operational details not given here, the manufacturer’s 
instructions supplied with the instrument shall be 
consulted. 
NOTE — The test specimen for the old model W.LR.A. shall 
weigh 6.0 g + 0.5 percent; and for the 2nd model, it shall 
weigh 2.5 g + 0.2 percent; and for the new model, it shall weigh 
4 g + 0.3 percent. 


C-1 ADJUSTMENT OF THE INSTRUMENT 


For preliminary calibration, adjust the instrument until 
the level of the liquid in the manometer tube coincides 


with the upper ‘zero’ mark. 


NOTE — The lower edge of the meniscus is observed when 
noting the length of the liquid column. 


C-2 CALIBRATION AND TESTING 


C-2.1 After preliminary adjustment, calibrate the 
instrument by using at least three ICAR-CIRCOT 
calibration cottons (see Annex A). 


C-2.2 Follow instructions given in 5, 6 and 8 for 
sampling, conditioning of samples and preparation of 
specimens to be tested. 


C-2.3 Follow instructions given in 9.1 to 9.5 for 
loading the specimen, closing the compression cylinder, 
and reading the gauge. 


C-2.4 Follow instructions given in 10 and 11 for 
calculating and reporting results. 
*Mention of the name of a specific (orproprietary) instrument 


is not intended to promote or give preference to the use of 
thatinstrument. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 9.1 ) 
OPERATION OF THE ATIRA FIBRE FINENESS TESTER* 


D-0 GENERAL 


Theinstrument developed by the Ahmedabad Textile 
Industry’s Research Association (ATIRA) measures 
the ‘Micronaire value’ Mc and ‘Maturity fineness’ MH 
of cottons on two separate scales. Cotton having Mc 
values in the range of 2.5 to 6.5 or MH values from 
1.5 to 7.0 may be tested on this instrument. Mc value 
is the micronaire value and MH value is the product 
of the maturity ratio and the fineness in micrograms 
per inch as obtained by weighing whole fibres. For any 
other constructional or operational details not given 
here, the manufacturer’s instructions supplied with the 
instrument shall be consulted. 


D-1 ADJUSTMENT OF THE INSTRUMENT 


D-1.1 Level the instrument accurately with the levelling 
screws provided. 


D-1.2 Check the level of the liquid in the manometer. 
The level shall coincide with the reference mark on the 
initial vertical portion of the manometric scale. If the 
level is lower, open the reservoir and top up with the 
provided manometric liquid. 


D-1.3 Squeeze the aspirator bulb, so that the float in the 
air tank rises to the top. As the float descends, gently 
close the fibre compression cylinder with the rubber 


IS 3674 : 2020 


stopper. See that the level ofthe manometer liquid stays 
between the limits marked on the final vertical section 
of the scale. 


D-2 CALIBRATION AND TESTING 


D-2.1 After preliminary adjustment calibrate the 
instrument by using the ICAR-CIRCOT calibration 
cottons (see Annex A). 


D-2.2 Follow the instructions given in 5, 6 and 8 for 
sampling, conditioning of samples and preparation of 
specimens to be tested. 


NOTE — The test specimen shall weigh 5.0 g + 0.2 percent. 


D-2.3 Follow the instructions given in 9.1 to 9.5 for 
loading the specimen, closing the compression cylinder 
and reading the gauge. 


D-2.4 Follow the instructions given in 10 and 11 for 
calculating and reporting the test result. 


*The ATIRA Fibre Fineness Tester is available at Ahmedabad 
Textile Industry's Research Association, Navrangpura, 
Ahmedabad-9. Mention of the name of a specific (or 
proprietory) instrument is not intended to promote or give 
preference to the use of that instrument. 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 9.1 ) 
OPERATION OF PORT-AR FIBRE FINENESS TESTER* 


E-0 GENERAL 


It is a portable Arealometer meant for use at places 
where the cotton is traded or processed. It is graduated 
in ‘equivalent fibrethickness’ in microns and micronaire 
units. The two scales are graduated from 3 to 7 microns 
and 2.5 to 7 micronaire units respectively. It measures 
a specimen of 8.0 g. It can be read to an accuracy of 
+ 0.05 micronaire unit. For any other constructional or 
operational details, not given here, the manufacturer’s 
instructions supplied with the instrument shall be 
consulted. 


E-1 ADJUSTMENT OF THE INSTRUMENT 


E-1.1 Place the instrument on a level surface and 
remove the cover. Check the zero of the permeability 
indicating meter. 


E-1.2 Place a weight of 8 g on the weighing scale and 
with the compression lever in the top position, adjust 
the zero screw until the permeability indicating meter 
reads near the red mark on the scale. 


E-1.3 Take approximately 8.0 g of cotton and place on 
the weighing scale. Give one stroke to the pump of the 
atomizer bulb and see whether the specimen is heavier 
or lighter than 8.0 g. If the indicator goes above the red 
mark, the specimen is heavier and if it goes below, the 
specimen is lighter. By taking off or adding bit by bit, 
adjust the specimen weight to 8.0 g. 


E-2 CALIBRATION AND TESTING 


E-2.1 After preliminary adjustment calibrate the 
instrument by using the ICAR-CIRCOT calibration 
cottons (see Annex A). 


E-2.2 Follow the instructions given in 5, 6 and 8 for 
sampling, conditioning of samples and preparation of 
specimens (respectively) to be tested. 


NOTE — The test specimen shall weigh 8.0 + 0.2 percent. 


E-2.3 Follow the instructions given in 9.1 to 9.5 for 
loading the specimen, closing the compression cylinder 
and reading the gauge. 


E-2.4 Follow the instructions given in 10 and 11 for 
calculating and reporting the test result. 


IS 3674 : 2020 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 9.1) 
OPERATION OF RAPID INSTRUMENT TESTING MACHINE (HVI TESTER)* 


F-1 SAMPLING FOR COTTON BALES 


Take one specimen from the bale sample. One specimen 
from each bale shall consist of two portions, one portion 
from each side of the bale. Take the specimen from the 
space between the wires or ties in such a way that each 
portion shall be 305 mm long and 154 mm wide. Weight 
of each portion shall be 114 g approximately so as to 
give a total specimen weight of 228 g approximately. 
NOTE — For sampling from laps, slivers or other source of 
lint cotton, sampling specified in 5.1 and 5.2 shall be followed. 


F-2 CALIBRATION AND TESTING 


F-2.1 Open the test sample with the fingers, breaking up 
lumps if any, and eliminating as much of the extraneous 
matter as possible. Condition the test sample as 
prescribed in 6.1. 


NOTE — If required by the buyer the opening of the test 
sample may be done by machine opening. 
F-2.2 Weight the specimen as per the equipment 
manufacture’s instruction and place the specimen into 
the instrument’s micronaire measurement area for 
testing. 


F-2.3 Follow instructions given in 9.1 to 9.5 for loading 
the specimen, closing the compression cylinder, and 
reading the gauge. 


F-2.4 Follow instructions given in 10 and 11 for 
calculating and reporting results. 
*Mention of the name of a specific (or proprietary) instrument 


is not intended to promote or give preference to the use of that 
instrument. 


IS 3674 : 2020 


ANNEX G 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION x 
Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TXD 01 


Organization 


ICAR - Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 

Bidhata Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Silk Technological Research Institute, 
Bangaluru 

Delta Ropes Mfg Co, Kolkata 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 

Garware Technical Fibres Limited, Pune 

ICAR - Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Indian Jute Industries Research Association, 
Kolkata 

Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkata 

Intertek India Pvt. Ltd, Mumbai 

Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 

North India Textile Research Association, 
Ghaziabad 

Office of Jute Commissioner, Kolkata 

Office of Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 

SGS India Pvt. Ltd, Chennai 

Testtex India Laboratories Pvt. Ltd, Mumbai 

Texanlab Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 

Textiles Committee, Mumbai 


Thanawala & Co, Mumbai 


The Arvind Mills Limited, Ahmedabad 


Representative(s) 
Dr P. G. Pati (Chairman) 


Suri R. K. PACHERIWALA 
SHRI RoHIT PACHERIWALA (Alternate) 


Dr Susuas V. NAIK 
Dr PRAKASH Buat (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND MAJARIA 
SHRI AAYUSH MANARIA (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. BORUAH 
SHRI S. S. KAsuyap (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY VASUDEO RAUT 

SHRI SACHIN KULKARNI (Alternate) 
DR PRADEEP MANDHYAN 

Dr T. SENTHILKUMAR (Alternate) 
Pror R. S. RENGASAMY 

ProF APURBA Das (Alternate) 
Ms SAUMITA CHOUDHURY 

Suri D. P. Gon (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. CHANDRA 

Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate I) 

SHRI RAMA SHANKAR UPADHYAY (Alternate II) 
SHRI NARAYAN B. BORADE 

SHRI HEMANT Paras (Alternate) 
SHRI YOGESH KUSUMGAR 

Dr M. K. TaLUKDARr(A/lternate) 
SHRI SANJEEV SHUKLA 

SHRIMATI NASRAH HIMAYAT Kiowa! (Alternate) 
SHRI SOMYADIPTA DATTA 

SHRI MAHADEB Dutta (Alternate) 
SHRI N. K. Gupta 

Suri JAMIL AHMAD (Alternate) 
Dr KARTHIKEYAN. K 

SHRIMATI ANITHA JEYARAJ (Alternate) 
SHRIMATI MEETA SHINGALA 

SHRI MAHESH SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRIHARIT SARDANA 

Ms Yojana Gawas (Alternate) 
SHRI KARTIKAY DHANDA 

Dr P. RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 
SHRI HEMAL THANAWALA 

SHRI UPENDERA THANAWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA KAJALE 
SHRIMATI MAMTA CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills’ Research 
Association, Mumbai 


Tirupati Technik, Mumbai 
TUV Rheinland (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurgram 


Uster Technologies India Pvt. Ltd, Mumbai 
VJTI, Mumbai 


Wool Research Association, Thane 
World Traders Manufacturing Co, Mumbai 
In personal capacity (B-21, Parijat, Talepakhadi, 


Eskar Road, Borivali, Mumbai-400091) 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 3674 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. A. SHAIKH 
SHRIMATI PRAGTI KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI A. A. SuDaM (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHAL MASAND 


SHRI CHARAN SINGH 
SHRI ASHOK MEHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAGDISH KULKARNI 


DR SURANJANA GANGOPADHYAY 
Dr S. P. BORKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SEEMA PATEL 
Suri Mayur Basuk(Alternate) 


SHRI VARUN GUPTA 
SHRI ADITYA Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr R. P. NACHANE 


Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 01 (14319). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


