NAT HIAF IS 17283 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


TAY Aas caaen AAN Ar 
IAN aaa 


Requirements for Good Aquaculture 
Practices — India GAqP CARPS 


ICS 67.120.30 


© BIS 2019 


anda NAK YO 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR NGA, 9 TAKANG TH AMT, ay Ret - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 5 


Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fish, Fisheries 
and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Considerable milestones have been reached in productivity of aquaculture products in the country. Concerns 
about food safety and quality, sustainability, environmental protection, worker safety and welfare have also 
gained importance. Thus, it is desirable to set up control and compliance systems for various kinds of aquaculture 
produce. In this context, it is necessary to pay attention to the quality of production practices requiring minute 
attention at different aspects of production, storage, handling and distribution. 


In India, aquaculture practices are highly localized occupations and display a lot of variability in cultural practices 
and varietal preferences across regions. Further, with the opening up of the world market, there is a flow of trade 
in the aquaculture products. It is, therefore, necessary to define and assign certain common minimum standards 
to facilitate trade in these products and to win the confidence of the consumers within the country and outside. 


Such standards envisaging focused approach for implementing good aquaculture practices, traceability etc. 
through appropriate infrastructure, record keeping and monitoring would reap following broad benefits: 


a) Development of basic infrastructure at the field level, 
b) Build up culture for good aquaculture practices by the farmers, 
c) Uniform approach across farms regardless of their sizes, 


d) Increased awareness among the producers as well as the consumers about the need for consumption of 
good quality and safe food, 


e) Traceability through complete integration of food chain, 

f) Improvement in the environment, 

g) Worker safety and welfare, 

h) Reputation in the international market as a producer of good quality and safe produce, and 

j) Overcoming the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs). 
This Standard is part of a series of Indian Standards on Good Aquaculture Practices under development. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been provided by Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research - Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture, Bhubaneswar (ICAR-CIFA). Contribution of Dr. P. C. 
Das, Principal Scientist, (ICAR-CIFA) is also duly acknowledged. 


IS 17283 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AQUACULTURE 
PRACTICES — INDIA GAgP CARPS 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard covers the control points and 
compliance criteria necessary to be followed by the 
producers (individual producers and/or members of 
a producer group) of freshwater carps. This standard 
applies to the good aquaculture practices (GAqP) to 
be followed at all stages of the production of carps 
in freshwater pond including practices followed for 
stocking, pond management, harvesting and post- 
harvest handlings prior to transportation to market. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
terminologies shall apply: 


21 Good Aquaculture Practices — Practices 
that address environmental, economic and social 
sustainability for on-farm processes, and result in safe 
and quality food and non-food aquaculture products. 


2.2 Applicant Producer/Producer Group — 
Individual/organization that has applied for certification 
to India GAqP certification body. 


2.3 Hazard — A biological, chemical and physical 
agent in/or condition of which have the potential to 
cause an adverse health effect. 


2.4 Individual Producer — A person/organization 
legally responsible for on farm production, who retains 
ownership of all the produce covered in the India GAqP 
licence. 


2.5 Inspection — An examination of all aquaculture 
practices in order to verify compliance to requirements 
specified in this standard. 


2.6 Record — Document showing objective evidence 
of the tasks performed and results achieved. 


2.7 Self-inspection — Internal inspection of the 
registered product carried out by the grower on his/her 
farm using control points and compliance criteria. 


2.8 Traceability — The ability to trace the history, use 
or location of a product (that is, the origin of materials 
and parts, processes applied to the product, or its 
distribution and placement after delivery) by means of 
a record. 


2.9 Worker — Any person on the farm who has been 
contracted to carry out a task. This includes farm 
owners and managers. 


2.10 Producer Group — A recognized group of 
producers applying for certification with an internal 
procedure and internal control of all the members 
registered to the India GAqP requirements, and 
complying the requirements as specified in this 
standard. 


2.11 Field — Separate unit of land within a farm. 


2.12 Farm — A farm is an agricultural production unit 
or roup of agricultural production units, covered by 
same operational procedures, farm management.- 


213 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
activity takes place including air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 


2.14 Customer — A customer is anyone who purchases 
products or services from a supplier. 


2.15 Certification — All actions leading to the issuance 
of an India GAqpP licence. 


2.16 Standard Operating Procedure — A written 
document which details an operation, analysis, or 
action whose mechanisms are prescribed thoroughly 
and which is commonly accepted as the method for 
performing certain routine or repetitive tasks. 


217 Major Requirement — The mandatory 
requirement that shall be fully complied with. In 
case of non-compliance, it will seriously affect the 
quality of freshwater aquatic animal as well as safety 
for consumers. It means that the requirement shall be 
complied with relevant laws and regulations as well. 


2.18 Minor Requirement — The requirement that shall 
be mostly complied with. In case of non-compliance, it 
will affect the health of freshwater aquatic animal or 
product quality. 


2.19 Veterinary Drug — Any substance applied or 
administered to any food-producing animal, whether 
used for therapeutic, prophylactic, or diagnostic 
purposes or for modification of physiological functions 
or behaviour. 


IS 17283 : 2019 


3 CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE 
CRITERIA 


3.1 Control points and compliance criteria required 
to be followed by the applicant producer (individual 
producer and/or member of a producer group) as well 
as by the certification body for independent verification 
of the aquaculture practices that have gone into the 
production of the produce are given in Table 1. In 
addition, the applicant producer (individual producer 
and/or member of a producer group) shall demonstrate 
compliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements. 


3.2 These criteria are marked as ‘Major’ or ‘Minor’ or 
‘Reco’. The criteria marked as ‘Major’ have a definite 
effect on the safety and quality of the produce and shall, 
therefore, be complied with, or shall give adequate 
assurance about the safety and quality of the produce. 
The criteria marked as ‘Minor’, though have a bearing 
on quality, and are those which, if implemented, would 
provide an advantage to the assessment for India GAqP 
certification. The criteria marked as ‘Reco’, are those, 
which though may not have direct bearing on safety 
and quality of produce but may have other benefits to 


the producer and are recommended for implementation 
and are advisory in nature. 


3.3 For the purpose of verification, a grading pattern 
given below shall be followed for grant of India GAqP 
licence: 


Compliance Compliance 
of Major of Minor 
Requirements Requirements 


Category 
of Licence 


(in Percent) (in Percent) 


India GAqP-- A 100 90 
India GAqP — B 100 80 
India GAqP — C 100 75 


4 BIS INDIA GAQP CERTIFICATION 


BIS India GAqP certification shall be as prescribed 
under the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 2016 and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. 
The details of the conditions under which the licence 
may be granted to producer (individual producer and/ 
or member of a producer group) may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


Table 1 Control Points and Compliance Criteria 
( Clause 3.1 ) 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 
1 LOCATION AND LAYOUT OF FISH FARM, SITE RECORD AND TRACEABILITY 
1.1 Identification and Major India GAqP registered produce a) Verify that the registered grower, society, 
traceability shall be traceable back to the farm and produce has been given a Code 
registered farm where it has been No. and a package of practice to be followed 
grown for accurate trace-back of the produce. 

b) Verify that the farm has a documented 
identification and traceability system that 
allows India GAqP registered product to 
be traced back to the farm, or, in a farmer 
group, to the registered farms 

c) Harvest information shall link a batch to the 
production records of the farms. Produce 
handling shall also be covered, if applicable. 
NOTE — The first traceability starts with 
the registration/identification number given 
to the farm. Next traceability is plot and 
batch identification. 

1.2 Farm location Minor Survey 8 No./Part-Survey No., Verify the location of the farm is complying to the 
village, tehsil, district, state where records 
the farm is located, total area 
under cultivation and area under 
India GAgP certification shall be 
specified 
1.3 Farm layout Minor Fields/plots and structures shall be Verify that ponds and other infrastructures are in 
identified on layout map of the farm place as per the layout of the farm 
Minor Availability of good water supply, Visual inspection of the design of water inlet 


inlet and outlet system 


and outlet system and water supply and drainage 
system among the ponds to prevent cross 
contamination 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


IS 17283 : 2019 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 
1.4 Vicinity of production Minor Vicinity of farm with reference to a) Find out the micro-climate of the area that 
area to potential risk chemical or other industries, saline affects the productivity, safety and quality 
source regime, agriculture fields, rivers, of the aquaculture product 
other water sources, hill rocks, and b) Verify measures taken to minimize 
reclaimed land shall be specified contamination 

1.5 Access to the farm Minor Convenient access to the farm from Visual inspection 
both outside and inside for easy 
farm operation and transportation 
of the inputs and produce 

2 SOIL AND WATER MANAGEMENT 

2.1 Soil Mapping Minor Land should be classified based on a) Verify that class of land has been decided 
topography, texture and structure based on prevailing land capability 
of soil, gradient, surroundings, etc. classification systems of the appropriate 
Soil maps should be prepared for authority. 
the farm. b) Verify that the type of soil is identified 

for each site based on a soil profile or soil 
analysis or local (regional) cartographic soil 
type map 

c) Verify that the analysis is carried out for 
the soil from actual depth of interest for 
farming the targeted species. 

2.2 Soil Health Minor Soil health shall be determined Verify that the soil is ideally suited for the species, 
based on physical and chemical based on soil reaction (Electrical conductivity, 
composition and soil profiling pH), soil nutrient status, etc. Refer soil analysis 

reports. 

2.3 Water source Major Water source can be surface water a) Verify that the water from source is free 
or ground water, and the source from any pollutants (pesticides, heavy 
need to be identified metals). 

b) Verify that the water supply and drainage 
are two separate system in the farm to avoid 
cross contamination 

2.4 Water quality Major Water quality shall be determined Verify that the water quality is suitable or is being 
based on standard chemical analysis monitored to provide ideal growing environment 

for the proposed carp species 

2.5 Waste water Major Effluent disposal should a) Verify that the effluent water is treated 

drainage Comply with relevant through treatment plant before release to 
i the environment 
laws and regulations f f 

b) Verify the quality of treated water before 
disposal 

3 GROWER RECORD 

3.1 Type of farming Reco Records relevant for the type of Verify the type of aquaculture activities and 
farming (co-operative, contract, relevant records 
lease farming, individual 
farmer, group farming/ public/ 

Governmental agencies) should be 
maintained 
32 Farm management Reco Grower’s accomplish-ment in a) Verify that farmer or the farm manager is 


capability 


farming, technical back ground in 
aquaculture, skills acquired and 
knowledge support available shall 
be documented. 


well versed in aquaculture through formal 
education, skill development training or 
experience 

b) Verify, if the farmer is getting technical 
know-how from Government or any other 
competent organization or individuals 


IS 17283 : 2019 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 
3:3 Maintenance of Minor Records on types of culture a) Verify that records are maintained for the 
records system, cultivated species, stocking species cultured in the particular system for 
density, cropping pattern shall be the current and previous growing seasons 
maintained and for a minimum period of six months for 
new applicants. 

b) Verify that records are maintained for the 
cropping pattern of particular farms and 
crop history of particular plots 

3.4 Retention period of Reco All records requested during the Verify that the producers keep up to date records 
records inspection shall be accessible and for a minimum of two years from the date of 
shall be kept for a minimum period “previous inspection 
of two years 
3.5 Internal evaluation Minor The  farmer/society/co-operative Verify that self-evaluation based on applicable 
body shall undertake internal self- criteria is conducted annually or seasonally during 
inspection on scheduling of crop crop duration 
production practices and shall 
exercise necessary supervision in 
their adoption 
3.6 Corrective Actions Major Effective corrective actions shall Verify, validate, implement and check 
be taken as a result of internal self- documentation of all corrective actions 
inspections. 
4 CULTURE SPECIES & SYSTEM 
4.1 Culture System Reco The culture system needs to be a) Verify that the culture system is specified 
specified b) Verify that the practitioner has basic 
knowledge and acquired skill to operate in 
the culture system 
4.2 Species Selection Major Culture species need to be selected Verify that species selected is suitable for the site 
based on market demand as well as and has good demand in the market. 
the soil and water quality of the site 
and climatic condition prevailing in 
the area 
4.3 Culture practice Major Culture practice to be followed Verify that the practitioner is trained/acquired 
need to be recorded knowledge and skill on the culture practice 
4.4 Cropping pattern Reco Cropping pattern recommended Verify that the cropping pattern recommended 
by State Agriculture Universities by State Agriculture Universities (SAUs)/ 
(SAUs)/National Research Institutes/ National Research Institutes/other Government 
other Govt. Organizations/Govt. organizations/ Government approved 
approved organizations shall be used organizations shall be used 
5 SEEDS 
5.1 Traceability of Seeds Major Seed procured from a reputed/ Verify that the seed used is procured from 
certified hatchery shall be used a reputed/certified hatchery and record is 
maintained on the procurement date and batch of 
seed production 
5.2 Quality of Seeds Major The seeds shall be active and a) Verify claim on seed, regarding size and 
apparently healthy, free from freedom from known diseases endemic to 
known major diseases of the the area. 
cultivated species. b) Verify that necessary documentation is 
maintained on verification of the claim 
5.3 Seed transport Reco Seed should be transported in Verify that the seed has been transported in 
hygienic conditions and with hygienic conditions and with minimum stress to 
minimum stress. Standard protocol the animals 
for seed transportation should be 
followed. 
6 NURSERY & REARING 
6.1 Pond Preparation Major The standard /recommended pond Verify that source of technology is documented 


preparation practices shall be 
followed. The source of technology 
shall be documented. 


Verify the records that standard/recommended 
practices have been followed during pond 
preparation 


SI No. 


Item 


Level 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Requirements 


IS 17283 : 2019 


Compliance Criteria 


6.2 


6.3 


6.4 


6.5 


6.6 


6.7 


6.8 


TAA 


7.2 


Stocking attributes 


Pond Environment 
Management 


Types of feed 


Daily feeding 


Health Management 


Harvesting 


Seed packing and 
transportation 


Minor 


Major 


Minor 


Minor 


Major 


Minor 


Minor 


Stocking size should be spawn 
(4-7 mm) and fry (20-30 mm) for 
the nursery and rearing phases, 
respectively, depending on the 
species and stocking density need 
to comply to recommendation of 
the source technology 


The standard pond management 
practices for maintaining optimum 
water quality (phased manuring, 
addition/exchange of water and 
aeration) need to be followed as 
per the demand of the species and 
system. 


Feed for the targeted species should 
be selected as per the production 
protocol. Feed should comply to 
recommended nutritional profile 
and should be farm-made or 
sourced from a reputed company 


Feeding to be done as per species 
behavior and actual requirement 


Routine health checkup of the 
stocked fish need to be conducted 
once in three weeks by cast net 
sampling. If any fishes are found 
to be affected by any diseases 
or external parasitic infestation 
then immediate corrective actions 
should be taken. 


The harvesting should be well 
planned to reduce the stress during 
harvest and subsequent mortality 
during transportation 


Seed should be packed in proper 
container bag filled with clear water 
and oxygen and packing density 
should comply to seed size and 
distance/time of transportation 


GROW-OUT CULTURE PRACTICES 


Pre-stocking pond preparation 


Pond preparation in 
acid-Sulphate soil 
region 


Preparation of dry 
and seasonal pond 


Preparation of 
perennial pond 


Stocking 


Major 


Major 


Major 


Soil reclaimation to be done to 
bring water pH to desirable level 
through 2 to 3 cycles of water 
filling-liming-draining of the pond 


Pond preparation to be done 
following suitable protocol of 
liming and application of organic 
manure 


Pond preparation to be done 
following suitable protocol of weed 
clearance, liming, application of 
organic manure 


Verify from the records that appropriate seed 
only are stocked and stocking density is as per 
recommendation of the source technology to 
achieve the desired final size in pre-define culture 
duration 


Verify from the records that the standard pond 
management protocol for maintaining water 
quality and pond environment are followed 


Verify that the nutritional value, forms of feed 
(sinking/semi-floating/ floating) and diameter of 
feed pellet suit the feeding behaviour and proper 
nutrition of the species 


Verify from the record if the daily ration is 
provided as per recommendation of source 
technology to avoid wastage of feed and curtail 
pollution of the pond environment 


Verify from the records that routine health 
checkup has been conducted and immediate 
corrective action has been taken whenever any 
abnormality noticed. 


Verify from the records that harvesting was well 
planned and carried out in an organized manner. 


Verify from the record that seed packaging and 
transportation are being made as per prescribed 
protocol 


Verify that the pH of soil and water is being 
maintained within suitable ranges of the cultured 
species 


Verify that pond preparation carried out with 
appropriate dosages of organic manures and lime. 


Verify from record if any unscrupulous chemicals 
having long retention period and ill effect on the 
food chain are used during pond preparation 


Verify that pond preparation carried out with 
prescribed use of lime, manures and chemical 
fertilisers as per the source technology. 


Verify that unscrupulous chemicals having long 
retention period and ill effect on the food chain 
are not used during pond preparation 


IS 17283 : 2019 


SI No. 


721 


7.2.2 


7.23 


7.3 
2:34 


7.3.4 


7.3.5 


Item Level 
Stocking Size Minor 
Acclimatization Minor 
Density and species Minor 


ratio 


Post-Stocking Pond Management 


Manuring and Minor 
fertilization 

Supplementary feed Minor 
and Feeding 

Pond environment Minor 
monitoring and 

management 

Health management Minor 
Reporting of disease Major 


outbreak 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Requirements 


Stocking size should not be 
less than fingerling or juveniles 
depending on the species, duration 
of culture and targeted production 


Seed to be acclimatized to the new 
pond condition prior to release 


Stocking density and species ration 
need to comply to recommendation 
of source technology 


Pond productivity should be 
maintained with interim application 
of lime, manures and fertilisers. 
Manuring must be stopped 15 days 
before harvest. 


Type of feed is selected based on 
feeding behavior and nutritional 
requirement of the cultured species. 
Feed should be farm-made or 
sourced from a reputed company 


Pond environment management is 
done following suitable protocols 
of liming, manuring, fertilization 


Periodic sampling of fishes 
for health check Management 
measure shall be considered prior 
to application of any therapeutics/ 
veterinary drugs/ chemicals in 
case of any abnormal symptom. 
Corrective measures should be 
taken up after preliminary diagnosis 


In case of disease outbreak, farmer 
shall immediately inform the nodal 
department 


Compliance Criteria 


Verify from the records that fingerling or 
juveniles are only stocked to achieve the desired 
final size in pre-defined culture duration 


Verify that proper seed acclimatization done 
prior to release to ensure higher survivability. 


a) 


b) 


a 


Nav] 


b 


Nas] 


a 


b 


Vw 


c 


wa 


a 


Nav] 


b 


Na 


c 


YS 


a 


Nav] 


b 


Na 


c 


YS 


d 


Tc 


a 


c 


b 


Na 


Verify that stocking density complies to 
the targeted production 


Verify that suitable species ratio 
maintained for effective utilisation of pond 
productivity and living space 


Verify from record that only recommended 
lime, fertilisers and organic manures 
are used for interim application and in 
prescribed dosage to maintain the natural 
productivity (plankton production 


Verify that manures and fertilisers applied 
as and when required in right dosage to 
avoid wastage and the deterioration of 
water quality 


Verify the nutritional claim of the feed 


Verify that the forms (sinking/semi- 
floating and floating) and size of the feed 
pellet suits the feeding behaviour 


Verify from record that daily feed ration 
is tailored to meet the actual requirement 
of feed to minimize wastage of feed and 
pollution 


Verify that record is maintained on water 
quality parameters and corrective measures 
taken to maintain the water quality within 
tolerance range of the cultured species 


Verify that pond environment management 
is done with appropriate protocol of 
interim liming, manuring and fertilization 
as per the source technology 


Verify if record of water transparency 
and plankton density is being maintained 
to give idea if natural food (plankton) 
available adequately in the pond 


Check the daily record of farming activity 
and verify from record on any disease 
incidence 


Check if the abnormal condition can be 
normalized through management measures 


Verify that effective preventive and 
prophylactic measures taken in case of any 
disease incidence. 


Verify that un-scrupulous chemicals are 
not used to cure or curtail the disease 
incidence. 


Verify the record of water quality and 
feeding schedule 


Verify for any earlier similar disease 
incidence and corrective measures taken 
thereafter and the fate of the measures to 
cure the disease 


SI No. 


8.2.1 


8.2.2 


8.2.3 


8.2.4 


9.2 


9:3 


Item Level 
Use of veterinary Major 
drugs and chemicals 
Harvesting Minor 


POST-HARVEST MANAGEMENT 


Live transport Reco 
Cold Chain Transport 

Sorting and Grading Reco 
Packing Reco 
Transport Reco 
Product Withdrawal Major 
and Recall 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


Requirements 


Use only permitted veterinary drugs 
and chemicals. 


The harvesting should be well 
planned to reduce the stress 
during harvest and subsequent 
deterioration of product quality. 


Transport harvested fish in live 
condition to main freshness of the 
product 


Harvested fishes are to be graded as 
per sizes. 


Packing is done to maintain product 
quality 


Harvested fish to be transported to 
the market 


Procedures for product withdrawal 


BUILDING, EQUIPMENT AND OTHER INFRASTRUCTURE 


Storage facility for Minor 
feed, feed ingredients, 
lime, fertilizers and 


other inputs 


Store facility for farm Reco 


implements 


Maintenance/ Minor 


calibration protocol 


Farm should have well ventilated 
storage facility for feed to maintain 
the feed quality during storage. 


Farm should have suitable 
provision to keep other inputs in 
good condition 


All farm implement should be 
orderly placed hygienically in store 


Maintenance schedule/Plan of farm 
machinery 


a) 


b) 


IS 17283 : 2019 


Compliance Criteria 


Verify the application record of veterinary 
drugs and chemical undertaken as 
corrective measures of the disease 
incidence. 


Verify the record of carcass characteristics 
and effluent water. 


Verify from the records that harvesting was well 
planned and carried out in an organized manner. 


a) 


b) 


Verify that live fishes are transported in 
suitable container 


Verify that chemicals having adverse effect 
on fish and pond productivity is avoided 


Verify that harvested fishes are graded before sale 
to fetch size specific sale price. 


a) 


b) 


a) 


b) 


a) 


b) 


c) 


a) 


b) 
c) 


Verify that the harvested fishes are properly 
packed to ensure better quality 


Verify that packing is done with approved 
packaging materials. 


Verify that appropriate fish : ice ratio 
maintained in pack based on transport 
distance and duration to maintain product 
quality during short and long-term 
transportation in cold chain 


Verify that no unscrupulous chemicals/ 
anti-biotic used during the packaging to 
extend the keeping quality 


Verify that each product batch is given 
a number for tracing back in case of 
withdrawal 


Verify that a procedure for withdrawing 
the product consignment is available. 


Verify from record and interview with the 
workers regarding any history of product 
withdrawal in the farm 


Visual inspection to verify that the store is 
clean, well ventilated and protected from 
moisture and has provision to store feed 
bags in stacks 


Verify that the store is free from rodents. 


Verify that the limes and other chemicals 
and fertilizers are of fresh stocks and are 
being stored properly 


Visual inspection 


a) 


b) 


Verify that the farm implements are 
maintained properly 


Verify the record that all measuring 
implements such as balance, gadgets 
for water quality monitoring, etc. are 
calibrated periodically as per requirement 


IS 17283 : 2019 


SI No. 


94 


10 
10.1 


10.2 


10.3 


11 


11.2 


11.3 


11.4 


12 
12.1 


13 
13.1 


Item Level 
Office building Reco 
HYGIENE IN FARM 
Discharge water from Major 
pond 
No discharge of Major 
domestic waste or 
animal house waste 
Toilet in farm Major 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


Requirements 


Well-equipped office and laboratory 


Treatment of discharge water in 
effluent treatment system (ETS) 
before release to environment 


Farm should be free from receiving 
any household waste or waste and 
wash water from animal shed 


Hygienically designed toilet should 
be located at safe distance from the 
pond 


PERSONAL HYGIENE AND WELFARE 


Personnel Hygiene Minor 
Sanitary facilities Minor 
Visitors Reco 
Amenities Reco 


TRAINING TO FARM PERSONNEL 


Training Requirements Reco 


RECORD KEEPING 


Maintenance of record Minor 


All workers should be free from 
any contagious disease. This should 
be ensured through periodic health 
screening of workers. 


Avoidance of contamination from 
human source 


Only authorized access only in 
certain area after proper sanitary 
measures 


Designated and well maintained 
areas scaled as per the number of 
farm workers for sitting and dining 


Assessment of training requirement 
for the personnel for fish farming 
and handling of farm implements 


All the major activities of the 
farm, records of employee, culture 
operation, input use, disease 
incidence, fish growth, harvest and 
sale records should be maintained 


Compliance Criteria 


a) verify the farm has a good laboratory for 
soil and water quality management 


b) Visual observation of the office room for 
facility like discussion table and other 
accessories inside for record keeping and 


sitting 


Verify that the farm should have a well-designed 
ETS to treat the discharge water before it release 
and this water should not contaminate the source 
water 


Visual inspection 


Verify the location of the toilet and its storage 
chamber to be at safe distance to prevent possible 
sewage contamination 


Verify the records of medical examination and 
health screening of workers 


Verify that proper facilities (hand washing, 
clean clothing, clean toilet) are available for the 
workers in the farm 


Verify the facility that is used (clean clothing, 
using chlorinated water for washing feet, etc.) to 
avoid contamination from the visitor, especially 
in the hatchery system 


Visual Inspection 


a) Verify from record that personnel have 
basic training on farming 


b) Verify that the personnel have been given 
refresher course periodically on the recent 
techniques of carp farming and post- 
harvest handling 


Verify that all these records are maintained 


IS 17283 : 2019 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Jena, J.K. and Das, P.C., 2011. Carp culture, in: Verma, S.A., Kumar, A.T., Rahman, O., radhan, S. (Eds.), 
Hand Book of Fisheries and Aquaculture. pp 1116 (Second Revised Edition). Directorate of Knowledge 
Management in Agriculture (DKMA), Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, p. 380-400. 


2. Jena, J.K., Das, P.C., Das, B.K., Mohapatra, B.C., Sarangi, N., Modayil, M.J., Vass, K.K., Ravichandran, 
P., Ponniah, A.G., Syda Rao, G., Eknath, A.E. and Ayyappan, S., 2009. Aquaculture Technologies for 
Farmers. Revised Edition, ICAR, New Delhi. pp. 126. 


3. Sahoo, P.K., Mohanty, J., Das, P.C., Mohanta, K.N., Barik, N.K., Jayasankar, P., 2012. CIFA: 25 Year of 
Freshwater Aquaculture Research, CIFA, Bhubaneswar. pp 196. 


IS 17283 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, 
Barrackpore 


Central Institute of Brackish Water Aquaculture, 
Chennai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), 
Cochin 


Central Institute of Fresh Water Aquaculture, 
Bhubaneswar 


Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Kochi 


Coastal Aquaculture Authority, Chennai 


Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 
Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


Fisheries Division, DAHD&F, Min. of Agriculture, 
Gol, New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


National Fisheries Development Board, Hyderabad 


National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology 


and Training (NIFPHATT), Cochin 
Sea Food Exporters Association of India, Alleppy 


Society of Aquaculture Professionals, Chennai 


The Marine Products Export Development Authority 


(MPEDA), Kochi 


Kerala University of Fisheries and Ocean Studies, 
Kochi 


All India Shrimp Hatchery Association 


Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 


Representative(s) 
Dr JoyKRUSHNA JENA, (Chairperson) 


Dr Bisay KUMAR BEHERA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA KUMAR MEENA (Alternate) 


Dr K. AMBASANKAR 
Dr SUBHENDU KUMAR OTTA (Alternate) 


Dr GoPAL KRISHNA 
DR B. B. Nayak (Alternate) 


Dr K. AsHoK KUMAR 
Dr MADHUSUDANA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr KEDAR NATH MOHANTA 
Dr P. C. Das (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. ABDUL NAZAR 


ProF R. JAYARAMAN 
Suri S. MANI (Alternate) 


Dr N. GOPALAN 
SHRI R. M. MANDALIK 


SHRI PAUL PANDIAN 
SHRI I. A. SIDDIQUI (Alternate) 


Ms VINITA VERMA 
Dr RasesH KUMAR (Alternate) 


ExECUTIVE DIRECTOR (TECHNICAL) 


SHRI V ARGHESE JOHN 
MR KAMAL RAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI NORBERT KARIKKASSERY 
PRESIDENT 


Joint DIRECTOR 
Deputy DIRECTOR (QC) (Alternate) 


Dr T. V. SANKAR 


SHRI D. RAMRAJ 
SHRI K. MADHUSUDAN REDDY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. RAJESH, 
HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT) 


Member Secretary 


Ms Navita YADAV 


SCIENTIST ‘C’ (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 12 (14332). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern. : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


