( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS:4878

- 1986

Indian Standard
BYELAWS FOR CONSTRUCTION CINEMA BUILDINGS OF

( First Revision
Building Byelaws Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI H. K. MEWADA 18 Saurabh Society, Ahmadabad Members P. D. AQARWAL

)

BDC

25

SHRI

Representing Public Works Department, Pradesh, Lucknow

Government

of Uttar

SHRI R. K. MATHUR (Alternate) SHRI CHANDRA BALLABH CHIEP ARCHITECT

Institute of Town Planners India, New Delhi Central Public Works Department (CDO, Library ), New Delhi

SR ARCHITECT ( D ) I ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( DEVELOPMENT Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Bombay PLAN ) D~~rtrrY Crrv ~,NQ~NIZ~~II. ( AIlernate ) De~rr~y CI~IEF ENQINEER ( P & D ) Railway Board, New Delhi Ministry of Works & Housing ( CPHEEO ), SHRI T. DURARIILAJ New Delhi Madras Municipal Corporation, Madras ENGINEER Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI T. N. GUPTA Roorkee SHRI B. B. GARQ (Alternate ) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay PROF G. S. H. JHABWELA Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, SIIR? M.-N. JOQLEKAR New Delhi Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI P. B. KUMB~ARE New Delhi SRRI S. A. PAWASEAR ( Alternate ) The Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel kR1 K. S. LAULY Industry, Dandeli ( North Kanara ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi S~JRI .GC. MATHUR SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Organization, Town & Country Planning SHRI G. D. MATHUR New Delhi ( Continued on page 2 ) f$J Cofiwight BUREAU OF INDIAN 1987 STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright AC; ( XIV of' 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 4878 - 1986
( Contbued from page 1 ) Members SJIRI B. B. NANDA SIIRI D. G. PANDYA S~IRXB. K. PATEL SHRI N. J. PATEL( Alternate) SARI JAMNADAS T. PATEL Representing Institution of Engineers ( India ), New Delhi Delhi Municipal Corporation, Delhi Panchayat, Housing & Urban Development Department, Ahmadabad Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmadabad personal capacity (Parkland Law Garden, Ahmadabad ) Corporation of Calcutta, Calcutta Kanvinde & Rai, New Delhi Public Works Department, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi Ministry of Labour Director General, BIS ( Ex-ojicio Member ) In

SHRI P.J. MEHTA

SHRI BIMAL KRISHNA ROY SHRISRALJKAT RAI TOWN&COUNTRY PLANNER SHRI J. K. VARS~NEYA SHRI VIJAY KUMAR SHRI R. K. GOPTA (Alternate ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

Secretary Deputy Director

SHRI S. K. JAIN

( Civ Engg ), BIS

Cinema

Houses Subcommittee,

BDC 25 : 1

Convener SHRI JAMNADAS T. PATEL Parkland Law Garden, Ahmadabad Members

SHRI R. P. ANAND

SHRI S. K. BANERJEE

Theatre Owner's Association, Bombay Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Delhi All India Radio, New Delhi Home Department, Government of Gujarat Delhi Municipal Corporation ( Delhi Service ), New Delhi Cinematograph Exhibitors Association of Bombay

New

SHRI H. C. JAYAL ( Alternate) SRRI M. R. BHATT COMMISSIONEROB POLICE SHRI S. K. DHERI

Fire

SHRI PRAN LAL K. DOSHI
SRRI SOLI P. ARYA ( DR P. R. DUTT

India,

Ministry of Health, Family Planning & Urban DeveloDment. New Delhi EXECZJTIVEENQINEER ( BUILDINQS ) Delhi Muni'cipal Corporation, Delhi Administration, Licensing Authority, Delhi SJ~RIMATI B. JINDQAI~ Delhi ( Continued ox page 74 )

Alternote)

2

1s : 4878 - 1986 CONTENTS
0. FOREWORD 1. SCOPE ... .. . . .. . _. .. . ._. . .. .. . .. . ... . .. ... .. . ..* ... ._. ... . .. .. . .. . .. . ... ... .. . .. . .. . .. . ... ._. ._. ._ . .. ___ . .. .. . ... .. . ... . . ... PAGE 5

7
7 14 26 27 29 29 30 30 33 40 40 40 45 49 57 60 61 62

2. TERMINOLOGY 3. ADMINISTRATION PART 1 4. MEANS OF ACCESS 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.

PERMANENT
. ..

CINEMA
. .. .. . ._. .. . .__ ... _.. . .. .__ ._.

BUILDINGS

5. SITE REQUIREMENTS . ._
. .. OPEN SPACES AREA AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES EXIT REQUIREMENTS .. . STRUCTURAL SAFETY . . . FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS FIRE PROTECTION .. .

REQUIREMENTSOF PARTS OF BUILDINGS

CONSTRUCTIONALPRACTICESAND SAFETY

16. REQUIREMENTSFOR WATER SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SANITATION PART 2 SEMI-PERMANENT CINEMA BUILDINGS
. .. .._ ... 17. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 18. RESTRICTIONSON THE GRANT OF No OBJECTION CERTIFICATES

19. OTHER REQUIREMENTS

._.

...

.. .

APPENDICES
63 APPENDIX A NOTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF CINEMA BUILDING APPENDIX B NOTIFICATION.FORGRANT OF No OBJECTIONCERTIFICATE 64 65 . .. APPENDIX C No OBJECTION CERTIFICATE .. . APPENDIX D APPLICATION FOR CINEMA BUILDING PERMIT/LICENCE APPENDIX E FORM FOR SUPERVISION .._ 66 67 ... ... APPENDIX F GUIDE FOR THE QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEDARCHITECTS 68 AND ENGINEERS ... ... ... .. 69 APPENDIX G FORM FOR SANCTION OR REFUSAL OF BUILDING PERMIT 70 ... APPENDIX H FORM FOR NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT APPENDIX J FORM FOR COMPLETIOP~ CERTIFICATE... APPENDIX K FORM FOR OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE _. ... APPENDIX L OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES . .. . .. .. . 71 72 73

3

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

lSr4878-1986

Indian Standard
BYELAWS FOR CONSTRUCTION CINEMA BUILDINGS OF

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 December 1986, after the draft finalized by the Building Byelaws Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Cinema is a very important and effective medium of communication of thought and expression, especially to the masses in the out of the way places. In India, the number of places exhibiting cinema films is quite inadequate to meet even the minimum needs of the country. Moreover, many of the existing ones do not meet some of the basic requirements of listening conditions, fire safety, public health in respect of ventilation, State Governments sanitary arrangements, lighting, exits, etc. Various have been promoting their own legislation to regulate, design, construction and operation of cinemas and also have framed rules for the day-to-day administration of the various provisions.

0.2.1Existing byelaws for the construction of cinema buildings in this country differ considerably from State to State. A need has, therefore, been felt to unify them, to ensure the orderly development of new cinema buildings with regard to various requirements. With this end in view, these byelaws have been formulated to provide guidance for orderly development of new cinema buildings. Therefore this standard was first published in 1968.
0.3 Provisions of this standard have been made flexible to accommodate the variations for choice of materials, methods of construction requirements, etc, to cater to the various local conditions, such as different climatic conditions and availability of materials. 0.4 Wherever reference to building the cinema building in question. occurs in the context, it shall mean

5

I$ : 4818 - 1986
0.5 This standard is intended chiefly to provide a model set of rules and regulations for the construction and maintenance of places exhibitmg cinematographic films and it does not include the legal provisions regarding the grant, procedure for cinema licences, licence for sale of tickets and similar administrative details for the running of the cinema houses. 0.6 After the publication of the first version of Indian Standard Code in 1968, considerable comments were received from various ,user agencies like enforcing authorities, cinema theatre owners, practising architects and engineers as well as cinematographic equipment manufacturers for suggesting additions, modifications in certain clauses and deletion of certain provisions. Accordingly, the work on first revision of Indian Standard was undertaken. This revision contains the following major changes . with respect to provisions of the Indian Standard Code of 1968: a) b) Rationalization of definitions;

Streamlining the administrative procedures for various clearances to ensure orderly and safe development of building construction activity; provisions on means of access have been added;

c) Detailed

d) Off-street parking spaces required for cars, motor cycles, scooters and cycles have been covered for the first time depending upon the class of city designated population-wise; e) Open g) h) spaces are specified in more rational fashion; covered in detail; cabin, bounparapet, f ) Requirements for projection room have been

Requirements for theatre foyer, basement, dary wall, etc, have been included;

Exit requirements have been spelt out in a detailed and performance oriented fashion regarding the location, number and dimension and types of doors, corridors, stair-cases and ramps; been related only to rule provisions have

j ) Provisions related to structural design have Indian Standard design codes and thumb been deleted;

k) The visibility requirements have been spelt out to remove certain ambiguities as well as to take into account the various projection techniques and different types of screen adopted. This is particularly relevant in the context of the distance between first row and screen; m) The requirements specifically; regarding regarding seating electrical have been spelt out more have been

n) The requirements added;

installations

6

fS : 4878 - I986 of fire protection have been re-written keeping Pi The requirements in view and use of the standard by removing all the general clauses and by elaborating specific requirements; of sanitary installations q) The requirements bring it in line with the Indian Standards r ) The necessary provisions have been introduced. 0.7 for have been revised on the subject; and cinema codes: to

semi-permanent on the following

buildings

This code has been based largely SP : 7-1983 SP : 30-1984 National NationaI Building Electrical

Code of India Code

1983 Rules of Karna-

0.7.1 Assistance has also been derived from the Cinema taka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and other states.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code covers administrative regulations, development control rules and general building requirements; fire protection requirements; rules for design of electrical installations, lighting, air-conditioning and lifts; regulations for ventilation, acoustics visibility conditions, sealing arrangements, and regulations for maintenance of water supply, drainage and sanitation; use and occupancy of places exhibiting cinematographic equipment, films. 1.2 The requirements of this code shall be held to requirements in the interest of public health, comfort construction of cinema houses. be the minimum and safety in the cons-

1.3 The provisions of this code deal with the requirements for the truction of permanent and semi-permanent cinema buildings. 2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose of this code, the following

definitions

shall apply.

2.1 Advertising Sign - Any surface or structure with characters, letters or illustrations applied thereto and displayed in any manner whatsoever out of doors for purposes of advertising or to give information regarding or to attract the public to any place, person, public performance, article or merchandise whatsoever, and which surface or structure is attached to forms part of or is connected with any building, or is fixed to a tree or to the ground or to any pole, screen, fence or hoarding or displayed in space. 7

IS 8 4878 -

1986

2.2 Air-Conditioning - The process of treating air so as to control simultaneously its temperature, humidity, purity and distribution to meet the requirements of conditioned space, 2.3 Aisles - The ganways left within walking into or out of a group of seats. and around the seating area for

2.4 Alteration - A change from one occupancy to another or a structural change, such as, an addition to the area or height, or the, removal of part of a building, or any change to the structure, such as, the construction of, cutting into or removal of any wall, partition, column, beam, joist floor or other support, or a change to or closing of any required means of ingress or egress or a change to the fixtures or equipment. 2.5 Approved Approved by the Authority having jurisdiction.

2.6 Authority Having Jurisdiction - The Authority which has been created by a statute and which, for the purpose of administering, the code may authorize a committee or an official to act on its behalf, hereinafter called the `Authority'. 2.7 Auditorium - An enclosure, covered or open, where people assemble for watching a performance given on the stage, or screen. 2.8 Balcony-A horizontal projection, to serve as passage or sitting out place. including a handrail can

or balustrade,

2.9 Balcony Floor - Extra floor constructed over part of the house for seating additional audience which may or may not project beyond the rear wall. 2.10 Balcony Soffit The under surface The lower of the balcony storey of within the hall. or

2.11 Basement or Cellar partly below ground level.

a building

below

2.12 Building - Any structure for whatsoever purpose and of whatsoever materials constructed and every part thereof whether used as human habitation or not and includes foundation, plinth, walls, floors, roofs, chimneys, plumbing and building services, fixed platforms, verandah, balcony, cornice or projection, part of a building or anything affixed thereto or any wall enclosing or intended to enclose any land or space and signs and outdoor display structures. Tents, SHAMIAhLgHS, tarpaulin shelters, etc, erected for temporary and ceremonial occasions with the permission of the Authority shall not be considered as building.

8

in the case 2.13 Building, Height of - The vertical distance measured, of fat roofs, from the average level of the ground around and contiguous to the building or as decided by the Authority to the highest point of the building adjacent to the street wall; and in the case of pitched roofs, up to the point where the external surface of the outerwall intersects the finished surface of the sloping roofs and in the case of gables facing the road, the mid-point between the eaves level and the ridge. Architectural features serving no other function except that of decoration shall be excluded for the purpose of measuring heights. 2.14 Building Line - The line up to which the plinth of a building adjoining a street or an extension of a street or on a future street may lawfully extend. It includes the lines prescribed, if any, in any scheme. The building line may change from time to time as decided by the Authority. 2.15 Cabin ing partition. 2.16 Ceiling the ceiling. A non-residential Height enclosures constructed of non load bearthe floor and

The vertical

clear distance

between

or horizontal structural overhang usually 2.17 CUzajja - A sloping provided over openings on external walls to provide protection from sun and rain. 2.16 Cinema - An auditorium pictures projected on a screen films. 2.19 Combustible a fire when tested 1979*. where the performance is in the form of through exhibition of cinematographic or adds heat to with IS : 3aoa-

Material - A material, if it burns for non-combustibility in accordance

2.20 Covered Area - Ground area covered by the building immediately above plinth level. The area covered by the following in the open spaces is excluded from covered area: Garden, rockery, a> pool, swimming well and well structures, plant nursery, water pool ( if uncovered ), platform round a tree, tank, fountain, bench, chabutra with open top and unenclosed on sides by walls and the like; drainage, culvert, and the like; uncovered and conduit, catch-pit, gully pit, chamber, gutter

b)

C>compound
*Method

wall, gate, unstoreyed porch and portico, slide, swing, staircases, areas covered by chhujja and the like;
of building materials (jrst revision ).

of test for non-combustibility

9

d) Watchman's booth, pump house, garbage shaft, electric sub-stations, and such other utility structures meant services of the building under consideration.
NOTE - For the purpose of these byelaws, minus the area due for open spaces. covered area equals the

cabin or for the
plot area

2.21 Drain - A conduit or channel or other used water. 2.22 Drainage the purpose. The removal

for the carriage

of storm water, sewage constructed for

of any liquid by a system

2.23 Echo - A distinct and clearly discernible reflected sound received at a point within the enclosure when any sound emanates from any part of that enclosure. A quick succession of such echoes is called flutter or flutter echo. 2.24 Enclosed Staircase - A staircase and doors from the rest of the buildings. 2.25 Enclosure - The apparatus is erected. portion separated in which by fire resistant the walls

of a place

cinematograhic any building,

2.26 Exit - A passage, channel or means of egress from storey or floor area to a street or other open space of safety. 2.27 Fire and/or Emergency Alarm System - An for points or detectors, souuders and other equipments and indication of alarm signals, for testing of circuits and red for the operation of auxiliary services. This device automatically or manually to alert the occupants in the other emergency. 2.28 Fire Resisting fire resistance. 2.28.1 Material A material

arrangement of the transmission whenever requimay be workable event of fire or degree of

which has certain

Fire Resirtance - The time during which it fulfils its function to the fire safety of a building when subjected to prescribed conditions of heat and load or restraint. The fire resistance test of structures shall be done in accordance with IS : 3809-1979*.

of contributing

2.29 Floor - The lower surface in a storey on which one normally in a building. The general term, `floor', unless otherwise specifically tioned shall not refer to a mezzanine floor.

walks men-

NOTE - The sequential numbering of floor shall be determined by its relation to the determining entrance level. For floors at or wholly above ground level, the lowest floor in the building with direct entrance from the road/street shall be termed as Floor 1. The other floors above Floor 1 shall be numbered in sequence as Floor 2, Floor 3, etc, in ascending order.
*Specification for fire resistance test of structures

( jirsl fcvision).

10

fs : 4878- i986
2.30 Floor Slope - Floor slope is the inclination at which, slopes to the horizontal. It may be positive that is sloping down screen end; negative that is sloping down from the screen end rear of the auditorium and compound, that is consisting partly partly of negative and may have a portion level in between. 2.31 Foyer - Hall in front of the entrance wait before actually entering the auditorium. in which the seating towards the towards the of positive, may

the audience

2.32 Gallery - An intermediate floor or platform projecting from a wall or' an auditorium or a hall providing extra floor area, additional seating accommodation, etc. 2.33 Head Room - The vertical distance between the floor and the ceiling. Where a finished ceiling is not provided, the under side of the joints or beams or tie beams shall determine the upper point of measurement. 2.34 Licensed Architect/Engineer has been licensed by the Authority. 2.35 Lobby open. 2.36 Lounge Passage Sitting A qualified architect/engineer who

or small ante-room,

into which one or more rooms

room or place for relaxation.

2.37 Non-combustible Material - A material which neither burns not gives off inflammable vapours in sufficient quantity to ignite a pilot flame ( see2.19 ). 2.38 Non-inflammable Materials - Materials in which charring or scorching does not reach the edge of the face of a 152.4 mm unperforated square sheet or to 76.2 mm from the point of application of the spirit flame when a large sheet is tested and which, when a perforated sheet is tested, does not continue to glow or carry flame after the spirit test flame has burnt out. 2.39 Open Space -An to the sky. area, forming an integral part of the plot, left open

2.39.1 Front Open Space - An open space extending across the front of a plot between the side open space lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof other than steps. Unenclosed balconies and unenclosed porches. 2.39.2 Rear Open Space - An open space extending across the rear of a plot measured between plot boundaries and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear plot boundary and the rear of the building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. 11

2.39.3 Side Oflen Space - An open space between the building and the side line of the plot and extending from the front line to the rear line of the plot and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side boundary line and the sides of the building or any other projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. 2.40 Owner - The word, when used in reference to any premises, means the person who receives the rent of the said premises or would be entitled to do so if the premises were let out. It also includes the following:

4 b)

An agent owner;

of trustee

who

receives

such

rent

on behalf

of the

A receiver, executor or administrator or a manager appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction to have the charge of, or exercise the rights of, an owner of the said premises; agent or trustee who receives the rent of or is entrusted with or is concerned with any premises devoted to religious or charitable purposes; to the terms of lease, is emalong the edge of a roof or a

Cl An

4 A mortgage in possession; and e) Occupier or licensee, who according
powered to act on behalf 2.41 Parapet floor. A low wall or railing built

of the owner.

2.42 Parking Space - An area enclosed or unenclosed sufficient in size to park vehicles together with a drive way connecting the parking spaces with a street or public place and permitting easy ingress and egress of the vehicle. 2.43 Plinth - The surrounding ground ground. portion of a and surface structure between the surface of the of the floor, immediately above the on pillars or otherwise to a building. for the

2.44 Porch - A covered surface supported purpose of pedestrian or vehicular approach

2.45 Road or Street - Any means of access, namely, highway, street lane, pathway, alley, stairway, passageway, carriageway, footway, square, place or bridge, whether a thoroughfare or not, over which the public have a right of passage or access or have passed and had access uninterruptedly for a specified period, whether existing or proposed in any scheme, and includes all bunds, channels, ditches, storm water drains, culverts, sidewalks, traffic islands, roadside trees and hedges, retaining walls, fences, barriers and railing within the road lines. 12

IS:4878 2.46 Road/Street Line -

- 1986

The line defining the side limits of a road.

2.47 Sanctioned Plan - The set of plans and specification submitted under the code in connection with a building and duly approved and sanctioned by the Authority. 2.48 Semi-Permanent Cinema Building - A building which is constructed of non-inflammable materials, as is generally used for the construction with side walls of 1 ,O m high plastered over which durable black canvas, tarpaulin curtains or other suitable materials shall be provided SO as to shut off light and afford shelter from rain. 2.49 Site ( Plot ) boundaries, A parcel ( piece ) of land enclosed by definite

2.50 Storey - The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or if there be no floor above it then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
2.51 Street Level or Grade - The officially established elevation of the centre line of the street `upon which a plot fronts and if there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of the street at its mid-' point.

2.52 To Erect -

To erect a building means:

a) To erect a new building on any site whether previously built upon or not; b) To,re-erect any building of which portions above the plinth level have been pulled down, burnt or destroyed; and
C)

Conversion from one occupancy

to another.

2.53 Travel Distance - The distance from the remotest point on a floor of a building to a place of safety be it a vertical exit, horizontal exit or an. outside exit measured along the line of travel. 2.54 Ventilation - Supply of outside air into or the removal air from an enclosed space. 2.55 Water Closet ( WC ) - A privy with arrangement pan with water. It does not include a bathroom. 2.56 Zoning Regulations approved by the Authority,
-

of inside,

for flushing the' land use

Any regulation

or plan govering

13

IS t 4878 - 1986
3. ADMINISTRATION 3.1 Applicability of the Code

3.1.1 Where a building is erected, the Code applies to the design and construction of the building.

3.1.2 Where the whole or any part of the building is removed, Code applies to all parts of the building whether removed or not.

the

3.1.3 Where the whole or any part of the building is demolished, the Code applies to any remaining part and to the work involved in demolition. 3.1.4 Where a building is altered, the Code applies to the whole building whether existing or new except that the Code applies only to part if that part is completely self contained with respect to facilities and safety measures required by the Code.
NOTE- In the case of existing cinema buildings, the Code shall not apply to the whole of cinema building for alterations if the alterations result in increase in conveniences, safety, etc, without increase in seating capacity. 3.1.5 Existing Buildings Nothing in the Code shall require the removal, alteration or abandonment, nor prevent continuance of the use or occupancy of an existing buildin,,o unless in the opinion of the Authority, such building constitutes a hazard to the safety of the adjacent property or the occupants of the building itself.

3.2 Interpretation
3.2.1 The heading which appears at the beginning of a clause or subclause of the Code shall be deemed to be a part of such clause or subclause respectively.

3.2.2 The use of present tense includes the future tense, the masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter, the singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word `person' includrs a corporation as well as an individual; writing includes printing .and typing and `signature' includes thumb impression made by a person who cannot write if his name is written near to such thumb impression. 3.3 Alternative
and Tests 3.3.1 The provision of the Code are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of design or construction not specifically prescribed by the Code, provided any such alternative has been approved. 14

Materials,

Methods

of Design

and

Construction

IS : 4878 - 1986

Authority may _ alternative provided it is _ _ approve any such ^ 3.3.2 __ The _ tound that the proposed alternative is satisfactory and conforms to the provisions of relevant parts regarding material, design and construction and that material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended at least equivalent to that prescribed in the Code in quality, strength compatibility, effectiveness, fire and water resistance, durability and safety. 3.3.3 Tests - Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the Code or evidence that any material or method of design or construction does not conform to the requirements of the Code or in order to substitute claims for alternative materials, design or methods of construction the Authority may require tests sufficient in advance as proof of compliance. These tests shall be made by an approved agency at the expense of the owner. 3.3.3.1 Test methods shall be as specified by the code for the materials or design or construction in question. If there are no appropriate test methods specified in the code, the Authority shall determine the test procedure. For methods of test for building materials, reference may be made to relevant Indian Standards. 3.3.3.2 Copies of the results of all such tests shall be retained by the Authority for a period of not less than two years after the acceptance of the alternative material. 3.4 Enforcement
3.4.1 The provisions of this code shall be enforced by the Authority or by a committee or an official or officials duly appointed by the Authority for such purpose.

3.4.2 Records - The Authority shall keep proper records of all applications received, permits and orders issued, inspections made and shall retain copies of all papers and documents connected with the administration of its duties. 3i4.3 Inspection - The Authority may, at any resonable time, enter into or building or premises for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this Code are being complied with. 3.4.4 Construction not According to Plan - Should the Authority determine at any stage that the construction is not proceeding according to the sanctioned plan or is in violation of any of the provisions of these byelaws, or any other applicable code, regulation, act or byelaw, it shall notify the owner, and all further construction shall be stayed until correction has been effected and approved,

Is: 487a1986
3.4.4.1 Should the owner fail to comply with the requirements at any stage of construction, the Authority is empowered to cancel the building permit issued and shall cause notice of such cancellation to be securely posted upon the said construction, if the owner is not traceable at his address given in the notice. Posting of such a notice shall be considered sufficient notification of cancellation to the owner thereof. No further work shall be undertaken or permitted upon such construction until a valid building permit thereafter has been issued. If the owner, in violation of the notice for cancellation, continues the construction the Authority may take all necessary means to stop such work. 3.4.5 Qfences and Penalties - Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of the Code of any requirements of obligations imposed on him by virtue of the Code, or who interferes with or obstructs any person in the discharge of his duties, shall be guilty of an offence and the authority shall levy suitable penalty. 3.4.5.1 The licensed architect/engineer shall be responsible of the construction and for the completion certificate; in the event of violation of the provisions of the Code he shall be liable to penalties as prescribed by the Authority including cancellation of licence.

! 3.4.6 Power to Make Rules - The Authority may make rules for carrying out the provisions and intentions of this Code provided that rules shall not be in direct conflict or nullify any of the provisions of this Code.
3.5 Cinema Building Permit/Licence

No cinema building or any part of cinema ' `3.5.1 .iVew Cinema Buildingsbuilding shall hereafter be erected except in conformity with provisions of this Code and a cinema building permit/licence is obtained from the licensing Authority/local body Authority.

: 3.5.2 Precede Building Permit - If any building, permit for which has been issued before the commencement of this Code is not wholly completed within a period of three years or within such extended period as may be allowed by the Authority from the date of such permit, the said permission shall be deemed to have lapsed and fresh permit shall be necessary toproceed further with the work in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
3.6 No Objection Certificate 3.6.1 Ai$ication for .hGo Objection Certificate - In areas where positive planning for cinema sites is available, no objection certificate is not necessary. In the case of area where positive planning is not available, no objection certificate shall be obtained in accordance with the following regulations: 16

IS:4878a) b) No person under 18 years of age shall hold any licence under these rules. be entitled

1986 or

to obtain

Any person desirous of erecting a cinema building or converting existing permises into a cinema shall first make public his intention to do so by exhibiting a notice given in Appendix A on a board on the proposed site in such a position that it may be plainly seen from the public thoroughfare upon which the site of such proposed cinema abuts. The notice shall be in the language of the locality or the language approved by the Authority. The notice on the board shall be maintained on the site until the matter is decided by the licensing Authority. The board shall be at least 1.20 x 0.90 m in size and the notice shall be exhibited thereon in bold and clearly legible letters.

c) Such person shall also give a similar notice in writing to the licensing Authority and make an application to the licensing Authority. for,. grant of a `No Objection Certificate' specifying therein whether the application is in respect of a permanent cinema or a semi-permanent cinema. The application shall be accompanied by a plan of the proposed site drawn to scale and shall clearly indicate the surroundings, roads and buildings which exist up to a distance of GO m of the proposed site. Schools, hospitals, temples or other like places should be clearly indicated in the plan ( see ah 4.1.2 ). 3.6.2 On receipt of such notice, the competent Authority shall at the cost of the applicant, notify the public or such intention by publication in newspapers or otherwise as it may be deem fit for the purpose of inviting objections. A, notification as shown in Appendix B for inviting objections shall be issued by the licensing Authority and shall specify the period within which the objections shall be lodged with it. 3.6.3 decided The application for grant of a `No Objection Certificate' shall be by the Authority within 90 days of the receipt of the application.

3.6.3.1 If within 90 days of the receipt of application for `No Objection Certificate', the Authority fails to intimate in writing to the applicant, of its refusal or sanction, the no objection certificate shall be deemed to have been sanctioned. In case of refusal, the Authority shall quote the reasons within stipulated time. 3.6.4 The `No Objection Certificate' shahbe irrthe form of Appendix and shall be valid for a period of 10 years on the date of issue in case permanent cinemas and 5 years in case of semi-perm:mcnt cinemas. 17 C of

IS : 4878 - 1986
3.7 Application for Cinema Building Permit/Licence

3.7.1 Notice - After the grant of `No Objection Certificate' every person who intends to erect or make material alteration in any place in a cinema building shall give notice in writing to the Authority of his said intention in the form prescribed ( see Appendix D ) from time to time and such notice shall be accompanied by plans and statements in quadruplicate, as required under 3.7.2 and 3.7.3. The plans may be ordinary prints on ferro paper. One set of such plans should be cloth mounted and shall be retained in the office of the Authority for record after the issue or refusal of a permit.

3.7.2 Information - The notice shall be accompanied by the site plan, building plan, services plans, specifications and certificate of supervision as prescribed in 3.7.2.2 to 3.7.2.6. 3.7.2.1
plans Size of drawing sheets and recommended notation for colouring

a) The size of drawing sheets shall be any of those specified in Table 1. b) The plans shall be coloured as specified in Table 2.
1

TABLE SLNO.

DRAWING

SHEET

SIZES UN-IRIMMED IN mm (4) 880 x 1230 625 x 880 450 x 625 330 x 450 240 x 330 165 x 240 SIZE

TRIMMED SIZE IN mm

(1)
3
ii) iii) iv) v) vi)

(2)
A0 Al A2 A3 A4 A5

(3) 841 x 1 189 594 x 841 420 x 594 297 x 420 210 x 297 148 x 210

3.7.2;2 Site plan - The site plans sent with an application for permit shall be drawn to scale of not smaller than 1 : 500 and shall show: a) the boundaries of the site and of any contiguous land belonging to the owner thereof; b) the position of the site in relation to neighbouring street; c) the name of the street on which the building is proposed to be situated, if any;

18

TABLE

2

COLOURING

OF PLANS (b) ] BUILDINGPLAN ~--------h_~__--_ `White Plan Blue Print (6) Thick black (7) Thick black

[ Clause 3.7.2.1 SL No. ITEM
r SITE PLAN h-,---_-,-,,

White Plan (3) Thick black Green Green dotted Thick dotted black No colour Black ( outline Yellow hatched Red filled in Red dotted )

----------

Blue Print -(41 Thick black Green Green dotted Thick dotted black No colour White Yellow hatched Red

Ammonia

Print

-_--_ 3 Ammonia Print

(1)
i) ii) iii) iv)

(2)
Plot lines Existing street Future street if any Permissible building lines Open spaces Existing work

(5) Thick black Green Green dotted Thick dotted black No colour Blue Yellow hatched Red

(8)
Thick black

-

NO colour
Blue Yellow hatched Red

No colour White Yellow hatched Red

v) z vi) vii)

No colour Black Yellow hatched Red

Work proposed to be demolished Proposed work ( see Note ) Drainage and sewerage work ww$ee supply

viii)

ix)

Red dotted

Red dotted

Red dotted

Red dotted

Red dotted

x)

Black dotted thin

Black dotted thin this need

Black dotted thin not to be done;

Black dotted thin for extension

t;
Black dotted thin of an existing Black dotted thin work this shall $ 2 '

NATE apply.

For

entirely

new construction

IS : 4878 - 1986

(1) all e) the

existing

buildings

standing

on, over or under the site; and of all other buildings, if any, to erect upon his contiguous land

position of the building, which the applicant intends referred to in (a) relation to:

i)

the boundaries of the site and in case where the site has been partitioned, the boundaries of the portion owned by the applicant and also of the portions owned by the other owners;

ii) all adjacent streets, buildings ( with number of storeys and height ) and premises within a distance of 12 m of the site and of the contiguous land ( if any ) referred to in (a); and iii) if there is no street within the nearest existing street. a distance of 12 m of the site,

the means of access from the street to the building, and to all other buildings ( if any ) which the applicant intends to erect upon his contiguous land referred to in (a); space .%-I to be left about the building to secure a free circulation air, admission of light and access for scavenging purposes; of

h) j) k)

the width of the street ( if any ) in front and of the street at the side or rear of the buildings; the direction any existing of north point relative physical features, such as wells, drains,

(if any)

to the plan of the buildings; etc; and by the Authority.

m) such other particulars

as may be prescribed

3.7.2.3 Building blan - The plans of the buildings and elevations and sections accompa&ng the notice shall be drawn to a scale of 1 : 100. The plans shall:

1) include

floor plans of all floors together with the covered area clearly indicating the size and spacings of all framing members and sizes of rooms and the position of staircases, corridors, gangways, ramps with its slope and other exit ways, lift wells, lift machine room and lift pit details;

2)

include detailed plan of auditorium and balcony with its slope showing seating arrangements ( the width of seats, back to back distance of seats, intervening distance between row of seats ), distance from the screen to the first row of seats, details of longitudinal and cross aisles, etc; show the use or occupancy of all parts of the buildings; 20

3)

Is: 4848 - 1986
4) show exact location of essential services, for example, of drinking water, WC, sink, bath and the like; 5) show details of booking windows and booths; arrangmcnt

6) include sectional drawings showing clearly the size of footings, thickness of basement wall, wall construction, size and spacing of framing members, floor slabs and roof slabs with their materials. The section shall indicate the heights of building and rooms and also the height of the parapet; and the drainage and the slope of the roof. At least one section should be taken through the staircase; 7) include details of building services, such as, air-conditioning system with position of dampers, mechanical ventilation system, electrical services, etc; 8) show location 9) show location and details of electric and details sub-station; and fire lifts; where provided; service ducts, etc;

of lift enclosures

10) show location

of smoke stop lobby/door,

11) show location of refuse chutes, and refuse area, if any;

refuse chamber,

12) show projector from with the location and graph equipment, plant for the generation electrical energy, transformer and switchgear 13) show smoke exhauster 14) include 15) details system; system net work; of fire alarm

details of cinematoand conversion of room;

show location of centralised control, connection of all fire alarm system, built-in fire protection arrangements and public address system, etc; and dimensions of static water storage tank and

16) show location pump room; 17) show location as, sprinklers, etc; 18) show location installations;

and details of fixed fire protection installation, such wet risers, hosereels drenches, COs installations, and details of first-aid fire fighting equipments/

19) give access to fire appliances/vehicles with details of vehicular turning circle and clear motorable accessway around the building; 20) give size ( width ) of main and alternate staircases along with balcony approach, corridor, ramp, ventilated lobby approach;

21

IS : 4878- 1986 21) give dimensions
lbuilding line; of the prqjected _ portions beyond the permissible for cars, scooters,

22) show
roof;

motor

details of vehicular parking cycles and cycles; place indicating elevations;

spaces provided the drainage

23) include terrace 24) show all street

and the slope of the

25) give indications of the north point relative to the plan; and 26) such other particulars as may be prescribed by the Authority. 3.7.2.4 Services plans - The services pians shall include all details of building services such as mechanical ventilation system, air-conditioning system, electrical services and lifts, and also details of plumbing services including plans, elevations and sections of private water supply and sewage disposals system, if any.
3.7.2.5 Specifications Specifications, both general and detailed, giving type and grade of materials to be used, duly signed by the licensed architect/engineer shall accompany the notice ( see Appendix D ). 3i7.2.6 Supervision - The notice shall be further accompanied by a certificate in the prescribed form ( see Appendix E ) by the licensed/architect engineer ( see Appendix F ) undertaking the supervision ( see 3.4.5.1 ). 3.7.3 Preparation and Signing of Plans - The licensed architect/engineer shall prepare and duly sign all plans and shall indicate his name, address, qualification and licence number as allotted by the Authority. The plans shall also be duly signed by the owner indicating his address. The services ( building and plumbing services ) plans shall also be prepared and signed by competent persons having suitable qualifications. 3.7.4 Notice for Alteration Only - When the notice is only for an alteration in the building ( see 3.1.4. ), only such plans and statements, as may be necessary, shall accompany the notice. 3.7.4.1 No notice and building permit is necessary for the alterations such as opening and closing of a window or door or ventilator providing inter-communication doors, providing partitions, providing false ceiling, re-roofing, re-flooring, re-erection of portions of buildings damaged by earthquake or other natural calamities to the same extent and specification as existed prior to such damage; and the like which do not otherwise violate any provisions regarding general building requirements, structural stability and fire safety requirement of the Code. 22

IS: 4878- 1986 3.7.5 Notice,for Land Adjoining the Government or Corporate Bodies Formed Under the Statute - In case of a notice of intention to erect, re-erect or make alteration in a building or to make or enlarge any structure abutting on property maintained by Public Works Department, Defence or other Government Departments, the notice and plan shall be in sufficient numbers to enable the Authority to forward one set each to the appropriate departments for report before the permission is granted; the government department shall report to the Authority within two weeks from the date of the receipt of the notice and plans whether or not they have any ob.jection to the proposed construction. If no reply is received within two weeks by the Authority, from the Government Department the notice and plans shall be deemed to have been sanctioned.
3.7.6 Fees - No notice as referred to in 3.7.1 shall be deemed valid unless and until the person giving notice has paid the fees to the Authority and an attested copy of the receipt of such payment is attached with the notice.
NOTE - The fees may be charged in terms oftotal floor area of the building. In the event of a building permit is not issued, the fees so paid shall not be returned to the owner, but he shall be allowed to re-submit it without any fees after complying with all the objections raised by the Authority within a period of one year from the date of rejection after which fresh fees shall have to be paid.

3.7.7 Duration of Sanction - The sanction once accorded shall remain valid up to three years and if the work is not completed, the permit shall be got revalidated before the expiration of this period, Revalidation shall be subject to the rules then in force. 3.7.8 Deviations During Construction - If during the construction of building any departure ( excepting for items as given in 3.7.4.1 from the sanctioned plan is intended to be made ( see 3.4.4 ), sanction of the Authority shall be obtained before the change is made. The revised plan showing the deviations shall be submitted and the procedure laid down for the original plan heretofore shall apply to all such amended plans except that the time limit specified under shall be three weeks in such cases. 3.7.9 Revocation of Permit - The Authority may revoke any permit issued there has been any false under the provisions of the Code, wherever statement or any misrepresentation of any material fact in the application on which the permit was based. 3.7.10 Qualijication of the Architects/Engineers - Architects and engineers referred to under 3.7.2.4, 3.7.2.5 and 3.7.3 shall be licensed by the Authority as competent to do the work for which they are employed. A guide for the equivalent technical qualifications required for such licensing with the Authority is given in Appendix F.

23

IS : 4878 -1986 3.7.11 Grant of Permit or Refusal - The Authority may either sanction or refuse the plans and statements or may sanction them with such modifications or directions as it may deem necessary and thereupon shall communicate its decision to the person giving the notice ( see Appendix G ). 3.7.11.1 The building plans shall also be subject to the scrutiny of the Fire Authority and the sanction through building permit shall be given by the Authority after the clearance from the Fire Authority. 3.7.11.2 If within 3 0 days of the receipt of the notice under 3.7.1 of the Code, the Authority fails to intimate in writing to the person, who has given the notice, of its refusal or sanction, the notice with its plan and statements shall be deemed to have been sanctioned; provided the fact is immediately brought to the notice of the Authority in writing by person who has given notice and having not received any intimation from the Authority within fifteen days of giving such written notice. Subject to the conditions mentioned in this clause, nothing shall be construed to authorise any person to do anything in contravention of or against the terms of lease or. titles of the land or against any other regulations, byelaws or ordinance operating on the site of the work. 3.7.11.3 In case of refusal, the Authority shall quote the reason and relevant sections of the Code which the plans contravene. The Authority shall as far as possible advise all the objections to the plans and specifications in the first instance itself and ensure that no new objections are raised when they are re-submitted after compliance of earlier objections. 3.7.11.4 Once the plan has been scrutinized and objections have been pointed out, the owner giving notice shall modify the plan to comply with the ob.j.ections raised and re-submit it. The Authority shall scrutinize the re-submitted plan and if there be further objections, the plan shall not be rejected, 3.8 Responsibilities and &ties of the Owner

3.8.1 Neither the granting of the permit nor the approval of the drawings and specifications, nor inspections made by the Authority during erection of the building shall in any way relieve the owner of such building from full responsibility for carrying out the work in accordance with the requirements of the Code ( see 3.4.5 ). 3.8.2 Every owner shall: a) permit the Authority to enter the building or premises for which the permit has been granted, at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing the Code. b) submit a document of ownership 24 of the site;

ts : 4878 - 1986 c) obtain, where applicable, from the Authority, permits relating to building, grades,- sewers, watermains, plumbing, signs, blasting, street occupancy, electricity, highways, and all other permits required in connection with the proposed work;

4

give notice to the Authority building site ( see Appendix

of the intention H );

to start

work on the ofwork from the

e) give

written notice to the Authority regarciing completion described in the permit ( see Appendix J ); and an Authority. occupancy permit ( see Appendix K )

f 1 obtain
3.8.3

Documents at Site

3.8.3.1 Where tests of any materials are made to ensure conformity with the requirements of the Code, records of the test data shall be kept available for inspection during the construction of the building and for such a period thereafter as required by the Authority. 3.8.3.2 tion keep: The person to whom a permit is issued shall during construc-

a) posted in a conspicuous place on the property in respect of which the permit was issued, a copy of the building permit; and b) a copy of the approved drawings and specifications 3.7 on the property in respect of which the permit 3.9 INSPECTION referred to in was issued.

3.9.1 Generally all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Authority and certain types of construction involving unsual hazards or requiring constant inspection shall have continuous inspection by special inspectors appointed by the Authority. 3.9.2 Inspection, where required, shall be made within 7 days following the receipt of notification, after which period the owner will be free to continue the construction according to the sanctioned plan. At the first inspection, the Authority shall determine to the best of its ability that the building has been located in accordance with the approved site plans. The final inspection of the completion of the work shall be made within 21 days following the receipt of notification [ see 3.8.2 (e) ] for the grant of occupancy certificate. 3.9.3 When inspection of any construction operation reveals that any lack of safety precautions exist, the Authority shall have right to direct the owner to stop the work immediately until the necessary remedial measures to remove the violation of safety precautions are taken. 25

IS : 4878 - 1986
3.9.4 Periodic inspections of building after by the Fire Authority to ensure compliance protection requirements. completion shall be made with the provisions of fire

PART

1 PERMANENT

CINEMA

BUILDINGS

4. MEANS OF ACCESS

4.1 Every or permit diminishes erected SO
4.1.1

person who erects a building shall not at any time erect or cause to erect any building which in any way encroaches upon or the area set apart as means of access. No building shall be as to deprive any other building of the means of access. means of access shall not be less than the following:

The

Width of Means of Access
m

Length of Means of Access
m

12.0 15-o 18.0 24.0
Further, in no case shall the internal accessways.

200 400 600
Above 600 in width than shall shall the means of access be lesser

4.1.2 The width of the main street on which the building abuts not be less than 12 m as given under 4.1.1 and one end of this street join another street not less than 12 m in width. 4.1.3 The street shall not end in a dead end.

4.1.4 The approach to the building and open spaces on all its sides up to 6 m width and the layout for the same shall be done in consultation with the Fire Authority of the city and same shall be hard surface capable of taking the weight of fire engine, weighing up to 18 tonnes. The said open space shall be kept free of obstructions and shall be motorable. 4.1.5 The main entrance to the plot shall be adequate width to allow easy access to the fire engine and in no case shall it measure less than 4.5 m. The entrance gate shall fold back against the compound wall of the premises, thus leaving the exterior accessway within the plot free for movement of fire service vehicle. If the main entrance at the boundary wall is built over, the minimum clearance shall be 4.5 m. If an arch or covered gate is constructed, it shall have a clear head-room of not less than 5 m.

26

IS : 4878 4.1.6 The building site shall in no way offend against traffic laws.

- i986

4.1.7 The means of access shall be levelled, metalled, flagged, paved, laid with water supply line and sewered, drained, channelled, lighted, provided with trees for shade to the satisfaction of the Authority free of encroachment by any structure of fixture so as not to reduce its width below the minimum required under 4.1.1 and shall be maintained in a condition to the satisfaction of the Authority. 5. SITE REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Locality of Site and Particulars on any site, or any part of which offensive matter objectionable to removed therefrom and the site suitable for building purposes to

5.1.1 No building shall be constructed there is deposited refuse, excreta or other the Authority, until such refuse has been has been prepared or left in a manner the satisfaction of the Authority.

5.1.2 No site which would admit of storm water draining into it owing to its level or location shall be used .for the construction of the building unless arrangements are made to prevent effectively the flooding of the site, either by draining into a storm water-course, if one is available or by raising the level of the site to an adequate height by the deposit of layers of sound and non-putrescible material. 5J.3 No site wherein the soil and sub-soil would be so saturated with water that dampness of the floor and walls of the building would be inevitable, shall be used for the construction of the building unless a damp proof course is provided in the basement of the building not higher than the level of the lowest floor unless the flooring is made with a material approved by the Authority, which would effectively prevent the dampness rising in the floor of the building. 5.1.4 Every person who constructs, reconstructs, alters or adds to a building shall wherever the site is within 15 m of any tank, reservoir, water-course, river, fresh water channel or well carry out such measures as may be necessary or as the Authority may direct for the purpose of preventing any contamination of or any risk of the drainage of building passing into such tank, reservoir, water-course, river, fresh water channel or well. 27

tS : 4878 - 1986 5.1.5 Distance.from Electric Lines - No building shall be allowed to be erected or re-erected, or any additions or alterations made to the existing building, unless, the following minimum clearances in accordance with the current Indian Electricity Rules are provided from the overhead electric supply lines: Vertical m a) Low and medium voltage lines f Up to and 2.5 3.7 Hori<ontal m 1.2 I.2

! including I 11 ooov
b) High lines voltage j

1 Above 11 kV 1 up to and 1 including
1 33 kV high voltage

3.7

2.0

c) Extra *. lmes

, ^ 3.7 ( see Note )

2.0 ( See Note )

NOTE - For extra high voltage lines apart from the minimum clearances indicated, a vertical and horizontal clearance of 0'30 m for every additional 33 kV or part thereof shall be provided.

5.1.6 The location of a cinema site shall be governed by the provisions of the development plan and/or development control rules, if any and for areas having no development plans, the site shall have to be approved by the Authority after giving due regard to the environment and involvements of the site, giving due cognizance to safety and hygiene. 5.2 Criteria Single Plot of Number of Cinema Houses and Its Location in a

5.2.1 Cinema house may be constructed underneath the other permitted occupancy in the same building but not in the basement. It shall not be permitted to be constructed on the top of other occupancy. 5.2.2 Another cinema house of smaller capacity with a proper designing on the top of cinema house at ground floor or more than one cinema house in a single plot may be permitted to be constructed provided requirements in regard to traffic load, parking, fire fighting, water supply, drainage and other safety requirements are ensured. In such cases working hours or show hours may be staggered to avoid a large gathering on the site. 5.3 Frontage The minimum width of the frontage 28 shall be 30 m.

IS : 4878 - 1986 6. OPEN SPACES

6.1 Front Side and Rear Open Spaces - The open space at front shall be not less than 12 m and other open spaces around the building shall be not less than 6 m. The front open space for increasing heights of buildings shall also be governed by 7.2(a).
NOTE - However, if cinema houses are permitted in pure the open spaces around the building shall be not less than 12 m. residential zones,

6.2 Projections into Open Spaces - Every open space provided shall be kept free from any erection thereon and shall be open to sky except as below: a) Cornice, roof or weather shade not more than O-75 m wide; or other openings not more b) Sunshades over windows/ventilators than 0.75 m wide; balcony c) Projected 0.9 m; and d) Porch 6.3 Limitations at higher floors of width not more than

of width not more than 3.6 m. to Open Spaces

6.3.1 Safeguard Against Reduction of Open Space - No construction work on a building shall be allowed if such work operates to reduce an open space of any other arljoining building belonging to the same owner to an extent less than what is prescribed at the time of the proposed work or to reduce further such open space if it is already less than that prescribed. 6.3.2 Addilions or Extensions to a Building - Additions or extensions to a building shall be allowed, provided the open spaces for the additions/ extensions satisfy provisions of 6.1 after such additionsjextensions are made and building regulations. 7. AREA AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS shall be governed by the development plan and/ having no development taking into account the

7.1 The limitation of area and height of buildings provisions of floor area ratio ( FAR ) given in the or development control rules, if any and for areas plan, the FAR shall be specified by the Authority various aspects as given below:

4 Types of construction; b) Width of street fronting the building and the traffic load; Cl Locality where the building is proposed and the density; 4 Parking facilities; e) Local fire fighting facilities; and f 1 Water supply and drainage facilities.
29

IS : 4878 - 1986 7.2 Height Limitations - The height and number of storeys shall be governed by the limitations of FAR, open spaces ( see 5 ) and the width of the street fronting the plot in accordance with the following:

a)

The maximum height of building shall not exceed width of street abuLting plus the front open space;

1.5 times the

b)

If a building abut on two or more streets of different widths, the building shall be deemed to face upon the street that has the greater width and the height of the building shall be regulated by the width of that street and may be continued to this height to a depth of 24 m along the narrower street subject to conformity of 5; and buildings in the vicinity of aerodromes, the maximum height of such buildings shall be decided in consultation with the Civil Aviation Authorities.

Cl For

8. OFF-STREET

PARKIfiG

SPACES

parking ( on-site parking ) spaces in a plot to be provided shall be in accordance with Appendix L. The spaces given in Appendix L shall be considered by the Authority in conjunction with the Development Control Rules, in force, if any. 9. REQUIREMENTS

8.1 The off-street

OF PARTS

OF BUILDINGS

9.1 Plinth - The plinth or any part of a building or outhouse shall be so located with respect to the surrounding ground level that adequate drainage of the site is assured. The height of the plinth shall be not less than 45 cm from the surrounding ground level.
9.2

Tiers,

Galleries

and Balconies
or balcony extends over any part of the floor of the auditorium and the shall not, in any part be less than

9.2.1 Where the first tier, gallery the auditorium, the height between soffit of such tier, gallery or balcony 3 m.

9.2.2 The height between floor of the highest part of the seating on the tier, gallery or balcony and the lowest part of the roof ceiling over the same shall not in any part be less than 3 m. 9.2.3 The height between the soffit of any tier, the floor of another tier, gallery or balcony below less than 2.4 m. 9.3 gallery or balcony and it, shall in no case be

Water-Closet

9.3.1 The height of a water-closet measured from the surface of the floor to the lowest point in the ceiling ( bottom) shall not be less than 2 m.
30

IS t 4878 - 1986

9.3.2 The floor area of water-closet width of 0.9 m. 9.3.3
Every water-closet shall:

shall be I.1 m* with a minimum

a) be so situated that at least one of its walls shall open

air;

to external

b) not be directly over or under any room other than another watercloset, unless it has a water-tight floor; c) have the material; platform or seat made of water-tight non-absorbent

d) be enclosed by walls or partitions and the surface of every such wall or partition shall be finished with a smooth impervious material to a height of not less than 1 m above the floor of such a room; e) be provided with an impervious floor covering, sloping towards the drain with a suitable grade and not towards varandah or any other room: f )' have a window or ventilator, opening to a shaft or open space, of area not less than OS3 m* with side not less than 0.3 m; and g) have a door completely closing the entrance to it. 9.4 Projection
9.4.1 Room

floor area This fier,

The projection room having one equipment shall have minimum area of 18 ma, with a minimum width of 3.3 m. The maximum floor of projection room shall be 33,5 m* for commercial cinema buildings. shall include the space for rewinding bench, inspection panel, amplipower package, etc.

9.4.2 The height of the projection room measured from the surface of the floor to the lowest point in ceiling ( bottom of slab ) shall not be less than 3 m. 9.4.3 In case separate space/room is provided for amplifier, tape deck and film safe, minimum floor area of 6 ms shall be provided. Switch room shall have minimum floor area of 6 ms. 9.4.4 The number and sizes of openings in the front face of the enclosure shall be provided in accordance with the type of projection such as 35 mm, 70 mm, cinemascope and Cinerama, wide angle, and vistavision as well as based on the number of machines being used for projector. 9.5 Theatre
Foyers 9.5.1 In every cinema building, a foyer or lobby shall be provided with a net floor area, exclusive of stairs or landings, of not less. 0.15 ma for each 31

IS : 4878 - 1986 occupant having access thereto. The use of foyers and lobbies and other available spaces for harbouring occupant until seats become available shall not encroach upon the clear floor area herein prescribed or upon the required clear width of front exitways. 9.6 Basements

9.6.1 The construction of the basement shall be allowed by the Authority in accordance with the land use and other provisions specified under the Development Control Rules. 9.6.1.1 The basement to be constructed within the prescribed setbacks and prescribed building lines and subject to maximum coverage on floor 1 ( entrance floor ) may be put to only the following uses: a) Air-conditioning equipment and utilities of the building; b) Parking spaces. be in every part at least of the roof slab or ceiling. 2.4 m in height and other machines and used for services

9.6.2 Every basement shall from the floor to the underside

9.6.3 The minimum height of the ceiling ofany basement shall be O-9 m and the maximum, I.2 m above the average surrounding ground level. 9.6.4 The walls and floors of the basement shall be watertight and be so designecl that the effects of the surrounding soil and moisture, if any, are taken into account in design and adequate damp-proofing treatment is given. 9.7 Cabin 9.7.1 The size of cabins shall not be less than within the divided space of any floor shall not the distance from the farthest space in a cabin more than 18.5 m. The maximum height of the 9.8 Parapet 3.0 ms. The clear passages be less than 0.75 m and to any exit shall- not be cabin shall be 2.2 m.

9.8.1 Parapet walls and handrails provided on the edges of roof terraces, balcony, verandah, etc, shall not be less than l-05 m and not more than 1.20 m in height from the finished floor level. 9.9 Boundary Wall

9.9.1 Except with the special permission of the Authority, the maximum height of the compound wall shall be 2.4 m above the centre line of the front street. 32

IS : 4878 - 1986 9.9.2 In case of a corner plot, the height of the boundary wall shall be restricted to O-9 m for a length of 10 m on the front and side of inter-sections and balance height of I 5 m if required may be made of open type construction through railings or of a design as approved by the Authority. 9.10 Staircase 9.10.1 The minimum width of staircase shall be 1.5 m. The minimum width of tread without nosing shall be 30 cm. The maximum height of riser shall be 15 cm and risers shall be limited to 15 per flight. 9.10.2 The minimum head-room in a passage under staircase shall be 2 2 m. The minimum clear head-room shall be 2.2 m. 10. EXIT 10.1 Types REQUIREMENTS of Exits the landing of a in any staircase

10.1.1 An exit may be a doorway; corridor; passageway(s) to an internal staircase, or external staircase, or to a verandah or terrace(s), which have access to the street, or to the roof of a building or a refuge area. An exit may also include a horizontal exit leading to an adjoining building at the same level. 10.1.2 10.2 Lifts and escalators shall not be considered as exits.

General

10.2.1 Every place of assembly, every tier or balcony, and every individual room used as a place of assembly shall have exits sufficient to permit safe escape of occupants, in case of fire or other emergency. 10.2.2 In requirements use. every of this building, exits shall comply with the minimum part, except those not accessible for general public

10.2.3 All exits shall be free of obstructions. No display or exhibit shall be so installed or operated as to interfere in any way with access to any required exit, or with any required exit sign. 10.204 NO building shall be so altered as to reduce or protection of exits to less than that required. the number, width

10.2.5 Exits shall be clearly visible and the routes to reach the exit shall be clearly marked and sign posted to guide the population of the floor concerned. Signs shall be illuminated and wired to an independent rlrctrical circuit on an alternative source of supply. 33

IS:

4878 - 1986

10.2.6 Where
provided for exits.

necessary,

adequate

and

reliable

illumination

shall

be

10.2.7 All exits from the auditorium shall be clearly indicated by the word `EXIT' in block letters 175 mm high and shall be so displayed as to be clearly visible in the light as well as in the dark. 10.2.8 Where a door is not required for exit it shall be marked words `NO EXIT' in red letters of size as indicated in 10.2.7. with

10.2.9 Fire-resisting doors shail be provided at appropriate place along the escape routes to prevent spread of fire and smoke, and particularly at the entrance to lifts and stairs where a `funnel or flue effect' may be created, inducting an upward spread of fire. 10.2.10 a manner No mirrors shall be placed in or adjacent as to confuse the direction of exit. to any exitway in such

10.2.11 Places of assembly in buildings of other occupancy may use exits common to the place of assembly and the other occupancy. Provided the assembly area and the other occupancy are considered separately, each has exits sufficient to meet the requirements of the Code.
10.2.12 Exits shall be sufficient for simultaneous occupancy of both the places of assembly and other parts of the building, unless the Authority determines that the conditions are such that simultaneous occupancy will not occur.

10.2.13 All exits shall provide continuous means of egress to the exterior of a building or to an exterior open space leading to a street.
10,2.14 Exits shall be so arranged that passing through another occupied unit. they may be reached without

10.2.15 For any place of assembly for over 1 000 persons, at least half the required means of exits shall lead directly outdoors or through exits serving other parts of the exitways completely separated from building. 10.3 Number and Size of Exits - The requisite number and size of various exits from each floor and tier in the auditorium shall be determined in relation to number of persons who may be accommodated on that Aoor or tier and shall be based on the occupant load capacity of exits, travel distance and height of buildings in accordance with provisions of 10.3.1 ( ses also 10.4 ). 34

IS:

4878 - 1986

10.3.1 Occupant Load
10.3.1.1 For determining the exits required, the number of persons within any floor area or the occupant load shall be based on the actual number of occupants, but in no case less than the values as given below: Occupant Load ( Gross Area* in ms/Person ) a) TWith fixed or loose seats and floors bj Without seating dining rooms facilities waiting dance O-6$ 1*5$ 0.39

including spaces

c) For foyer and similar

10.3.1.2 Ma<canine - The occupant load of a mazzanine floor discharging to a floor below shall be added to that floor occupancy and the capacity of the exits shall be designed for the total occupancy load thus established. 10.3.2 Cabacity of Exits

10.3.2.1 The unit of exit width, used to measure the capacity of any exit, shalj be 50 cm. A clear width of 25 cm shall be counted as an additional half unit. Clear widths less than 25 cm shall not be counted for exit width. 10.3.2.2 The capacity of exits (doors, corridors, stairways and ramps) indicating the number of persons that could be safely evacuated through a unit width of 50 cm shall be in accordance with the following values: Number of Occupants per Unit Exit Width a) For stairways b) For ramps e) For doors/corridors 40 50 60

10.3.2.3 Horizontal Exit Allowance - When horizontal exit is provided in buildings, the capacity per storey per unit width of exit of stairways given in 10.3.2.2 may be increased by 50 percent.
*The gross area shall mean plinth area or covered area. *The occupant load for an assembly area having fixed seats shall also be determined by the number of fixed seats installed. $The gross area shall include, in addition to the main assembly room or space any occupied connecting room or space in the same storey or in the storeys above or below where entrance is common to such rooms and spaces and they are available for use by the occupants of the assembly place. No deductions shall be made in the gross area for corridors, closets or other subdivisions; the area shall include all space serving the particular assembly occupancy. QSuch exits shall be in addition to the exits specified for the main auditorium area.

35

IS : 4878 - 1986

10.3.3 Arrangement of Exits
10.3.3.1 Exits shall be so located shall not exceed 30 m. 10.3.3.2 The travel distance shall not exceed 6 m. that the travel distance on the floor

to an exit from the dead end of a corridor

10.3.3.3 Wherever more than one exit is required for any room space or floor of a building, exits shall be placed as remote from each other as possible and shall be arranged to provide direct access in separate directions from any point in the area served. 10.4 Number of Exits have at

10.4.1 Every place of assembly for over 1 000 persons shall least four separate exits as remote from each other as practicable.

10.4.2 Every place of assembly for less than 1 000 persons shall have at least two separate exits as remote from each other as practicable and if capacity over 600, at least three separate exits shall be provided with each exit not less than of 2 unit widths. 10.5 Doorways 10.5.1 Every exit doorway shall open into an enclosed stairway, or a horizontal exit of a corridor or passageway providing continuous and protected means of egress. 10.5.2 No exit doorway shall be less than shall be not less than 200 cm in height. 10.5.3 Exit doorways shall open but shall not obstruct the travel shall reduce the required width of overhead or sliding doors shall not 100 cm in width. Doorways

outwards, that is, away from the room, along any exit. No door, when opened, stairway or landing to less than 90 cm; be installed.

10.5.4 Exit door shall not open immediately upon a flight of stairs; a landing equal to at least the width of the door shall be provided in the stairway at each doorway; the level of landing shall be the same as that of the floor which it serves. 10.5.5 Exit doorways shall be openable without the use of a key. 10.6 Corridors and Passageways from the side which they service

10.6.1 Exit corridors and passageways shall be of width not less than the aggregate required width of exit doorways leading from them in the direction of travel to the exterior. 36

IS : 4878 - 1986 10.6.2 Where stairways discharge through corridors and passageways, the height of corridors and passageways shall be not less than 2.4 m. 10.7 Internal Staircases stairs shall be constructed of non-combustible materials

10.7.1 Tntcrior throughout. 10.7.2 Interior with an external pletely enclosed.

staircase shall wall constituting

be constructed as a self-contained unit at least one of its sides and shall be com-

10.7.3 A staircase shall not be arranged round a lift shaft unless the latter is totally enclosed by a material of fire-resistance rating as that for type of construction itself. 10.7.4 10.7.5 Hollow combustible construction shall not be permitted.

No gas piping shall be laid in the stairway.

10.7.6 Hand rails shall be provided at a minimum height of IGO cm to be measured from the base of the middle of the treads to the top of the hand rails. Further, the gap between the two verticals shall not exceed 30 cm. This gap shall be reduced to 15 cm where children are likely to use the staircase, 10.7.7 The number of people in between floor landings in staircase shall not be less than the population on each floor for the purpose of design of staircase. 10.7.8 angle. 10.8 Fire Winders Escapes shall not be permitted or External Stairs account in calculating the in the case ofstairs turning at an

10.8.1 Fire escapes shall not be taken into evacuation time of a building. 10.8.2 All fire escapes shall be directly

connected

to the ground. and remote from the

10.8.3 Entrance internal staircase,

to the fire escape shall be separate

10.8.4 Care shall be taken to ensure that the wall opening or window opens on to or closes to a fire escape. 10.8.5 times. The route to the fire escape shall be free of obstructions at all

10.8.6 The fire escape shall be constructed of non-combustible materials and any doorway leading to the fire escape shall have the required tire resistance. 37

IS : 4878 - 1986 used as afire 10.8.7 No staircase, greater than 45" from the horizontal. escape, shall be inclined at an angle

X0.8.8 Fire escape stairs shall have straight flight not less than 75 cm The number of wide with 20 cm treads and risers not more than 19 cm. risers shall be limited to 15 per flight. 10.8.9 Hand rails shall be of a height not less than 100 cm.

10.9 Roof Exit 10.9.1 In buildings over three storeys in height where the slope of the roof is less than ZO", direct access to the roof shall be provided from the street by means of a stairway. Where roofs are used as roof gardens or for other habitable purposes, sufficient stairways shall be extended to them to provide the necessary exit facilities required for such occupancy. 10.10 Horizon&l Exits exit shall be same as for the exit door-

10.10.1 The width of horizontal ways. 10.10.2 A horizontal of self-closing type. exit

shall be equipped

with at least one fire door

10.10.3 Floor area on the opposite or refuge side of a horizontal exit shall be sufficient to accommodate occupants of the floor areas served, allowing not less than 0.3 ms/person. The refuge area into which a horizontal exit leads shall be provided which exits adequate to meet the requirements of this part. At least one of the exits shall lead directly to the exterior of the building or to a street. 10.10.4 .Where there is a difference in level between connected areas for horizontal exits, ramps, not more than 1 in 10 in slope shall be provided; steps shall not be used. 10.10.5 Doors both sides. 10.11 Ramps where provided shall be so located as to be easily visifor in horizontal exits shall be openable at all times from

10.11.1 Ramps ble to the users.

10.11.2 Ramps shall comply with all the applicable requirements stairways regarding enclosure, capacity and limiting dimensions.

lO.lL3 The slope of a ramp shall not exceed 1 in 10. In certain cases, steeper slopes may be permitted but in no case greater than 1 in8. 38

IS : 4878 - 1986 10.11.4 For all slopes exceedin, u 1 in 10 and wherever the use is such as to involve danger of slippin g. The ramp shall be surfaced with approved non-slipping material.
10.12

Aisles

10.12.1 Clear aisles not less than 1.2 m in width shall be formed at right angles to the line of seating in such number and manner that no seat shall be more than seven seats away from an aisle. Rows of seats opening on to an aisle at one end only shall have not more than seven seats.
10.12.1.1 Under the conditions, where all these aisles do not directly meet the exit doors, cross-aisles shall be provided parallel to the line of seating so as to provide direct access to the exit provided that not more than one cross-aisle for every 10 rows shall be required. The width of cross aisles shall be a minimum of 1 m. 10.12.2 Where possible, gradients or inclined planes shall be used instead of steps but no gradient or inclined plane shall be steeper than 1 in 10. 10.12.3 If steps have to be inserted in a gangway or passage, there shall be not less than three steps at any one place. The treads shall not be less than 30 cm and risers not more than 15 cm. 10.12.4 All gangways and treads of steps shall be maintained slippery surfaces and shall be kept well illuminated. 10.12.5 Druggets matting and floor shall be securely fastened to the floor. covering if provided with non-

in gangways

10.12.6 Exits and the gangways and passages leading to exit shall be kept clear of any obstruction other than rope barriers provided in accordance with 10.12.7. On no account shall extra seats be placed in the gangways or spectators be allowed to stand in the gangways at the time of performance in such a way as to block or reduce their effective width.

10.12.7 Rope barriers in gangways or elsewhere shall be fitted with clips or fastenings which will part in the centre on slight pressure and shall not trail on the floor. 10.12.8 The fascia of boxes, balconies and galleries shall have substantial railings not less than 65 cm high above the floor. The railings at the end of aisles extending to the fascra shall be not less than 75 cm high for the width of the aisle or 90 cm high at the foot of steps. 39

IS : 4878 - 1986 10.12.9 Cross-aisles except where the back ot seats on the front of the aisle project 60 cm or more above the floor of the aisle, shall be provided with railings not less thau 90 cm high. 11. STRUCTURAL SAFETY

11.1 The structural stability of building shall be ensured to take care of the loads, forces coming on different areas of cinema building as well as material used for construction. This shall be done in accordance with Part VI Structural design of SP : 7-1983*. 12. CONSTRUCTIONAL PRACTICES AND SAFETY

12.1 Construction of all elements of a building, storage, stacking and handling of materials, safety of personnel during construction operations for all elements of a building and demolition of buildings shall be in accordance with Part VII Constructional practices and safety of SP : 7-1983*. 13. 13.1 FUNCTIONAL Lighting and REQUIREMENTS Ventilation for different Illumination, 150 50 70 100 locations lux of a

13.1.1 Recommended values of illumination cinema building shall be as follows: Locations a) Foyers b) c) Auditoria Corridors

d) Stairs/Ramps

13.1.2 General ventilation involves providing a building with relatively large quantities of outside air in order to improve general environment of building. They may be achieved in any one of the following ways: a) Natural b) Natural supply and natural exhaust of air; of air; of air; and of air. buildsupply and mechanical supply and natural exhaust exhaust

c) Mechanical d) Mechanical

supply and mechanical

exhaust

13.1.3 Recommended values for air changes ing with non-smoking shall be 6 to 9 per hour.

in case of a cinema

13.1.4 Unless the auditorium is air-conditioned, the means of ventilation shall take the form of natural ventilation and power driven exhaust fans suitably located and of adequate size for the purpose intended. *National Building Code of India 1983. 40

18 : 487%- 1986 13.1.5 In case more than one exhibition is given on any day, the whole of the auditorium shall be flushed with air and all means of exhaust, f:tns, air-conditioning units, if any and/or air cooling units shall not be alloL\.ed during this period to remain idle. 13.1.6 For information regarding requirements and methods for ligllting and ventilation, reference may be made to Part VIII Building services, Section 1 Lighting and ventilation of SP : 7-1983". 13.2 Air-conditioning and Heating cannot be obtained

13.2.1 Where desired temperatures and humidities by ventilation, air-conditioning is resorted to.

13.2.2 All plans, specifications and data for air-conditioning and heating systems of the building shall be supplied to the Authority, where called for. 13.2.3 The plans for heating and air-conditioning systems shall include all details and data necessary for review of installation, such as:

a) building: name, type and location; b) owner: name; C) orientation: north point on plans; d) general plans : dimensions and height of e) intended use of all rooms; f 1 detail or description of wall construction,
finish;

all rooms; including insulation and inclusize,

!a h) 2 k) ml n)

detail or description of roof, ceiling ding insulation and finish; detail or description weather stripping, of windows

and floor construction,

and outside doors, including etc;

storm sash, sills, storm doors,

layout showing the location, size and construction tower ( apparatus ), ducts, distribution system; information regarding location, sizes and capacity tion system, refrigeration and heating plant, equipment; information regarding supply grille system; chimney type of dampers

of the cooling of air distribuair handling

used in air-conditioning

or gas vent size, shape and height;

*National

Building Code of India 1983. 41

fS:4878

- 1986
equipment load, such as number heaters and lighting load; and of people, motor,

p) internal

q) location and grade of the required fire separations. 13.2.4 Preplanning - In the event OFbuildings not being air-conditioned at the time of construction and proposed to be air-conditioned at a later stage, provisions for structural and other requirements of the system shall be made at the planning stage. 13.2.5 In air-conditioned 25.5 f 2.75%. 13.2.6 fresh air shall be whether enclosed buildings, inside temperature shall be

In an air-conditioned auditorium, the total minimum outside introduced into an enclosure by an air-conditioning plant or unit related to the number of occupants in the enclosure at any time, they are smokers or non-smokers and to the cubic contents of the space in the manner as specified below:
Air Requirements Recommended 0.21

ms/min
Minimum o-14

Smoking

0.42

0.28

None Some

13.2.7 In the event of a break down of the air-conditioning plant, alternate arrangements should be available for ventilation and air circulation. 13~2.8 Heating
13.2.8.1 Central systems The installation for air-conditioning system may be used advantageously for the central heating system with such additions as a hot water or steam boiler, heating coils, thermostats, etc.

13.2.8.2 Unit systems - The common unit systems include individual heating units, steam boiler units ( oil or gas fired ) and gas units. The construction and operation of these individual units shall satisfy the local byelaws with regard to safety in operation and safety of occupants. 13.2.8.3 Safety controls should be used with electric strip heaters. 13.2.9 For information regarding design, construction and installation of air-conditioning and heating systems and equipment installed in buildings for the purpose of providing and maintaining conditions of air temperature, humidity, purity and distribution suitable for the use and occupancy of the space, reference may be made to Part VIII Building

services, Section

3 Air-conditioning

and heating of SP : 7 - 1983*.

*National Building Code of India 1983.

42

IS : 4878 - 1986 13.3 Sound Insulation 13.3.1 The generally point of view of comfort, be 35 to 40 dB(A). and Acoustical Requirements !i om shall

acceptable noise levels inside auditorium economy and other practical consideration

13.3.2 Adequate acoustical treatment shall be given in the projection room for suppressing the noises emanating in the room and also to provide satisfactory listening conditions. 13.3.3 For information regarding the desired noise levels and sound insulation, reference may be made to Part VIII Building services, Section 4 Acoutics, sound insulation and noise control of SP : 7-1983*. The acoustical design of auditorium shall be done in accordance with IS : 252t-1963t. 13.4 Visibility Requirements

13.4.1 The distance between screen and the front row of seats shall not be less than width of the screen itselfprovided in case of cinemascope or other similar modern techniques. This shall not be less than 3/4 of effective width of screen; and in case of 70 mm presentations, it shall be not less than 11.40 m. The distance between screen and the front row of seats shall be subject to the angle of elevation to the top edge of the projected picture on the screen to the centre of plane passing through the observer's eyes and normal to the back line not exceeding 35". Where curved screen is used, the distance of the viewer from the nearest point on the screen shall be not less than 0.2 effective width. 13.4.2 The elevation of the balcony seats should be such that line of sight to the centre of screen should not be inclined more than 30' to the horizontal. 13.4.3 The seats should be so arranged for a spectator. that good visibility is achieved

13.4.4 The floor slopes shall be so arranged that every viewer is provided with good visibility and listening conditions. The elevation is based on the principle that each listener shall be elevated with respect to the person immediately in front of him, so that the listener's head is about 12 cm above the path of sound which would pass over the head of the personin front of him. It is possible to reduce this to 8 cm if the seats are staggered. 13.4.5 Screen luminance shall be in accordance with IS : 5353-1969$.

*National Building Code of India 1983. TCode of practice for acoustical design of auditoriums and conference halls. $Specification for screen luminance for the projection of 35 mm film on matt directional screens.

and

43

I% : 4878 - 1986
13.5 Seating Requirements shall be so arranged that there is free access to the

13.5.1 The seating exits. 13.5.2 minimum

An average width of seats shall be not less than width of seats shall be 45 cm. of rows of seats from back to back

50 cm and the shall be not less

13.5.3 The spacing than 90 cm.

13.5.4 In all cases there shall be an intervening space of at least 30.5 cm between the back of one seat and the front of the seat immediately behind measured between perpendiculars. 13.5.5 All seats except in boxes shall be securely fixed to the floor and if battened together or made of links, the complete link shall be firmly attached to the floor. 13.6 Provisions for Lifts for lifts shall be made for buildings more than 15 m

13.6.1 Provision in height.

13.6.2 The appropriate aspect of lift installation shall be discussed during the preliminary planning of the building with all the concerned parties namely, client, architect, consulting engineer and/or lift manufacturer. This enables the lift manufacturer to furnish the architect and/or consulting engineer with the proposed layout or vice-versa. 13.6.3 As a result of preliminary discussion, the drawings ing should give the following particulars and finished sizes: a) b) c) number of lifts and size and position of lift well enclosures; number and type of landing doors; of lift well; of the build-

particulars

size, position, between

d) number e) height f) number

of floors served by the floor; floor levels; of entrances; of access to machine and, room; if possible, natural lighting of

g) total headroom; h) provision j) provision of ventilation machine room; of machine of lift pit; 44 room;

k) height m) depth

IS t 4878 - 1986

n) PI 9)

position

of lift machine,

above

or below lift well; Joists or stanchions adjacent to

size and position of any trimmer the lift well at each floor; size and position or supporting size and position of any footings are adjacent to the lift pit; and carry household luggage,

steel work at roof levels; or grillage foundations, if these

r>

s) in the case of passenger

lifts whether the lift cage is required to such as refrigerator, steel almirah, etc. advise the lift manufacturer, regarding lifts in buildings

13.6.3.1 The architect/engineer should if the Authority has any special requirements in the administrative area concerned.

13.6.3.2 When submitting application for a building permit to the local Authority, the building plans shall include the details of lifts ( No. of lifts duly numbered, location, type, type of doors, passenger capacity and speed ) . 13.6.4 Planning and designing of lifts shall be done in accordance with the provisions given in Part VIII Building services, Section 5 Installation of lifts and escalators of SP : 7 - 1983*. 14. ELECTRICAL 14.1 Execution INSTALLATIONS of Work

14.1.1 Unless otherwise exempted under the appropriate rule of the Indian Electricity Rules, the work of electrical installations shall be carried out by an electrical contractor licensed and under the direct supervision of a person holding a certificate of competency and by persons holding a valid permit issued and recognized by any Indian government. 14.2 Planning

.

14.2.1 General - The design and planning of an electrical wiring installation involve consideration of all prevailing conditions, and is usually influenced by the type and requirement of the consumer. It is recommended that the advice of a competent electrical engineer be sought at the planning stage with a view to providing for an installation that will prove adequate for its intended purpose and safe and efficient in its use. 14.2.1.1 The design and planning of an electrical wiring shall take into consideration, some or all of the following: a) The type of supply, occupancy, arrangement available; *National Building Code of India 1983.
45

installation

envisaged

load

and the earthing

IS : 4878 - 1986 b) The atmospheric condition, such as cooling air moisture or such other conditions which are likely installation adversely; temperature, to affect the or

c) The possible presence of inflammable or explosive dust, vapour gas; d) The degree of electrical and mechanical protection necessary; e) The importance of continuity need for stand by supply; f ) The probability g) The probable the electricity h) The j) relative of service including

the possible

of need for modification operation and maintenance supply tariffs available;

or future extension; cost taking methods; interference suppresinto account

cost of various

alternative

The need for radio sion; Safety aspects; and

and telecommunication

k) Ease of maintenance; m) n) $$nergy conservation. 14.2.1.2 All electrial are intended for. apparatus shall be suitable for the services these

14.2.1.3 Co-ordination - Proper co.ordination and collaboration between the architect, civil engineer and the electrical and mechanical engineer shall be effected from the planning stage of the installation. The provisions that will be needed for the accommodation of substation, transformer, switchrooms, service cable ducts, rising mains and distribution cables, sub-distribution boards, openings and chases in floors and walls for all required electrical installations, etc, shall be specified in advance. 14.2.1.4 Before starting wiring and installation of fittings and accessories, information should be exchanged between the owner of the building/architect/electrical contractor and the local supply authority in respect of tariffs applicable, types of apparatus that may be connected under each tariff, requirement of space for installing meters, switches, etc, and for total load requirements of lights, fans and power. 14.2.1.5 While planning an installation consideration should be taken of the anticipated increase in the use of electricity for lighting, general purpose socket-outlet, etc. It is essential that adequate services which may be required useful life of the building. provision should be made for all the immediately and during the intended

46

IS:4878-

1986

142.2 For detailed planning requirements of electrical installations with regard to location and requirements of sub-station, main switches, switchboards, distribution boards, ctc, reference may be made to Part VIII Building services, Section 2 Electrical installations uf SP : 7-1983".
14.3

Branch Circuits
branch circuits load groups: machinery; and air-conditioning power connections. installation; and shall, in general, cater to the following

14.3.1 The
individual

a) Power installation: i) Stage iii) Lifts; ii) Ventilation iv) Additional b) Lighting: i) In front of the theatre such as general lighting of outdoor, foyer, corridors and stairs, and auditorium; ii) In the rear of the theatre for stage; workshops and storehouses; and c) Emergency supply. shall have at least regulaexit and stairways of the 14.3.2 The electrical lighting of the main building three separate and distinct main circuits as follows:

a) For the enclosures ( cabin ) and hence through tor to the central lighting of the auditorium; b) For one half of the auditorium, passageways, parts of the building open to public; and c) For the remaining half of the auditorium, exit and parts of the building.

a dimmer stairways,

passageways,

14.3.3 The control of the circuits in respect of the two halves auditorium referred to in 14.3.2 shall be remote from each other. 14.3.4 The cabin shall be provided with two separate circuits, ing the cabin equipments and the other to lights and fans.

one feed-

14.3.5 Wiring shall be of the conduit type. Ends of conduits shall enter and be mechanically secured to the switch, control gears, equipment terminal boxes, etc. Ends of canduits shall be provided with screwed bushes. Within the enclosure, all cables shall be enclosed in screwed metal conduits adequately earthed, PVC conduits may be used in the auditorium and other places.
*National Building Code of India 1983.

47

IS : 4878 - 1986 14.3.6 Temporay wiring shall not be allowed queue sheds and similar places,
in cabin, rewinding room, Nothing of

14.3.7 The cabin equipment shall be accessible at all times. shall impede access to any part of the equipment or its control. 14.3.8 circuits. Linked tumbler switches shall not be used for

the control

14.3.9 Branch and Main Distribution Boards shall bl:: mounted at suitable height not higher thau 2 m from the floor level. A front clearance of I m should also br provided. 14.3.10 Wood work shall not be used for the mounting of or construction of the frame work for iron-clad switch and Distribution Boards and control gear.

14.3.11 All the
2.25 m.

lighting

fittings shall

be at a height

of not less than

14.3.12 The single pole switches
be mounted on sheet steel boards

for the individual suitably earthed.

lights and fans shall on the focuss-

14.3;13 Suitable socket outlets with controls shall be provided side walls near the stage for tapping supply to screen motor, stage ing lights, audio systems and portable lights. 14.3.14 In the queue sheds, bulk head fittings shall be used. fittings shall the aesthetic at a height

14.3.15 For outdoor lighting, water tight fittings may be so mounted without spoiling building. 14.3.16 The plug points shall be provided from the floor.

be used and view of the of about 1.5 m

14.3.17 When a tapping is taken from the open yard wiring, it shou d be taken only at a point of support through porcelain connectors housed in a junction box, fixed to the supporting pole. 14.4 For detailded requirements regarding safety and related matter in electrical installations, reference may be made to Part III Electrical installlations in non-industrial buildings, Section 3 Recreational, assembly buildings of SP : 30-1984" to be read in conjunction with other relevant Parts and Sections. Electrical installations in multistoreyed buildings shall be done in accordance with Appendix to Part III of SP : 30-1984*. .-*National Electrical Code. 48

IS:487814.5 Emergency Supply

1986

14.5.1 Sufficient number of emergency lights source or sources, with the provision for automatic failure of main supply shall be provided.

fed from independent switching-on in case of

14.5.2 Depending on the total capacity required for standby supply for the occupancy, suitable generator set shall be installed. The location of the standby supply shall preferably be on the ground level away from the auditorium so that noise from the generator reaching the audience could be minimized. The changeover of supply arrangements should be reliable and easy to operate. 14.6 Audio-visual System - Installation of amplifying and sound distribution systems shall conform to the guidelines contained in Part I General and common aspects, Section 14 Electrical aspects of building services SP : 30-1984*. 15. 15.1 FIRE PROTECTION of Construction

Types

15.1.1 The design of any building and the type of materials used in its construction are important factors in making the building resistant to a complete burn-out and in preventing the rapid spread of fire, smoke or fumes, which may otherwise contribute to the bars of lines and property. 15.1.2 The fire resistance ratings for various types of construction for structural and non-structural members should be as given in Table 3. 15.2 Mixed Occupancy - When any building is used for more than one type of occupancy, it shall conform to the requirements for the most hazardous of the occupancies. If mixed occupancies are separated by a separating wall of 4 h fire rating, the occupancies shall be treated individually. 15.3 At the time of designing openings in separating walls and floors, particular attention shall be paid to all such factors as will limit fire spread through these openings. 15.4 Openings in an external wall shall be protected with fire-resisting assemblies or enclosures having a fire resistance equal to that of the wall or floor in which these are situated. 15.5 Where fire-resisting doors are employed as `cut-offs' or `fire breaks', they shall be maintained in good working order, free from any obstruction, so that they may he readily opened to allow quick escape of any person or persons trapped in that section of the building, and also, when necessary, prompt rescue work can be expeditiously carried out. *National Electrical Code. 49

IS : 4878 - 1986

TABLE

3

FIRE RESISTANCE

RATINGS

OF STRUCTURAL

ELEMENTS

( Clause 15.1.2 ) STRUCTURAL ELEMENT FIRE RESISTANCE RATINGS ( in hours )

1) Exterior

walls less than Bearing Non-Bearing Bearing Non-Bearing Bearing Non-Bearing 2" 1: 4 1 4 4 2 2 1 Supporting more than one floor t 4

Fire separation 3.7 m

Fire separation of 3.7 m or more but less than 9 m Fire separation more 3) Fire separation of 9 m or

2) Fire walls and party walls
assemblies 4) Fire enclosures of exitways and stairways 5) Shaft other than exitways, vator hoistways 6) Exitway access corridors 7) Non-bearing partitions 81 Interior bearing walls bearing partitions, columns, girders, trusses ( other than roof trusses ) and framing ele-

Supporting only Supporting only 9) Structural ing wall members supportincluding

one floor a roof

10) Floor construction, beams

3 5 m or less in height to lowest member More than 5 m but less than 6'7 m in height to lowest member 6'7 m or more in height to lowest member 2

including 11) Roof construction, beams, trusses and framing arches and roof deck

1

0

50

IS:4878

- 1986

15.6 Life shafts and stairways serve as flues or funnels thus increasing the fire by increased draught and their designs shall be of enclosed type as to reduce or avoid possibility and consequent spread of fire. 15.7 Surface furnishes on walls ( including external facade of the building ) and ceilings shall be of such finishing materials so as to minimize spread of flame in case of fire. 15.8

Air-Conditioning

and Ventilation

15.8.1 Air-conditioning and ventilating systems shall be so installed and maintained as to minimize the danger of spread of fire, smoke or fumes thereby from one floor or fire area to another, or from outside into any occupied building or structure.
15.8.2 Air-conditioning and ventilating systems circulating air to more than one floor or fire area shall be provided with dampers designed to close automatically in case of fire and thereby prevent spread of fire or smoke. Such a system shall also be provided with automatic controls to stop fans in case of fire, unless arranged to remove smoke from a fire, in which case these shall be designed to remain in operation. 15.8.3 Air-conditioning system serving large places of assembly ( over 1 000 persons ), shall be provided with effective means for preventing circulation of smoke through the system in the case of a fire in air filters or from other sources drawn into the system even though there is insufficient heat to actuate heat sensitive devices controlling fans or dampers. Such means shall consist of approved photo-electric or other effective smoke sensitive controls, or if approved by the Authority, may be manually operated controls in cases where qualified personnel responsible for operation of controls are continuously on duty while the premises are occupied.

15.9 Basements 15.9.1 Where

( Including

Sub-basements

)

basements are necessary for a building and where such basements are used for storage, provisions shall be made for the escape of any heat arising due to fire and for liberating any smoke which may be used.

15.9.2 The access to the basement shall be separate from the main and alternative staircase providing access and exit from higher floors. Where the staircase is continuous in the case of buildings served by more than one staircase, the same shall be of enclosed type serving as a fire separation from the basement floor and higher floors. Open ramps shall be permitted if they are constructed within the building line in case adequate arrangements shall be made such that surface drainage does not enter the basement.
51

IS:

4878.1986 Installations

15.10 Fixed Fire Fighting

15.10.1 Static Water Storage Tanks - Underground static storage tank of at least 50 000 litres for buildings of height up to 15 m shall always be available for the purposes of fire fighting with arrangements of replenishment by main or alternative source of supply at the rate of 1 000 lines per minute. When this is not practicable, the capacity of static storage tank(s) shall be increased proportionately in consultation with the local fire brigade. 15.10.1.1 The static storage water supply required shall entirely be accessible to the fire engines of the local fire service. Provision of suitable number of manholas shall be made available for inspection, repairs and insertion of suction hose; etc. The covering slab shall be able to withstand the vehicular load of 18 tonnes. 15.10.1.2 The domestic suction tank connected to the static water storage tank shall have an overflow capable of discharging 2 250 litres per minute to a visible drain point from which by a separate conduit the overflow shall be conveyed to a storm water drain: a) To prevent stagnation of water in the static water storage tank, the suction tank of the domestic water supply shall be fed only through an overflow arrangement to maintain the level therein at the minimum specified capacity. b) The static water storage tank shall be provided with a fire brigade collecting breaching with 4 number 63 mm dia ( 2 number 63 mm dia for pump with capacity 1 400 litreslminute ) instantaneous male inlets arranged in a valve box at a suitable point at street level and connected to the static tank by a suitable fixed pipe not less than 15 cm in dia to discharge water into the tank when required at the rate of 2 250 litres per minute. 15.10.2 Automatic Sprinklers - Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in basements/multi-level used as car parks, any room or other compartment 6f a building exceeding 500 ms, all floors of mixed occupancy which constitute a hazard and not provided with staircases independent of remainder of the buildings, stages and stage basements of theatres. 15.10.3 Automatic High Velocity Water Spray or Emuls$ying System - Automatic high velocity water spray or emulsifying system shall be provided for protection of indoor transformers. 15.10.4 Fixed Foam Installation - Fixed foam generating system shall be provided for protection of boiler rooms with its ancillary storage of furnace oils in basement. 52

IS : 4878 - 1986

15.10.5 Portable Fire Extinguirhm
15.10.5.1 Portable fire extinguishers ( Soda Acid ) conforming IS : 93-l-1976* shall be provided at the rate of one fire extinguisher every 100 seats or part thereof.
to for

15.10.5.2 The extinguisher shall be so located that no point within the floor area covered is more than 15 m from the nearest extinguisher by the normal route of travel. 15.10.5.3 The extinguishers shall be placed on racketslnitches on the wall near each exit, 1.2 m from the floor level. They shall be easily accessible and the passages leading to the extinguishers shall not be obstructed in any way. 15.10.5.4 Directions for using the extinguishers shall in all cases be prominently painted on the extinguisher and the attention of the public shall be directed to them by placards legibly printed or painted and fixed immediately above them. 15.10.5.5 Portable fire extinguishers of CO,/Dry chemical powder type shall be provided in all enclosures housing projection machine, rectifier, rewinding room, and near electrical installations including airconditioning plant room, transformer room, etc, as specified by the local fire authority. 15.10.5.6 Portable fire extinguishers shall be renewed or well cleaned and recharged every 12 months and shall be subject to annual approval of local fire Authority, a record of which shall be kept for inspection in accordance with IS : 2190-1979t. 15.10.6 Fire fighting equipment shall be suitably marked by illuminated signs, wired to an independent alternate source of Supply. located and clearly electric circuit on an

15.10.7 Adequate technical staff trained in fire fighting shall be maintained by the licensee. Attendants and staff shall be drilled periodically at least once in every month to train them in the use of all fire-fighting equipment maintained in the premises.
15.10.8 During an exhibition all fire extinguishing appliances shall be in charge of some person or persons specially appointed for this purpose. Such persons need not be employed exclusively for looking after the fire appliances but they must not be given any other work during an exhibition which would take them away from the buildilfg or otherwise prevent them
*Specification for portable chemical fire extinguisher, soda acid type ( third recision 1. t&de of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire appliances ( second raoirion ).

53

IS:4878-

1986
in case of danger or alarm of fire. The a badge on its arm depicting the word

from being immediately available person so appointed shall wear `FIRE' during the exhibition. 15.10.9 The instructions posted in some conspicuous cinema shall be acquainted 15.10.10 receptacles.

to be followed in case of fire shall always be place, so that all people connected with the with their contents. closed in fire resisting

All films not in use shall be kept securely

15.10.11 Automatic fire alarm system conforming to IS : 2189-1976* shall be installed in auditoria, corridor, foyer, canteen, and the space used for storage purposes so that any fire is detected at its very inception and the first-aid fire-fighting appliances put into operation immediately. 15.10.12 A report of any fire or alarm at once sent to the Fire Brigade. of fire, however, slight shall be

15.10.13 The fire fighting appliances shall be distributed over the building in such a manner so as to be readily available in case of fire in any part of the building and shall be regularly maintained, inspected and tested in accordance with the requirements laid down in IS : 2190-1979t. 15.10.13.1 Additional fighting arrangements shall fire Authority. precautionary be provided measures in regard as per the requirements to fire of local

15.11 The premises of cinemas shall be so arranged as to be in communication with the nearest fire station by means of a telephone. The telephone shall be fitted in such a place and in such a manner as the competent authority may direct. The installation and maintenance of the telephone ( complete telephone connection ) shall be carried out by the licensee at his own cost. 15.12 Lighting conductors shall accordance with the requirements be provided in each cinema given in IS : 2309-19691. in cinema building shall in be

15.13 Requirements for exits to be provided in accordance with 10.

buildings

*Code of practice for installation of automatic fire or alarm system using heat sensitive type fire detectors (Jirst revision ). iCode of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire apphances (second revision ). fCode of practice for the protection of buildings and allied structures against lighting (Jirst revi& ).

54

tS : 4878 - 1986 15.14 Special Hazards 15.14.1 Seats in places of public assembly, accommodating more than 300 persons, shall be securely fastened to the floor. All seats in balconies and galleries shall be securely fastened to the floor, except that i.n nailedin-enclosures, boxes with level floors and having not more than 14 seats, the seats need not be fastened. 15.14.2 Rooms containing high pressure boilers, refrigerating machinery of other than domestic refrigerator type, large transformers or other service equipment subject to possible explosion shall not be located directly under or adjacent to the required exits. All such rooms shall be effectively cut off from other parts of the building and provided with adequate vents to the outer air. 15.14.3 All rooms of areas used for storage of any combustible material or equipment, or for paintings refinishing repair or similar purposes shall be effectively cut off from assembly areas of protected with a standard system of automatic sprinklers. They shall be located away from staircases. 15.14.4 Every stage equipped with fly galleries, gridirons and rigging for movable theatre-type scenery, shall have a system of automatic sprinklers over and under such stage areas or spaces and auxiliary spaces, such as dressing rooms, store rooms and workshops, and the proscenium opening shall be provided with a fire-resisting curtain, capable of withstanding a lateral pressure of4 kN/ms over the entire area. The curtain shall have an emergency closing device capable of causing the curtain to close without the use of power and when so closed, it shall be reasonably tight against the passage of smoke. 15.14.5 The stage roof of every theatre using movable scenery or having a motion picture screen of highly combustible construction shall have ventilator or ventilators in or above it, openable from the stage floor by hand and also opening by fusible links or some other approved automatic heat actuated device, to give a free opening equal to at least one-eighth the area of the floor of the stage. 15.14.6 Where automatic sprinkler protection is not provided, the proscenium wall of every theatre using movable scenery of decorations shall have, exclusive of the proscenium opening, not more than two openings entering the stage, each not to exceed 2 m and fitted with self-closing fire check doors. 15.14.7 Automatic smoke vents shall be installed above the auditorium of theatres, including motion picture houses, with vent area equal to not less than 3Q percent of the floor area of the auditorium, including 55

IS : 4878

- 1986 galleries, boxes and tiers. It of small vents rather than a

the sum of the floor areas of all balconies, may be desirable to provide a large number small number of large vents. 15.14.8 Every cinema building shall enclosed in a fire-resisting fixed enclosure it shall have the following requirements protection.

have the projection apparatus known as `Projection Room'and from the point of view of fire

15.14.8.1 The projection room shall not have any direct access or communication with the auditorium. It shall be entirely self-contained and shall house only the cinematograph apparatus, fire appliances and such controlling apparatus as of necessity be placed therein. 15.14.8.2 There shall be one entrance and an alternative exit from open air to the projection room suitably spaced and fitted with self-closing fitting door of fire-resisting material opening outwards, and all openings, bushes and joints shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent, as far as possible, escape of any smoke into the auditorium, 15.14.8.3 The enclosure and any fitting covering openings thereto shall be made of fire resisting material and shall be so designed, constructed and maintained as to prevent as far as possible, when all openings are closed, fire in the enclosure spreading to the structural features and fittings of the building, the emission of smoke to any part of the building and egress of air. 15.14.8.4 Proper and efficient means of ventilation shall be provided in the enclosure in such a manner that there shall be no communication with any part of the building to which the public is admitted through the medium of such means of ventilation. 15.14.8.5 The ooenings in the front face of a projection room shall material sd constructed that: be fitted with shutters-of no&ombustible a> they can be closed from a point near the projectors a point outside the projection room and rewinding accessible to members of the staff; b) they may, if required, be closed simultaneously; and also from room which is

and

c> when closed they fit closely over the openings.
NOTE - The shutters and the mechanism for closing them shall be tested on each day there is a cinematograph exhibition and before the public are admitted to the premises.

56

fS:487815.14.8.6 No smoking shall be permitted: or rewinding room in which electrical

1986

a) in any projection film is stored or charged; and

or in any room in which batteries are installed or shall be posted

b) in and immediately outside any such room; notices stating that smoking is prohibited.

15.14.8.7 No readily inflammable film or naked light, other than arc lights in the lanterns of film projectors, spot-lights effects lamps or other electrical apparatus for the production of lighting or optical effects, shall be permitted to be in any such room. 15.14.8.8 Where flammable substance is used in repairing or jointing film there may be kept in the projection and rewinding rooms not more than 5 ml thereof, which shall be kept in a stoppered container. rooms film. 15.14.8.9 There may a reasonable quantity be kept in the projection and rewinding of wax for the purpose of lubricating the

15.14.8.10 Cinematograph projectors shall be placed on firm support constructed of fire resistant materials and shall be provided with a metal shutter which may be readily inserted between the source of light and the film gate. Thus, this shutter may immediately be dropped in the event of an accident to the cinernatograph apparatus or stoppage of the film and shall only be raised when the film is in motion for the purpose 01 projection. 15.15 All cinema buildings including multitstorcyed buildings shall be planned, derigned and constructed to ensure fire safety and this shall be done in accordance with Part IV Fire protection of SP : 7-i983* unless otherwise specified in these byelaws. 16. 16.1 REQUIREMENTS SANITATION Water Supply of water supply for cinema buildings FOR WATER SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND

16.1.1 Minimum requirements shall be 15 litres per seat per day.

16.1.2 Every cinema building shall be provided with drinking water taps/fountains connected to a water supply pipe line in accordance with requirements given in Table 4. In case supply of water is cut-off, there shall be an arrangement to connect the water taps/fountains to a hygienic tank or water container containing pure drinking water. *National Building Code of India 1983. 57

1s : 4878 - 1986 16.1.3 Provision shall also be made by the owner of the building for water supply requirements for fire fighting purposes within the building, depending upon the height and occupancy of the building. 16.1.4 In a building, adequate provision storage of water for the following reasons: a) to provide against mains, etc; b) to reduce c) to tide over periods d) to maintain building. 16.2 Drainage interruptions is required to be made for to

of the supply caused by repairs on the mains; and requirement

the maximum a storage

rate of demand for the

of intermi ttent supply;

fire fighting

of the

and Sanitation

16.2.1

Basements shall be made such that surface

16.2.1.1 Adequate arrangements drainage does not enter the basement.

16.2.1.2 The walls and floors of the basement shall be watertight and be so designed that the effects of the surrounding soil and moisture, if any, are taken into account in design and adequate damp-proofing treatmcnt is given. 16.2.2 Roofs

16.2.2.1 The roof of a building shall be so constructed or framed as to permit effectual drainage of the rain water therefrom by means of a suficiency of rain water pipes of adequate size so arranged, jointed and fixed as to ensure that the rain water is carried away from the building without causing dampness in any part of the walls or foundations of the building or those of an adjacent building. 16.2.2.2 The Authority may require rain water pipes to be connected to a drain or sewer to a covered channel formed beneath the public footpath to connect the rain water pipe to the road gutter or in any other approved manner. 16.2.2.3 Rain water pipes shall be afhxed to the outside of the external walls of the building or in recesses or chases or formed in such external walls or in such other manner as may be approved by the Authority. for fitments for drainage 16.2.3 The requirements cinema buildings shall be in accordance with Table 4. 58 and sanitation for

TABLE

4

REQUIREMENTS

FOR

FITMEiVTS

( Clauses 16.1.2 and 16.2.3 ) FITMENTS (1) Water-closets
1 per FOR MALE PURLIC

FOH FEMALE PUBLIC (3) 3 per 100 persons up to 200 persons and for over 200 persons add at the rate of 2 per ICO persons or part thereof

FOR MALE STAFF (4) 1 for 1 to 15 persons 2 for 16 to 35 persons

FOR FEMALE STAFF (5) 1 for 1 to 12 person3 2 for 13 to 25 persons

(9.)

100 persons up to 400 persons; and for over 400 persons, add at the rate of 1 per 250 persons or part thereof water-

Ablution

taps

1 in each closet

1 in each water-closet

1 in each closet be provided

water-

1 in each water-closet
50 persons or part thereof

1 water tap with draining arrdngements shall in the vicinity of water-closets and urinals Urinals 1 for 25 persons part thereof or -

for every

Nil up to 6 personi. 1 for 7 to 20 persons 2 for 21 10 45 persons 1 for I to 15 persons 2 for 16 to 35 persons

\Vash basins

1 for every 200 persons or part thereof

I for every 200 persons or part thereof

1 for 1 to 12 persons 2 for 13 to 25 persons

Drinking water taps/ fountains NOTE 1 NOTE 2 -

. ... .. ... ,.. .. . ... 1 per 100 persons or part

thereof

_ .. .. ,.. . ___. _.__. ._.__ ._.._. . .. __.

...

s .. 10 s co
I ti

Some

of the water-closets

may be European

style,

if desired. are males and one-third females.

It may be assumed

that two-thirds

of the number

IS:4878

- 1986

16.3 The planning, design, layout, construction and maintenance of water supply, drainage and sanitation shall be done in accordance with Part IX Plumbing services, Section 1 Water supply and Section 2 Drainage and sanitation of SP : 7-1983*.
17. GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS No smoking shall be permitted
in the auditorium during

17.1 Smoking
a performance.

17.2 Hawking - No person shall, during a performance or exhibition or in the interval of performance or exhibition and no licensee or his nominee shall during a performance or exhibition or in the interval of performance or exhibition, allow any person: a) hawking in the auditorium; to any member of the to

b) sell or supply any eatables or drinks audience in the auditorium itself; and

c) distribute or sell, for consideration or not, any article or thing any member of the audience in the auditorium itself.

17.2.1 The licensee shall make separate space arrangement having area not less than 10 ms for providing for the light refreshment of the spectators during the performance or in the interval of performance. This space may however be attached to the auditorium at the same time not affecting the smooth flow of traffic in the corridors and causing no congestion at any exit. 17.3 Spitoons - Spitoons of such description in such numbers and in such places as may be prescribed by the Authority shall be provided. 17.3.1 No person shall, at except in the spitoons provided any time, spit in any part of the cinema for that purpose.

17.4 Booking Windows - Booking windows shall be provided in such a manner and number as prescribed by the competent Authority so as not to cause obstruction to sudden rush of public before and after the cinema show, by providing in addition suitable guideways. 17.4.1 Suitable shelters for sun and rain and other atmospheric agencies affecting the health of the people shall be provided for the would be purchasers of tickets standing in queues. 17.4.2 The guide way and shelter shall be sufficient to accommodate at least one-third of the number of the would be purchasers of tickets.
*National Building Code of India 1983.

60

IS:4878-

1986

17.4.3 The guide ways should be so constructed that it provides an easy flow of the traffic from the entrance to the exit of the booking counter. In case these booking windows are put up as a separate structure isolated from the main building there should be some connected structure between the two blocks such that people after buying the ticket could reach the auditorium or the mainbuilding without having to pass through conditions of inclement weather.
17.5 Maintenance a) of Cleanliness, etc The licensee shall care: to be all windows and other means rnaintained in good order; of ventilation in the building

b) every part of such building sanitary conditions;

or place to be maintained

in proper

c) the walls of the building to be hotlime washed at least once in every two years or more often if so required by the Authority; d) the premises to be thoroughly cleaned and all refuge matters to be removed at least once every twenty four hours or more often if so required by the Authority; e) electrical equipment such as fans, glass and shades cally cleaned and kept in a presentable condition; f) to be periodi-

mechanical equipment such as exhaust fans, air-conditioning plant, lift, etc, to be periodically cleaned and inspected to be kept in a working condition; to be periodically inspected inspected to ensure out

g) all fire fighting installations its working conditions; h) all storage tanks periodically.

to be regularly

and be cleaned

PART

2

SEMI-PERMANENT ON THE GRANT

CINEMA

BUILDINGS

18. RESTRICTIONS CERTIFICATES

OF NO OBJECTION
cities than

18.1 Semi-permanent cinemas shall be permitted only in towns and having a population of less than one lakh and also not having more three permanent cinemas already functioning there.

18.2 The `No Objection Certificate' granted for a semi-permanent cinemas shall lapse at the end of 5 years provided that Authority may extend the validity of the permit/licence by a further period of 5 years in case the semi-permanant cinema has been converted into permanant cinema buildings within 5 years of the grant of `No Objection Certificate'.

61

IS : 4878 - 1986 38.3 Semi-permanent buildings shall not be permitted to be constructed more than one storey unless it is converted into a permanent building by the Authority. However, construction of the basement may be allowed by the Authority in accordance with the land use and other provisions specified under the Development Control Rules. 19. OTHER REQUIREMENTS

the planning of a semi-permanent cinema building, it shall be essential to make all necessary provisions in regard to traffic load, parking spaces, fire fighting, building service installations, water supply, drainage and other safety requirements which would be applicable to permanent cinema buildings on its conversion. 19.2 The provisions of 3, 4, 5 ( except 5.2 ), 6, 8, 9 ( except 9.2, 9.5 and 3.8 ), 10 ( except 10.8 and 10.9), 11, 12, 13, ( except 13.6 ), 14, 15 and 17 shall mutatis mutandis be applicable to semi-permanent cinema buildings. However, certain administrative requirements as given in 3 such as details to be given in building plan, etc, and other requirements may be relaxed by the Authority for semi-permanent cinema buildings to the extent that other safety requirements are not affected.

19.1 During

19.3 The front portion and a portion of the adjacent two sides of the boundary wall around the premises shall be of masonry construction of sufficient height as specified in 9.9 and the remaining portion of the boundary wall shall be of barbed wire fencing so as to prevent outside public from causing any inconvenience to the persons within the premises when the show is on with the side cladding thrown open.
19.4 The side walls of the main building shall be dwarf walls of minimum 1.0 m high plastered over which durable black canvas, tarpaulin curtains or other suitable material shall be provided so as to shut off light and offered shelter from rain.

62

IS:4878

- 1986

APPENDIX [ Clause 3.6.1 (b) ]
NOTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION

A

OF CINEMA

BUILDING

son/daughter

Please take notice that I ......................................................... of ............................... .................. age .................. * resident of __.......................................................................... YI propose locating a permanentlsemi.............................. . ..................

permanent belonging about

.................................................................
to Shri ......................................................

on the land admeasuring and assessed under

.............................................................

............................................................................ `f .................. and bounded as under ... ............................. ................................. . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -

Notice cinema

is hereby

given that any objections Authority within

to the location

of the said

should be lodged with the

...................................

...............................

15 days from ......................................

...............................................

*Full address. tName of the Authority.

63

IS:4878-

1986

APPENDIX [ Clause 3.6.2 ]
NOTIFICATION Whereas FOR GRANT

B

OF NO OBJECTION

CERTIFICATE ... son of.. .............

Shri .........................................

................................................ * of ................................................................

age .........................

resident . has ...............

......................................................
a `No Objection nent cinema at land of Shri Certificate' for the location

applied to me for the grant of of a permanent/semi-perma-

.......

.......................

-f ............................

on the

................................................. and assessed under ...................................... ..............................................................

........................... .... $ .....................
and bounded as under

. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . . . *.. *
Notice grant is hereby given that any person having Certificate' as aforesaid any objection to the

of a `No Objection

should lodge

his objec-

tions in writing

with the undersigned not later than the . . . . . . . . . *... .- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . -. . . . day of . . . . . . . . . i.. . . . . . . . . _.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,,.-a. 19 ..*... Any objections received after that date shall not be consideration. under my hand this... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of
A.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

taken into Given

. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19 .. .

Licensing

Authority

*Full address. tFul1 description of location IName of the Allthority.

of site.

64

IS: 9878 - 1986

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.6.4 )
NO OBJECTION

C

CERTIFICATE

In exercise of the powers conferred by Rule . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . of the . . . . . . . . * . . . . . . . . . . . . I. . . . . . . . . . * . . . . . . . . . . . . Cinema Rules, I, . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ._. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . -"..*.... . ..*..* .- . . . . . . . . . . . . do hereby grant this certificate that there is no objection to Shri . ..**.* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.. -. . . . . . . . . . . . son of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .-. . . ..I.... *. . . . . resident of . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . N... . . . .. . . . . . . . . ..I - . . . . . . . . . . . . .a. . . . m.......... * . . . . *. . . . ,...- I..,.......... -. . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . .
l

locating a permanent/semi-permanent
1

cinema

on the land belonging

to

Shri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . at . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .t .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . __. .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. .. . . . . . . . .- .. . . . . .. . . . . .. . * The site where the cinema is to be located is specified below: ( Please give here the description of the site )

This `No Objection Certificate' is valid for a period of two years in the case of permanent cinema, and six months in the case of touring cinema from the date hereof and if within this period the proposed cinema is not put up, a fresh no objection certificate should be applied for. Given under my hand this . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . day of . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . .-. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . .. .

Licensing Authority

*Full address. tFul1 description

of location of site,

IS : 4878 - 1986

APPENDIX D ( Clauses 3.7.1 and 3.7.2.5 )
APPLICATION
To The Licensing Authority/Local
v . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . .

FOR CINEMA

BUILDING

PERMIT/LICENCE

Body Authority
. . .

. ..... ... ... ... .. .-. . . . . .
Sir,
6 . . . . .

. . . . . .

. . .

l

.,....

. . . . . . . . . . .

apply to you, pursuant to Rule *..*. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . of the licencelrenewal of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cinema Rules for a licence/temporary a licence for cinematograph exhibition for ._. . ..* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . years to be given in the premises situated on/in plot No. . . . . . . . . . ._ . . . . . . . . . in colony/ street/road . . . _.. . . . . . . . . . . . and I BAZAR . forward heri%h; the'following pl;;ns.gnd.`l~~~fi~~ions ( Items 1 to 4 ) in quadruplicate, duly signed by me and ( name in block letters ) . . . . . . . . . . . . licence No. __ ._.. _.... . _.. . . . . . . .. ... .. . . . . the licensed architect/engineer, ._.... ._..., . . . who have prepared the plans, designs, etc, and a copy of other statements/documents ( as applicable ) ( Items 5 and 6 ): I hereby 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Site Plan Building Plan Services Plan Specifications, General and Detailed* Ownership Title Attested Copy of Receipt for Payment

of Fees and permission accor-

I request that the proposal ded to me to execute the work.

may be approved of owner

Signature

. _.. . . . . . .

. ..

. . . . . . . . ..

Name of owner ._. . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . . . . . *- . . . . . . . . . ( in block letters ) Address of owner

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1..

1.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..-... . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Date

. . . . .. .. . . . . .. . . . .

*A format may be prepared by the Authority for direct use. 66

IS : 4878 - 1986

APPENDIX ( &use
To

E

3.7.2.6 )

FORM FOR SUPERVISION The Licensing Authority/Local Body Authority . f . .. . . . . . . . . . . ..- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
." ..,...

m

,,.,......

* .

. . .

..."

.

.

.

.

.

..C..

Sir, I hereby certify that the erection/material alteration in/of cinema building situated on/in plot No. ._. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . *... . . . . . . . . . . . . . in colony/ BAZAR . . . -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . * Street/Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . city . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . shall be carried out under my supervision and I certify that all the materials ( type and grade ) and the workmanship of the work shall be generally in accordance with the general and detailed specifications submitted along with, and that the work shall be carried out according to the sanctioned plans. Signature of Licensed Architect/Engineer ................................

Name of Licensed Architect/Engineer ( in block letters ) Licence No. of Architect/Engineer. Address. of Architect/Engineer

.......................................

............................................. u.. ....................

........................

. . . . . . -. . . . . .-. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .
*`. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..-......... *..

Date . . . . . . . . . *. ,.....,

67

IS : 4878 - `1978

APPENDIX

F

( Clauses 3.7.2.6 and 3.7.10 )
GUIDE FOR THE QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSED ARCHITECTS AND ENGINEERS REQUIREMENTS

F-l. F-l.1

ESSENTIAL

Every building work for which permission is sought under the building byelaws shall be designed and supervised by a licensed architect/ engineer. Qualifications which an architect or engineer should have before he may be registered by the local body and permitted to practise within the local body's jurisdication are given in F-2.1 to F-2.2. F-2. QUALIFICATIONS FOR ARCHITECTS AND ENGINEERS

F-2.1 The minimum qualifications for licensing of architect shall be the Associate Membership of the Indian Institute of Architects or such degree or diploma which makes him eligible for such membership or such qualifications listed in the Architects Act 197'2, and shall be registered with the Council of' Architecture under the Act.
F-2.2 The Corporate Engineers ing which minimum qualifications for licensing of engineer shall be the Member of Civil Engineering Division of the Institution of ( India ) or such degree or diploma in civil, structural engineermakes him eligible for such membership.

F-2.2.2 The work of structural designing of the building shall be carried out by a licensed engineer having minimum 3 years experience in structural engineering practice in designing. The 3 years experience shall be relaxed to 2 years in case of post graduate degree of recognized Indian or Foreign University in the branch of structural engineering. In case of doctorate in structural engineering, the experience required would be one year.

68

ISr4878-1986

APPENDIX ( czause 3.7.11 )

G

FORM FOR SANCTION OR REFUSAL OF BUILDING
To . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . Sir, . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

PERMIT

With reference to your application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *-. . . . .. . -. . . . . . . . dated... .., . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . for grant of permit for the cinema building in colony/Street .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .-. situated on/in plot No. . . . . . __.. . . .. . . . . . . . MOHALLA/BAZAR . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._ City . . . . . . ._. ._. . . . ._. . . . . . . . . . I have to inform you that the sanction has been granted/refused by the Authority on the following grounds: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.

6. &ice' Stamp
Office ( Communication

Signature Authority

of the . . . . I_. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

) No. .. . ... .. . ... . . Name, Designation

and Address of the Authority *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . .. . . . . . . . . .

Dated . . . . . ..I.........

a... 69

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . * . . . . . . ..I...........

* ..*

IS : 4878 - 1986

APPENDIX H [ Clause 3.8.2 (d) ]
FORM FOR NOTICE
The Licensing Authority/Local

OF COMMENCEMENT
body Authority

. . . ._ . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.. .. . .- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I hereby building ................................. will be commenced vide No. of . . ........................ certify that the erection, material alteration in/of cinema

situated

on/in plot No. ........................... Street/Road ........................ on ................................

in colony/BAZAR city .............

as per your permission,

. . ___................

dated ....................
architect/engineer, with plans, dated

under the supervision
licence No. ............. .. elevations and sections

licensed

..........................
sanctioned,

and in accordance

vide No. .........................

...............................

Signature

of owner

.....................

Name of owner ........................... ( in block letters ) Address of owner

.........................

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .-.
Date .-. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.U . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

*.*a

. ..-..........

u-

,.....,..

70

I$:

4878 - 1986

APPENDIX [ Clause 3.8 2(e) ]
FORM FOR COMPLETION
The Licensing
...................

J

CERTIFICATE

Authority/Local
..................................

body Authority
*. ..... . .

.

....................

...........................

..........

I hereby certify that the erection, re-erection or material alteration in/of cinema building No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . situated on/in plot No. . . . . . . ._. .._ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in colony /BAZAK . ._. . . . . . . . .*. street/road . . . I.. . . . . . . . . .._. ._. . . . . . . . . . . . . . _. city ... ___ ... ._ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . has been supervised by me and has been completed on . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . according to the plans, elevations and sections ... ... ... ... .. . . . sanctioned, vide No. . . . . . . ,_. . . . . . . . . . ,__ . . . . . . . . . dated . . . _.. ._. .., ._. . . . ._. The work has been completed to my best satisfaction, the workmanship and all the materials ( type and grade ) have been used strictly in accordance with general and detailed specifications. No provisions of the act or the building byelaws, no requisition madr, conditions prescribed or orders issued thereunder have been transgressed in the course of the work. The building is fit for use for which it has been erected, r-e-erected or materially altered, constructed and enlarged.

Signature Name Licence Address

of Licensed

Architect/Engineer

. . _.

. . . . . .. .

. . . . .- . . . .. . . . .

( in block

of Licensed Architect/Engineer letters ) No. of Architect/Engineer of Architect/Engineer

. . . . . . . .__.__ . . . __ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a". . . . . .. . . . .
. . . . ..`_ ..,.............. ...

._. . . . __.... . . ...*...

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *.... **-**- . . .. *...

. . . . . * . . . . . . . . . . . . ._ . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .--

Dated

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . .

71

IS : 4878 - 1986

APPENDIX [ Clause 3.8.2(f) ]
FORM FOR OCCUPANCY

K

CERTIFICATE

. . . . . . . . . .- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . ..* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . .

I hereby

certify that the erection/material

alteration

in/of cinema

building situated on/in plot No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in colony/BA.ZAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . street/road . ..* . . . . . . . . . . . . .-. . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . -- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . completed under the supervision of . . . _.. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . . . . . . . . . . . . *... licensed architect/engineer licence No . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..-.***.-. has been inspected by me and I declare that the building conforms in all respects to the requirements of byelaws for construction of cinema buildings, in respect of structural safety, fire safety, hygienic and sanitary conditions inside and in the surroundings and is fit for occupation.

Office Stamp

Date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._. . . .

Signature of the Authority... . . . . . . .,. . . . . . .

72

IS:4878 -1986

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.1 )
OFF-STREET PARKING

L

SPACES

L-l. Each off-street parking space provided for motor vehicles ( cars ) shall not be less than 13.75 ms in area, and for scooters and cycles, the parking spaces provided shall not be less than 1.25 ms and I.00 ms respectively. L-2. The parking space in cinema buildings shall be provided ted below: Motor Vehicles - Space shall be provided as given parking motor vehicles ( cars ): Sl Jvo. i> ii) iii) Cities/ Towns With population between 200 000 to 1 000 000 With population 50 000 to 200 000 With population less than 50 000 One Car Parking for Every 25 seats 80 seats 120 seats as stipulabelow for

Space

NOTE - The requirements for off-street parking for metropolitan cities with population 400 000 shall be broadly based on the above scale and these requirements shall be appropriately adapted to suit the increased traffic generated, the tra6c pattern as well as the nature of vehicles in the city.

b)

Other Types of Vehicles - In addition to the parking areas provided in (a) above, 25 to 50 percent additional parking space shall be provided for parking other types of vehicles and the additional spaces required for other vehicles shall be as decided by the Authority, keeping in view the nature of traffic generated in the city. of car parking may be provided in the front open space reducing the clear vehicular accessway to less than G m.

L-3. One row of 12 m without

L-4. Off-street parking space shall be provided with adequate vehicular acess to a street; and the area of drives, aisles and such other provisions required for adequate manoeuvering of vehicles shall be exclusive of the parking space stipulated in M-2. L-5. Parking of vehicles. spaces shall be paved and clearly marked for different types

L-6. In the case of parking spaces provided in basements, at least two ramps of adequate width and slope shall be provided, located preferably at opposite ends. 73

IS: 4878- 1986
( Co rtinued from page 2 ) Members SIIH.I G. D. MATHUR SHRr M. M. MISTRY SHRI B. D. DHAWAN (Alternate) SHICI ANIL PANDIT SHRI D. G. PANDYA Representing Town 8z Country Delhi National Buildings Planning Organization, New Delhi New

Organization,

Snn~ D. RAMANUJAM SHRI B. G. DAVE ( Alternate) Public Works Department, Madras SEMOR DEPUTY CHIEF ENQINEER ( BLDU ) EXECUTIVE ENQINEER BLD~ ( Alternate ) Central Circuit Cine Association, Bhusaval SH~I SHEODANMAL SHRI SWARUP CHAND S. JAIN ( Alternate ) Motion Picture Association, Delhi SH~I VIJAY NARAIN SETH SHRI JOQINDER SIN~H (Alternate) Gujarat Theatre Owners' and Exhibitors AssociaSHRI IND~E~AI D. SHAH tion, Ahmadabad SHRI JAYANTI LAL H. SEAR ( Alternate ) Home Department, Government of Maharashtra, SUPERINTENDINO ENolNEER Bombay EXECUTIVE ENQINEER ( Alternate ) Suri & Suri Consulting Acoustical Engineers, SI~LI GAUTAM Sum New Delhi

National Film Development Corporation Ltd, Bombay Panchayat, Housing and Urban Development Department, Ahmadabad Film Federation of India, Bombay

74

