WAT ATA IS 14194 (Part 2) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


qafa AWA A tsalqediss — 
upaa Bl uaa 
UNT 2 pasar Baa ATA 
( ERT FRIANT) 


Radionuclides in Environmental Samples 
— Methods of Estimation 


Part 2 Gross Alpha Activity Measurement 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 13.020.40; 13.280 


© BIS 2022 


Rda mAP Sl 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS YH, 9 IEIR Mle MHL AMT, as freit - 110002 
w MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110 002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2022 Price Group 3 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards, after the draft finalized by the Nuclear Energy for Peaceful Applications Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1994 for measurement of gross alpha activity in the 
environmental samples. While formulating standard, it was kept in view that long lived gross 
alpha activity of air filter sample can be used to detect any air contamination especially 
Plutonium (Pu). In case of water samples, gross activity determined by evaporation of an 
aliquot can indicate the trend of contamination especially for the waters receiving wastes 
from fuel reprocessing plant. 


This standard was subsequently revised in 2013 in view of the technological advancement in 
this field. In first revision, modifications were made in sample size, activity measurement 
procedure and in calculations. Requirement of calibration was also incorporated in the 
standard. 


This second revision has been undertaken in order to upgrade the test method procedure as 
per the current practice followed by the industries. In this revision, the following changes 
have been made: 


— Principle of the test method has been elaborated; 

— Efficiency of the alpha counting system has been prescribed; 

— Standard source for calibration 7*°Pu has been prescribed; 

— Limit for low and high total dissolve solid (TDS) in water sample has been 
prescribed; and 

— Test method procedure for water sample has been modified. 


All laboratories carrying out analysis or measurement of radioactivity in commodities shall 
be duly certified by Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Govt of India. 


This standard is being published in five parts. Other parts of this standard are: 
Part 1 Gross beta activity 
Part 3 Uranium 
Part 4 Radium 
Part 5 Sampling 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 
1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. 


IS 14194 (Part 2) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


RADIONUCLIDES IN ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLES — METHODS OF ESTIMATION 
PART 2 GROSS ALPHA ACTIVITY MEASUREMENT 


(Second Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) prescribes the 
method of test for measurement of gross 
alpha activity in the environmental 
samples (particularly air and water). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain 
provisions which, through reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. 
At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revisions and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 

264 : 2005 Nitric acid (third 
revision) 

265 : 1993 Hydrochloric acid (fourth 
revision) 

1070: 1992 Reagent grade water- 
Specification (third 
revision) 

10332: 1982 Hydrofluoric acid, 
aqueous 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the 
following terms shall apply. 


3.1Activity 


The number of spontaneous nuclear 
disintegrations occurring in a certain 
quantity (weight/volume) of material 


during a specified time interval, divided by 
that time interval. It is expressed in 
Becquerel (Bq), where 1 Bq = 1 
disintegration/second. Earlier unit of 
activity was Curie (Ci), where 1 Ci = 3.7 x 
10!° disintegrations/second. 


3.2 Nuclide 


A species of atom characterized by its 
mass number, atomic number and nuclear 
energy state, provided that the mean life in 
that state is long enough to be observable. 


3.3 Radionuclide 


An element, with a certain mass number 
and atomic number, which undergoes 
spontaneous disintegration in a measurable 
period of time. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


Alpha particle incident on silver activated 
zinc sulphide [ZnS(Ag)] powder spend 
their energy completely in raising the 
valence band electrons into conduction 
band. The electron from the excited state 
returns to the ground state, either directly 
or through activator sites. The loss of 
energy appears as visible/ultraviolet (UV) 
light when they reach the ground state. 
Cathode of multiplier tube (PMT) is 
positioned in such a way that it absorbs 
full light energy and emits primary 
electron. PMT multiplies the primary 
electron and develops a current signal at 
the output of anode which is amplified and 
saved to register it in a counter. 


5 APPARATUS 


5.1 Alpha Counting System 


IS 14194 (Part 2) : 2022 


Comprising of a ZnS (Ag) detector, with 
sample holder in close proximity of the 
detector, is capable of housing stainless 
steel planchets, of 2.5 cm diameter. The 
background of the system is about 0.002 
counts per seconds (cps) and the efficiency 
for the plated **°Pu source is 25-30 
percent. The efficiency is largely 
influenced by thickness of sample. 
Minimum detectable activity (MDA) for 
unit volume of sample is 8.9 mBq for a 
counting time of 5 000 s. The system shall 
be so sensitive and capable to detect gross 
a radioactivity below 0.1 Bq/l in the 
drinking water sample when measured as 
per the described method. 


5.2 Efficiency of the Alpha Counting 
System 


An electroplated standard source of 7°?Pu 
is counted on the ZnS (Ag) detector for 3 
600 s. Efficiency of the detector is 
obtained by the following formula: 


Efficiency (%) 
_ Counts per second x 100 
~ Disntegration per second 


5.3 Stainless Steel Planchet — of 0.5 mm 
thick and 25 mm in diameter. 


5.4. Infrared Lamp — of 500 W 
6. REAGENTS 
6.1 Fe Carrier 


A carrier of 5mg/ml is to be prepared by 
adding 1.45 g of ferric chloride in 100 ml 
of ultrapure water. 


6.2 Ba Carrier 


A carrier of 2mg/ml is to be prepared by 
adding 0.2 g of barium sulphate in 100 ml 
of ultrapure water. 


6.3Alpha Calibration Standard Source 
— electroplated source of 7°’Pu 


7 PROCEDURE 


7.1 Air Filter for Long Lived Alpha 
Activity 


7.1.1 Collect air particulate sample on 
Millipore or glass fibre or Whatman No. 
40 filter paper of 25 mm diameter placed 
in the air sampler. Filter about 5 m° of air. 
Carefully transfer the filter paper along 
with particulate matter to aœ counting 
system and count the a activity after 
allowing the short lived radon daughter 
products to decay. Calculate the activity 
per cubic metre of air based on the flow 
rate (m/s) and time of filtration. 


7.2 Water Samples with Low Dissolved 
Solids (< 100 mg/l) 


a. The collected water sample, 
present in a pre-conditioned 
polyethylene bottle, is properly 
labelled with a code including the 
following details: Sample code, 
date of collection, sampling 
location and sample type. Prior to 
sample processing the water 
sample is passed through 0.45 um 
filter using vacuum filtration 
assembly, to remove the suspended 
solids. Thereafter the total 
dissolved solids (TDS) is measured 
in the filtered water sample. The 
residue is discarded. The filtered 
sample, in a glass beaker, is further 
processed for gross alpha 
measurement. 


b. Evaporate 100 ml sample to 10 ml 
in a clean glass beaker at 100 °C on 
a hotplate. Sputtering of liquid and 
overheating are to be avoided. 


c. Add nearly 10 ml of pre- 
concentrated sample on a stainless 
steel planchet, with an increment of 


2ml at a time using a graduated 
pipette. 


d. Completely evaporate the liquid on 
a new, background counted 
stainless steel planchet under 
infrared lamp. 


e. Heat the planchet to a red hot 
condition. 


f. Count the cooled planchet for gross 
alpha in an alpha counting system. 


7.3 Water Samples with High Dissolved 
Solids (> 100 mg/l) 


a. Take 1 liter of filtered water 
sample. 


b. Acidify with 2 ml conc nitric acid. 


c. Add 5 mg/ml of Fe carrier and 2 
mg/ml of Ba carrier. 


d. Add ammonia and 50 percent 
ammonium sulphate (to precipitate 


ferric hydroxide 
[Fe(OH)3] and barium sulphate (to 
precipitate radium barium 


sulphate). Ammonia is added 
dropwise to ensure complete 
precipitation. 


e. Centrifuge and transfer the 
precipitate on new, background 
counted stainless steel planchet of 
2.5 cm diameter (the precipitate 
thickness should not be more than 
10 mg/cm’). 


f. Evaporate it under an infrared (IR) 
lamp and heat the planchet to a red 
hot condition in flame. 


g. Count in ZnS (Ag) based alpha 
counting system. 


IS 14194 (Part 2) : 2022 


8 ACTIVITY MEASURMENT 


8.1 The alpha counting system is switched 
on for at least an hour before 
measurement, for stabilization. 


8.2 Take a 10 000 s background with a 
blank stainless steel planchet. 


8.3 Determine the efficiency of the counter 
using the standard reference source. 


8.4 The sample, on stainless steel planchet, 
is counted on the alpha counting system 
for 5 000 s. This includes background of 
the alpha counter. 


9 CALCULATION 


9.1 Calculate the gross alpha activity (A) 
of the sample (Bq/unit volume) as follows: 


(=-=) +s x 100 


A (Bq/l) = ~5 T a 


where 


S = Total alpha 
counts due to 
sample plus 
background, 


ts and tg = Counting times 
of sample and 
background, in 
seconds, 


B = Background 
counts, 


SD is the stadard deviation 


S B 
= iG + Cael 


IS 14194 (Part 2) : 2022 


E = Efficiency (%) of the 
alpha counting 
system, and 


V = Volume of water 
sample, in 1. 


10 PRECAUTION 


Precaution should be taken that the 
precipitate load on stainless steel planchet 
should not be more than 10 mg/cm? to 
avoid alpha absorption. 


NOTES 
1 Analytical Reagent (AR) grade chemicals 
and reagents shall be used. 


2 Ultrapure water shall be used for 
preparation of stock standards and reagents. 

3 Glassware to be used for sample processing 
and storage are to be soaked in 10% nitric 
acid followed by rinsing with ultrapure water 
before use, to prevent sorption of elements on 
the walls of the container. 

4 Analyse duplicate samples, reagent/process 
blanks and = analytical blanks, known 
standards during the process for quality 
control. 


IS 14194 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Nuclear Materials for Peaceful Applications Sectional Committee, CHD 30 


Organization 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (Health 
Safety & Environment Group ), Mumbai 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, 
Mumbai 


Atomic Mineral Directorate, Hyderabad 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
(Radiochemistry & Isotope Group), 


Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (Nuclear 
Fuels Group) Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Trichy 


Board of Radiation and Isotope 
Technology (BRIT), New Delhi 


Defence Research &Development 
Organisation, Jodhpur 


Department of Atomic Energy, Nuclear 
Fuel Complex, Hyderabad 


Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


Heavy Water Board, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Management, 
Ahmedabad 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 


Indian Rare Earths Ltd. Research Centre, 
Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr D. K. ASWAL (Chairperson) 
DR B. K. SAPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. PAWAR 


DR T. S. SUNIL KUMAR 


DR H. J. PANT 


Dr S. K. JHA 


SHRI A. SUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI M. ARUN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI N. JAYACHANDRAN 


DR VAY KADWAD (Alternate) 


DR PRADEEP NARAYAN 


DR B. N. MURTHY 
SHRI Y. BALAJI RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI P. C. SWAIN 


MS ANANYA VERMA 


PROF M. P. RAMMOHAN 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI D. SINGH 
DR B. R. MISHRA (Alternate) 


IS 14194 (Part 2) : 2022 


Organization 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic 
Research, Kalpakkam 


Larsen and Tubro Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, 
Mumbai, 


Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai 


Uranium Corporation of India Ltd, 
Jharkhand 


Ministry of Defence (Institute of Nuclear 
Medicine and Allied Sciences), New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR B. VENKATARAMAN 


DR K SANKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM SEHGAL 


SHRI ANIL PARAB (Alternate) 


LT COL PANKAJ AHUJA 


LT COL AMAN SODHI (Alternate) 


SHRI BHASKAR PANDIT 


DR R. JALALI 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


DR ARUNA KAUSHIK 


SHRI PRADEEP GOSWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI PUSHPENDRA KUMAR 
Scientist ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 30 (12901). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


