NAT HA IS 16307 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


ататек те «тетер зечт« — FRE — 
HF qfraror erar oneri vat зайт 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products — 
Cigarettes — Monitor Test Piece — 
Requirements and use 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.160 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH HM, +ç faccfl — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2021 Price Group 5 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Divisional Council. 


Smoke yields of cigarettes are routinely analysed for quality control, product development and regulatory 
compliance by smoking cigarettes on an analytical smoking machine. The smoke yield values should reflect the 
contribution of only the tobacco blend and cigarette design when smoked under a standard smoking regime, the 
smoking machine should not play any role in influencing the smoke yields. This is possible only if the analytical 
processes involved when using a cigarette smoking machine are stable and consistent. To ensure this, the smoking 
machine and smoking process are monitored regularly by smoking test cigarettes made to very strict specifications 
within a very narrow range of variation. As the test cigarette is meant only for laboratory purposes and not for 
human consumption, it is differentiated from normal cigarettes by naming it as monitor test piece. 


Monitor test pieces can be manufactured indigenously or obtained from CORESTA (Centre de Coopration pour 
les Recheches Scientifiques Relatives au Tabac/Cooperation Centre for Scientific Research Relative to Tobacco, 
Paris; www.coresta.org). 


In view of the above, it was considered necessary to set specifications for manufacturing the test pieces as well as a 
standard method for using the indigenously made test pieces or CORESTA test pieces for monitoring the stability 
of the smoking machine and smoking process on a regular basis. 


This standard was first published in 2015 as identical adoption of ISO 16055 : 2012 “Tobacco and tobacco 
products — Monitor test piece — Requirements and use”. The ISO standard has since been revised in 2019 to 
align with the more intensive smoking regimes used in ISO 20778 “Cigarettes — Routine analytical 
cigarette smoking machine — Definitions and standard conditions with an intense smoking regime” and 
ISO 20779 “Cigarettes — Generation and collection of total particulate matter using a routine analytical smoking 
machine with an intense smoking regime”. This revision is being brought out to develop IS 16307 as indigenous 
standard, while aligning with latest technological advancements in the area and alignment with Intense Smoking 
Regime of ISO was not found suitable. In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn 
from ISO 16055 : 2019 “Tobacco and tobacco products — Monitor test piece — Requirements and use”. 


While formulating this standard, necessary consideration has also been given to the relevant rules and regulations 
prescribed by the Government of India under the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products Act (COTPA), 2003 and 
the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 16307 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS — 
CIGARETTES — MONITOR TEST PIECE — 
REQUIREMENTS AND USE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard describes the requirements for a 
monitor test piece, its manufacture as well as its use 
for monitoring the stability of the analytical processes 
involved when using a cigarette smoking machine. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards. 


IS No. Title 


15393 (Part 2) : 
2003/ISO 5725-2 
: 1994 


(Trueness and 
Precision) of measurement 
methods and results | — 
Part 2: Basic method for the 
determination of repeatability 
and reproducibility of a standard 
measurement method 


Accuracy 


16022 : 2015 Routine analytical 
cigarette-smoking machine — 
Definitions and standard 


conditions 


16024 : 2012 Cigarettes — Determination of 
carbon monoxide in the vapour 
phase of cigarette smoke — 


NDIR method 


Tobacco and tobacco 
products — Atmosphere for 
conditioning and testing 


16121 : 2013 


16023 : 2021 Cigarettes — Determination 
of total and nicotine-free dry 
particulate matter using a routine 
analytical smoking machine 


(first revision) 


IS No. Title 


16025 : 2014 Cigarettes — Determination of 
nicotine in smoke condensates — 


Gas-chromatographic method 


16042 (Part 1): 
2012 


Cigarettes — Determination of 
water in total particulate matter 
from the mainstream smoke: 
Part 1  Gas-chromatographic 
method 


16042 (Part 2) : 
2021 


Cigarettes — Determination of 
water in total particulate matter 
from the main stream smoke: 
Part 2 Karl Fischer method 
(under development) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this document, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


3.1 Monitor Test Piece — Cigarette sample 
produced for a specific test purpose, validated to fulfil 
requirements within specified tolerances and intended 
to be used for laboratory purposes only and labelled to 
clearly indicate that it is not for human use. Monitor 
test piece is used to monitor the stability of analytical 
processes involved when using a cigarette-smoking 
machine. 


A monitor test piece is a sample taken from a batch 
of cigarettes that show the greatest homogeneity with 
regard to their physical, chemical and smoke yield 
characteristics. 


3.2 CORESTA Monitor Test Piece — Monitor test 
piece supplied by CORESTA. 


3.3 Analysis Value — Result, based on the testing of 
5 or 20 items (depending on the type of smoking 
machine used), of a smoking test and analysis carried 
out in accordance with IS 16023, IS 16024, IS 16025 
and IS 16042 (Part 1) [or IS 16042-2/FAD 04 (16062)]. 


IS 16307 : 2021 


3.4 NFDPM (Nicotine-Free Dry Particulate 
Matter) — A derived value obtained by subtracting 
the contents of nicotine and water from total particulate 
matter (TPM) per test piece or cigarette. 


3.5 Smoke Yield — Contents of NFDPM, nicotine and 
carbon monoxide per test piece or cigarette. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 The monitor test pieces shall be produced from one 
production batch. 


4.2 The number of monitor test pieces produced shall 
be sufficient to cover the needs of a period of at least 
two years. 


4.3 For reasons of homogeneity, the cut tobacco used 
shall be taken from one well-mixed batch of a single 
grade of flue-cured tobacco with no addition of further 
materials, such as stems, humectants or flavours. 


4.4 The non-tobacco materials used, such as cigarette 
paper, filters and tipping paper shall be taken from one 
production batch and strict quality-control measures 
shall be applied specially during the production of the 
filters. 


Specifications for the production of CORESTA 
monitor test pieces are to be found in Annex A. The 
requirements also include a stable yield for carbon 
monoxide which is best obtained with a non-ventilated 
filter. Therefore, the recommendation is that the monitor 
test piece is unventilated. Similar specifications may be 
adopted for local production of monitor test pieces. 


4.5 The production tolerances on tobacco mass, 
circumference and draw resistance of the monitor test 
piece shall be controlled as precisely as possible. It will 
normally be necessary to increase the quality control 
measures and to decrease the production machine 
speed to obtain the required consistency in physical, 
chemical and smoke yields of the monitor test pieces. 
Mass control is critical in the production of a reliable 
monitor test piece. Excessive mass variation contributes 
to unacceptable variation in smoke yields. The standard 
deviation of mass of individual monitor test piece must 
be controlled to below 16 mg. If necessary, monitor test 
pieces should be selected by mass before smoking. 


4.6 The packaged monitor test pieces shall be stored at 
a temperature below or equal to+4 °C until they are to 
be used. 
NOTE — Other reference standards in the tobacco field 
require a storage temperature below —16 ?C for reasons of 
hygiene. Normally, a storage temperature of + 4 °C is sufficient 
for monitor test pieces. 


4.7 The monitor test pieces in a lot shall show 
consistent values for the puff Nos. and the contents of 
NFDPM, nicotine and carbon monoxide in their smoke 
yields. This consistency shall be assessed by means of a 


comparative study of sufficient size across participating 
laboratories and smoking machines. 


4.8 The product design shall ensure that the smoke 
yields (NFDPM, nicotine and carbon monoxide) are 
sufficiently high per monitor test piece (approximately 
14 mg NFDPM and carbon monoxide, approximately 
1.4 mg nicotine) so that the influence from a possible 
offset in the smoking machine settings can be 
distinguished from the normal variation of the smoke 
yields. 


4.9 It is essential to make the monitor test piece 
clearly distinguishable from commercial cigarettes. 
The monitor test pieces shall be packed in hinge-lid 
boxes of 20 labelled with the Sample No. and a text. 
‘For Laboratory use only’ in addition to the regulatory 
requirements in force. 


5 TESTING 


5.1 Testing of the lot, including determination of 
the values for carbon monoxide, NFDPM, and nicotine 
in the smoke, shall be carried out in accordance 
with IS 16024, IS 16023, IS 16025 and IS 16042-1 
[or IS 16042 (Part 2) the form of an interlaboratory 
trial run to check the consistency of the monitor test 
pieces in accordance with 15393 (Part 2). The results 
are statistically evaluated to ensure acceptably low 
variation in physical parameters and smoke yields prior 
to release of the monitor test piece for use. In addition, 
stored monitor test piece should be tested annually in 
an interlaboratory study to ensure the consistency of all 
its essential parameters over long storage. 
NOTE — Monitor test pieces for daily routine use may be 
produced by the individual company for its own purposes. 
However, for the purposes of interlaboratory comparisons or 
for comparison of analytical consistency between laboratories, 
it is advised to use CORESTA monitor test pieces. 


5.2 The smoke yield will normally be based upon 

the smoking of at least 20 monitor test pieces to set 

specifications for smoke yield (mean and SD) for the lot 

and recorded in the data sheet (see 6). These values will 

be used to prepare the control charts for monitoring the 

stability of the smoking machine and smoking process. 
NOTE — CORESTA monitor test piece will have already 
gone through a multi-laboratory study before being shipped. 
The data sheet accompanying each consignment of CORESTA 
monitor test piece will contain all relevant data ready to be 
used for monitoring purposes. 


5.3 If the smoke values (mean and SD) of the test 
pieces match with those recorded in the data sheet, the 
smoking machine and smoking process will be taken 
as stable. Otherwise the errors will be identified and 
corrective action taken. Sample cigarettes shall be 
smoked only on a stable smoking machine. 


Figure 1 illustrates the use of monitor test pieces in 
routine smoking analysis. 


IS 16307 : 2021 


Construct the control chart in accordance with ISO 7870, ISO 7873 and ISO 8258 


Smoke and analyse 


monitor test piece 


Result for 
variation 
ОК? 


Search for Eliminate 
errors errors 


Yes 
Average 
x | = : E 
errors 
No 
Yes 


Smoke 


cigarette 
samples 


Can 
cigarette 
results be regarded 
as valid? 


Smoke and analyse 
monitor test piece 


Result for 
variation 
O.K.? 


Search for Eliminate 
errors errors 


[= 
Ауегаре Мо Search for 
О.К? errors 


And so on 


Fic. 1 FLOW CHART FOR THE USE OF MONITOR TEST PIECES IN ROUTINE ANALYTICAL SMOKING 


IS 16307 : 2021 


5.4 The monitor test pieces are periodically smoked 
in parallel to sample cigarettes on a linear smoking 
machine and sequentially on a rotary machine to 
maintain a check and control on the smoking machine 
and smoking process (see 7.2.2 and 7.2.3). 
NOTE — The frequency of smoking test pieces as controls 
when sample cigarettes are being smoked will vary from 
laboratory to laboratory and from machine to machine. 
Practical procedures and suggestions are given in 7.2.3. 


6 SHEET INFORMATION 


6.1 General 


A data sheet shall contain the information set out in 
6.2 and 6.3. 


6.2 General Specifications 


6.2.1 Physical — Specifications for length, 
diameter/circumference, filter length, tipping length 
and filter material. 


6.2.2 Chemical — Total sugar, reducing sugar and 
nicotine. 


6.3 Analysis Values for Smoke Yields 


The results from the laboratory testing of the monitor 
test piece, comprising: 


a) the type of smoking machine used; 


b) the average and standard deviation of the results 
for puff number; 


c) the average and standard deviation of the results 
for nicotine in the smoke; 


d) the average and standard deviation of the results 
for nicotine-free dry particulate matter; 


e) the average and standard deviation of the results 
for carbon monoxide in the smoke; 


f) the two-sided confidence interval for the mean 
values, with a confidence level of 95 percent. 


7 USE 


7.1 General 


Monitor test pieces are used to monitor the stability 
of the analytical processes involved when using a 
cigarette-smoking machine for routine analyses in 
accordance with IS 16022. In particular, they are 
used to assess whether the analytical process related 
to the machine-smoking of cigarettes [described in 
IS 16121, IS 16023, IS 16024, IS 16025 and IS 16042-1 
(or IS 16042 (Part 2)] is ‘in statistical control’ 
(see ISO 7870-1). 


The routine use of monitor test pieces may vary from 
laboratory to laboratory and between the two commonly 
used types of analytical smoking machine. The general 
principle is to evaluate the consistency of the values of 
the essential parameters (such as puff number, carbon 


monoxide in the vapour phase, total particulate matter, 
nicotine and water in total particulate matter and 
NFDPM) by using control charts. 


Monitor test pieces are not to be used for calibration 
purposes, and the results obtained with monitor test 
pieces shall not be used for correcting or calculating 
analytical data from investigation samples. 


The smoke yields will normally be based upon the 
smoking of at least 20 monitor test pieces as described 
in IS 16023. 


The smoking of 20 cigarettes will give one average 
result from a rotary smoking machine whereas a linear 
smoking machine will give 4 average results from 
smoking 5 cigarettes in each of 4 channels. This means 
that the variation in the smoking process has to be 
determined by different methods for the two smoking 
machines. For the rotary machine, the variation may 
be determined as a “between smoke runs” variation 
whereas the variation for the linear machine may be 
determined from the 4 individual results from the 
4 channels. In other words, the process variation from 
the rotary smoking machine is based on “independent” 
single results while the variation from the linear 
smoking machine can be based on 4 results from one 
smoke run but from 4 “independent” channels. 


This means that different types of control chart have 
to be used for the two smoking machines. The actual 
choice shall be made according to the actual demands 
and cannot be specified to fit all needs. 


7.2 Practical Procedures for the Use of Monitor Test 
Pieces 


The practical procedures for use of monitor test pieces 
are based upon the condition that the consistency of a 
process can be evaluated by analysing control samples 
at chosen intervals, and comparison of the test results 
graphically in a control chart (see ISO 7870-1). 


7.2.1 The frequency at which the monitor test pieces 
shall be analysed cannot be specified. It depends 
on the local need. The considerations given in 7.2.2 
and 7.2.3 describe the importance of a practical choice 
(see also ISO 7870-2 : 2013). 


7.2.2 Under the condition that the analytical process is 
consistent (stable), it is assumed that all the analytical 
results obtained between two valid results from the 
monitor test pieces are also valid. In contrast, results 
obtained during a period which begins with a valid check 
result and ends with a non-valid check result must be 
regarded as non-valid until further investigations have 
indicated their validity. Thus there is a risk of having 
to reject these results and having to repeat the analysis. 
To avoid the loss of large numbers of results, it is 
important to analyse the monitor test piece at intervals 
which are not “too great”. It becomes a balance between 
analytical capacity and need for confirmation of 
consistency. 


7.2.3 The procedure for the two types of smoking 
machine will be different but based, of course, upon the 
same principle: sequential smoking and confirmation 
ofthe validity ofthe smoking results. 


The following procedure can be recommended: 


a) For the rotary smoking machine — At the 
beginning of a series of smoking analyses, a 
smoking run and an analysis is performed with 
the monitor test pieces. At practical intervals 
(for example for each 10 to 15 smoke runs), this 
procedure should be repeated, ending the day with 
smoking of the monitor test pieces. 


b) For the linear smoking machine — At the 
beginning of a series of smoking analyses, the 
monitor test piece is smoked on a selection of 
channels (4 would normally fit into a smoking 
plan). During the daily smoking, this could be 
repeated at a practical frequency, with monitor test 
pieces being smoked on 4 channels for every 2 or 
3 smoke runs. To secure the best information, it is 
important that smoking of the monitor test pieces 
is evenly distributed on all 20 channels over a 
period of time. 


7.3 Practical use of Control Charts 


The analysis values from smoking and analysis of 
monitor test pieces are plotted on the appropriate 
control charts so that the results for average and for 
variation can be evaluated. 


IS 16307 : 2021 


It is possible to use control charts where standard 
values are given, but also where the standard values 
are not given (see ISO 8258). This means that control 
charts can be constructed for the individual laboratory 
without knowledge of the official target values for the 
test piece but the control chart can also be constructed 
with reference to target values. 


The control charts may have both warning and action 
limits (see ISO 7873) or have only one set of control 
limits (see ISO 8258). Either kind of control chart can 
be used, but for the correct evaluation of the consistency 
of the analytical process it is very important that the 
rules for testing for assignable causes (see ISO 8258) 
are followed. 


It is a matter of choice whether to use control charts 
with or without target values combined with one set 
or two sets of control limits. It depends on the actual 
needs. It may be practical to combine the target values 
from the inter-laboratory testing with the results from 
the individual laboratory’s own routine check. On the 
other hand, this may be impractical for laboratories 
which have analytical averages which differ from the 
target values. In these cases, the consistency check 
will be affected by the obstruction of the control limits 
by the official target values, and it may be better to 
determine any difference between the local average 
and the official average by other statistical methods for 
differences between variances and between averages. 


IS 16307 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
CORESTA monitor test piece — Specification 


Table A-1 Tobacco Blend and Cut Rag 


Parameter Description 

Type of tobacco Flue cured lamina without stems 
Additives Preferably none, but absolutely no more than 2 percent glycerol 
Cut width = 0.9 mm 


Table A-2 Monitor Test Piece Dimensions 


Parameter Value 
Test piece length = 83 mm (king size) 
Test piece diameter =7.8 mm 
Test piece mass = 980 mg 
Test piece pressure drop = 1.4 kPa? 
Rod length = 62 mm 
Rod mass = 820 mg 
Tobacco mass = 780 mg 
Tobacco density = 260 mg/cm? 
Tobacco moisture = 12.0 percent 


Parameter 


9 Pressure drop may also be expressed in millimetres water gauge (mm WG). 1.4 kPa = 140 mm WG. 


Table A-3 Monitor Test Piece - Non-tobacco Materials 


Value 


Filter rod diameter 
Tow specification 
Filter pressure drop 
Plasticiser 

Plug wrap 

Filter length 
Tipping 

Tipping width 


Test piece paper 


Paper width 


=7.8 mm 

High-crimp cellulose acetate tow of type 2, 8Y36HK (dtex units) (in denier units 2, 5Y32HK) or similar 
In the range 0.75 kPa to 0.8 kPa ? 
= 7 % triacetin 
Non-porous 

=21 mm 
Distinguishable from commercial products (that is, grey tipping) with CM logo, no perforation preferable. 

= 29 mm 


Wood pulp, filler precipitated calcium carbonate = 30 percent, air permeability = (40 to 50) cm? min! cm? at a 
pressure differential of 1 kPa ®, citrate (expressed as anhydrous citric acid) = 0.7 percent 


z 26 mm 


9 Pressure drop may also be expressed in millimetres water gauge (mm WG). 0.75 kPa to 0.8 kPa = 75 to 80 mm WG. 
» Air permeability may also be expressed in CORESTA units (CU). 1 CU = 1 cm? min! cm 2. 


Table A-4 Smoke Yields 


Parameter Value 
NFDPM = 14 mg/monitor test piece 
Nicotine = 1.4 mg/monitor test piece 
co = 14 mg/monitor test piece 
Puff number =9 


IS 16307 : 2021 


ANNEXB 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1 ISO 3402 Tobacco and tobacco products — 3 ISO 7870-2 : 2013 Control charts — Part 2: 
Atmosphere for conditioning and testing. Shewhart control charts. 
2 ISO 7870-1 Control charts — Part 1: General 4 ISO 7873 Control charts for arithmetic average 
guidelines. with warning limits. 


5 ISO 8258 Shewhart control charts. 


IS 16307 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


Organization 


Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 
Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 


Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, 
Hyderabad 


АП India Bidi Industry Federation, Pune 


Bidi Tobacco Research Station, Anand Agricultural 
University, Anand 


Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 


FICCI Research and Analysis Centre, New Delhi 
Godfrey Phillips India Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research, 
Noida 


ITC Limited, Bengaluru 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


Smokeless Tobacco Association, New Delhi 


Smokeless Tobacco Federation (India), Delhi 


The Association Chambers of Commerce & Industries 
of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


The Indian Tobacco Association, Guntur 

The Tobacco Institute of India, New Delhi 

Tobacco Board, Min of Commerce & Industry, 
Guntur 


VST Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 


In personal capacity 
D S Group, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Dn D. Damopar Reppy (Chairman) 
Dr C. CHANDRASEKHARA RAO 


Dr J. MANJUNATH 
Dr K. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN KHANNA 
Dn K. К. JosHı 


Ms Do tty A. JANI 
SHRI HARARAYTRIPATHI (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dn M. S. Kamaru (Alternate) 


Dr Монр SHAUKAT 
Dn L. SwAsTICHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR PANDEY 


Dn Biswasit DEB 
SHRI PRANAM NAGARE (Alternate) 


Dr YoGESHWER SHUKLA 


Dn RooPA HARIPRASAD 


Dr KAMAL Kumar TYAGI 
Dr Panac Vias Nax (Alternate) 


Dr VASUMATI N. GOKANI 


SHRI С. K. SHARMA 
Ms NAVNEET Kaur (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY BECHAN 


SHRI SURAJIT GHOSH 
Dr MADHAVAN SRIDHARAN (Alternate) 


Dr P. SRINIVAS 
Hon SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARADTANDAN 
Dn P. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN, ToBACCO BOARD 
Suri P. Мамо Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI C. VIJAYA KUMAR 
SHRI J. NAGESHWARA Rao (Alternate) 


Dn C. V. N. Rao 


Suri C. K. SHARMA 


IS 16307 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Mumbai Dr RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
DRK. V. SATYANARAYANA (Alternate ]) 
Dn Sonia GHANI (Alternate П) 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Guwahati Dn PRASENJIT SAHA 
SHRI SANJIB KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI NAVITA Y ADAV 
ScieNrIST ‘D’ (FAD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 04 (16298). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


