( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 6521 (Part'1 ) - 1972

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN OF TOWER CRANES
PART I STATIC AND RAIL AMOUNTED
Sectional
Calcutta

Cranesand Allied Appliances
Whll

Committee,

SMDC 26

Represenfing Pvt Ltd, Calcutta

Hindustan

Motors

Ltd, Uttarpara

SHRI l<.I;. l~II.4TT.4CiIARYYi, ( ~`llkU?dC 11) .Jcssop ant! Co Ltd, Calcutta SIiRI R. N. Brrocv.\I. SIIRI S. NAG ( Alfcrnntv j Port Trust, Calcutta SIIRI B. R. CIIATTERJEE Ministry of Railways DEPUTY DIIZEOT~R STANDARDS ( ELEC)-I, RDSO, LUC~NO~ DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( Loco ), RDSO, LUCKNOW ( Alternate I ) ASSISTANTDIRECTOR ( ELEC )-I, RDSO, LUCKNOW( Altertiatc II ) Central W'ater and Power Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( P & M ) Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI C. GOS~AMI SIIRI R. N. SINHA ( Alfernate I ) SHRI B. N. S. MURTHY ( Alternafe II ) Mukund Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. P. GOYAL SIIRI M. M. CHILI.IMBI ( Alfernafe ) M. N. Dnstur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI H. S. KAMATH SHRI .J. J. DOSHI ( Altertmfe ) Dinctorate General of Technical Development, New SHRI S. MAJ~MDAR Delhi Directorate Gcncral of Supplies & Disposals, New SHRI H. C. MALIIOTRA Delhi Mantons ( Bangalore) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. V. hfANAT Tata-Robins Fraser Ltd, Jamshcdpur SHRI A. K. MUKHERJEE SHRI T. K. ROYCHOWDIIURY( Alfernnfe ) Colts Cranes of India Ltd, Calcutta SEIRI S. N. MUNDKUR SHRI G.~G. DEY ( Al/ernafe ) Heavy Electricals India Ltd, Bhopal SHRI H. N. OJHA SHRI V. R. M. SUNDARAM ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Ltd. Durgapur SHRI B. N. PAUL Tak Machinery Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. G. PRADHAH Westrrn Mechanical Industrirs Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. S. PUNWANI SHRI D. CHATTER~EE ~nllertrcl/r )

( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

ZNSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

IS : 6521( Part 1) - 1972

Members

RepescntSng

Southern Structurals Ltd, Madras SHRI D. SUBBARAO SHRI S. R. KRIHNASWAMY ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Rourkela SHRI P. K. RATH SHRI P. T. BULANI ( Alternate ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, .Bangalore REPRESENTATIVE Siemens India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. ROY SHRI A. V. CHINDARKAR( Alternate) SHRI B. T. ROY Indian Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur Braithwaite & Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. N. SARKAR Hindustan Steel Ltd, Bhilai SHRI T. C. SHARMA SHRI T. P. V. NAIR ( Alternate ) Steel Construction Co Pvt Ltd, Bangalore SHRI S. SITA RAM SHRI B. N. PARTHASARATHY ( Alternate ) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRI S. SUDARSANAM SHRI V. V. N. MURTY ( Alternate) SHRI G. A. VAZIRAN~ Indian Engineering Association, Calcutta SHRI S. N. MUNDKUR ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. SRIV.~STAVA, Director General, ISI ( Ex-o$icio Member ) Deputy Director (Strut & Met ) Secretary SHRI M. S. NAGARAJ Assistant Director ( Strut & Met ), ISI

Panel for Code for Jib and Tower Cranes, SMDC
Convener SARI -MM. S. PUNWANI Members DIRECTOR ( P & M ) SHRI C. GOSWAM~ SHRI P. K. Hur SHRI H. S. -MANI

Cranes 26/P-2

Including

Derrick

Western Mechanical

Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay

Central Water and Power Commission, New Delhi Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi Hindustan Motors Ltd, Uttarpara Nayveli Lignite Corpn Ltd, Nayveli

2

S:6!321(

hart f)-1972

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN OF TOWER CRANES
PART I STATIC AND RAIL MOUNTED

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on I5 March 1972, after the draft finalized by the Cranes and Allied Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard has been prepared to ensure that rail mounted tower cranes embody s&11 fundamental principles of design as are essential to secure reliability and safety in operation. 0.3 All the necessasy information regarding the conditions under which the cranes are to ,be used together with the particulars laid down in Appendix A shall be supplied with the enquiry or order. The manufacturer shall supply with the tender the information in accordance with pro forma l&d down in Appendix B. 0.4 The standard keeps in view the manufacturing and trade practices being followed in the country in this field. Assistance has also been derived from BS 2799 : 1956 ` Specification for power-driven rail mounted tower cranes ' issued by the British Standards Institution. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether standard is complied with, the final value, ing the result of a test, shall be rounded The number of significant places 1960*. should be the same as that of the specified a particular requirement of this observed or calculated, expressoff in accordance with IS : 2retained in the rounded off value value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers power-driven cranes of the tower type. The crane may be static or rail mounted. The travelling motion of the crane may or may not, however, be power-driven and the jib may or may not be derricked ( see Fig. 1 to 3 for examples of various types of these cranes ).
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( reuiscd).

3

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972

ALTERNATIVE

TY~PES OF JIB

NOTE-Tower

may or may not slew with the jib. TOWER CRANE MOUNTEDON RAILS WITH COUNTERWEIGHT ALOPT

FIG. 1

2. TERMINOLOGY
2.0

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 553~~ 1969* shall apply. However, for ready reference some of the definitions are given below. of lifting ( or lowering ) of the load in a a vertical

2.1 HoistingThe motion vertical direction. 2.2 Slewing axis.
*Glossary

Rotary

motion

of the crane jib or load about

of terms for cranes.

4

IS:6521(PartI)-1972

t

ALTERNATIVE

TYPES

OF JIB

FIG. 2

TOWER CRANE MOUNTED ON RAILS Angular movement

WITH

SLEWING

TOWER in a the the

2.3 Derricking or Lu9lng vertical plane. ~k4$%avelling . 2.5 Traversing jib. 2.6 Radhshook, when slews. Controlled

movement of the

of the crane jib whole crane along along

or Racking -The

movement

of the trolley

The horizontal distance fmrn the centre line of the lifting hanging vertically, to the centre line about which the jib 5

ALTERNATIVE

TYPE

OF JIB

FIG. 3

TOWER CRANE MOUNTED ON RAILS AND STABILIZED BY OUTRIQCJERS -That part of the crane structure which provides for the jib mounting. The tower may or may not

2.7 Tower or Mast elevation and support slew with the jib.

2.8 Trolley or. Crab - A carriage supported on four or more wheels for over or under slung running on a crane bridge girder(s) fitted with Power-operated driving means for the transversing and hoisting motions. crabs may be controlled from pendant push buttons or from an operator's cabin attached to the crab or crane strukture. 2.9 Ballast stability. -Dead weight added to the structure added fitted of a crane to secure of a crane rope above

2.10 Counterbalance-Dead weight to balance the weight of the jib. 2.11 Overhauling the lifting hook, Weight A weight 6

to the structure to the hoisting

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 3. MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT 3.1 The materials
and equipment used in the construction of the cranes shall conform where applicable to the requirements specified in the appropriate Indian Standards given in Appendix Cl. 3.2 Timber structure. shall not be used for any stress bearing part of the crane

4. IDBNTIFICATION

AND RADIUS -LOAD

INDICATION

4.1 The crane
maximum radius inscriptions:

shall and

bear one or more plaques clearly visible from from ground level having the following permanent

a) Manufacturer's name, and b) Maximum radius safe working radii. 4.2 A small plaque shall be located bearing the following inscriptions: a) Manufacturer's b) Manufacturer's

loads

and

their

appropriate the cab

in a permanent

place

inside

name, serial number,

c) Year of manufacture, and d) Safe working load as under:

1) Different 2) Different
3) Different

lengths radii,

of jib, of slewing, outriggers, and motion. speed gear in hoisting

3) Different angles 4) With or without change

4.3 Indication

of Load at Different RadiiA load indicator and radius indicator shall be provided in full view of the operator giving In information as regards radii and the appropriate working load thereof. the case of variable jib lengths the indicator should Abe recalibrated and checked before putting the cranes into service.

4.4 A device shall be fitted to the crane, which will give an alarm to the The alarm shall be both driver when the safe working load is exceeded. This device should have provision for cutting off the visible and audible. power supply in the hoisting direction in case the load exceeds the over load limit.

7

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 5. SERVICE CONDITION

5.1 The crane shall be deemed to be under service conditions when it is~on a level track and handling any load in the vertical plane up to and including the safe working load. The actual load shall also include the load imposed by the wind pressure as specified in IS :~807-1963*. 5.2 The lengthening or shortening of the jib by the user is not recomm&ded and, when any alteration in the length of the jib is required, this shall be effected only under the guidance of the manufacturer or other competent person. When such an alteration is made to the jib the safe working loads of the crane shall he re-assessed, the crane retested and a load plate fixed on the crane showing the appropriate safe working loads for the changed length of the jib. The automatic radius and safe load indicator and, if fitted, the approved type of visual and audible warming device, shall be adjusted to operate for the re-assessed loading. 5.3 Some information Appendix D. 5.4 Wind Effect 5.4.1 Under service conditions the crane structure shall be able to withstand a steady wind pressure of 25 kgf/m2. The mechanism shall be designed for a steady wind pressure of 15 kgf/m2. 5.4.2 Under static conditions, the crane structure shall be capable of withstanding a steady maximum wind pressure as specified in IS : 87519641_ in different zones of the country. 5.4.3 The wind pressure under either conditions shall be calculated with form factors given in Table 4 of IS : 807-1963*. 6. CALCULATION STRUCTURE OF FORCES IN STEEL MEMBERS into IN THE two classes on the track for the tower cranes is given in

6.1 Classification - The tower cranes shall be classified that is Class 1 and Class 2 as given in Table 1.

6.2 Permissible Stresses - The structure of the crane shall comply with I The factors of safety for wire ropes gearing and brakes IS : 807-1963+. shall be as specified in this standard. 6.3 Minimum Thickness -Where the calculated thickness of the member is less than 6 mm the thickness of the members of the crane structure, consisting of steel plates or rolled steel sections, shall be not less than the appropriate thickness given in Table 2. *Code of practice for design, manufacture, erection and testing ( structural portion ) of cranes and hoists. t&de of practice for structural safety buildings : Loading standards ( rcuiscd). 8

fS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972
TABLE 1 CI,ASSIFICATION OF CRANES AND HOISTS

(Chuse 6.1 )
C~~sIFl0.4~10i-4 No. , ALL APPLIANCIUUSED FORRAISINGORLOWERINGPERSONS 7 Effective Dynamic yy Load Effect (2) Short f Long (3) Low Low High Low (4) Low Low Low High

(1)

t

1

2

Short Short

NOTE -

In applying this table, the following may be considered:

a) The working period of any crane or hoist shall be considered to be short if it operates or may reasonably be expected to operate for less than 500 hours per annum, or long if it operates or may reasonably be expected to operate for more than 500 hours per annum. The term `operates' signifies that the crane is actually under load or in motion, or both. b) The effective load of any crane or hoist shall be considered to be low unless it lifts or may reasonably be expected to lift loads greater than two-thirds of its safe workings load on more than 1 000 occasions per annum. The effective load shall otherwise be considered to be high. c) In the case of overhead travelling cranes, dynamic effects may be considered low if the speed of travelling of both crab and crane or hoist is each less than 100 m, 130 m/minute if the active surfaces of the respective track rails are Dynamic effects shall be considered high if uninterrupted by gaps or joints. the crane or hoist or any part or motion thereof is used for any purpose or in any manner likely tom produce greater shock effects than those caused by travelling on steel track rails at the aforesaid speeds. Dynamic effects may be considered low for mobile cranes or mobile hoists having well-sprung road wheels and travelling at moderate speeds on surfaces not less regular than closely laid decking of sawn timber. Road wheels having approved pneumatic balloon tyres of the ` off-the-road ' type may be considered equivalent to well-sprung road wheels. Dynamic hoists. effects shall be ccnsidered high for other mobile cranes or mobile

6.4 The thickness of members made of tubes sealed at the ends shall be not less than 2.5 mm. 7. SLEWING or other means adopted, in order to protect the structure and mechanism from shock and torque greater than that for which they have been designed. 9

7.1 A slipping device shall be provided in the slewing mechanism,

IS : 6521 ( Part I ) - 1972
TABLE 2 MINIMUM THICKNESS INCLUDING FOR CORROSION ( Clause 6.3 ) ( All dimensions in millimetres )
DESIGNTHICKNESS (1)

THE

ALLOWANCE

MINIMUM THICKNESS
(2)

Up to and including 3.5 Over 5 up to but not including 6 NOTE -The minimum thickness may be reduced including 1 ton maximum rated load capacity.

5 6 to 3 mm on cranes of up to and

8. STABILITY 8.1 Stability in Service Condition -The crane shall be so designed that when in any working position and being subjected to a wind pressure of 25 kgf/m2, the crane would not tip if the load on the hook were assumed to be twice the maximum safe working load. 8.1.1 Where the crane is so designed that the jib can be removed or replaced with the mast erected, the crane shall be stable without the USC of blocks or guys throughout these operations. 8.2 Stability During Out-of-Service Conditions - The crane shall be designed to be stable when out-of-service while subjected to a steady maximum wind pressure for different zones as specified in IS : 875-1964* with the jib at the maximum working radius and free to slew. It is permissible to increase the effective span of the supporting base by the use of out-riggers, jacks or blocks, provided that they form a permanent part of the crane structure. Such out-riggers, jacks or blocks shall be constructed so as to permit them to make satisfactory contact with a firm base and provide adequate support. 8.2.1 The effect of fixing a crane to its rails or using of guys shall not be+ taken into account while calculating stability. 8.2.2 A notice shall be fixed in the cab and err the outside of the crane, clearly visible from the ground, giving instructions on what action shall be taken when the crane is left unattended, with special instructions on procedure when it is left in a position where the jib is prevented from slewing. 8.3 Backward Stability - To ensure adequate backward stability the centre of gravity of the crane shall be not away from the axis of rotation
*Code of practice for structural safety buildings

: Loading standards (revised).

10

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972
than 30 percent of the minimum radial distance from the axis of rotation to the backward tipping fulcrum. -For this purpose the crane shall be assumed to be at rest on level track, without load and with the jib or trolley at its minimum working radius. 8.4 The weight and position of the ballast required to ensure stability shall be clearly and permanently shown in a prominent position, and adequate provision shall be made for accommodating~and, where necessary, securely fixing such ballast. 8.4.1 account Devices for anchoring the crane to the rails shall not be taken into when determining the stability of the crane.

8.4.2 Provision shall be made on the travelling structure to prevent the stability being endangered in the event of derailment or breakage of an axle or wheel.

9. JIBS 9.1 The jib feet and the members
by which they are connected to the mast or tower shail be ~of steel, except that cast iron may be used for the sole purpose of increasing the pin bearing area.

9.1.1 Diaphragm braces shall bc provided the jib is of lattice construction.

for stiffening

purposes

when

9.2 Jib and its attachments shall be designed to witllstand stresses arising under working conditions including:

the sum of the

a) all stresses due to load,

b) all stresses Cl accelerating 4

due to weight of the jib and its attachments,

and retarding forces acting horizontally at the jib head pin due to slewing of the load, accelerating and retarding forces acting horizontally due to slewing of the jib, and horizon-

stresses due to wind pressure of 25 kgf/m?, e> and retarding forces acting vertically f 1 accelerating tally clue to derricking of jib,

g) transverser
h)
10.1 The maximum

shear stress due to 25 percent of maximum axis load, and stress due to sudden application -of slew and luff brakes, CANTILEVER bottom boom of the cantilever shall be designed to withstai:b-i compressive stresses and bending stresses between panel points.

10. FIXED

IS : 6521(

Part I) - 1972

beam freely supported at the ends and having a-span three-quarters of the length between panel points. The bending moment at the panel points shall be assumed to be equal to that at the centm of the panel.
11. TOWERS AND MASTS

10.2 The local bending stresses shall be calculated on the assumption of a

11.1 Towers and masts shall be designed to resist the bending,

torsional and direct stresses induced therein under all the conditions described in IS : 807-l 963*.
12. JOINTS

12.1 Strength of Joints - The calculated strength of riveted joints or joints made by friction grip bolt members shall be not less than the calculated net strength of the member.

12.1.1 The calculated strength of other bolted joints in structural members shall be 25 percent more than the net strength of the member. 121.2 The calculated stresses in rivets, bolts and walls shall not exceed the permissible stresses given in IS: 807-1963*. The welded joints shall be designed in accordance with IS : 8.16-1969t. 12.2 %&ret and Bolt Holes (Except Those for Friction Grip Bolts ) All rivet and bolt holes shall be drilled accurately and all arrises and burrs shall be removed before assembly.
shank

The diameter of holes for rivets shall not exceed the nominal rivet by more than 1.5 mm. In the case of precision bolts the diameter of holes shall not exceed the nominal bolt shanked diameter by more than 0.5 mm.
diameter

12.2.1

12.2.2 Where machined bolts are used in the structure the plain shank part of the bolt shall be sufficiently long to ensure adequate bearing area ~for the load. 12.2.3 Where bolts are used in shear ~they shall be machined bolts fitted into reamed holes. Black mild steel bolts shall not be used for joints in stress bearing members. 12.2.4 Tapered washers shall be used where bolts are employed taper& surfaces, and tack welded. on

*Code of practice for design, manufacture, erection and testing (structural portion) of cranes and hoists. tcode of practice for use of metal arc welding for general comtruction iu mild ateel ( jrst revifion ) . 12

IS t 6521( Part I ) - 1972 12.3 Friction IS : 3757-1966* IS : 4000~1967t. Grip Bolts - Friction grip bolts shall comply with and shall be fitted in accordance with the provisions of
off for any reason, the

-If, after final tightening, a nut or bolt his slackened NOTE bolt, nut and washer shall be discarded and not used again.

12.3.1 If friction grip bolts are used in joints which require to be disconnected and reconnected during dismantling and erection, the crane shall bear a notice to this effect. 12.4 Spacing of Rivets - The distance between the centres of rivets for stress-bearing parts shall be not less than 24 times the diameter of the rivet and shall not exceed sixteen times the thickness of the thinnest outside plate or angle. Where two lines of staggered riveting are used in the same angle or flange, the maximum distance between the rivets on each line may be taken as I.5 times those given above. 12.4.1 The distance between centres of rivets and the sheared or hand flame cut edge of a plate shall be not less than 1.75 times the diameter of the rivet, and between the centre of the rivet and a rolled, machined or machine flame out edge shall be not less than l-5 times the diameter of the rivet. 12.5 WeldingWelding shall conform to one of the following Standards as applicable:
a)

Indian

IS : 816-1969$,

and

b) IS : 6227-19715. 13. SUPPORTS FOR ROTATING STRUCTURE PART OF CRANE supported Facilities

13.1 Rotating part of the crane structure shall be adequately and adjustments provided to maintain the desired alignment. shall be provided for access and lubrication. 14. WIRE ROPES

14.1 Unless otherwise specified or agreed to by the purchaser, wire ropes shall comply with the relevant Indian Standards ( see Appendix C ).
*Specification for high tensile friction grip fasteners for structural engineering purposes. iCode of practice for assembly of structural joints using high tensile friction grip fasteners. $Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for general construction in mild steel (Jlrst revision ) . $Code of practice for use of metal arc welding in tubular structures.

13

IS : 6521( Part I ) -_1972 14.1.1 A test certificate of the wire ropes used shall be furnished by the manufacturer with full particulars of construction, breaking and tensile strength and the actual length used. 14.2 The factor of safety based on nominal breaking strength and rated lifted load shall not be less than 5 for Class 1 mechanism and 6 for Class 2 mechanism. 14.3 When a load is supported by more than one part of rope, the tension in each part shall bc equal. 14.4 The derricking rope shall be of sufficient length wherever `possible to permit the jib head being raised or lowered from ground level to the position during erection or inspection of the crane without the assistance of the hoisting rope. 14.5 The length of the hoist rope should be adequate to permit the jib to be brought to the ground level. In the case of multilayer winding the length of the wire rope should be double than that normally required. 14.6 15. Reverse bends shall be avoided as far as possible. RQPE DRUMS

15.1 Material for Drums - Drums shall be made of cast iron, cast steel or mild steel conforming to the relevant Indian Standards. The minimum requirement is as follows: a) Grey cast iron b) Cast steel c) Mild steel Grade 20 of IS : 210-1970* Grade 2 of IS : 1030-1962t IS : 226-1969: or IS : 2062-19698

15.2 Diameter of Drums and Pulleys -The diameter of each drum measured at the bottom of the groove shall be not less than that specified in Table 3, for rope speeds not exceeding 60 m/min. It is recommended that larger diameters should be used wherever possible. 152.1 For each increase in rope speed of 30 m/min, 5 percent of the basic figure should be added to the diameter of the drum. 15.3 Grooving of Drums the contour at the bottom of for approximately 120". The radius of the rope by not Table 4.
*Specification tspecification SSpecification $Specification for for for for

Rope drums shall be machined grooved and the grooves shall be circular over an angle radius of the groove shall be larger than tile less than an appropriate amount given in

grey iron castings ( second revision ) . steel castings for general engineering purposes ( reaised). structurahteel ( standard quality ) (fourUz revi.hn )_ structural steel (fusion weldhg quality ) (Jrsf revision ),

14

IS : 6521 ( Part I ) - 1972
TABLE 3 DRUM AND PULLEY DIAMETERS

( Ckzuses 15.2 ROPE CONSTRUCTION TENSILE BREAKING STRENGTH OFWIRE

and 16.1 )
MINIMUM DIAMETER OFDRUMS OR PULLEY CLASSIFICATION OF CRANEMECHANISM

Ic--~---Class 1 (3) 18d

Class 2 (4)
23d 27d

(1) 6 x 19
6 x 24

(2) kgf/mm* 160-175
175190 160-175

211
16d

19d 21d 17d 19d

175-190 G x 37
NOTEd = rope

18d 15d
16d

160-175 175-190

diameter.

TABLE 4

RADIUS

OF GROOVE

IN DRUMS

AND SHEAVES

( Clauses 15.3 and 16.3 )

(All dimensions in millimetres)
DIAMETER OFROPE r---h--------) Up to and sorer Including (1) 16 24 29 (2) 16 24 29 INCREASE OVER ROPERADIUS

(3) 1-o 1.5 2.0 3.0

15.3.1 diameter 15.3.2 between

The depth of the rope. The grooves
adjacent

of the groove of the drum

shall

be not less than be

O-35 times
there

the
is

shall

~turns of the rope a clearance

so pitched that of not less than:

12 mm diameter, a) 1.5 mm for ropes up to and including 2.5 mm for ropes over 14 up to and including 29 mm diameter, 1,) and 3.0 mm for ropes river 29 mm diameter, 15

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 15.3.3 Grooving shall be finished smooth surface defects likely to injure the rope. The shall be rounded. and shall be free from edges between the grooves

15.4 Length of Drum-When the length of the hoisting rope to be wound on and off the drum under service conditions does not exceed 30 m, the drum shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate the rope in one layer. For single layer \\,inding there shall bc not less than two dead turns at the anchored end plus a spare groove at the other end in ~addition to the If the rope is wound on length of rope required for the specified length. the drum in more than one layer the anchorage shall be located clear of the winding, preferably outside the flange and an automatic rope guide capable of laying the- rope in proper sequence shall be provided. Rope anchorages shall be readily accessible.
NOTE-O verIapping layrrs of rope arc not recommended.

15.5 Flange - When the rope is fixed at both ends and the fall is from the When, centre of drum then the drum need not be provided with flange. however, the rope falls from one end of the drum, the fall end of the drum ilihen the rope is fully wound on the drum the flange shall be flanged. shall project a distance not less than 2 rope diameter and in no case shall be less than 25 mm. 15.5.1 The provision of 15.5 does not app!y if a spur wheel is secured the drums and so forms one of the flanges. 15.6 The lead angle of the rope shall not exceed 5" ( 1 in 12 ). 16. ROPE PULLEYS 16.1 The diameter of pulleys at the bottom of the groove shall be not less than the diameter of the drums specified fin Table 3. It is recommended that larger diameters should be used wherever possible. 16.2 The diameter at the bottom of the groove of each non-rotating compensating pulley shall be 9 times the diameter of rope for Class 1 mechanism and 12 times for Class 2 mechanism. 16.3 Rope pulleys shall be grooved to a depth not less than l-5 times the diameter of the rope. The groove shall be finished smooth and shall bc free from surface defects likely to injure the rope. The contour at the bottom of the groove shall be circular over an angle of 130 f 5" approxi. mately. The radius of the part of the groove shall be larger than tht radius of the rope by not less than the appropriate amount given ir. Table 4. 16.4 Lead Angle - The angle between the rope and a plane cular to the axis of the pulley shall not exceed 5" ( 1 in 12 ). 16 perpendi to

k$ : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 16.5 Pulleys shall be adequately
guarded to retain the rope in the groove.

shall 16.6 Guide pulleys or rollers . __ be fitted with the jib and other parts of the structure, where required, for the purpose of preventing chafing of the ropes. 16.7 All pulleys funning loose eon their shafts shall be provided with Pulleys, where not easily accessible, shall be suitable bushes or bearings. of the s?lf-lubricating type. 17. 17.1 LIFTING Lifting HOOKS hooks shall comply with the relevant Indian Standards. if required, to prevent

17.2 Hooks shall rotate upon ball or roller locking device shall be fitted to prevent rotation 17.3 The hooks shall be provided with displacement of the sling from the hook. an

bearings and, of the hook. efficient device

17.4 The safe working load shall be legibly stamped on a non-vital part of A test certificate shall be supplied if each hook and at the bottom block. required. 18. SHACKLES 18.1 Shackles shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards. load shall be

18.2 When the rope on the shackle is eccentric the allowable reduced depending upon the eccentricity of the load. 18.3 Test certificate shall be provided WEIGHT with each shackle.

19. OVERHAULING
19.1 When an smooth bore and efficiently served the examination 20. 20.1 GEARING Material -

overhauling weight is used on fhe rope it shall have a be bell-mouthed at the top and bottom unless the rope is or otherwise protected, and provision shall be made for of the part of the rope passing through the weight. AND PAWLS ( cast or wrought 1 tonne bronze

All gears and pawls shall be of steel

)

with the following exceptions:
a) Spur wheels for slewing, on cranes up to and including maximum rated load capacity, may be of cast iron, b) Worm wheels rims, and may be made with cast iron centres and

17

IS : 6521( Part s ) - 1972 c) Spur wheels may be of cast iron~centred
secured. 20.2 Design - Gears Indian Standards. 20.2.1 cannot shall be designed in accordance with the relevant with steel rimadequately

The slewing race wheel may consist of a pin rack. Keys in gear trains shall be so fitted and secured work loose in service. that they

20.3 Fixing -

20.4 Gear Boxes - Gear boxes shall be so designed that the gears which they enclose will be automatically lubricated; the gears shall be readily removable and the boxes shall be oil-tight as much as is reasonably practiThey shall be of rigid construction and fitted with inspection cable. Facilities for oil filling, adequate covers and lifting lugs where necessary. breathing, drainage and means of indicating clearly the correct oil levels shall be provided. 20.4.1 Gear box feet shall be machined and shall be seated and positively located on appropriately level surface, preferably machined, except Provision should be made for other where integral or shaft mounted. types of mountings also if used. 20.4.2 Material for the gear box shall either be cast iron, cast steel or mild steel fabricated. The material shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards ( see Appendix C ). Gear box, if fabricated, shall be stress relieved.

20.5 Where worm gearing is used as a First-m&ion drive it shall have, under test, the same load and time rating as the driving motor atid the temperature rise of the oil bath when measured by a thermometer shall not exceed 40�C above the temperature of the atmosphere. 21.

SHAFTS AND AXLES
and rigidity and adequate They shall, where necessary, be shall be provided with fillets of as quality.

21.1 Shafts and axles shall have ample strength
bearing surfaces for their purposes. finished smoothly and, if shouldered, large a radius as possible. 21.2

Shafts shall be made of steel of suitable

21.3 Shaft Keys - Where practicable, keys, keyways and splines sllall conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 3plines shall be accurately Use of tapered keys shall be avoided as far as possible. machined. 18

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 22. LUBRICATION 22.1 Lubrication of Bearings Inclading Ball and Roller Bearings All lubrication points shall be readily accessible. Gear trains shall be properly lubricated. 22.2 Centralized lubrication may be provided if required by the purchaser (see Appendix B ). In this case provision shall be made at the bearings to vent excess lubricant pressure. 22.3 Lubricating nipples, pipes, and adopters the relevant Indian Standards. shall generally comply with

22.4 A lubricating chart in the ~maintenance manual indicating all the lubricating points, the type of lubricant ed frequency of lubrication. 22.5 Grease lubricated ball and roller bearings with grease during initial assembly. 23. TRACK WHEELS

shall be provided and recommendbe packed

shall in addition

23.1 Track wheels may have cylindrical or tapered (conical ) treads, with flanges or any other means, as and where necessary, to guide the crane effectively and to prevent derailment. The wheels shall be mounted in such a manner as to facilitate removal and replacement. 23.2 Material - Track wheels shall be of steel ( cast or wrought ) or shall have steel tyres shrunk-on cast iron or steel centres and registered. 23.2.1 The steel shall be medium carbon steel ( 0.6 percent and the hardness at the tread shall be between 300-350 HB.
request, the manufacturer shall supply the analysis NOTE -On contents of carbon, silicon, mar.ganese, sulphur and phosphorus.

carbon
of each

MUX )
cast for

23.3 Diameter of Wheels-The tread diameters of wheels shall preferably be standardized to sizes specified in IS : 1136-1958* commencing at 150 mm, in the order of preference specified therein. The minimum tread diameter the formula given below: D=where D = tread diameter of wheel in millimetres, W = wheel load in kilograms, and a = full width of rail head including radii in millimetrcs,
*preferred sizes of wrought metal products.

of the wheel 1.5 w
a

may

be calculated

from

19

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 19'12 23.4 Flanges - The dimensions of flanges of track wheels shall be not less than the values given in Table 5.
TABLE 5 FLANGE DIMENSIONS

( All dimensions in millimetres )
DIAMETER OF WHEELS c-&DEPTH OF FLANGE THICKNESS OF G IJIDING mW~~~L FLANGE AT BASE

Over (1) 300 500

Up to and Including (2) 300 500 1000 -

(3) 15 20 25 30

(4) 15 20 25 30

`

1 000

23.4.1 The thickness of flanges of non-guiding wheels if flanged may be less than the values given in Table 5 to be determined by the crane manufacturer. 23.5 Width of Tread -The width of the wheel tread shall be greater than the rail head by an amount which shall suitably allow for the known variations in the gantry rail alignment and gantry track span dimensions. 24. CRANE ANCHORING 24.1 Means other than the normal travelling brake'shall be provided to prevent the movement of the crane along its track when left unattended or under storm conditions at fixed points on the track. It should be possible to operate this device from ground level. Rail clamps should be provided in addition to anchoring device for fixing the crane at intermediate points on the track. These clamps should be electrically interlocated with travelling mechanism. 25. GUARDING 25.1 Effective guards shall be provided for drives, revolving shafts, fly-wheels, couplings, bolts or keys on any revolving shaft, wheel are made safe by design or by position or are of the crane structure. gear wheels, belt and chain collars, projecting set screws, or pinion, unless those parts effectively guarded by parts

25.2 Design - The guard may be of sheet metal, perforated or expanded metal wire mesh, wood, pressed fibre, or other suitable material and shall 20

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 The guards should be designed to completely encase the parts concerned. allow for routine inspection and maintenance work. 25.2.1 The guard shall be constructed of material suitable to withstand the atmospheric conditions in the situation in which the guards are to be used, and shall be sufficiently rigid to resist distortion. 25.2.2 The guard s&all be securely attached to a fixed support. 25.3 Thickness - The thickness of metal guard shall not be less than 1 mm and of wooden guards 18 mm. NOTE - An increasedthickness,or the use of corrosionresistingmaterial, is desirable in damp and corrosiveatmosphere. 25.4 Size of Openings and ClearanceThe minimum clearance between the guard and the moving parts, and the size of opening in guards of perforated metal, woven ,wire, metal lattice of similar material shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
Size of Opening r_-__A----~ Minimum Clearance

Over mm 10 ;2' 26. LADDERS

Up to and Including mm 10 12 32 40 AND PLATFORMS

. mm 50 100 125
22

26.1 Safe means of access shall be provided to the driver's cabin and to every place where any person engaged on the inspection, repair or lubrication of the crane, has to work; adequate hand-holds and foot-holds being provided where necessary. In particular: a permanent steel ladder shall be provided for access to the top of 4 the mast or tower, and the jib; b) every platform shall be securely fenced with guard rails and toe boards; 4 sides of ladders shall extend to a reasonable distance beyond platforms, or some other reliable hand-hold shah be provided; 4 where a ladder is vertical and exceeds 10 m in height, it is recommended that intermediate resting places shall be provided between the platfdrm and the foot of the ladder so that, where possible, uninterrupted lengths of the ladder do not exceed 10 m; and it is recommended that vertical ladders, external to the structure, should have back-loops.

21

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 27. OPERATOR'S CABIN AND MACHINERY HOUSE

27.1 An operator's cabin having a clear height of 2 m shall be provided to afford the driver adequate protection from the weather; it shall allow a A seat clear view of the load and jib in all possible positions while sitting. shall be provided for the driver. 27.2 The means of access to the cabin shall be such as to ensure that There should there is no danger to the driver being trapped in the cabin. also be a separate exit for emergency use, Where access is through the float-, there should be sufficient room in the cabin for the driver to stand besides the trap and raise it without difficulty, and the trap door shall be of adequate size. 27.2.1 A fan, fire extinguisher, operator's cabin, a gang or hooter shall be provided in the

27.3 Cab - Control levers and pedals shall allow the driver, when in his normal driving position, ample room for operation. It shall afford as far as possible an unrestricted view of load and adequate all-round visibility. 27.4 If the vertical position of the control cabin is adjustable, the means of access and exit shall be effective at all levels. Means shall be provided for supporting the cabin without imposing a load on the cabin hoisting rope and if the hoisting mechanism for the cabin is hand-operated, an effective sustaining arrangement shall be provided. 27.5 The door of the cabin shall be fitted with a lock to prevent unauthorized entry when the crane is left unattended. 27.6 In the case of non-rotating cabins the operator's should be mounted as a revolving platform. 28. BRAKE 28.1 Hand brakes, foot brakes, or electro-mechanical brakes shall be provided for the hoisting and derricking motions, and shall be designed to exert a restraining torque 25 percent greater than the torque transmitted under service ~conditions to the brake drum from the suspended safe working load, neglecting the losses in the transmission mechanism between the load and the brake. 28.2 The streses in any part of the brake construction while -such a restraining torque is being exerted shall not exceed one half ~of the stresses allowed for the material by this standard. 28.3 The temperature of the rubbing surfaces of the brake shall not exceed 100�C with fabric lining or 200�C with bonded asbestos or metal lining 22 seat and controls

*_

IS : 6521( Part 1:) - 1932 i after the safe working load has been raised and then lowered on the brake five times continuously through the specified lift, the speed of lowering being 25 percent greater than that of lifting. ! 28.4 The brakes, when of the electro-mechanical type, shall begin to apply the braking torque immediately the current is cut off from any i cause during the effective life of the lining. A dashpot or other means may be provided to prevent shock. arrangement shall be provided for the

; 28.5 A suitable brake or braking travelling motion.

I 28.6

A suitable brake shall be provided for the slewing motion.

' 28.7 Weights - Brake weights whenever used shaII be bolted securely to their Jevers atid locked. 28.8 Brake Drums and Shoes - The wearing surface of all brake drums shall be machined and shall be cylindrically smooth and free from defects. Brake drums shall preferably be balanced. The hardness of the brake drums shall be 200 BHN. 28.9 Brake blocks and lining shall be protected from the action of water, grease and oil as far as possible. Braking linings shall be effectively and permanently secured during the effective life of the lining. shall be provided with a simple and 28.10 Adjustment -Brakes ~accessible means of adjustment to compensate for wear and removal for relining. 28.11 Where more than one lowering brake is provided, each brake shall be capable of exerting the full braking torque specified in 28.1 and shall be independently operated. 28.12 Brakes applied by hand shall not require a force greater than 15 kgf at the handle. Brakes applied by foot shall not require a force of more than 30 kgf on the pedal to exert the restraining torque referred to in 27.1. autonlatic locking device capable of 28.13 Locking Device -An sustaining 50 percent above the safe working load shall be provided on a hand- or foot-operated brake. 28.14 An emergency holding brake shall be fitted in the load side when a change speed gear is fitted. 29. RLECI'RODYNAMIC BRAKING

29.1 Where motions are driven by separate electric motors, electrodynamic braking is permissible to supplement the requirements of 27. 23

`IS: 6521( Part I ) - 1972 29.2 Where electrodynamic braking is adopted, the conductors and the contact surfaces of the motor and the control gear shall be proportioned in a manner such that the additional duty will not cause them to overheat.
brake with the NATE - Care should be taken not to confuse the electromechanical electrodynamic one. Although the former is often referred to as an automatic electric brake its action is mechanical and the braking effect is nullified electrically by a solenoid or electromagnet, or electrohydraulic thruster.

30. BRARE

MAGNETS

30.1 The terminals of brake magnets shall be protected from accidental contact and the windings shall be effectively protected from mechanical damage. LYhere necessary the magnets shall be provided with an efficient cushioning device. 30.2 Two types of duty are recognized a) continuous or heavy duty, b) normal duty. and for both ac and dc magnets, namely:

Since with an ac brake magnet the current in the coil is greater for the open position than for the closed, the ratings for ac are slightly different from dc as shown in Table 6.

TABLE DUTY

6

BRAKE

MAGNET

RATINGS ac MAGNETS (3) Suitable for being in circuit continuously where the brake coil operates in frequently

dc MAGNETS

(2)
Heavy duty Suitable for being in circuit not more than 7.5 minutes out of every 15 minutes or 240 operations per hour

For 240 operations per hour where the time that the brake coil is in circuit is not more than 5 minutes out of every 15 minutes per the not of Suitable for 240 operations per hour where the time that the brake coil is in circuit is not more than 5 minutes out of every 15 minutes

Normal

duty

Suitable for 240 operations hour where the time that brake coil is in circuit is more than 5 minutes out every 15 minutes

-24

IS:

6521 (Part I)-1972

30.3 The brake magnets shall operate, for both duties, at the currents and voltages given in Table 7.
TABLE 7 BRAKE MAGNET OPERATING CURRENTS AND VOLTAGES dc MAGNETS ac MAQNET~ (3) *Lift at 90 percent normal voltage *Hold at 50 percent voltage normal

WINDING

(1)
Series: Se~~rit~~,istor

(2)
Lift at 60 percent full load current Hold at 20 percent full load current Lift at 40 percent full load current Hold at 20 percent full load current

Shunt

*Lift at 90 percent voltage

normal

*Hold at 50 percent normal voltage

brake releasing gear may be used in NOTE 1 - Motor operated or electro-hydraulic preference to brake magnets if desired. NOTE2 - Where 3-phase motors are used the associated brake magnets should also be of the J-phase type. to apply with hot coils corresponding to the duty cycle at normal rise of the brake magnet shall not exceed that allowed for the control equipment fitted [see IS : 1822-1967 ` Specification for ac motor starters of voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts (jirst revision )' 1.

voltage. The temperature

*This~is intended

31.. CONTROLS

51.1 All control handles and pedals shall be placed in convenient positions, which will allow the driver ample room for operation and admit a clear view of the resultant load movement. Controls shall be sidequately protected to prevent accidental contacts with live parts. 31.2 The ~position of controls shall be such that when the driver is intentionally operating any control handle, he cannot readily operate any other control inadvertently. 31.3 The control levers shall be provided with stops and/or catches to Each control shall bear an ensure safety and facility of operation. indelible indication of the motion controlled and, wherever practicable, the direction of movement.

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 31.4 Where practicable,
controller handles should move in the direction of the resultant load movement. Each controller shall be marked in a permanent manner to show the motion controlled and, wherever practicable, the direction of movement.

31.5 The control handles or pedals for the manual- or foot-operated brakes on the hoisting, derricking and slewing motions shall be so placed that the driver, when in his normal position, can operate them promptly. 31.6 Notching - Notching for the controller handle in the ` OFF ' position shall be more positive than the notching in the other position. The handle may be -provided with a lock, latch, dead man or spring return feature if specially requested by the customer. 32. MANUAL POWER motion, it shall be assumed that an operator, when turning a handle, exerts a mean force of 12 kgf continuously or 18 kgf as a maximum ,upon the handle and that the mean speed ( at handles ) is 45 m /min. 32.1.1 The changeover electrically interloca'ied. from
I

32.1 For power-driven cranes fitted with hand-operated mechanism on any

power drive

to hand drive should be

32.2 Handles shall be conveniently placed and it shall be assumed that not more than two operators, each exerting the effort described above, will operate any handle while the maximum load is being carried. 33. INTERNAL COMBUSTION

ENGINES

33.1 Internal combustion engines shall comply with relevant Indian Standards onthe l-hour basis, and a silencer shall be fitted to the exhaust. The exhaust pipe shall be fitted in such a position that the exhaust fumes of the engine do not reach the driver. Fuel tank capacity shall be sufficient for at least 8 hours running on normal crane duty, and means shall be provided for ascertaining the amount of fuel contained in the tank.
33.2 When required the silencer. by the purchaser, a spark-arrestor shall be fitted to

33.3 The sump and lubrication system of the engine shall be so arranged that efficient lubrication is maintained to all bearings when the engine, is operating in any plane inclined at an angle of 1 in 4 to the horizontal. 33.4 Provisions shall be made for draining off the water circulating system ~during frosty weather, the drain cocks being fitted in accessible position. The arrangement shall be such that it is not possible to leave pockets of water either in the system or the pump casing. 26

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 34. GENERATORS AND MOTORS

34.1 Ratings and Enclosures - The ratings shall be such that, under the temperature rise shall not exceed the the specified service conditions, limits specified in IS : 325-1970* for S-phase induction motors or other relevant Indian Standards. This shall not preclude use of intermittent rated motors, if required. 34.1.1 The generators and motors shall be totally enclosed surface cooled or totally enclosed fan cooled type and whenever required shall be weatherproof. 34.2 Motors braking. shall be suitable for reversing frequent acceleration and

34.2.1 If it is intended to retard or stop the motion of a crane by electric braking, the motor shall be of suitable design to withstand this duty. 34.3 MountingsGenerators and mqtors shall be so located that the brush-gear and terminals are accessible for inspection and maintenance and normal ventilation is not restricted. 34.3.1 Test certificates shall be supplied if required by the purchaser. out from 34.4 Terminals - Generator and motor leads ,shall be brought the frame to terminals in the terminal box fixed to the frame. 35. CONTROLLERS AND RESISTORS

35.1 Controllers and resistors for direct current motors and alternating current slip ring induction motors shall comply with the requirements of IS : 1822-19677 except that, where series resistor control is used that is where there are no special slow-motion connections, the current v&h the hoisting controller at the first step shall not ( unless otherwise specified ) exceed 75 percent of that at full load, in the case of hoisting motors above 10 hp. For hoisting motors up to and including 10 hp the current with the hoisting controller at the first step shall not exceed full load current. 35.2 Unless otherwise specified, controller ( or the derricking current. the current on the first step of the slewing controller ) shall not exceed full load

35.3 The controllers and resistors shall be adequately protected to prevent accidental contract with live parts, and-shall be so rated that the temperature rise does not exceed the limit specified in IS : 182219671_ during the operation of the crane under service conditions.
*Specification for three-phase induction motors ( third revision). tSpeci6cation for ac motor starters of voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts (~?r~t revision).

27

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 35.4 Resistors shall be so arranged that adjustment, examination and replacement, 35.5 A manually-operated position shall disconnect unless otherwise specified. they are easily accessible for

main current controller when in the ` OFF ' all supply leads to the associated motors mounted inside its cover a complete

35.6 Each controller shall have circuit diagram in durable form.

NOTE 1 -It is recommended that the resistors should be enclosed in ventilated housingsand, wherenecessary, with sheet metal covers and that each resistor should be fitted with a terminal bar unless all terminals are brought out on one side of the resistor. The terminal bars shall be fitted in any case where the current rating is above 100 A. NOTE 2 -In the working instructions to the crane driver it is desirable to mention that when heavy loads are being lifted the first step of the controller should be regarded as a transition notch.

36.

ELECTRICAL

IfROTECTIVE

GEAR as under:

36.1 Iron-clad

protective

gear shall be provided

a) When the aggregate horsepower of the two largest motors is less than 40 ( or their aggregate current is less than 60 A ); a manually-operated switch-fuse panel which is easily accessible may be used, and the minimum equipment on this panel shall be a main switch in association with high-rupturing capacity replaceable fuses for each motor. The number of poles in the main switch, and the number and position of fuses in the motor circuits shall be in accordance with Indian Electrical Rules or as may be otherwise directed by the purchaser. b) When the aggregate horsepower of the two largest motors is 40 hp ( or more or their aggregate current 60 A or more ), a protective panel of the contactor type shall be provided and the minimum equipment on such a panel shall be as follows: An airbreak, contactor type main circuit-breaker, together with magnetic type overload relays for each of the several The number of poles in the circuit-breaker motor circuits. and number and position of overload relays fitted shall be in accordance with Indian Electrical Rules for the protection of motors on ac or dc supplies, or as may be otherwise directed A double-pole switch-fuse for controlling by the purchaser. the operating coil circuit of the contactor shall be provided. A push button emergency stop shall be so placed that it can be used promptly in all cases by the operator for cutting off the main supply. 28

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 36.2 The
main circuit-breaker shall be electrically interlocked with the controllers in such a way as to prevent the circuit-breaker being closed, unless all controllers are in the ` OFF ' position. 36.3 In case of ac 3 phase supply, single-phase preventors ed to protect the motor in case of single phasing. 36.4 A diagram, in durable form, of connections shall be fixed to the inside of the cover. shall be providpanel

of the protective

37. ISOLATING 37.1 For

SWITCH

each electric crane which is supplied from an electric supply external to the crane an iron cl?d isolating switch shall be provided as close as Tossible to the crane end of the trawling cable through which the The isolating switch shall be fixed on the supply is brought to the crane. crane structure in such a position that it can be operated readily from ground level and the cover shall be interlocked with the switch so that it can be opened only when the switch is in the ` OFF ' position. 37.2 When the isolating switch is combined with the crane protective panel it shall be mechanically interlocked with the door giving access to the panel, and the incoming terminals shall be screened to prevent accidental contact when the door is opened. When not so combined a red label plate shall be attached to the cover of the protective panel, marked ( ISOLATE BEFOREOPENING COVER `. 38. LIMIT 38.1 SWITCHES to prevent the following:

Limit switches shall bc provided a) Over-hoisting, b) Over-lowering, c) Over-derricking d) Over-traversing, e) Over-travelling.

in both directions, and

38.2 The contacts of limit switches shall be operated positively; switches in which the contracts are operated by a spring or gravity or both, on the withdrawal of a cam or similar device, shall not be used. 39. CABLE WIRING FOR POWER CIRCUIT cables used for Standards (see

39.1 Cables -

Rubber and crane wiring should comply Appendix C ).

polyvinyl chloride-insulated with the relevant Indian

29

is:65il(Parti)-19% 39.2 Protection -All
cables shall be adequately protected against mechanical damage and metal trunking may be used if desired. Cable conduits shall comply withTelevant Indian Standards ( see Appendix C ). If cables are drawn into a steel tube, the steel tube shall be heavy gauge welded or solid drawn screw joined.

power and control cables suitably 39.3 Multicore Cables - Multicore clamped to the crane structure may be used. Suitable clamping glands should be provided at both ends of each multicore cable. 39.4 Current Rating -Ratings of the cables shall comply with the relevant Indian. Stat?dards. Where cranes are equipped with l-hour the s;ator or armature cables may be upratkd by a rated motors, factor of l-4 above the ratings for *continuous duty. Similarly, for cranes equipped with 0*5-hour rated motors, an uprativg factor of 1.7 may Where the cranes are equipped and intermittent duty rated be used. motors, the factor for uprating ~the cable will be -equal to dE X where ID! is the intermittent duty factor of the motor.

39.4.1 The cables for rotor or armature resistor circuits carry current during accelerating periods only and may, therefore, be further uprated. For For 5-minutes rated resistors, the uprating factor of 2 may be used. intermittent rated resistors, suitable uprating factors may also be applied.
39.4.2 Consideration should be given to such factors as the ambient temperature, grouping and disposition of the cables, and to the limitation of voltage drop, which will influence selection of suitable cables. 40.

MAIN SUPPLY
by flexible cable from plug boxes or

40.1 The main supply may be obtained or fixed supply points.

40.2 Where flexible cables are liable to be run over by traffic, manuallyautomatically-operated take-up gear shall be provided.

40.3 Where the power is supplied through a trailing cable, the cable should bc so supported ( where it terminates ) that there is no appreciable mechanical strain on the electrical connections or the cable.

41. WIRING

DIAGRAM

41.1 A wiring diagram of the crane shall be provided. On this diagram shall bc given the rating of each of the motors, the cable sizes and such other information as tends to facilitate inspection and maintenance of'the crane. 30

IS : 6521 ( Part I ) - 1972 ~42. LIGHTING 42.1 Where provision is made for the connection of a handlamp, the voltage of the supply to the lamp shall not exceed 250 V dc or 25 V ac either between conductors or to earth. When the supply is ac the handlamp circuit shall be fed through a double-wound transformer with some part of the secondary winding earthed. 42.2 Where fixed lighting is required by the purchaser and where the lamps are arranged in series, double-pole switching shall be provided for each lamp circuit. 42.3 Safety Device - A load moment switch should limiting the moment developed by the lifted load. be provided foi

42.3.1 An anemometer with electrically interlocating shall be provided to restrict the operation of the crane beyond the designed wind velocity. ~42.3.1.1 Warning lamps for air traffic should be installed.

43. EARTHING 43.1 The crane structure, motor frames and metal cases of all electrical equipment, including metal conduit or cable armouring or guards, shall be efficiently bonded to facilitate earthing, and an earthing terminal shall be provided. 43.2 An earthing conductor shall be provided and a collector ring if electrical connection is required between the fixed and +otating structure of the crane. 44. TESTING 44.1 The insulation resistance of any circuit shall be not less than 2 Ma. 44.2 &fore it is put into service the tests given in Table 8 and such other tests as may be required by statutory regulations shall Abe applied to the crane on a level track, and a certified record of the test figures shall he supplied to the purchaser. 44.2.1 If required by the purchaser, the manufacturer shall carry out a test to verify under agreed conditions the stability as specified in 8. 44.2.2 The setting of all load and/or radius indicators, where provided, shall be verified during the tests. This requirement shall also apply to ,cutouts and limit switches, where fitted. 44.3 The tests shall be carried out at a place to be agreed upon between the purchaser and the manufacturer, and when conducting acceptance tests the manufacturer shall be entitled to employ his own crane driver. 31

TABLE 8 TESTS ( Clause44.2 )

%r (1)'
la

HOISTING (2) With the hook carrying the maximum S.W.L. appropriate to each speed, between the minimum and the maximum radii appropriate thereto.

DERRICKINC OR TRAVERSING (3) Loads and radii as Test la ( Co1 2 ). The load is to be carried in both directions through the full range of derricking or traversing approthe priate to S.W.L.

SLE~INC (4) Loads and radii as Test la ( Co1 2 ). Slewing motion to be tested in both directions, through the maxrmum angle for which the crane is designed to slew. (5) Loads and radii as Test la ( Co1 2 ). Travelling motion to be tested in both directions with jib and pointing fore and aft and at right angles to direction of travelling.

REMARKS (6) The speeds enumerated in Appendix B shall be substantially as specified.

lb

2a w

With the hook carrying the S.W.L. at the maximum radius. , With the hook carrying a load of 25 percent in excess of the S.W.L. between the minimum and the maximum radii appropriate thereto.

Loads and radii as Test2a (Co12). The load to be carried in both directions through the full range of derricking ap;;; opriate to S.W.L.

Loads and radii as Test 2a (Co12). Slewing motion to be tested in bbth directions through maximum the angle for which crane is the designed to slew.

Loads and radii as Test 2a (. Co1 2 ) . Travelling r&ion to be tested in both directions and with jib pointing fore and aft and at right angles to direction of travelling.

2b

With the hook carrying a load of 25 percent excess of t+ in

During these tests the specified speeds need not be attained but the crane shall prove itself capable of dealing with the overload without difficulty. Not more than one cycle shall be performed with each overload which need not be lifted to a height greater than that necessary to bring load on to all the teeth of the gears.

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 44,4 The requirement that the contract speeds of electric cranes shall be attained is contingent on the voltage and frequency of the electric supply, and the motors being correctly maintained. 45. PAINTING 45.1 Before despatch of the crane the complete crane covering structural, mechanical and electrical parts shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt, Mechamgrease, scale and rust, and then given a single coat of primer. cal and electrical components shall be given an additional finish coat of The exposed mechanical parts of the paint of colour of customer's choice. crane shall be given one coat of rust preventor. 45.2 Wood and metal before ~assembly. surfaces bolted or riveted together shall be painted

APPENDIX
( Chuse-0.3 )
INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED OR ORDER

A
WITH THE ENQUIRY steam, frequency or internal in hertz,

1. Type of Crane and Nature of Drive-electric, combustion engine ( petrol or diesel ). 2. Nature of Electricity Supply - ac or dc voltage, number of phases and number of wires, and

4 b) 4 4

Any local bye-laws that affect supply; Type and position of conductors or plug boxes; Are plug boxes to be supplied by purchaser?; If cable operated; drum and is required, of motors state whether automatic or hand-

Types e> 3. Capacity

and rating

( see IS : 325-1970* ),

of Crane: safe working in tonnes at . . . . . . m radius, radius and load in tonnes at maximum . . . . . . m.

a) Maximum 4. Maximum Minimum 5. Working

b) Safe working

height of lift . . . . . . m at . . . . . . m radius height depth of lift .,... .m at . . . . . . m radius ( below rail level ) . . . . . . m at . . . . . . m radius.

*Specification

for three-phase induction motors ( fhird reuision).

33

IS:6521(PartI)-1972 6. Speeds -Any special requirements should be indicated. surveys or statutory requirements to be

7. Additional specifications, complied with: a) General,

b) Ropes and rope attachments, and c) Electrical equipment ( including heaters, limit switches, etc ). 8. Type of work for which crane is intended. 9. Other requirements such as maximum tail radius and clearance jib or cantilever together with sketches. 10. Nature of track on which crane is to run, if existing: between centres of track Weight and type of rails ( heads proud or flush with ground ), b) Complete specification for rails and the method of fixing, .C> Distance a> under

Ais,

4

Radius e>

Maximum permissible wheel load, and of sharpest curve, if any. and facilities

11. If the crane is to be erected on site by manufacturer, available.

12. Any special local conditions under which the crane would have to operate for example extreme temperatures, corrosive atmospheres, high altitudes and exposed sites.

APPENDIX
INFORMATION 1. Type Offered TO BE SUPPLIED Drawing number.

B
BY THE MANUFACTURER

( Clauses 0.3, 22.2, and Table 8 )

2. Capacity of Crane level. 3. Clearances

Loads and radii range of lift, above and below rail

required by crane structure for all positions of jib:

a) Jib length, and b) Angle of slew.

34

IS : 6521( Part I ) - 1972 4. Speeds:
S'eed in mlmin at Sqfe Working Load of
t0tltltX

4 b) 4

Hoisting, slow gear Hoisting, fast gear Slewing Derricking or traversing

.. . .. . ... . . . . . *... ..* . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . ... .. . ...

.. . . .. .. . ... .. . . .. ... . .. . .. . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . ...

4 e) Travelling 4
b) cl 4

5. Electric motors: Particulars of power supply required; Number of motors, type and enclosure; B.H.P. and speed of motors at full load; Class of rating, and limits of permissible temperature-rise IS : 325-1970* ) ; Maximum current demand from mains; and of control gear, resistors and other equipment. (see

4 f 1 Particulars
6. Internal

combustion engines:

a) Make and type, b) B.H.P.~and speed, c) Number of cylinders, d) Two or four stroke, e) Nature of fuel, f ) Cooling system, and g) Method of starting. 7. Mechanical 8. Travelling specification including brakes, gearing and bearings, wheels:

a) Type, b) Material, c) Tread diameter, and d) Width of tread.

l Specification

for three-phase induction motors (third r&ion), 35

IS I 6521( Part I ) -1972 9. Ropes: Hoisting De&king or Traversing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... otircr Ropes

Number Quality

of falls of material of wire

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ... ... ...

Description Construction Diameter Specified Factor

breaking

strength

... ...

of safety

10. Hook particulars. 11. Type 12. Type of driver's of indicating cabin and machinery house.

and safety devices. supplied. excluding in tonnes. Manufacturer: Purchaser: .., . . . tonnes of material . . . . . . tonnes of material if necessary. ... ... ... ... ballast, in tonnes.

13. Tools and accessories 14. Approximate 15. Weight

total weight, part,

of heaviest

16. Ballast, if any, to be supplied by Details 17. Method 18. Crane

of size and construction of transport and maximum

should be supplied dimensions

of components.

track

( see also Appendix between

D ): or gauge, service conditions, at centre line of track, of

a) Distance c) Maximum d) Minimum e) Increment f)

rail centres,

c

b) Rail section, load per wheel under radius on the gauge on curves, or radii of curve(s)

Minimum length of track and space required for erection crane, and g) Maximum unit load under out rigger should be specified. comments on any information 36 provided at 12 above.

19. Manufacturer's

IS : 6521( Part 1) - 19%

APPENDIX

C

( Clauses 3.1, 14.1, 20.4.2, 39.1 and 39.2 )
LIST OF RELEVANT INDIAN STANDARDS AND CODES PRACTICE FOR MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT OF

C-l.

MATERIALS

C-l.1 Ferrous Materials IS : 210-1970 IS : 226-1969
(fourth

Specification Specification
revision ).

for grey iron castings for structural steel

( second revision ). ( standard quality)

IS : 961-1962 Specification for structural steel ( high tensile ) ( ievised ). _ IS : 1030-1962 Specification for steel castings for general engineering purposes ( revised ). IS : 1387~-1959 General requirements for the supply of metals and metal products. IS : 1875-1961 .Spec&ation for carbon steel, bars, billets, blooms and slabs for forgings. IS : 2062-1969 Specification for structural steel ( fusion welding quality ) ( jirst revision ). C-1.2 Bolts and Nuts IS : 1363-1967 Specification for black hexagon bolts, nuts and lock nuts ( dia 6 to 39 mm ) and black hexagon screws ( dia 6 to 24 mm ) (first revision ). IS : 1364-1967 Specification for precision and semi-precision hexagon bolts, screws, nuts and lock nuts ( dia range 6 to 39 mm) (j&s t revision ) . IS : 1367-1967 Technical supply conditions for threaded fasteners ( first revision ). C-l.3 Wire Ropes IS : 2266-1970 Specification for steel wire ropes for general ing purposes (first revbion ). engineer-

IS : 2365-1963 Specification for steel wire suspension ropes for lifts and hoists. IS : 3973-1967 Code of practice ~for selection, installation and maintenance of wire ropes. 37

&:6521(Parti)-1972
c-2. MECHANICAL AND FABRICA~ON C-2.1 -Keys and Keyways
IS : 2048-1962 IS : 2291-1963 IS : 2292-1963 IS : 2293-1963 IS : 2294-1963 C-2.2 Specification Specification Specification Specification Specification for parallel for tangential keys. keys'and keyways.

DETAILS

for taper keys and keyways. for gib-head keys and keyways. for woodruff keys and keyslots.

Welding
IS : 816-1969 Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for genera1 construction in mild steel. IS : 818-1968 Code of practice for safety and health requirement in electric and gas welding and cutting operations. IS : 1024-1968 Code of practice for welding of structures subject to dynamic loading. IS : 1323-1966 Code of practice for oxy-acetylene welding for structural work in mild steel (revised ).

C-2.3

Gears
IS : 2467-1963 Notation for toothed gearing. IS : 2535-1969 Specification for basic rack and modules of cylindrical gears for general engineering and heavy-engineering (first revision).

C-2.4

Rivets
IS : 1929-1961 Specification 48 mm dia). for rivets for general purposes ( 12 to

c-3. C-3.1

ELECTRICAL

DETAILS ( third of

Motors
IS : 325-1970
revision ) .

Specification

for

three-phase

induction and

motors maintenance

IS : 900-1965 induction
C-3.2

Code of practice for installation motors ( revised ).

Cables and Conductors 1s : 434 ( Part I )-I964
Part I With copper
IS : 434

S_pecification for rubber-insulated conductors ( revised ).

cables: cables:

( Part II )-I964 Specification for rubber-insulated Part II With aluminium conductors ( revised ).

38

fS : 693-1965 Specification ibr varnished cambric insulated cables ( revised ) . IS : 694 ( Part I )-I964 Specification for PVC insulated cables ( for voltages up to 1 100 V ) : Part I With copper conductors ( revised). IS :~694 ( Part Ii )-1964 Specification for PVC insulated cables ( for voltages up to 1 100 V ) : Part II With aluminium conductors ( revised) . 1s : 1596-1970 Specification for polythene insulated and PVC-sheathed cables ( jkt revision). IS : 1753-1967. Specification for aluminium conductors for insulated cables ( jrst revision ) . C-3.3 Conduits IS : 1653-1964 Specification wiring ( revised ). IS : 2509-1963 Specification trical installations. C-3.4 Switchgear `IS: 1822-1967 -exceeding Specification for ac motor 1 000 volts (jut revision). starters of voltage not for rigid for rigid steel conduits for electrical for elec-

I

non-metallic

conduits

IS :2147-1962 Degrees of protection provided voltage switchgear and control gear. C-4. GENERAL CODES Glossary of terms for cranes.

by enclosures

for low-

C-4.1 Definition IS : 5522-1969 C-4.2

Codes of Practice IS : 807-1963 Code of practice for design, manufacture, erection and testing ( structural portion ) of cranes and hoists. IS : 3177-1965 Code of practice for design of overhead travelling cranes and gantry cranes other than steel work cranes. IS : 4137-1967 Code of practice for heavy duty electric overhead travelling cranes including special service machines for use in steel works. IS: 4573-1968 Code of practice for design of mobile cranes ( all types ). IS : 4594-1968 Code of practice for desigp of portal and semi-portal wharf cranes ( electrical ).

39

fS : 65il( Part I) - 1992

I

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.3)
TRACK D-l. FOR TOWER
importance that each inspected.

D
CRANES
to the safe operation of the track should be designed by

As the track is of extreme crane, it is strongly recommended a competent person and regularly

D-l.1 The track should be level and should be secured to foundations or applied sleepers of strength and spacin g adequate to take the maximum wheel pressure, and designed to suit the safe allowable bearing pressure on the ground.
D-2. It is further recommended included in the manufacturer's that the following instruction book: instructions should be

' ` At least one rail of the track should be electrically bonded at each joint by means of a copper tape cc wire having a minimum crosssectional area of 64 mn?. This rail of the track should be effectively earthed. '

