**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11620 (1986) : Recommended practice for ultrasonic 
testing and acceptance for plain carbon and low alloy 
forging quality steel blooms [MED 17: Chemical Engineering 
Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 66-047 : 008-76 IS : 11620 - 1986 




(Reaffirmed 2003) 
Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
FLUID BED DRYER 



£ 
cr 

UJ 

c 

5 

o 
o 

UJ 



CO 

c 



1. Scope — Covers fluid bed dryers which are commonly used for relatively coarse granular and free 
flowing material- 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Capac/7/ — Shall imply the quantity of solid material producBd or volatile liquid removed from 
wet feed under the stipulated conditions of quality. In case of fluidized bed dryers it can be expressed 
for continuous unit as: 

a) The quantity (kg) of dried material per unit time (h) within stipulated volatile contents at the 
inlet and outlet of the dryer. 

b) The quantity (kg) of volatile liquid removed per unit time (h) within stipulated volatile content 
at inlet and outlet of the dryer. 

For batch fluidized dryer the capacity is usually defined as the weight of the wet material charged 
or dry material produced or liquid evaporated per batch. 

2.2 Constant Rate Drying --Kisu^Wy occurs in the initial stage of drying of wet material during which 
period of time the evaporation rate remains constant and the bed material is at constant wet bulb 
temperature of ini;oming gas. 

2.3 Critical Moisture Content — is the moisture content at a particular time during the drying process 
when the constant rate drying phase ends and the falling rate drying phase starts. 

2.4 D/-/ 5as/5 — is the representation of the moisture content in the product obtained by dividing 
the mass of volatile liquid by the mass of absolute dry matter. It is generally expressed as percentage. 

2.5 Drying Curve — is a graphical representation of the volatile content (dry basis or wet basis) of 
product versus time during the process of drying. Drying curve identifies the constant rate, falling rate 
regimes of drying. 

2.6 Drying Rate — The rate at which wet material loses volatile liquid under drying condition. The 
drying rate Is often divided Into constant rate and falling rate periods, expressed In volatile liquid 
loss per unit time. 

2.7 Drying Time — The time required to reduce a product from one volatile content to a lower 
volatile conteat based on experimental or practical conditions. 

2.8 Equilibrium Moisture — The moisture content of the product when the product is in equilibrium 
with surrounding atmosphere is known as equilibrium moisture. The relative humidity of the surround- 
ing atmosphere at the same condition is the equilibrium relative humidity at the particular temperature. 

2.9 Evaporation — The change of liquid to gas which occurs at the surface of liquid. 

2.10 Falling Rate Drying — The period of drying in which the rate of drying, the change of moisture 
with time is decreasing with time, is termed as falling rate drying. 

2.11 Feed — Wet Input material to the dryer is termed as feed. 

2.12 Final Moisture Content —~ A representation of the moisture control of a product leaving a dryer 
is termed as final moisture content of product moisture and is expressed as dry basis or wet basis. 

2.13 F//7es — Small diameter particles In feed or those which form from larger particles during hand- 
ling and drying. The fines may be carried by the drying gas. 

2.14 Fluidized Bed Dryer — A unit for drying in which the product is in suspension. 



Adopted 20 march 1386 



© September 1386, ISi 



Gf 2 



INDIAN STAt4DABDS INSTITUTION 

MAriAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2AFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 11620 -* 1986 

2AB F/ufd/zat/on Veioclty — The operating gas velocity, which is higher than minimum fluidization 
velocity at which the fluidization and drying of bed particles occurs. 

2.16 Free Moisture — The water in a substance not held by hygroscopic forces. 

2.17 Hold-up — Total weight of the material held in the dryer at any time of operation. 

2.18 Hygroscopic — Describes a material which gains or loses moisture depending upon the product, 
and the humidity and temperature of the surrounding environment. 

2AB Minimum Fluidization Velocity — The gas velocity at which the bed of solid particles is on the 
verge of fluidization is termed as minimum or incipient fluidization velocity. 

2.20 Moisture Content — The weight of moisture in a product per unit weight of the product. It is 
usually expressed as dry basis or wet basis. 

2.21 Retention Time or Residence Time — is the time taken by the product to travel from feed end to 
the product discharge end. Or in other words the time spent by the solid particle in the dryer. 

3. Nomenclature — The various components of the fluidized bed dryer shall be designed as per 
Fig. 1. 



POWDER 
INLET 



DRYiNG MEDIUM 
OUTLET 



BAFFLE PLATE 



POWDER 
OVERFLOW 



LOOSE RING 
FOR LEVEL 
ADJUSTMENT 




POWDER 
INLET 



LIFTING DEVICE FOR 
TOTAL DISCHARGE 



DRYING 
MEDIUM INLET 



DISTRIBUTOR PLATE WITH 
SUPPORTING GRID 



FIG. 1 NOMENCLATURE OF FLUID BED DRYER 
2 



IS : 11620*1986 

4. Classification 

4.1 Ftuidized bed dryer shall be classified. 

4.1.1 Based on operation as 

a) Batch type where the charge to be dried is loaded into the dryer and is removed after the 
drying is over, 

b) Continuous - Where the wet feed continuously enters the dryer and the dry product leaves 
the dryer at constant rate. 

4.1 .2 Based on mode of heat supply 

a) Conventional convective heat dryers ~ Where the heat required for drying is supplied by gas. 

b) Contact fluidized bed dryer — Where part of the beat required for drying is passed through 
heating surface embedded in the fluidized bed. 

4.1 .3 Based on the fluidization method 

a) Cenventional static fluidized bed — Where the fluidization of particles takes place by the 
fluidizing gas only. 

b) Vibrated fluidized bed — Where the fluidization of solid particle is achieved by the combined 
effect of vibrations and gas flow. 

4.1 .4 Based on type of volatile solvent present 

a) Open cycle fluidized bed dryer — Where a low volatile usually water is present as a solvent 
and recovery of the solvent is not called for. 

b) Closed cycle — Where there is a recycle of an explosive mixture of volatile solvent with 
oxygen content of air and where the recovery of solvent is must. 

5. Sizes 

5.1 Size of fluidized bed dryer shall be denoted by the diameter or length, breadth and height of the 
shell. Usually the cross-section area of the fluid bed is a representation of size of fluid bed dryer. The 
following gives a typical calculation for continuous fluidized bed dryer: 

Q 



A = 



VxCpX(T,^-Tout) 



where 



A = fluidized bed area, m^; 

Q = heat required for drying, J; 

V = operating fluidizing gas velocity, m/h; 
Cp = specific heat of fluidizing gas, J/kgK; 
Tin = inlet gas temperature, K; and 
/"out = outlet gas temperature, K. 

For cylindrical unit with diameter D(m) 

A - 7r/4D2 

and for rectangular fluidized bed unit with length L(m) and width B(m) 

A=^LxB 

5.2 The size of gas distribution plate usually perforated plate has the same overall dimension as thai 
of the cross-section of the fluidized bed, however, the diameter and pitch of the holes depending upon 
the designer and the product are determined from the selected percentage open area from following 
equation: 



For sqthare pitch 



7t/4c/2 



P 



,2 



iiJ 



IS: 11620 -1986 



For triangular pitch 



f = 



1/2 (W4tf') 



= 30.(1)" 



where 



/ = percent open area of plate, 
d == diameter of hole (nnm), and 
p == pitch of holes (mm). 

6. Material of Construction — The material of construction for various components of fluidized 
bed dryer will depend upon the duty requirements. Table 1 gives a list of the same as per general 
practice. 



Remarks 



TABLE 1 MATERIAL OF COIMSTRUCTIOIM 
SI No. Component Material Specification 

1. Main shell a) 18:2062-1980 'Specification for structural steel 

(fusion welding quality) {second revision)' 

b) Stainless steel according to IS : 6911-1972 
'Specification for stainless steel plate sheet and 
strip' 

2. Perforated plate Stainless steel according to IS : 6911-1972 

3. Supporting grid IS : 2062-1980 

IS : 6603-1972 'Specification for stainless steel 
bars and flats' 



7. Marking — The manufacturer shall provide a nameplate of a suitable corrosion resistance material, 
securely attached to the dryer In a position that is accessible and, if the dryer is to be lagged where it 
will not be obscured, stamped with the following information: 



a) M^anufacturer's name, 

b) Manufacturer's serial number and identification, and 

c) The number of this standard. 



EXPLA1MAT0RY NOTE 

The fluidized bed dryers are suitable for crystals, granules, and short fibres, for example, rayon 
staple, salt crystal's, sand, ores, and synthetic rubber. 

These are not applicable for large solids, and special forms and shapes, such as pottery, brick, 
and rayon cakes. 



Printed at printrade. New Delhi, India 



