INA NAG IS 6164 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


maa aes — Tran did 


( TECH FRITT ) 


Hydrochloric Acid — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.060.30 


© BIS 2023 


AA Aah Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WMS NIA, 9 FTL Me AH AM, Ag Redi - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


VTE: TUNOG A 


August 2023 Price Group 9 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the approval of the Chemical Division Council. 


Hydrochloric acid is one of the most extensively used chemicals in a multitude of industries. It is used to 
industrially process steel, and also in the production of batteries, photoflash bulbs and fireworks. It is even used 
to process sugar and make gelatin. It is neutralized if released into the soil and it rapidly hydrolyzes when exposed 
to water. 


Hydrochloric acid is classified as a strong acid, because of its capability to deprotonate and donate hydrogen in 
solution. This acid is not easy to handle and safety precautions are to be strictly followed. Hydrochloric acid has 
a sharp and irritating odour and is highly corrosive. Exposure to HCl gas or solutions of HCl may cause eye 
irritation and permanent damage with loss of sight. Dermal exposure may cause burns. Inhalation of HCl 
immediately causes severe irritation with cough and choking sensation. A complete knowledge and understanding 
of the hazards of hydrochloric acid is essential for its safe handling. 


This standard attempts to guide the users in the recognition of the hazards and recommended handling procedures. 
This standard describes properties of hydrochloric acid, the nature of hazards associated with it and essential 
information on storage, handling, packing, labelling, waste disposal, cleaning and repair of tanks, selection and 
training of personnel, personal protective equipment and first-aid. 


This standard was first published in 1971. With a view to update the standard based on the experience of last five 
decades and on the currently available data, the Committee felt a need to revise the standard. In this revision 
general properties have been incorporated and modifications have been made to update safety measures for 
controlling hazards and essential information on symptoms of asphyxiation, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, 
handling, labelling and employee safety based on the currently available data and last five decades experience. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian Standards on 
code of safety of chemicals. 


In the preparation of this code of safety, considerable assistance has been derived from MCA Safety Data Sheet 
No. 39 for hydrochloric acid, aqueous and hydrochloric acid, anhydrous issued by the Manufacturing Chemist’s 
Association, Washington, D.C., USA. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 6164 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
HYDROCHLORIC ACID — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This code describes the properties of 
hydrochloric acid, the nature of hazards associated 
with it and essential information on storage, 
handling, packing, labelling, and disposal of waste, 
cleaning and repairing of containers, selection and 
training of personnel, personal protective 
equipment, and first-aid. 


1.2 This code does not, however, deal with 
specifications for design of buildings, chemical 
engineering, plants, method and ingredients used in 
the manufacture, equipment for waste disposal and 
operation control. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of 
these standards: 


IS No. Title 
IS 4155 : 2023 Glossary of terms relating 
to chemical and radiation 


hazards and hazardous 
chemicals (first revision) 


IS 1260 (Part 1): Pictorial markings for 
1973 handling and labelling of 
goods: Part 1 Dangerous 

goods (first revision) 


IS 8519 : 1977 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment 
for body protection 


IS 8520 : 2023/ Eye and face protection — 
ISO 19734 : 2021 Guidance on selection, use, 
and maintenance (first 

revision) 


IS 8807 : 1978 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment 
for protection of arms and 
hands 


IS No. Title 
IS 4167 : 2020 Glossary of terms relating 
to air pollution (second 
revision) 


IS 10667 : 1983 Guide for selection of 
industrial safety equipment 
for protection of foot and 
leg 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 4155 and IS 4167 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 


Hydrochloric acid is classified as a strong acid, 
because of its capability to deprotonate and donate 
hydrogen in solution. This acid is not easy to handle 
and safety precautions are to be strictly followed. 
Hydrochloric acid in its concentrated, liquid form 
has a strong irritating odour and is very corrosive. It 
can cause damage, such as chemical burns, upon 
contact. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — hydrogen chloride 


4.1.2 Common Name and Synonyms — 
hydrochloric acid, hydrogen chloride, muriatic 
acid, chlorohydric acid 


4.1.3 Uses 


Hydrochloric acid is used in the production of 
chlorides, for refining ore in the production of tin 
and tantalum, for pickling and cleaning of metal 
products, in electroplating, in removing scale from 
boilers, for the neutralization of basic systems, as a 
laboratory reagent, as a catalyst and solvent in 
organic synthesis, in the manufacture of fertilizers 
and dyes, for hydrolyzing starch and proteins in the 
preparation of various food products, and in the 
photographic, textile, and rubber industries. 


4.2 Identification 
4.2.1 Formula — HCl 


4.2.2 CAS Number — 15364-23-5 (also reported 
7647-01-0) 


IS 6164 : 2023 


4.2.3 UN Number — 1789 (hydrochloric acid) 
1050 (hydrogen chloride, anhydrous) 


4.2.4 UN Class — UN Hazard Class: 2.3; UN 
Subsidiary Risks: 8 


4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2R 
4.3 Physical Properties 


4.3.1 General — colourless to slightly yellow gas 
with a pungent, irritating odour 


4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 36.458 g/mol 


4.3.3 Physical State — gas at room temperature and 
pressure 


4.3.4 Colour — Clear, colourless to slightly yellow 
(aqueous hydrochloric acid). Clear colourless and 
white fumes in moist air (anhydrous hydrogen 
chloride) 


4.3.5 Odour — pungent or irritating odour 


4.3.6 Boiling Point 
a) 110 °C (aqueous hydrochloric acid); and 
b) 85.05 °C (anhydrous hydrogen chloride). 
4.3.7 Melting Point — (-) 114.444 °C 


4.3.8 Freezing point — (-) 66 °C (35.21 percent — 
111 °C acid) 


4.3.9 Vapour Density (Air = 1) — 1.268 


4.3.10 Specific Gravity 
a) Solid (water = 1) — 1.507; and 
b) Liquid (water = 1) — 1.189. 
4.3.11 Viscosity at 20 °C — 0.0156 cp 


4.3.12 Vapour Pressure at 30 °C — 
52 atm (absolute) 


4.3.13 Refractive Index at 25 °C — 1.254 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — high (72 g/100 g 
water at 20 °C) 


4.3.15 Solubility in Other Solvents — soluble in 
soluble in methanol, ethanol and ether 


4.3.16 Hygroscopicity 


a) Hygroscopic (aqueous hydrochloric acid); 
and 

b) Very hygroscopic (anhydrous hydrogen 
chloride) 


4.3.17 Flammable Properties — not flammable 


4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


4.4.1.1 Reacts exothermically with organic bases 
(amines, amides) and inorganic bases (oxides and 
hydroxides of metals). Reacts exothermically with 
carbonates (including limestone and building 
materials containing limestone) and hydrogen 
carbonates to generate carbon dioxide. Reacts with 
sulphides, carbides, borides, and phosphides to 
generate toxic or flammable gases. Reacts with 
many metals (including aluminum, zinc, calcium, 
magnesium, iron, tin and all of the alkali metals) to 
generate flammable hydrogen gas. Reacts violently 
with acetic anhydride, 2-aminoethanol, ammonium 
hydroxide, calcium phosphide, chlorosulfonic 
acid, 1, 1-difluoroethylene, ethylenediamine, 
ethyleneimine, oleum, perchloric acid, 
b-propiolactone, propylene oxide, silver 
perchlorate/carbon tetrachloride mixture, sodium 
hydroxide, uranium (IV) phosphide, vinyl acetate, 
calcium carbide, rubidium carbide, cesium 
acetylide, rubidium acetylide, magnesium boride, 
mercury (II) sulphate [Lewis]. Mixtures with 
concentrated sulphuric acid can evolve toxic 
hydrogen chloride gas at a dangerous rate. 
Undergoes a very energetic reaction with calcium 
phosphide. 


4.4.1.2 Hydrochloric acid should be stored away 
from sources of moisture in a cold, dry, 
well-ventilated environment. 


4.4.2 Polymerisation 


In the presence of hydrochloric acid, aldehydes and 
epoxides polymerize violently. 


4.4.3 Corrosion Properties 


Most metals are extensively corroded by 
hydrochloric acid. 


5 HEALTH HAZARDS AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 Health Hazards 
5.1.1 General 


5.1.1.1 Anhydrous hydrogen chloride is a gas at 
ambient conditions having corrosive action upon the 
skin or mucous membranes. In this form it will cause 
rapid and severe burns. It is particularly dangerous 
to the eyes. The gas or vapour is so penetrating and 
pungent that when high concentrations do occur, 
those exposed immediately leave the contaminated 
area, unless trapped or unable to do so because of 
some other injury. 


5.1.1.2 Hydrochloric acid reacts with chromate, 
permanganate and per-sulphate and gives chlorine 
which is highly toxic. 


5.1.1.3 The gas is highly soluble in water, forming 
hydrochloric acid. Concentrated solutions are 
corrosive and especially dangerous to the eyes. 
Prompt removal by copious flushing with water 
often prevents serious damage. 


5.1.1.4 The generally accepted threshold limit value 
for an eight-hours working day is 2 parts of 
hydrogen chloride per million parts of air by volume 
(2 ppm) (7 mg/m’). 


5.1.1.5 The effects on exposure to different 
concentrations of hydrogen chloride in air are as 
specified in Table 1. 


Table 1 Effects on Exposure to Different 
Concentrations of Hydrogen Chloride in Air 


(Clause 5.1.1.5) 


SINo. Concentrations Effects on 
of Hydrogen Exposure 
Chloride in Air 
a) (2) (3) 
i) 30 ppm by Causes irritation 
volume of throat 
ii) 50 ppm to 100 Tolerated for not 


ppm by volume more than an hour 


iii) 1 000 ppm to Dangerous even 
2 000 ppm by for brief exposure 
volume 


5.2 Toxicity Information 
The available toxicity values are given below: 


a) Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) 
(ceiling) — 7 mg/m’; 

b) Threshold Limit Value (TLV) (ceiling) — 
2.98 mg/m’; 

c) Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health 
(IDLH) — 74.56 mg/m’; 

d) Lethal Dose 50 (LDs0) (rabbit), dermal — 
5 010 mg/kg; 

e) Lethal Dose low (LD,,) (human) oral — 
2 847 ug/ kg; and 

f) Lethal Concentration (LC) Inhalation (rat) 
— 3 124 ppm (1 h). 


5.2.1 Acute Toxicity 
5.2.1.1 Local 
5.2.1.1.1 Eyes 


Contact of the eyes with hydrochloric acid (aqueous 


IS 6164 : 2023 


or anhydrous) can rapidly causes severe irritation of 
the eyes and eyelids. If the acid is not quickly 
removed by thorough irrigation with water, there 
may be prolonged or permanent visual impairment 
or total loss of sight. 


5.2.1.1.2 Skin 


Concentrated solutions are destructive to clothing, 
and on contact with the skin can cause severe burns 
unless, promptly washed off. Repeated contact of 
the skin with dilute solutions may lead to the 
development of dermatitis. Exposure to the vapour 
of anhydrous hydrogen chloride may also result in 
burns or dermatitis. 


5.2.1.1.3 Teeth 


Working in an environment of hydrochloric acid 
gas mist or gas may result in corrosion of the teeth. 


5.2.1.1.4 Oral 


Acute oral exposure may cause corrosion of the 
mucous membranes, esophagus, and stomach with 
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea reported in humans. 


5.2.1.2 Systemic effect 
5.2.1.2.1 Inhalation 


Inhalation of excessive concentrations of 
hydrochloric acid vapours immediately produces 
severe irritation of the upper respiratory tract 
resulting in cough, burning of the throat, and a 
choking sensation. Such an exposure necessitates 
prompt voluntary withdrawal from the contaminated 
atmosphere, when possible. Reactions encountered 
in man have usually been limited to inflammation 
and occasionally ulceration of the nose, throat, and 
larynx. Under rare conditions, if inhaled deeply, 
oedema of the lungs may occur. 


5.2.1.2.2 Ingestion 


When concentrated hydrochloric acid is swallowed, 
it causes severe burns of the mucous membranes of 
the mouth, oesophagus, and stomach. The lips and 
mouth usually turn white, and later, brown. There is 
pain in the throat and stomach, difficulty in 
swallowing, intense thirst, nausea, and vomiting, 
followed by diarrhoea and, in severe cases, by 
collapse and death. 


5.2.1.3 Chronic toxicity 


No chronic toxic effects, local and systemic have 
been established. 


5.3 Fire Hazards 


5.3.1 Hydrochloric acid (aqueous or anhydrous) as 


IS 6164 : 2023 


such involves no fire hazard. However, anhydrous 
hydrogen chloride readily dissolves in water to form 
the aqueous acid which attacks most metals with the 
evolution of explosive hydrogen. 


5.3.2 Hydrochloric acid from the tank/pipe line must be 
completely discharged, sufficiently cleaned and 
ventilated by introducing air, before the tank/pipe line 
containing hydrochloric acid is welded/or cut by using 
torch and by any other tool using a flame. 


5.3.3 Suitable Extinguishing Media — water, dry 
powder, foam, and carbon dioxide 


5.4 Corrosion Hazards 


5.4.1 Aqueous hydrochloric acid attacks almost all 
metals with the evolution of hydrogen, which may 
form explosive mixtures with air. It is one of the 
most difficult of the acids to handle. The corrosive 
action of hydrochloric acid on metals increases with 
increase in temperature, concentration, and other 
factors. 


5.4.2 Anhydrous hydrogen chloride is not very 
corrosive to metals and may be handled in ordinary 
steel pipe. Unless leakage occurs, the storage of the 
material in steel cylinders does not present any 
particular corrosion hazard. However, the gas 
absorbs water very readily and the wet gas has 
corrosive properties. 


6 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 
6.1 Availability and Use 


Personal protective equipment should not be used as 
a substitute for safe working conditions. The correct 
use of personal protective equipment requires 
education of the worker in the proper employment 
of the materials available to him; it also requires 
careful and constant supervision of the employee. 
Personal protective equipment shall always be 
readily accessible and in good condition. It should 
be inspected frequently to ensure usability. In 
addition to protective equipment, facilities capable 
of supplying copious quantities of flowing water 
should be readily accessible at all times, as the delay 
in acquiring these materials in case of personal 
injury may mean permanent injury or even the death 
of the employee. 

Protective 


6.2 Recommended Personal 


Equipment 


Employees who handle aqueous or anhydrous 
hydrochloric acid should be provided, when 
indicated, with the following equipment. 


6.2.1 Non-Respiratory Equipment 
6.2.1.1 Suitable gas-tight chemical safety goggle 


(see IS 8520). 


6.2.1.2 Rescue harness and lifeline for those 
entering a tank or enclosed storage space. 


6.2.1.3 Head protection 


Safety, or ‘hard’ hats made of treated fibre, should 
be used to provide protection against accidental 
liquid leaks, falling tools, or other objects. Brimmed 
felt hats may be substituted for safety hats where the 
danger of falling objects is remote. 


6.2.1.4 Foot protection 


High rubber shoes with built-in steel toe-caps are 
recommended for workers handling concentrated 
aqueous hydrochloric acid. Rubbers may be worn 
over leather safety shoes. Shoes should be 
thoroughly cleaned and ventilated after 
contamination (IS 10667). 


6.2.1.5 Hand and body protection 


Woollen outside clothing or other acid resistant 
fabrics is recommended for workers handling 
aqueous hydrochloric acid. Rubber or synthetic 
plastic aprons should be used for protection against 
accidental contact (see IS 8519). Rubber aprons and 
gloves should be worn to protect the hands from 
these materials, as necessary and should be cleaned 
after use (see IS 8807). 


6.2.2 Respiratory Equipment 


6.2.2.1 Proper respiratory protective devices 


Air-line masks with the proper reducing valve and 
filter (suitable for use only where conditions will 
permit safe escape in case of failure of the 
compressed air supply); or self-contained breathing 
apparatus with stored oxygen or air, which allows 
greater mobility but requires more highly trained 
men. In tank work, small manholes may make this 
apparatus unsuitable because of its bulk, although 
the type known as self-generating is especially 
designed for entrance and egress through small 
openings. Masks and breathing apparatus should be 
approved for their intended purpose by the proper 
authorities and should be equipped with full face 
pieces. 


6.2.2.2 Industrial gas masks equipped with 
canisters 


This should be used only when it is certain that the 
concentration of vapour is less than 2 percent by 
volume (20 000 ppm) and the oxygen content is not 
less than 16 percent, and then only for exposure not 
exceeding half an hour. This type of mask should 
not be used in an emergency. 


6.2.2.3 Respirator recommendations 


6.2.2.3.1 Respirator recommendations for handling 
hydrochloric acid up to 50 ppm are as specified in 
Table 2. Assigned Protection Factor (APF) scores 
which gauge the quantity of contaminants the 
operator is expected to inhale while wearing the 
respirator. 


Table 2 Respirator Recommendations for 
Handling Hydrochloric Acid 


(Clause 6.2.2.3.1) 


SI No. Assigned Recommended 
Protection Respirator 
Factor 
(APF) 
Q) (2) (3) 
i) 10 Any supplied-air 
respirator 
ii) 25 Any powered, air- 
purifying respirator 
with cartridge(s) 
providing protection 
against the compound 
of concern 
iii) 50 Any self-contained 


breathing apparatus 
with a full facepiece 


6.2.2.3.2 Emergency or planned entry into unknown 
concentrations or IDLH conditions: 


(APF = 10 000) Any supplied-air respirator that has 
a full facepiece and is operated in a pressure-demand 
or other positive-pressure mode in combination with 
an auxiliary self-contained positive-pressure 
breathing apparatus. 


6.2.2.3.3 Escape 


(APF = 50) Any air-purifying, full-facepiece 
respirator (gas mask) with a chin-style, front- or 
back-mounted acid gas canister. Any appropriate 
escape-type, self-contained breathing apparatus. 
Escape indicates that the respirators are to be used 
only for escape purposes. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING AND 
TRANSPORT 


7.1 Storage 
7.1.1 General 
Hydrochloric acid storage tanks should be designed 


and constructed in accordance with an appropriate 
national standard. 


IS 6164 : 2023 


Aqueous hydrochloric acid containers and 
anhydrous hydrogen chloride cylinders should be 
stored out of direct rays of the sun and away from 
sources of heat. Location of storage should be in the 
open, or in well-ventilated buildings or sheds. 
Ample, natural ventilation should be provided. The 
personnel handling HCl should resort to the use of 
proper personal protective equipment. Concentrated 
hydrochloric acid is toxic if inhaled, so avoid 
breathing it in and always handle it while under a 
fume hood. 


7.1.2 Type of Construction 


While storage exterior to buildings may be 
preferable, normal materials, such as wood, 
concrete, or steel are fairly satisfactory for building 
construction. Since wood is rather rapidly attacked 
by hydrochloric acid fumes, which cause 
embrittlement and warping and may endanger the 
load bearing capacity of the structure, and since 
concrete surfaces disintegrate in contact with 
hydrochloric acid, acid-proof brick is the preferred 
material of construction. Steel, concrete and wood, 
when used, should be protected by suitable acid- 
resistant surface coatings. Provision should be made 
for drainage and washing down spills with large 
quantities of water. 


7.1.3 Isolation 


Hydrochloric acid should not be stored with or near 
oxidizing agents, particularly nitric acid and 
chlorates. Fumes from hydrochloric acid are highly 
corrosive to metals and thus, indirectly, present 
health and fire hazards. Therefore, storage should be 
located outdoors in open sheds or well-ventilated 
areas whenever possible. All containers should be 
stored away from highly flammable substances, 
such as oil, gasoline, paint, waste, and other 
potential fire areas; also, away from elevators, 
gangways, and all locations where moving objects 
may fall upon them. Storage in subsurface rooms is 
not recommended. Full, empty, or partially emptied 
containers should be so labeled and separately stored 
to avoid confusion. Local building codes should be 
observed. 


7.1.3 Electrical Requirements 


Electrical fixtures preferably should be of the 
vapour-proof type. All wiring should be in tight, 
rigid metal conduits, all protected with an acid- 
resisting coating. All electrical equipment should 
conform to the national electrical specifications 
wherever existing. 


7.1.4 Venting of Tanks 


Each storage tank should be provided with a vent of 
sufficient size for venting vapours to the atmosphere 


IS 6164 : 2023 


at an elevation higher than the immediate 
surroundings. The vent shall be of acid-resisting 
material, of a type which will maintain the tank at 
atmospheric pressure, and be capable of being 
cleaned readily to prevent plugging. 


7.1.4.1 Since hydrochloric acid fumes settle rather 
rapidly toward the ground in quiet, humid weather, 
it is recommended, particularly where large 
quantities of fumes are involved, that the fumes be 
carried through acid-resistant ducts to a centrally 
located scrubbing tower. This can be a water ejector 
constructed of suitable material used as a fume 
scrubber. Water can be used in the tower to absorb 
the acid for re-use or for conveying it to a 
neutralizing pit. Alkaline absorbing solutions in 
controlled quantities may be used instead of water 
when conditions warrant their use. 


7.1.4.2 An acid-resistant overflow, should be 
provided either in combination with, or separate 
from, the venting system and should discharge into 
a limestone-packed, tile drain or sump located well 
away from building or tank foundations. 


7.1.4.3 Hydrochloric acid storage tanks working at 
atmospheric pressure should have separate vent and 
overflow lines. The overflow lines should be sized 
to prevent any pressure build up within the tank in 
the event of an overfill. The overflow pipeline 
diameter should be equal to or greater than the inlet 
pipe diameter. Normally, the overflow pipe is at 
least 100 mm in diameter and located at 350 mm 
below the vent base. The overflow pipeline should 
terminate as close to the ground as possible within 
the bund or other contained area. 

Tanks, which are pressure vessels, can have 
combined vent/overflow systems. 


7.1.4.4 Storage tank vent 


Storage tank vent line size depends on the tank 
design conditions as following: 


a) A tank designed for +25 "water column 
requires a 3" diameter vent; 


b) A tank designed for +10 "water column 
requires a 4" diameter vent; and 


c) A tank designed for +1 "water column 


requires a 5" diameter vent 


Normally, the vent is at least 150 mm (6 inches) in 
diameter, fitted on top of the tank and venting to a 
safe location. 


7.1.4.5 Isolating valves 


Isolating valves made of acid resistant materials 
which can be closed quickly and safely in an 


emergency should be provided in the hydrochloric 
acid storage tanks. 


Remotely operated shut off valves may be provided 
at places which can be easily accessed when 
necessary. 


7.1.4.6 Level gauge 


A reliable contents gauge should be fitted to the 
storage vessel. Pneumercators, magnetically 
coupled float gauges or ultrasonic reflection 
transmitters are the most satisfactory methods of 
measurement for acid tanks. 


Diaphragm gauges are suitable for tanks/designed to 
operate at atmospheric pressure. 


A differential pressure transmitter should be used for 
installations/tanks designed to operate above 
atmospheric pressure. 


7.1.5 Material of Construction 


UPVC, high density polyethylene (HDPE), 
Polypropylene reinforced externally with resin 
impregnated fibre glass or carbon steel lined with a 
suitable grade of rubber are the recommended 
materials for construction of storage tanks for 
storage of aqueous hydrochloric acid. 


7.1.6 Drums 


Drums should be stored with the closures up to 
prevent leakage, securely blocked on skids, and on a 
properly drained and dry site. They should be stored 
out the direct rays of the sun and away from heat, 
oil, grease, and from all other potential sources of 
fire. Drums should be vented when received, and at 
least weekly thereafter, to relieve accumulated 
internal pressure. 


7.1.7 Carboys 


Carboys should be stored, preferably under cover, 
on floors of acid-resistant brick or concrete treated 
with sodium silicate. Suitable drainage facilities 
should be provided. If necessary to store outdoors, 
carboys should be protected from direct sunlight, be 
provided with suitable dunnage for the bottom tier 
and stored in a properly drained site. 


7.1.8 Cylinders 


Cylinders should be stored in a cool, dry location, 
away from sunlight, moving objects, and 
combustible and reactive materials. 


7.2 Handling 
7.2.1 Hydrochloric Acid, Aqueous 


7.2.1.1 Spilled hydrochloric acid should always be 
attended to. All spillage should be removed 


immediately by flushing the contaminated area with 
copious quantities of water. Soda ash or lime should 
be available for immediately neutralizing spilled 
acid on concrete, wood, or other reactive or 
absorbing material. When soda ash is used, ample 
ventilation should be provided. 


7.2.1.2 Tanks and equipment, pumps, lines and 
valves should always be drained, flushed, and 
thoroughly evacuated or purged with water or other 
fluid, such as an inert gas, before being repaired. The 
supplier should be consulted as to suitability of 
purging fluid and potential hazards from such 
purging. Care should be taken that the purging fluid 
does not generate flammable hydrogen gas. 
Workmen should never be allowed to attempt to 
repair equipment while it is in operation and the 
lines full of acid. If pipe sections are to be removed 
and flanges opened, the lower bolts should be 
loosened first, and although the lines have been 
flushed, care should be taken to avoid personal 
contact with any liquid draining or dripping from the 
equipment. 


7.2.1.3 If it is necessary to remove sections of lines 
by cutting with a torch, the repairmen should make 
doubly sure that the lines have been drained, flushed 
with water or an alkaline solution, and purged with 
inert gas before the work is started. Operators 
engaged in this type of repair work should wear full 
protective clothing. The hazard of a hydrogen 
explosion is present when cutting into empty acid 
lines or empty acid tanks. This hazard may be 
minimized by forcing a stream of carbon dioxide or 
another inert gas into the line, or by adding dry ice 
to the tank before the repair work. Although 
hydrochloric acid is not explosive, hydrogen is. The 
use of a torch should be avoided. 


7.2.1.4 Glass bottles 


7.2.1.4.1 Employees handling glass bottles should 
be equipped with proper personal protective 
equipment (6.2.1.5). Bottles should be carefully 
handled to avoid breakage. Be sure that the closures 
are tightened before moving bottles. 


7.2.1.4.2 Do not breathe vapour. 


7.2.1.4.3 All bottles should be carefully inspected on 
receipt and any broken in transit, set aside for special 
handling or disposal. 


7.2.1.4.4 When removing bottles from storage 
tiers,the neck of the bottle should always be tilted 
away from the workmen or other individuals. 


7.2.1.5 Carboys 


7.2.1.5.1 Employees handling carboys should be 


IS 6164 : 2023 


equipped with protective clothing consisting of a 
brimmed felt or treated fibre hat, rubber gloves, 
chemical safety-type goggles, rubber apron, and 
rubber safety toecap boots or shoes. 


7.2.1.5.2 All carboys should be carefully inspected 
on receipt and any damaged ones, set aside for 
special handling or disposal. 


7.2.1.5.3 All closures should be securely fastened 
before moving either filled or empty carboys. 


7.2.1.5.4 It is a good practice to place a cap or a boot 
over the neck of the carboy whenever it is moved. 


7.2.1.5.5 Specially designed hand trucks should be 
used for transporting individually boxed carboys 
about the plant. Hooks should never be used. 


7.2.1.5.6 Handling carboys by the closure or neck of 
the bottle is prohibited. 


7.2.1.5.7 Walking a carboy is dangerous because it 
may break and thus cause serious hand lacerations 
or other injuries. 


7.2.1.5.8 When removing full or empty boxed 
carboys from storage tiers, trucks, or cars, and when 
stacking full or empty carboys, the neck of the bottle 
should always be tilted away from the workman. 


7.2.1.5.9 Full carboys of hydrochloric acid should 
never be stacked more than three tiers high. Empty 
carboys should never be stacked more than four tiers 
high. 


7.2.1.5.10 When opening carboys, the hands and 
face should be kept to the side of the carboy neck, 
never over it. In the case of wired carboys, the 
recommended method of removing the wire holding 
the stopper in place is to use a wire cutter (preferably 
the face type). Never attempt to remove the wire by 
twisting or prying. To do so, will frequently break 
the neck of the bottle and injure the workman. 


7.2.1.5.11 Use of air pressure to empty carboys 
should never be allowed. A tilter especially designed 
for the purpose, or a siphon fabricated of material 
resistant to hydrochloric acid should be used. 


7.2.1.6 Drums 


7.2.1.6.1 Any rubber drum showing evidence of 
damage shall be tested to 1.4 kg/cm? hydrostatic 
pressure before use. 


7.2.1.6.2 The drums should be handled with care to 
prevent damage. They should not be dropped or 
allowed to contact any object that may cut rubber. 
They should not be allowed to contact grease or oils. 


IS 6164 : 2023 


7.2.1.6.3 Protective clothing should be worn when 
handling drums of hydrochloric acid. The use of 
brimmed felt or treated fibre hat, rubber gloves, 
chemical goggles, rubber apron, and rubber safety 
toe-cap shoes are recommended. 


7.2.1.6.4 All drums should be tested for loose 
closures and signs of leakage or damage before 
moving, then set aside for special handling if 
damage is found. All closures should be tightened. 


7.2.1.6.5 To vent a drum or to remove the closure 
entirely, a drum should be securely blocked in place 
with closure up and a plug or socket wrench with a 
long handle used to open it by applying pressure on 
the wrench slowly and evenly. Operator should 
stand to one side of the drum and face away from the 
closure while loosening. After closure starts, it shall 
be turned slowly, observing any signs of venting of 
internal pressure. If drum contains accumulated 
internal pressure, it should be slowly reduced to 
atmospheric pressure before removing closure 
completely. Hammering closures is prohibited. 


7.2.1.6.6 Drums should always be emptied by 
gravity with the use of a faucet or a safety siphon 
with a bulk starter, fabricated of materials resistant 
to hydrochloric acid. Use of air pressure should not 
be allowed. While being discharged, drums should 
be supported securely to prevent movement. After 
withdrawals, the drum closure shall be replaced 
securely. 


7.2.2 Hydrogen Chloride, Anhydrous 


7.2.2.1 Anhydrous acid forms white fumes in 
contact with air. These may hover around a valve or 
fitting after it has been completely closed 0; repaired 
and give the impression that a leak still exists. 
Absorption of moisture converts gaseous hydrogen 
chloride into moist hydrochloric acid with all its 
potential hazards. 


7.2.2.2 Anhydrous acid as a low boiling, fuming 
chemical, is very corrosive. Leaks may result in the 
discharge of liquid or gas, or both and thus create 
serious hazards. 


7.2.2.3 Leaks in equipment containing anhydrous 
acid should be repaired immediately. All pressure in 
the lines and containers should be reduced to 
atmospheric pressure and both lines and containers 
swept clean of the gas by flushing with air or an inert 
gas before starting repairs. In repairing a leak, the 
operator should be equipped with full protective 
clothing and equipment. 


7.2.2.4 Leaks at the outlet valve of a cylinder usually 
may be eliminated by further tightening the valve 
stem by bumping the valve wrench with the heel of 


the hand, turning stem in a clockwise direction. Only 
wrenches approved by or provided by the supplier 
should be used. Leaks at the packing gland usually 
may be eliminated by drawing up the packing nut, 
turning the nut in a clockwise direction. Leaks 
through the valve seat that cannot be corrected may 
be temporarily stopped by applying the valve outlet 
cap. This is only a temporary measure and an effort 
shall be made to use or dispose of the cylinder 
contents safely into an absorption system. The 
supplier should be consulted where emergency 
conditions exist. 


7.2.2.4.1 In case of leakage through the valve neck 
there are no reliable methods for stopping the 
leakage. The product will either have to be 
transferred to another container or have to be 
neutralized. 


7.2.2.4.2 No attempt should be made to further 
tighten the valve into the cylinder. Tightening 
against pressure may cause the leak to increase or 
possibly tear the threads and dislodge the valve. 


7.2.2.4.3 A leak at the packing of the cylinder valve 
can usually be corrected by tightening the packing 
nut on top of the valve (see Fig. 1). The cylinder 
valve should be closed and the downstream system 
depressurised. Tighten the packing nut and then 
slowly open the valve to verify that the leak has 
stopped. If this fails, reclose the valve, depressurize 
the system, disconnect the cylinder and notify the 
supplier. 


7.2.2.4.4 Cylinders equipped with diaphragm valves 
that begin leaking from the valve stem area or the 
vent ports have no reliable means to stop the leak, 
which will allow continued use of the cylinder. If 
such a leak is detected, the valve must be closed 
immediately and the system depressurized. Do not 
attempt to tighten the bonnet nut at the top of the 
valve to stop the leak. Contact the supplier for 
additional information. 


7.2.2.4.5 By cooling the liquid exiting from the 
leaking cylinder, it becomes possible to transfer 
large amounts of anhydrous hydrochloric acid from 
one container to another. The basic procedure for 
transfer is as follows: 


a) The leaking cylinder is oriented to allow 
for liquid withdrawal; 


b) Liquid product is then transferred through 
a cold bath, reducing the temperature, and 
on to the receiving container (see Fig. 2); 
and 


c) The residual product in the leaking 
cylinder can then be absorbed or 
neutralized. 


PACKING NUT 


PRESSURE RELIEF 
DEVICE 


IS 6164 : 2023 


WA VALVE STEM 


PACKING RINGS 


OUTLET CAP 


Fic. 1 VALVE 


Appropriate 
Gage 


/ 
Liquid Cylinder Oriented to 
Give Access to Liquid Phase 


To 
Disposal 


Empty 
Cylinder 


FIG. 2 TRANSFERRING LIQUID PRODUCT THROUGH A COLD BATH 


CAUTION — The transfer of liquid anhydrous 
hydrochloric acid poses safety hazards. Steps must 
be taken to ensure that no liquid can become trapped 
between valves in the transfer system. Trapped 
liquid exerts enormous pressure as it warms. 


7.2.2.5 If a cylinder leak is such that it cannot be 
stopped by ordinary methods, the cylinder should be 
removed from the storage area and exhausted to the 
absorption system, or it should be placed in such a 
position that it will gradually lose its contents 
without causing nuisance or damage. 


7.2.2.6 Cylinders 


7.2.2.6.1 No part of any cylinder containing 
anhydrous hydrogen chloride should be subjected to 
a temperature above 52 °C. A direct flame should 
never be permitted to come in contact with any part 
of a cylinder. 


7.2.2.6.2 Care should be taken to protect cylinders 
from any object that will produce a cut or other 
abrasion on the surface of the metal. 


7.2.2.6.3 Cylinders should be handled carefully so 
as to prevent dropping or striking each other. 


7.2.2.6.4 Cylinders shall be moved by a suitable 
truck equipped with adequate clamps, chains, or 
other holding devices. Dragging or sliding should be 
avoided. 


7.2.2.6.5 Use of lifting magnets and slings (rope or 
chain) should never be permitted. A crane may be 
used only when a safe cradle or platform is provided 
for the cylinders. 


7.2.2.6.6 Cylinders should never be used for rollers, 
supports, or for any purpose other than to carry 
anhydrous hydrogen chloride. 


7.2.2.6.7 The repair or alteration of cylinders or 
valves should never be attempted by the purchaser. 


7.2.2.6.8 No attempt should ever be made to mix 
gases or liquids in a cylinder. 


7.2.2.6.9 Valve protective caps should be kept in 
place on the cylinders except when the cylinders are 
connected for discharge. 


IS 6164 : 2023 


7.2.2.6.10 Cylinders should be securely clamped or 
chained in place while being unloaded. 


7.2.2.6.11 In discharging cylinders, connecting lines 
to equipment should be strong enough to withstand 
the maximum operating pressure and be provided 
with check valves, and with liquid or solid traps to 
prevent a suck-back of material to be treated into the 
connecting line and the cylinder. Care should be 
taken that cylinder threads match threads on all 
equipment connected to them. Connections that do 
not fit should never be forced. Pressure gauges and 
other accessories provided for use with other 
products shall never be used on cylinders containing 
hydrogen chloride gas. 


7.2.2.6.12 To discharge the cylinder, the cylinder 
valve should be opened slowly, and the operator 
should make sure that the packing nut is tight, then 
slowly open the cylinder valve by turning valve stem 
counter-clockwise. No wrenches or tools other than 
those provided or approved by the supplier should 
be used. The valve stem or wheel should never be 
hammered in attempting to open or close the valve. 


7.2.2.6.13 When there is any doubt about the proper 
handling of a cylinder or its contents, or about piping 
and flow controls, the supplier should be consulted. 


7.3 Packing and Labelling 
7.3.1 Packing 


7.3.1.1 Aqueous acid 


Smaller amounts, such as 3 litres or less, are packed 
in glass bottles. Up to 60 litres of the acid, may be 
packed in boxed polyethylene or glass carboys. 
Rubber drums may be used for not more than 
60 litres of acid. For amounts up to 250 litres, 
rubber lined metal drums may be used. Rubber or 
glass lined tanks are suitable for storing larger 
amounts. 


7.3.1.2 Anhydrous acid 


Anhydrous acid is supplied in cylinders approved by 
chief inspector of explosives. 


7.3.2 Labelling 

7.3.2.1 Aqueous hydrochloric acid 

Each container shall carry an identifying label or 
stencil. It shall also bear a label depicting the symbol 


given in Fig. 5 of IS 1260 (Part 1). The lower half of 
the label shall have the following words printed: 


HYDROCHLORIC ACID 


WARNING! CAUSES BURNS 
Avoid contact with skin and eyes. 
Avoid breathing vapours. 


In case of contact, immediately flush skin or eyes with plenty 
of water for at least 15 min; for eyes, get medical attention. 


7.3.2.2 Anhydrous hydrogen chloride 


Each cylinder shall have an identifying stencil or label. It shall also have a label depicting the Fig. 2 of 
IS 1260 (Part 1) and shall have the following information printed in the lower half portion: 


HYDROGEN CHLORIDE, ANHYDROUS 


DANGER! 
PRESSURE 
CAUSES BURNS 
EXTREMELY IRRITATING 


HAZARDOUS LIQUID AND GAS UNDER 


Do not breathe gas. 


Do not expose eyes or skin to the gas. 


In case of contact, immediately flush skin or eyes with plenty of 
water for at least 15 min; for eyes, get medical attention. 
NOTE — Suck-back into cylinder may cause explosion. Under no circumstances 


should the cylinder delivery tube be inserted in aliquid or gas without a vacuum 
break or other protective apparatus in the line to prevent suck-back. 


7.4 Transport 
7.4.1 Unloading of Tank Cars 


7.4.1.1 Personal protective clothing should be worn 
when loading or unloading tank cars. Recommended 
equipment consists of a brimmed felt or treated fibre 
hat, chemical safety goggles, rubber gloves, high top 
rubber safety shoes, and woollen outer clothing. A 
rubber acid suit should be worn when connecting or 
disconnecting the car, but the wearing of a complete 
rubber suit should be limited to short periods to 
avoid excessive fatigue. Water in ample quantity 
should be available immediately at the unloading 
station to flush away any spillage. 


7.4.1.2 Unloading operations should be conducted 
by carefully instructed, reliable employees, under 
adequate and trained supervision, and with ample 
ventilation and adequate illumination. Provide 
written instructions to the operating person covering 
all aspects of the operation including: 


a) Checking of the load details and the tank 
ullages; 


b) Inspection of hoses and other equipments 
used for unloading of tanks. 

c) Measures to prevent the vehicle moving 
while hoses are connected; 


d) The acid transfer procedure; and 
e) Emergency procedures. 


7.4.1.3 All caution markings on both sides of the 
tank and dome should be read and observed. 


7.4.1.4 Caution signs should be so placed on the 
track or car as to give necessary warning to persons 
approaching the car and should not be removed until 
after the car is unloaded and disconnected from 
discharge connection. Ensure that the offloading bay 
is located in a safe, well ventilated position. There 
should be easy access and exit for tankers, 
preferably without reversing. Tankers should not 
wait on public roads or busy internal roads. 


7.4.1.5 It is considered good practice that derails be 
placed at one or both ends of the unloading track 
approximately one car-length from the car being 
unloaded, unless the car is protected by a closed and 
locked switch or gate. 


7.4.1.5.1 When loading and unloading a tank truck, 
make sure that the manual brakes and a vehicle lock 
are applied so that the truck cannot move during the 
operations. Under no circumstances should the truck 
be left unobserved. 


IS 6164 : 2023 


7.4.1.5.2 Spillage of acids because of movement 
of vehicles with the hoses still connected can be 
prevented by providing barriers across the tanker 
stand, brake interlocks on the vehicle, clamping or 
breakaway couplings on the hose connections. 


7.4.1.5.3 Where access above ground level is 
necessary for offloading the tanker, effective 
measures to prevent falls, such as access gantries 
with stairs or ladders, and protective handrails on the 
tanker top needs to be provided. 


7.4.6 Dome fittings should be inspected for leaks or 
other defects before unloading. In the event of a tank 
car or fitting failure or leak that cannot be stopped 
by following previous instructions from the supplier, 
he should be immediately contacted by telephone or 
wire for further instructions. 


7.4.7 Compressed air, if used, shall be as free as 
possible from oil, moisture and foreign matter. To 
ensure this, the air supply should be taken from the 
TOP of the air receiver (reservoir), which should be 
drained at regular intervals. The airline leading to 
the tank car (usually a dead end line which is idle 
between unloadings) should be thoroughly blown 
out before it is connected to the tank car. 


7.4.8 Under no circumstances should water or other 
liquid be introduced into loaded or unloaded car 
tanks by the purchaser. 


7.4.9 The purchaser should not permit any 
employee to enter an empty tank car for any 
purposes whatsoever. Empty tank cars should be 
returned as promptly as possible. 


7.4.10 Before unloading the tanker, check placards 
and the accompanying delivery notes to ensure, that 
the material being delivered is what it is supposed to 
be. This is particularly important if incompatible 
materials are stored on site. 


Before acid is unloaded from a tanker into a storage 
tank, operator unloading the tank should ensure that 
there is enough ullage space in the tank to take the 
load. 


7.4.11 Mark the pipelines appropriately with the 
name of the acid, flow direction, with colour coding 
and indication of open/close direction of major 
valves to prevent erroneous operation during 
transfer of acids. 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is involved it 
shall be carried out in accordance with the Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989. While referring to the statutes, the 
stipulations given in the subsequent amendments of those statutes 
shall be taken into account. 


IS 6164 : 2023 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 General 


All personal attending to spill/leak should use proper 
personal protective equipment while handling 
hydrochloric acid. Personal protective equipment 
should be used for eye protection, skin protection 
and respiratory protection. 


8.2 Spillage 
8.2.1 Genera/Information 


The unloading area around the tank containing 
hydrochloric acid should be designed in such a way 
that it can properly contain spills. Full set of 
protective equipment should be there including 
rubber boots. Personnel should keep upwind of the 
spill, and if it is required to enter the spill area, 
self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) should 
be worn. People who are not involved with spill 
should be remain away. Absorb spillage to prevent 
material damage. 


8.2.2 Land Spill (Spill on Land) 
8.2.2.1 Containment and mitigation 


Construct the dike to contain the spill. Dilute spill 
with water spray to reduce fuming. Neutralize with 
soda ash, lime or another weak base. After 
neutralization test the pH and once the pH reaches to 
range of 6 to 9, the material can be transfer to 
container for disposal. Never flush hydrochloric acid 
to sanitary sewer. 


8.2.2.2 Consequence 


Its exposure to humans leads to corrosion of body 
parts through inhalation or direct contact. 


8.2.3 Water Spill (Spill in Water) 


8.2.3.1 Containment 


Stop use of water. Notify proper authorities to stop 
water intake or to monitor water for contamination. 


8.2.3.2 Consequence 


This product may affect the acidity (pH) in water 
with risk of harmful effects to aquatic organisms. 


8.3 Leakages 
8.3.1 General Information 


Proper maintenance and repair should be done of 
containers and other equipment to avoid leakages 
from valves, flanges or other joints in machinery and 


equipment. Flush away hydrochloric acid that has 
been leaked on concrete, wood, or other corrosion 
sensitive materials with water. 


8.3.2 Storage 


Cool and ventilated area should be used for storage 
of hydrochloric acid. Keep separate from 
incompatible materials such as oxidizing agents, 
metals, organic materials and alkalis. It can corrode 
metallic bodies. Keep container tightly closed and 
store in a safe place. 


8.4 Waste Disposal 
8.4.1 Aqueous Hydrochloric Acid 


8.4.1.1 Waste disposal of aqueous hydrochloric acid 
and materials contaminated with it depends to a 
great extent upon local conditions. For appreciable 
quantities of acid, neutralization with an alkaline 
material is usually required before disposal into a 
surface water. Since certain agencies of local, state, 
and central governments have been established to 
protect the waters of the country from pollution, all 
rules and regulations applying to a given location 
should be ascertained and observed. 


8.4.1.2 When waste acid is discharged into a city 
system, neutralization with controlled quantities of 
alkali should be employed to prevent corrosion of 
the city sewerage system. Neutralization by passage 
through a bed of limestone or oyster-shell may be 
employed when conditions permit and warrant. 


8.4.2 Anhydrous Hydrogen Chloride 


Elimination of waste anhydrous hydrochloric acid 
may be accomplished by absorption in a packed 
tower through which water or an alkaline solution is 
circulated. In any absorption system, provision shall 
be made to ~prevent suck-back due to the high 
solubility of hydrochloric acid gas in water. The 
disposal of the recovered aqueous hydrochloric acid, 
or of the alkali chloride, will depend upon the 
economics of the case and upon local conditions, 
regulations, and ordinances. 


9 PREVENTIVE MEASURES 
9.1 General 


Hydrochloric acid does not present a serious 
industrial hazard, provided workers are properly 
instructed and adequately supervised in, the proper 
handling of it. The most important factor in the 
prevention of injury is to prevent contact of the gas 
or solutions with the eyes, skin, and the respiratory 
and gastrointestinal tracts. 


9.2 Ventilation 


Ventilation should be adequate to maintain the 
atmospheric concentration at a level that does not 
exceed the generally accepted threshold limit value 
of 5 ppm by volume of air. 


9.3 Safety Showers and Eye Baths 


Readily accessible, well-marked; frequently 
inspected, rapid-action safety showers shall be 
available in the areas where hydrochloric acid is 
handled. The showers should be capable of 
supplying large quantities of water under 
moderately high pressure. Blankets should be 
located near the safety showers. Special 
eye-washing fountains, a bubbler drinking fountain, 
or a hose with a liberal, gentle flow of drinking 
water should be available for eye irrigation. All of 
the above equipments should be inspected and 
tested at frequent intervals to ensure its being in 
good working condition at all times. The locations 
of such equipment should be marked clearly. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Safety in handling hydrogen chloride depends 
upon the effectiveness of employee education, 
training and supervision. The education and training 
of employees to work safely and to use the personal 
protective equipment and other safeguards provided 
for them is a responsibility of supervisor. Employee 
education and training should emphasize the need of 
safely handling hydrogen chloride according to the 
methods outlined in the manual, in order to avoid 
spilling or splashing, leaks, burns, inhalation of the 
vapour of burning material, or ingestion. 
Unauthorised and untrained employees should not 
be permitted in areas where acetone is being 
handled. 


10.2 Before being placed on the job, all new 
employees should be instructed and trained to 
maintain a high degree of safety in handling 
procedures. Older employees should be 
re-instructed and trained periodically. 


10.3 Employees working where hydrochloric acid 
hazards exist should be instructed and trained in the 
following: 


a) Hazards of hydrochloric acid; 


b) Location of gas masks and other personal 
protective equipment, safety showers, 
bubbler drinking fountains, equipment 
especially suitable for eye irrigation, water 
hoses, exits, and first-aid equipment; 


c) Proper use of personal protective, 
emergency, and first-aid equipment; 


IS 6164 : 2023 


d) Proper individual conduct in case of 
emergency, 


e) The necessity for reporting to his superior 
any possible hazard, such as an unusual 
odour of hydrogen chloride or any 
evidence of spillage of hydrochloric acid. 
Contaminated areas should be flushed with 
copious quantities of water and the acid 
neutralized with soda ash or lime as quickly 
as possible. When soda ash is used, ample 
ventilation should be provided. All 
employees engaged in this operation 
should be provided with all the necessary 
protective devices to prevent personal 
injury, 

f) Key personnel should be drilled in the 
proper use of emergency equipment and in 
the actions to be taken in case of acid burns: 
and 


g) Workers should be carefully trained in the 
proper ways of handling the gas and the 
aqueous acid, and should be supervised 
until their proficiency in handling is 
demonstrated. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 
11.1.1 Personal Hygiene 


11.1.1.1 Employee must always wear protective 
equipment while handling hydrochloric acid. Take a 
shower or bath after the work, wash face and hands, 
and gargle immediately before taking a meal. 


11.1.1.2 Food should not be stored near the place 
where hydrochloric acid is being handled. 


11.1.1.3 Employees handling hydrochloric acid 
must gargle with a sodium bicarbonate solution at 
the end of the work to prevent acid corrosion of the 
teeth. 


11.1.2 Physical Examination 
11.1.2.1 Pre-placement physical examinations 


Prior to assignment to operations involving the 
handling of aqueous or anhydrous hydrochloric acid, 
all employees should have a careful preplacement 
physical examination, and those who have the 
following conditions should be excluded from such 
processes: 


a) Chronic skin disorders; 


IS 6164 : 2023 


b) Chronic diseases of the upper respiratory 
tract; 

c) Only one eye; and 

d) Seriously impaired vision, uncorrected, in 
one or both eyes. 


11.1.2.2 Periodic examination 


The extent of medical or dental control depends 
upon the amount of exposure to hydrochloric acid. 
Eyes should be assessed periodically. Inspection of 
respiratory tract is also recommended to avoid 
bronchial infection. 


11.1.2.3 Medical examination 


An annual physical examination should be 
conducted for each employee who is constantly 
exposed to hydrochloric acid. They should be 
instructed to report any irritation experienced while 
exposure to hydrochloric acid. 


11.1.2.4 Dental examination 


Periodical dental examinations may be conducted. 


11.2 First Aid 


11.2.1 General 
Speed in removing the patient from the 
contaminated atmosphere and in removing 


hydrochloric acid from the skin or eyes is of primary 
importance. First-aid shall be started immediately in 
all cases of contact with hydrochloric acid in any 
form. 


11.2.2 Contact with Skin 


11.2.2.1 Workers who have been exposed to a high 
concentration of hydrogen chloride, or who have 
had aqueous hydrochloric acid spilled, splashed, or 
sprayed upon them should be subjected immediately 
to a drenching shower of water. Their clothing 
should be removed as rapidly as possible while they 
are in the shower, and medical assistance should be 
summoned at the earliest possible moment 
(in calling the physician, describe the nature of the 
injury and the exact location of the patient). It is 
essential that all affected body surfaces be washed 
with copious quantities of running water for a 
sufficient time to remove all hydrochloric acid. No 
attempt should be made to neutralize the acid with 
alkaline solutions. 


11.2.2.2 It should be borne in mind that in cases of 
severe or extensive burns, shock symptoms, such as 
rapid pulse, sweating, and collapse, may occur at 
any time. If such symptoms should appear, keep the 
patient lying on his back and keep him warm (but 
not hot) until a physician arrives. No oils or oily 


ointments should be applied to the burned areas 
without specific direction from the attending 
physician. 


11.2.3 Contact with Eyes 


If even minute quantities of hydrochloric acid, in 
either strong or dilute solution, enter the eyes, or if 
the eyes have been exposed to strong concentrations 
of hydrochloric acid, they should be immediately 
irrigated with copious quantities of running water 
for at least 15 min. The eyelids should be held a 
part during the irrigation to ensure contact of water 
with all accessible tissues of the eyes and lids. A 
physician, preferably an eye specialist, should be 
called in attendance at the first possible moment. If 
a physician is not immediately available, the eye 
irrigation should be continued for a second period of 
15 min. After the first period of irrigation is 
completed, it is permissible as a first-aid measure 
to in still into the eye two drops or three drops of a 
0.5 percent solution of pontocaine or other 
equally effective topical anaesthetic. No oils or 
oily ointments should be instilled unless advised by 
the physician. 


11.2.4 Inhalation 


11.2.4.1 Exposed individuals usually leave the 
contaminated atmosphere immediately, if possible. 
Therefore, the extent of injury is not likely to be 
greater than inflammation of the upper respiratory 
tract. Oxygen usually furnishes relief from 
coughing. If one familiar with administering 
oxygen- is present, its application should be 
continued for at least 15 min to 30 min. 


11.2.4.2 In order to prevent the development of a 
severe lung congestion (pulmonary edema), 
100 percent oxygen should be administered as soon 
as possible after any exposure suspected of being 
severe. Oxygen administration is most effective if 
expiration is made against a measured resistance. 
This may be accomplished readily by use of metered 
pressure masks which are available for this type of 
treatment, or it may be accomplished by use of a 
rubber tube connected to the inlet valve of a snugly 
fitting face mask and inserted to a depth of not more 
than 6 cm, below the surface of water in a suitable 
container. It is advisable to start with a very low 
resistance (1 cm) and increase gradually to the point 
of tolerance. The pressure resisting exhalation 
should be adjusted to the patient’s tolerance by 
varying the depth of the end of the tube below the 
water’s surface or adjust the pressure in the metered 
mask. Oxygen inhalation shall be continued as long 
as necessary to maintain the normal colour of the 
skin and mucous membranes. In cases of severe 
exposure, the patient should breathe 100 percent 


oxygen under positive exhalation pressure for half 
an hour periods every hour for at least three hours. 
If there are no signs of lung congestion at the end of 
this period, breathing is easy, and the colour is good, 
oxygen inhalation may be discontinued. Throughout 
this time, the patient should be kept comfortably 
warm, but not hot. 


11.2.4.3 Stimulants will rarely be necessary where 
adequate oxygenation is maintained. Any drugs for 
shock should be given only by the attending 
physician. 


11.2.5 Ingestion 


11.2.5.1 If a person has swallowed aqueous 
hydrochloric acid and is conscious, he should 
immediately be made to drink copious amounts of 
lime water or milk of magnesia. Use plain water if 
these are not readily available. Do not use sodium 
bicarbonate. The patient may be expected to vomit 
spontaneously, but no attempt should be made to 
induce vomiting. Do not attempt to use a stomach 
tube. Summon a physician at once, describing in 
detail the nature of the accident and the exact 
location of the patient. 


11.2.5.2 Nothing should ever be given by mouth to 
an unconscious patient 


While awaiting the arrival of the physician, watch 
the unconscious patient closely for evidence of 
obstruction to breathing. His tongue should be kept 
well forward in his mouth, and false teeth should be 
removed. Placing the patient in a face-down position 
will aid considerably in preventing aspiration of 
vomitus. 


12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


12.1 General Principles for Tank Cleaning and 
Repairs 


12.1.1 Before a tank is entered, tests should be made 
by a qualified person to determine if further washing 
is necessary, and during the course of the work, 
further tests should be made to ensure that no 
oxygen deficiency exists and that no harmful gas or 
vapour, particularly hydrogen, is present. Written 
permission of the supervisor shall be obtained by the 
repair or cleaning crew. 


12.1.2 Pipelines into or out of the tank or other 
apparatus should be disconnected, preferably by 
removing a complete small section, and a blank 
flange should be secured on the open end of the line 
to protect against human error and unsuspected 
leaks. Valves, cocks, and blank flanges in the 
pipeline should not be relied upon alone. 


IS 6164 : 2023 


12.1.3 The operator should make sure that the tank 
can be left by way of the original entrance. 


12.1.4 The electrical switches should be locked in 
the off position, and the drive belts should be 
removed. The operators should be completely 
safeguarded against an accidental start of the 
agitating equipment or other moving parts located 
inside the tank or adjacent to the entrance. 


12.1.5 Before directing men to enter a tank, the 
foreman should make an inspection of the interior. 
He should be equipped with either a hose mask, an 
airline mask, or a self-contained breathing 
apparatus, together with a rescue harness and life 
lines. Another person should be on guard during the 
inspection. 


12.1.6 Special ventilation and a continuous fresh 
air supply are recommended during the entire time 
men are cleaning, inspecting, or repairing the 
tank. Asphyxiating gases are not readily detected, 
and it is best to guard against these by forced 
ventilation from a blower located outside the tank. 


12.1.7 Proper personal protective equipment 
should be worn by anyone entering a tank for 
inspection, cleaning, or repairs. 


12.1.8 One man on the outside of the tank should 
keep the men in the tank under constant observation, 
and at least two men should be available to aid in 
rescue if any of those in the tank are overcome. 


12.1.9 A hose mask, an air-line mask, or a self- 
contained breathing apparatus, together with rescue 
harness and life line, should be located outside the 
tank entrance. This equipment should be used for 
rescue, if necessary, regardless of the type of 
respiratory protection or the air supply which is 
provided for employees inside the tank. 


12.1.10 In addition to protecting the workmen 
actually engaged in the cleaning and repairing of 
tank, attention should be paid to the protection of 
workers in nearby areas. 


12.1.11 The portable electric lights should be of the 
6-volt type if possible, and power tools should be of 
the three-wire, grounded, explosion proof type 
approved for use in hazardous locations. They 
should be maintained in excellent condition. 


12.2 Entering Tanks 
12.2.1 The tank or equipment should first be 
emptied completely of all liquid. 


12.2.2 The remaining gas in the tank should then be 
vented to the absorption system, the tank opened, 


IS 6164 : 2023 


and all pipes leading to and from the tank drained, 
disconnected, and blanked off. 


12.2.3 The tank should be filled with water or other 
suitable wash liquid and drained once or twice, inlet 
and exit lines disconnected and blanked off, and all 
switches opened. Due to possible attack of tanks and 
containers by wash liquids, the supervisor should be 
consulted on proper wash liquid to be used in each 
case. If necessary, soda ash or lime may be added in 
sufficient quantity to neutralize any residual acid. 
(Use of soda ash will result in evolution of carbon 
dioxide, which will displace the air if insufficient 


ventilation is provided). The tank may then be filled 
with water and drained, or hosed and drained. After 
this, it should be thoroughly purged with fresh air. 
The tank should then be in a condition to permit 
entry. 


12.2.4 A wooden shovel and bucket may be used to 
clean out any residual sludge or water. 


12.2.5 An adequate supply of fresh air should be 
provided all the time the tank is being cleaned or 
repaired. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 6164 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization(s) 


In Personal Capacity (1204, Bhumika Residency, Sector 20 
Block No 21 roadpali Klambolinode , Navi Mumbai, 410218) 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Government of India, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, 
Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, Governemnt of India, New Delhi 


Department of Space (ISRO), Bengaluru 


(DRDO), 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 


Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association, Mumbai 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. Das (Alternate) 


MS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R 
Ms LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


IS 6164 : 2023 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Ministry of Pet and 
Natural Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association 
of India, Mumbai 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In Personal Capacity (/-4/2/, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


Representative(s) 


DR D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
D. SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


MISS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (21953). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


