(Reaffirmed 2000)

1!3:110771984

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS ON SOIL AND WATER

Irrigation

Equipment

and Systems

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC

58

Chairman DR H. S. CHAUHAN hfembers SHEI RAVI KDMARAUIRW_~L DRA.K. BHATTACHARYA SHRI T. K. CE~KR.~BORTY

Represettting G. B. Pant University of Agricultural Pantnagar & Technology,

SUPERINTENDING ENQINEEH ( AC+RILENCZG ) ( Alternate ) Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur PROF J. F. CORREIA Coromandal Indag Products Private Limited, SHRI S. JAMES FREDRICK _* . Madras SHRI G. PAUL LAMECH ( Alternate ) Voltas Limited, Bombay SHRI R. S. IYER SRRI A. S. KOTHEXAR ( Alternate ) Central Board of Irrigation Sr Power, New Delhi SHRI S. P. KAUSHISli Directorate of Agriculture, Government of Haryana, SHRI H. S. LOHAN Chandigarh Andhra Pradesh State Irrigation Development CorSRRI A. N. MEDHORA poration Limited, Hyderabad &RI H.R. %SHRh Ministry of Irrigation SHRI M. PARTHASABT~Y Polyene General Industries Private `Limited, Madras SHRI S. R. ANUJAN ( Alternate ) Premier Irrigation Equipment Limited, Calcutta SRRIM. J. POOE SHRI SUMAN SHANKARDA~S ( Alternate ) Jindal Aluminium Limited, Bangalore SERI K. R. RA~HUNATH SHRI M. S. MRUTHYUNJAYAPPA ( Alternate ) Wavin India Limited, Madras SHRI K. R. RANOARAJAN SRRI M. S. MARE~~=U ( Alternate )

Shri Ganga Rolling Mills, Allahabad Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), New Delhi Directorate of Agricultural Engineering, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta Department of Agricultural Engineering, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras

( Continued on page 2 )
@ Cojpright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Zndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11077-1984 (Continued from
page 1 ) Rspressnting Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Amritsar Direct;t;e of Agriculture, Government of Bihar,

Members SRRI B. S. SANDHU
SHRISANTOKHSINCZII SHRI T. C. PAUL ( Alternate ) SHR1v.P. SHRIVASTAVA

SHBI JAI PAL SINWI SHRI N. K. TYA~I SERI T. PURN~ANDAI,~, Director ( Agri & Food )

State Planning Institute, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal Director General, IS1 ( Es-OJ%J Member ) Secretary

Assistant Director

SERI K. ANBARASU

( Agri & Food ), IS1

2

IS : 11077 - 1984

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS ON SOIL AND WATER

0.

FQREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 November 1984, after the draft finalized by the Irrigation Equipment and Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Soil and water are the main two ingredients which help in increasing the productivity of agricultural crops. The definitions of the various terms ~that are used in the field of soil and water are available. However, connotations vary from person to person and place to place. Therefore, an attempt has been made in this standard to evolve definitions of various terms clearly to ininimize the scope for varied interpretations and uses. It is hoped that this standard would help in adoption of uniform terminology in the country. 0.3 Terms included in this standard may cover various disciplines of agriculture, such as agricultural engineering, horticulture, soil sciences, agricultural chemistry and forestry. All these fields are viewed from point of view of soil and water management practices in agricultural field.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard gives definitions of terms used in the field of soil and water in agriculture field.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 The terms are arranged in an alphabetical order. Some of the terms with similar meaning may appear in different clauses, in such cases, the definition in full has been given where the term is more commonly used. 2.1 A Horizon - The upper horizon of the soil material has been removed by percolating waters. 2.2 Accelerated
Erosion See erosion

mass

from

which

( b ).

3

IS:11077 2.3 Acid ions.

- 1984 Soil A `sour' soil containing more hydrogen than hydroxyle

2.4 Acre-Foot - Quantity of water that would cover of 1 foot (43 560 ft3 1 233.5 m3 ). 2.5 Acre-Inch --Quantity of water that would cover of 1 inch ( 3 630 ft3 -= 102.8 m3 ). 2.6 Adapter ( Sprinkler Irrigation connect two variable pipes of different 2.7 Aerate To impregnate

1 acre for a depth 1 acre for a depth to

) - A device used as a fitting sizes. air.

with a gas, usually

2.8 Aeration Soil - The process by which air in the soil is replaced by air with low airflow rates from the atmosphere. In a well-aerated soil, the soil air is very similar in composition to the atmosphere above Poorly aerated soils usually contain a much higher percentage the soil. of carbon dioxide. 2.9 Aerobic a) b) c) Having molecular in oxygen the as a part or the environment. of molecular oxygen, as aerobic ( In cases of as aerobic

Growing only organisms.

presence

Occurring only in the presence of molecular oxygen. certain chemical or biochemical processes such decomposition ).

2.10 Agronomy - A specialization of agriculture concerned with the theory and practice of field-crop production and soil management. The scientific management of land. 2.11 Air Capacity field moisture capacity. The quantity of air in the soil when the soil is at air by diffusion and changes, barometric

~2.12 Air Drainage (Soil ) - Renewal of soil meteorological factors, such as soil temperature variations and action of wind. 2.13 Air a) Dry

The state of dryness ( of a soil ) at equilibrium with the moisture content in the surrounding atmosphere. The actual moisture content will depend upon the relative humidity and the temperature of the surrounding atmosphere. To allow to reach equilibrium surrounding atmosphere. 4 in moisture content with the

b)

IS : 11077 - 1984 Porosity - The proportion of the bulk volume of soil that is filled with air at any given time or under a given condition such as a specified moisture tension. Usually the large pores; that is, those ( See drained by a tension of less than approximately 100 cm of water. moisture tension ).
2.15 Alkaline PH is above below 7. 2.16 Alkali to interfere appreciable 2.17 Alkaline soil ). 7, A chemical term referring to `basic' reaction where the as distinguished from `acid' reaction where the FH is

2.14 Air

Soil - A soil that contains sufficient exchangeable sodium with the growth of most crop plants, either with or without quantities of soluble salts. Soil Any soil having PH greater than 7'0. ( See reaction in a soil,

2.18 Alkalinity Soil - The degree of intensity of alkalinity expressed by a value greater than 7.0 for the soil PH.

2.19 Alkalizatioa
content 2.26

- A process of the soil is increased.

where

by

the

exchangeable-sodium

Alluvial Soil
a) deposited alluvium and A soil developing from recently exhibiting essentially no horizon development or modification of the recently deposited materials. When capitalized, the term refers to a great soil group of a zonal order consisting of soils with little or no modification of the recent sediment in which they are forming ( indicated by absence of a B horizon ).

b)

2.21 Amendment
a)

Soil

An alteration of the properties of a soil, and thereby of the soil by the addition of substances such as lime, gypsum, sawdust, the soil more of making etc, to the soil for the purpose suitable for the production of the plants.

b) Any such substance used for this purpose strictly speaking such as even fertilizers constitute a special group of soil amendments. 2.22 -Ammonification - The biochemical nitrogen is released from nitrogen containing process whereby ammonical organic compounds.

2.23 Ammonium Fixation - Adsorption of ammonium ions by minerals or organic fractions of the soil in forms that are relatively insolube and relatively inexchangeable by other cations. 5

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.24 Anaerobic a) The absence of molecular b) oxygen. oxygen ( such as anaerobic oxygen ( as a biochemical Growing in the absence of molecular bacteria ). in the absence of molecular

c) Occurring process ).

2.25 Anion-Exchange Capacity - The sum total of exchangeable anions that a soil can adsorb. %xpressed as milliequivalents per 100 grams of soil ( or of other adsorbing material such as clay ). 2.26 Anisotropic Homogeneous Soils - Soils not having the same physical properties when the direction of measurement is changed. Commonly used in reference to permeability changes with direction of measurement. 2.27 Application Rate - Rate at which the water is applied given area. Usually expressed in depth of water per hour. to a

2.28 Appropriate Right - A doctrine of rights to use irrigation water, according to which rights are based on date of appropriation of water and the rrght to water in limited quantity by beneficial use on the land. 2.29 Aquifer - A formation that contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield significant quantity of water to wells and springs. by the low rainfall and 2.30 Arid - A climate that is characterized high rate of evaporation. Arid climate for cool region is usually defined as less than 10 inches of precipitation per year, and semiarid as between 15 and 20 inches per year ( 37.5 and 50 mm ). 2.31 Arid Climate - Climate characterized by low rainfall and high evaporation potential. A region is usually considered as arid where less than 10 inches of precipitation occurs per year ( 25 mm ). 2.32 Automatic System ( Drainage ) - System where by the pumping unit starts and stops automatically in response to an automatic control, such as a float switch. 2.33 Auxiliary Spillway - Dam spillway built excess of that carried by the principal spillway. to carry runoff m

2.34 Available Nutrient or Nutrient Availability - The portion of any element or compound in the soil that can be readily absorbed and assimilated by growing plants. ( `Available' should not be confused with exchangeable. ) 2.35 Available Soil Moisture for use by plants in the soil. The portion of soil moisture available 6

IS' : 11077 - 1984 Soil Moisture Capacity - Total amount of available Usually consoil moisture that can be held by a soil for use by plants. sidered to be the moisture held between field capacity and wilting point. B
2.37 B. Horizon - The been added by percolating horizon of deposition waters. to which similar materials devices have placed

2.36 Available

2.38 Baffles - Vanes, guides, grids, grating, or in a conduit to check, deflect or regulate flow.

of placement of commercial -2.39 Banding Fertilizer - The method fertilizers in concentrated strips, usually below the soil surface. 2.40

Bank -

Margin

of raised ground

bordering

a water course or lake,

entering the banks of stream channels 2.41 Bank Storage - Water during flood period of stream flow. The water so stored is released after the flood. 2.42 Bar centimetre.

A unit

of pressure

equal

to one million

dynes

per square

2.43 Base Exchanger complex by other cations.

The replacement of cations, held on the soil ) ( S cc (1 1so cation exchange capacity. a material expressed is saturated with as a percentage of

2.44 Base Saturation - Extent to which exchangeable cations other than hydrogen, the cation exchange capacity.

2.45 Base-Saturation Percentage - The extent to which the absorption complex of a soil is saturated with exchangeable cations other than hydrogen, expressed as a percentage of the cations other than hydrogen, It is expressed as a percentage of the total cation-exchange capacity. 2.46 Basin - Area drained by a river and its tributaries or a level plot or field surrounded by levees, which irrigated. ( Hydrology ) may be flood

of water by flooding within 2.47 Basin Irrigation - The application areas of approximately level land surrounded by levees. Basins may vary in size from a few square feet to several acres. 2.4% Bedding - Method of surface drainage consisting of narrow-width plough in which the dead furrows -run parallel to the prevailing land Also known as crowning or ridging. slope, and are used .as field drains. Also, the process manner of bedding conduit strength. of laying a drain or other conduit in its beak. The may be specified to conform to the earth load and 7

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.49 Bedding Ditch of surface drainage. 2.50 Bed Load flowing stream. The ploughed material ditch formed in a bedding system moving on the bed of a

Coarse

or sediment

2.51 Bed Rock - The solid rock underlying soils and the regolith in depth ranging from zero ( where exposed by erosion ) to several hundred feet. 2.52 Beehive - Dome-shaped grating placed underdrains for excluding entrances of trash. 2.53 Berm - The undisturbed the edge of the soil bank. area between on surface inlets to

the edge of a ditch and soil. to

2.54 Black Alkali -- Seealkali soil and non-alkali

2.55 Black Earth - A term used as synonymous with `Chernozem' describe self-matching black clays.

2.56 Black Soils - A term used to describe soils with dark surface horizons of the black ( Chernozem ) zone; includes black earth or chernozem, wiesenboden, solonetz, etc. 2.57 Blinding - Placement of loose soil around a tile or conduit to prevent damage or misalignment when the trench is backfilled. Allows water to flow more freely to the tile. 2.58 Blind Drain - Type of drain consisting of an refilled with pervious materials such as coarse sand, stone, through whose voids water percolates and -outlet. Often referred to as a French drain because of ment and widespread use in France. excavated trench, gravel or crushed flows towards an its initial develop-

2.59 Blinding Material - Material placed on top of and around a closed drain to improve the flow of water to the drain and to prevent displacement during backfilling of the trench. 2.60 Blind Inlet - Surface water inlet to drain in which entrance of water is by percolation rather than open flow channels. It is used where quantity of water is small and amount of sediment is too large. 2.61 Blocky Soil Structure See soil structure. soil order and or 2.62 Bog Soil - A great soil group of the intrazonal Includes muck and peat. hydromerphic suborder.

2.63 Border Dike - Earth ridge built to guide or to hold irrigation recharge water within prescribed limits in a field; a small levee. 8

IS:11077

- 1984

2.64 -Border Ditch - Ditch used as a border on irrigated strip or plot, water being spread from one or both sides of the ditch along its entire length. 2.65 Border Irrigation ( Strip Irrigation ) - The application of The soil is essentiwater to strips marked by levees 3 to 30 metre apart. ally level between levees, on even topography, with a gentle slope so that the water forms a sheet over the whole area. 2.66 2.67 Bottom Breather Land See flood plain.

See vent.

2.68 Broad-Crested Weir - Weir for water measurement with a The crest should be significant dimension in the direction of the stream. long enough to attain a uniform depth of flow before discharge. 2.69 Brown Earth - Soil with a mull horizon but having no horizon Generally used as a synonym of accumulation of clay or sesquioxides. for `Brown forest soil' but sometimes for similar soil acid in reaction. 2.70 Brown Forest Soils - A great soil group of the intrazonal order and calcimorphic suborder, formed on calcium-rich parent materials and possessing a high base status but lacking a pronounced alluoial horizon. 2.71 Brown :Podzolic Soil - A zonal great soil group similar to podzolic soil but lacking the distinct A 2 horizon characteristic of the podzol group ( some American Soil taxonomists prefer to class this soil as kind of podzol and not as a distinct great soil group ). 2.72 Buffer Soil Compounds The clay, organic matter, and compounds such as carbonates and phosphates which enable the soil to resist appreciable change in $H value. soil to its 2.73 Btilk Density - The ratio of the mass of waterfree Bulk density is expressed in grams per cubic centimetre bulk volume. and Is sometimes referred to as `apparent density'. When expressed in grams per cubic centimetre, bulk density is numerically equal to apparent specific gravity or volumetric weight. 2.74 Bulk Specific %ravity --- The to the mass of unit volume of water. 2.75 Bulk Volume - The of an arbitrary soil mass. volume, ratio of the bulk including density of a soil

the solids and the pores,

2.76 Bullet - Round-nosed cylindrical plough point of a mole drain plough which forms a rounded -cavity as the plough is drawn through the soil. Also referred to as a torpedo. In older type ploughs a ball or plug is attached to the rear of the bullet to eliminate crumbs and smooth out the walls of the mole cavity. 9

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.77 By-Pass Ditch -

drainage plant.

area directly

Ditch or waterway for carrying to the gravity outlet, by-passing C

water from a the pumping

2.78 C Horizon - A horizon underlying the B horizon.

of

relatively

unweathered

material

2.79 Calcareous Soil - Soil containing sufficient free calcium carbonate or calcium-magnesium carbonate to effervese visibly when treated with cold O-1 N hydrochloric acid. 2.80 Caliche - In arid and semiarid regions, zones of the lower part of B Horizon or upper part of C Horizon cemented by calcium carbonate. 2.81 Canal --Constructed open channels of an irrigation system for transporting water from the source of supply to the point of use, to remove water from areas covered with water. 2.82 Capability Ratings - The classification of land ( or soil ) according to its ability to produce and practices necessary to obtain good production economically. 2.83 Capillary Capacity - The maximum amount of capillary remaining in soil after the gravitational water has drained away. water

2.84 Capillary Conductivity - Capacity of partially saturated soils to transmit water, measured at the ratio of water flow velocity to the driving force. As a soil becomes more saturated, capillary conductivity approaches the hydraulic conductivity. 2.85 Capillary Fringe - A zone just above the water table ( zero gauge pressure ) that remains almost saturated. ( Theextent and the degree of definition of the capillary fringe depends upon the size-distribution of pores. )
- Water held in the soil pores by force of 2.86 Capillary Moisture surface tension as a continuous film ~around the soil particles.

2.87 Capillary

Porosity

-- See porosity.

2.88 Capillary Potential - The energy required per unit-mass to move water against the capillary field forces in the soil from a free water surface to any point in the soil. 2.89 Capillary Pressure Head - Head water that rises by surface tension above a free water surface in the soil. Also called capillary rise. 2.90 Capillary Soil Moisture - Moisture tension forces against the force of gravity. 10 in soil held by surface

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.91 Capillary Zone - Soil zone above water level which pores become filled as a result of surface tension, 2.92 Catcbment Area or Basin -- Flow collected drainage basis; the area of such a basin. up to a limit in o

from a watershed

2.93 Cation Exchange -- The interchange between a cation in solution and another cation on the surface of any surface-active material such as clay colloicl or organic colloid. 2.94 Cation-Exchange Capacity - The rnilliequivalents of cations per 100 gm of soil which can be held by surface forces and which can be The term as applied to soils is synonymous replaced by other cations. with base exchange capacity but is somewhat more precise in its meaning-. Cation exchange capacity depends on the method used for its determination. For example, using a different replacing cationor making the For western soils it is replacement at a different PH affects the result. usually determined by treating with neutral ammonium acetate and determining the absorbed ammonia. 2.95 Cemented Indurated - A condition occurring when grains or aggregates are caused to adhere firmly and are bound by some material that acts as a cementing agents. 2.96 Channel Capacity - Flow rate of channel when flowing full or at design flow. 2.97 Check-Basin Irrigation a ditch, canal or the soil together natural

See irrigation

method. by use of checks large so

2.98 Check-Drain - Conventional that it can be used as a sub-irrigation

drain altered system.

2.99 Check Irrigation - Application of a comparatively of water in level plots surrounded by levees.

stream

-2.100 Chisel, Subsoil A tillage implement with one or more cultivator-type feet to which are attached strong knife like units used to shatter or loosen hard, compact layers, usually in the subsoil, to depths below normal plough depth. 2.101 Chlorosis - Yellowing or blanching particularly the leaves. May be caused unavailability of nutrients, or other factors. 2.102 Cipoletti does not require of green portions by chlorophyll of a plant, deficiency, It

Weir - Trapezoidal weir with 1 to 4 side slopes. a correction for end contractions. large amounts of clay or having

2.103 Clayey - Containing similar to those of clay.

properties

11

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.104 Clay a) Naturally occurring inorganic crystalline material found in soils and other earthy deposits, the particles being of clay size, that is less than 0'002 mm in diameter. b) Material as described under ( a ), but limited by particle size. of pipe made from shales or clays, -2.105 Clay Tile - Short lengths used for subsurface drains. 2.196 Clean Out an open nor closed section.

Removal of vegetative growth, silt and debris from drain or other conduit without change in size or value that expresses

2.107 Climatic Index -- A simple numerical climatic relationships into a simplified expression.

2.108 Climax - The final stage of a succession which continues to occupy an area as long as climatic or soil conditions remain unchanged. 2.109 Clod 5 or 10 mm to by the activity operations are normal tillage A compact, coherent mass -of soil ranging in size from as much as 200 or 250 mm. Produced artificiall~y, usually of man by ploughing, digging, etc, especially when these performed on soils that are either too wet or too~dry for operations. pipe, which greater than

2.110 Closed Drain - Surface drain, tile or perforated receives surface water through surface inlets. 2.111 Coarse Fragments 2.0 mm, in diameter. Rock or mineral particles

- The texture exhibited 2.112 Coarse Texture and sandy loams except very fine sandy loam. 2.113 Co-efficient discharge. of Discharge Ratio

by sands, loamy sands, to theoretical

of observed

2.114 Co-efficient of Roughness - Factor in fluid flow or formulae expressing the character of a channel surface and its frictional resistance to flow. 2.115 Co-efficient of Runoff - Factor in the rational runoff expressing the ratio of the peak runoff rate to rainfall intensity. formula

2.116 Compost - A mingled and decomposed mixture for fertilizing. fertilizer that may be Made of plant parts, lime, soil or commercial added, mixed and decomposed. 2.117 Common drains. Outlet All outlet 12 used in common by several

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.118 Concentrated Flow - The flowing of a rather large -accumulated It often causes serious body of water over a relatively narrow course. erosion and gullying. 2.119 Conduit - Any conveyance of water. open or closed channel intended for the

2.120 Confined Water - Under groundwater, constrained by an overlying confining bed, which is under sufficient pressure to rise above the bottom of the confining bed. 2.121 Confining Clays - Impervious or slowly pervious clay layers in the subsoil which restrict or confine the movement of percolating water. 2.122 Consistency a) The resistance of a material to deformation or rupture, and b) The degree of cohesion or adhesion of the soil mass. 2.123 Consistency Cons*ants - The minimum percentage by weight of moisture at which a small sample of soil will barely flow under a standard treatment. 2.124 Consumptive Use - The water used by plants in transpiration and growth, plus water vapour loss from adjacent soi or snow or from Usually expressed as intercepted precipitation in any specified time. equivalent depth of free water per unit of time. 2.125 Continuous Flow Irrigation - System of irrigation water delivery where each irrigator receives his allotted quantity of water at a continuous rate. 2.126 Contour Basin contours of the land. 2.127 Contour contour. 2.128 Contour contour ditches. Ditch Flooding Basin made by levees or borders Irrigation following the on the from

ditch laid out approximately of irrigating by flooding

Method

- Furrows ploughed on the contour on pasture 2.128 Contour Furrows or range land to prevent soil loss and allow water to penetrate into the soil. Also furrows are laid out on the contour for irrigation purposes. 2.130 Contour Guide Lines - Lines laid out approximately contour to serve as a guide for farming operations. on the

measuring notch which has sides designed 2.131 Contracted Weir -A to produce a contraction in the cross sectional width of the over flowing water. 13

1s : 11077 - 1984 2.132 Controlled Drainage - Regulation of the water table by means of pumps, control dams or check drains, or a combination of these for maintaining the water level at a depth favourable to boost crop growth. 2.133 Control -Structure gravity flow systems. Water regulating structure, usually for

2.134 Conveyance Loss - Loss of water from a channel or pipe during conveyance, including losses due to seepage, evaporation and transpiration by plants growing in or near the channel. 2.135 Core Trench - Excavation an earthern embankment. for a core wall in the construction of

2.136 Core Wall - A wall of masonary, sheet piling, or puddled clay built inside a dam or embankment to reduce percolation. 2.137 CorrugatienIrrigation - Application of water in small furrows The furrow guides the water, but running down from the head ditch. some over topping may occur. 2.138 Cover Crop - A crop planted to cover or protect the soil for a May be used for green manure. certain part of the year. 2.139 Cover Drain ( See tile drain ). 2.140 Crack Width Also called joint space. Closed Width drain beneath the surface of the soil. drain tile.

between the ends of adjacent

- Footing structure shaped to fit the conduit it supports 2.141 Craddle or a large, smooth area which is levelled out for large trees to be felled on to prevent breakage. 2.142 Creep - Slow mass movement of soil and soiI material down relatively steep slopes primarily under the influence of gravity, but facilitated by saturation with water and by alternate freezing and thawing. 2.143 Crest - Top of a dam, of a wave or peaks of a flood. dike, spillway, or weir; or the summit a channel of specified for a given discharge.

2.144 Critical Depth - Depth of flow in dimensions at which specific energy is minimum

2.145 Critical Reaction - In biology that $H at which a biological process becomes too slow to measure or at which organisms die. 2.146 Critical Velocity - Velocity at which a given discharge changes from tranquil to rapid flow; that velocity in open channels for which the specific energy ( sum of the depth and velocity head ) is minimum -for a given discharge. 14

IS : 11077 = 1984 2.147 Cross ( Sprinkler ) each 90" apart. 2.148 Crumb in diameter. Pipe fitting with four outlets or connections

A soft, porous, more or less rounded bed from 1 to 5 mm

2.149 Crumb Structure - A structural condition with porous aggregates of irregular shape, rarely over 2 cm in diameter and of a medium to soft consistence. 2.150 Crust - A surface layer on soils where the upper or surface horizon coherers into plate or crust distinct from the horizon immediately below it. - A homogeneous inorganic substance of definite chemical 2.151 Crystal composition bounded by plane surface that forms definite angles with each other, thus giving the substance a regular geometrical form. ( See soil mineral. ) 2.152 Crystal Structure crystalline material. The orderly arrangement of atoms in a

2.153 Crystalline Rock - A rock consisting of various minerals that ( See igneous rock and sedimenhave crystallized in place from magma. tary rock. ) 2.154 Cubic Metre per Second - A flow of water equivalent to a stream one metre wide and one metre deep flowing at a velocity of one metre per second. - A tillage ~operation use in preparing land for 2.155 Cultivation seeding or transplanting or later for weed control and for loosening the soil. - Summation of the depth of water 2.156 Cumulative Infiltration absorbed by a soil in a specified elapsed time in reference to the time of ( See infiltration. ) initial water application. 2.157 Cut - Portion of land surface or area from which earth or rock has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. -_Process 2.158 Cut-and-Fill area and using the excavated areas. of earth moving by excavating part of an material for adjacent embankments or fill

2.159 cut-off - Wall, collar, or other structure such as a trench filled with relatively impervious material intended to reduce percolation of water through porous strata. In river hydraulics, the new and relatively short channel formed either naturally or artificially when a stream cuts through the neck of an O-bow Meander. 15

IS:11077

-1984

2.360 Cut-off Drain - A tile drain system normally placed near the upper edge of a wet area to intercept water before it gets down the
SlOpe.

2.161 Cyclic Salt - Salt deposited lakes from wind or rain fall.

or soils near the sea or inland salt D

2.162 Dam - An artificial structure to store or divert water, to create a hydraulic head, to prevent gully erosion, or for retention of soil, rock or other debris. 2.163 Darcy's Zaw volume of water passing downward through a unit time is proportional to the area of bed and in hydraulic head and is inversely proportional of the bed. A law describing the rate of flow porous media. As formulated by Darcy the Q where Q = the volume of water passed in unit time, S = the area of the bed, e = the thickness of the bed, H = the height of the water on top of the bed, and II = the co-efficient depending on the nature of the sand and for cases where the pressure `under the filter is equal to the weight of the atmosphere.' b) Generalizationfor Three Dimensions - The effective rate of viscous flow of water in isotropic porous media is proportional to, and in the direction of, -the hydraulic gradient. ' a) Historical - The sand filter bed in to the difference to the thickness of water through law is:

~7

KS

(Hfe)
e

c) Generalizationfor Other Fluids - The effective rate of viscous flow of homogeneous fluids through isotropic porous media is proportional to, and in the direction of, the driving force. 2.164 Deep Percolation - Water which percolates the root zone and cannot be used by plants. 2.165 Deflocculate a) To separate the individual components of compound particles by chemical and/or physical means, and 16 downward below

IS:11077

-1984

b) to cause the particks of the disperse phase of a colloidal to become suspended in the dispersion medium.

system

2.166 Degradation - The process of changing a soil from one type to a more highly leached one. Particularly, bringing about replacement of sodium by hydrogen by leaching a saline or alkali soil ( incorrect to use degradation to denote a decrease in soil ferti~lity). used by De Sigmand, this term 2.167 Degraded Alkali Soil -As refers to a soil containing less than 0.1 percent salt but with appreciable Soil PH values in the quantities of exchangeble sodium and hydrogen. surface horizons may be below 6.0 but are usually between 6.5 and 8.0. This corresponds approximately to the great soil group known as soloth. 2.168 Delivery Box - A structure for the control and water diverted to a farm unit,
2.169 Delivery

measurement of

Loss

-

See conveyance loss. drops

2170 Delta - Alluvial deposit formed where a stream or river its sediment I-oad on entering a body of more quiet water.

- Reduction of nitrates to nitrites, to ammonia, 2.171 Denitrification and to free nitrogen; or any part of this process. 2.172 Density density. ) Mass per unit volume. ( See bulk density and particle

2.173 Depletion Curve - glower portion of recession curve for soil moisture, stream flow, ground water, etc. Usually shown as a decay function. 2.174 Depression Storage - Water stored in shallow surface depressions and therefore, not available for producing surface runoff, 2.175 Depth capacity. of Irrigation Depth of soil to be brought soluble to field

- Removal 2.176 Desalinization saline soil, usually by leaching.

of excessive

salts from the

2.177 Desert Crust - A hard layer, containing calcium carbonate, gypsum, or other binding material, exposed at the surface in desert regions. - The layer of gravel or stones left on the 2.178 Desert Pavement land surface in desert regions after the removal of the fine material by wind erosion. 2.179 Design Application Efficiency - Compound application efficiency when water is to be applied at design rate and design time of set. 17

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.180 Design Run-off Rate given period of time. Maximum run-off rate expected in a

2.181 Desilting Area - Area of grass, shrubs or other vegetation used solely for including deposition of soil and debris from flowing water, located above a stock tank, pond, field or other area needing protection See filter strip. from sediment accumulation. 2.182 Dielectric Constant - A constant which conductivity to an electric charge of a substance. 2.183 Differential Water Capacity denotes the non-

See soil water.

2.184 Diffuse Layer - A system, when referred to soils, which consists of a charged ( negative particle ) surface and an equal amount of counter ions ( positive ) accumulated in the liquid near the particle surface. 2.185 Diffusion Pressure Deficit - Amount by which the pressure of water in a solution is less than that of pure water at the same temperature and atmospheric pressure. 2.186 Dispersed Soil --Soil in -which the clay and colloid fraction is dispersed and forms a colloidal soil. A soil in a dispersed state depends, among other things, on the composition and concentration of the soil solution and is to be distinguished from the degranulated or unaggregated conditions. A dispersed soil usually runs together and becomes plastic or sticky, when wet. It usually has low permeability, tends to have high bulk density, and forms hard, infriable lumps upon drying. 2.187 Dispersion Medium - The portion which the disperse phase distributed. of a colloidal system in

2.188 Distributary - Smaller conduit taking water from a canal for delivery to farms; any system of secondary conduits;, river channel flowing away from the main stream and not rejoining it, as contrasted to a tributary. 2.189 Distribution E4Eciency - Measure irrigation water distribution over a field. 2.190 Distribution Loss See conveyance of loss. the uniformity of

2.191 Distribution

System conveys

a) System of ditches, and their appurtenances, which irrigation water from the main canal to the units. b) Any system which distributes water to users.

2.192 District - A political subdivision or public corporation organized, under state laws, for the purpose of creating, operating and maintaining works for the specified purpose which may be irrigation, drainage, soil conservation, water conservation, flood control, etc. 18

IS-: 11077.- 1984 2.193 Ditch canal drain. ) Constructed open channel for conducting water. ( See

2.194 Ditch Storage -

Seechannel storage.

2.195 Diversion - Channel constructed across the slope for the purpose of intercepting surface run-off, changing the accustomed course of all or part of a stream. 2.196 Diversion Dam - A structure or barrier all of the water of a stream to a different course. built to divert part or

2.197 Diversion Duty of Water - The irrigation water diverted at the intake of a canal system usually expressed in depth or the irrigable area under the system. 2.198 Diversion Box - Structure built into a canal or ditch for dividing the water into predetermined portions and diverting it into other canals or ditches. - Legal prior rights of water which 2.199 Doctrine of Appropriation asserts that all rights are based on beneficial use. 2.200 Double Ditch or Drain - Designating drained by both the laterals and a main tile. 2.201 Drag - The force of the flow of fluid ground on the boundary. 2.202 Drain a) To provide channels, such as open ditches or drain tile, so that excess water can be removed by surface or by internal flow. b) To lose water ( from the soil ) by percolation. 2.203 Drainage, Excessive - Too much or too rapid loss of water from soils, either by percolation or by surface flow. Loss greater than that necessary to prevent the development of an aerobic condition for any appreciable length of time. 2.204 Drain Tile from the soil. Concrete or ceramic pipe used to conduct water an area of land which is over the surface of the

2.205 Drainage Classification - Standards of the soil, that is, SCS classification.

describing the drainability

2.206 Drainage Co-efficient -Design rate at which water is to be removed from a drainage area. It may be expressed in millimetres of depth per day or in terms of flow rate per unit area. 2.207 Drainage Curves - Design curves giving prescribed rates of surface run-off for different levels of crop protection, and which vary according to-the size of drainage area. 19

IS:11077

- 1984 Furrows for carrying run-off water.

2.208 Drainage Furrows -

2.209 Drainage Pattern - Arrangement of drains or lines of drains, one with another arrangement of tributaries within a watershed. 2.210 Drainage Pumping Plant - One or more pump's power units and appurtenances for lifting drainage water from a collecting basin to a gravity outlet. 2.211 Drainage System - Collection of open and/or closed used to collect and dispose of excess surface or subsurface water. 2.212 Drainage channel. Terrace Graded terrace with a relatively drains, deep into

2.213 Drain Well - Vertical opening to a permeable substratum which surface and subsurface drainage water is channeled. 2.214 Draw - A small natural stream tributary, usually without a permanent stream in its bottom. drainage

hollow,

- Vertical fall of the water surface, water table, or 2.215 Drawdown piezometric surface resulting from a withdrawal of water. 2.216 Drilled Fertilizer - Commercial fertilizer surface, usually by a special machine ( drill ). placed below the soil

2.217 Drop-Inlet Spillway - Overall structure in which the water is dropped through a vertical riser connected to a discharge conduit. - Overall structure in which the water drops 2.218 Drop Spillway over a vertical wall into an apron at a lower elevation and dissipating its kinetic energy. - Structure for transferring water in a channel 2.219 Drop Structure The later A drop may be vertical or inclined. to a lower level channel. is called a chute. 2.220 Drought - Climatic condition in which there is insufficient soil moisture available for normal vegetative growth and animal life of a place. 2.221 Duty of Water - The quantity of irrigation given area for the purpose of maturing its crops.

water applied to a 1 on i

2.222 Dust Mulch - A loose, finely granular, or powdery condition the surface of the soil, usually produced by shallow cultivation. E 2.223 Earth Dam rock material. A water barrier 20 composed of compacted

soil or

IS : 11077- 1984 2.224 Ecology - The science that organisms and their environment. deals with the inter-relations of

2.225 Edaphic - of or pertaining to the soil is the condition resulting from or influenced by factors inherent in the soil on other substrata, rather than by climatic factors. 2.226 Edaphology - The science that deals with the soil as a natural body and its natural position with influence of soils or living things, particularly plants, including man's use of land for plant growth.
- The portion of the total precipitation 2.227 Effective Precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

2.228 Efibxent ground surface.

Seepage

-

Diffuse

discharge

of ground

water to the

2.229 Effluent Stream - Stream of reach of a stream which receives water from ground water or seepage. 2.230 Electrical Conductivity - The property of a medium of transferring electrical charge. The reciprocal of the electrical resistivity. The resistivity is the resistance in ohms of a conductor which is 1 cm long and has a cross-sectional area of 1 cm2. Hence, electrical conductivity is expressed in reciprocal ohms/cm or mhos/cm. The terms electrical conductivity and specific electrical conductance have identical meaning. 2.231 Electrical Resistance Blocks - Small blocks consisting of a pair of electricals set in an absorbent material, such as plaster of paris, used to estimate soil moisture content. Resistance between the electrodes is a function of the moisture content of the block and surrounding soil. 2.232 Electra kinetic ( Zeta ) Potential

a) The difference in electrical potential between the immobile liquid layer attached to the surface of a charged particle and the bulk liquid phase. b) The work done in bringing a unit charge from infinite ( bulk solution ) to the plane of shear in the diffuse double layer. 2.233 Elevation Head above some datum. Energy possessed by a fluid due to its position

2.234 Eluvial Horizon - Soil horizon from which some fine material has been removed by water suspension. 21

IS : 1X077 - 1984 2.235 Elluviation - The removal of soil material in suspension ( or in solution ) from a layer or layers of a soil. ( Usually, the loss of material in solution is described' by the term `leaching'. ) ( See illuviation and leaching. ) 2,236 Endodynamamorphic Soils - Soils with properties been influenced primarily by parent material. 2.237 Energy Gradient direction of flow or motion. that have

Change in energy per unit length in the ( See potential gradient. )

2.238 Equalizing Ditch - Secondary ditch, usually parallel to a field ditch, used to furnish irrigation water to two or more furrows. 2.239 Equipotential energy. Line or surface having the a constant surface potential by wind,

2.240 Erode - To wear away or remove water, or any other agents.

land

2.241 Erodible - Susceptible to erosion ( expressed highly erodible, slightly erodible, etc ). 2.242 Erosion

by terms, such as

4 b)

The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other geological agents, including process such as gravitational creep. Detachment and movement of soil or rock by water, wind, ice, or gravity. The terms given in 2.243 to 2.254 are used to describe different types of water erosion.

2.243 Accelerated Rrosion - Erosion much more rapid than normal, natural, geological erosion, primarily as a result of the influence of the activities of man or, in some cases, of animals. 2.244 Geological Erosion or Normal Erosion - The normal or natural slow and steady erosion caused by geological process, acting over long geological periods and resulting in the wearing away of mountains, the building up of flood plains, coastal plains, etc, synonymous with natural erosion. 2.245 Gully Erosion - The erosion process whereby water accumulates in narrow channels and over short periods, removes the soil from this narrow area to considerable depths, ranging from 0.3 or O-6 m to as much as22.5 to 30 m. 2.246 Natural Erosion - Wearing away of the earth's surface by water, ice, or other natural agents under natural environmental condiSynonymous tions of climate, ve,oetation, etc. Undisturbed by man. with geological erosron. 22

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.247 Normal Erosion - The gradual erosion of land used by man ( See geological erosion. ) which does not greatly exceed natural erosion. 2.248 Rill Erosion - Soil erosion by water process in which numerous small well defined channels of only several centimetres in depth are formed; occurs mainly on recently cultivated soils. ( See rill. ) removal of a fairly 2.249 Sheet Erosion -The from the land surface by run off water. uniform layers of soil

2.250 Splash Erosion - The spattering of small soil particles caused by the impact of raindrop or very wet soils. The loosened hand spattered particles may or may not be subsequenly removed by surface run-off. 2.251 Erosion Pavment - A layer of coarse fragements, such as sand or gravel, remaining on the surface of the ground after the removal of fine particles by erosion. - Amount of erosion that may be expected 2.252 Erosion Potential under given climatic, topographic, soil, crop and cultural conditions. 2.253 Erosive Tending to cause erosion. agent necessary to

2.254 Erosive Velocity - Velocity of the erosive cause erosion of the material in question.

- Those elements that must be present for 2.255 Essential Elements a plant to grow. There may be primary ( those needed in quantity ) or minor elements ( those needed in small amount ). 2.256 Evaporation - Conversion of water from liquid or solid into vapour through the transfer of heat energy. 2.257 Evapo-Transpiration and that lost by evaporation state

- The sum of water used for vegetation for a particular area during a specified time. 2.258 Exchangeable Ions - Those ions held on the soil complex that may be replaced by other ions. There are ions held so tightly that they can not be exchanged. 2.259 Exchange Capacity - The total ionic charge of the adsorption complex active in the adsorption of ions. ( See anion-exchange capacity and cation-exchange capacity. ) 2.260 -Exchange Complex - Active surface constituents of soils which are capable of ion exchange. 2.261 Exchangeable-Cation Percentage ( ECP ) - The extent to which the adsorption complex of a soil is occupied by a particular cation. It is expressed as follows: ECP 0
NOTE -

Exchangeable Cation-exchange

cation ( meq/lOO g soil )? x loo capacity ( meq/lOO g sol1 ) 23

meq = milli-equivalent.

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.262 Exchangeable Phosphate - The phosphate anion reversibly attached to the surface of the solid phase of the soil in such a form thal it may go into solution by anionic equilibriumreactions with isotopes 01 phosphorus or with other anions of the liquid phase without solution of the colloid phase to which it was attached. 2,263 Exchangeable Potassium - The potassium that is held mainly by the adsorption complex of the soil and is easily exchanged with the cation of neutral non-potassium salt solutions. 2.264 Exchangeable-Sodium Percentage ( ESP ) - This term indicates the degree of saturation of the soil exchange complex with sodium and is defined as follows: ESP =
NOTE -

Exchangeable sodium ( meq/lOO g soil ) Cation exchange capacity ( meq/lOO g soil )
meq = milli-equivalent.

x 100

F one of the categories 2.265 Family, Soil - In soil classification intermediate between the great soil group and the soil series. ( See classification, soil. ) 2.266 Farm Distribution System - Ditches, pipelines and appurtenant structures which constitute the means of conveying irrigation water from a farm turnout to the fields to be irrigated. 2.267 2.268 2.269 2.270 2.271 Farm Drain -- See drain. Farm Irrigation Farm Lateral Efficiency Seelateral. Seedeep percolation. Seepond, tank. Seeirrigation efficiency.

Farm Percolation Loss Farm Pond -

2.272 Farm Water Management - General term applying to the management of all water on a farm. 2.273 Fertility - The quality of soil to aid plant growth by supplying nutrients in desirable proportions and quantity. 2.274 Fertilizer - Any organic or inorganic material of natural or synthetic origin which is added to a soil to supply certain elements essential to the growth of plants. 2.275 Fertilizer Elements - The three primary essential elements are They are so named because they nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. are artificially supplied to the soil in manure or commercial fertilizer form. 2.276 Fertilizer Grade - The guaranteed minimum analysis in percent, of the major plant nutrient elements contained in a fertilizer 24

IS : 11077 - 1984 material or in a mix fertilizer. ( Usually refer to the percentage of N-PsO,-K20 but proposals are pending to change the designation to the percentage of N.P.K. ) 2.277 Fertilizer Ratio - The ratio of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in a fertilizer, The ratio is expressed in small, whole numbers, such as l-2-1 or l-3-2. 2.278 Fertilizer Requirement - The quantity of certain plant nutrient elements needed, in addition to the amount supplied by the soil, to increase plant growth to a designated optimum. 2.279
Field Capacity ( Field Capillary Moisture Specific Retention ) - The amount of water retained Capacity and

in a soil against a force of gravity at any specified time ( about 24 to 36 hours ) after flooding. It is approximated by moisture equivalent and one-third atmosphere percentage. within a field either

2.280 Field Ditch - A smaller ditch constructed for irrigation or for drainage.

2.281 -Fifteen Atmosphere Percentage - The moisture percentage in soil sample which has been wetted and then brought to equilibrium on a cellulore membrane in the pressure-membrane apparatus at a pressure of 15 kg/ems. This characteristic moisture value for soils is expressed in terms of moisture percentage, dry-weight basis, and lies in the wilting range for many soils. 2.282 Film Water - A layer of water surrounding soil particles and varying in thickness from 1 or 2 perhaps 100 or more molecular layers. Usually considered as that water remaining after drainage has occurred, because it is not distinguishable in saturated soils. 2.283 Filter ( Drain ) - Envelope of graded porous material placed around a closed drain to prevent soil from entering the drain. ( See lining material. ) 2.284 Filter Strip - Strip of farm ponds, diversion terraces run-off water, causing deposition ing sediment flow to structure or permanent vegetation planted above and other structures to retard flow of of transported material, thereby reducreservoir ~below. ( SC.+ desilting area. )

2.285 Final Infiltration Rate or Final Intake of Water - Rate at which water is absorbed by soil when the infiltration has become essentially constant. Also called final intake rate. ( See infiltration. ) 2.286
Fine Sand

a) A soil separate. b) Soil textural class.

( SM soil separates. ) ( See soil texture ). 25

IS:11077

-1984

2.287 Fine Texture - Consisting the fine fractions, particularly of and clays; that is, clay loam, sandy clay, silky clay, and clay textural clayey texture and moderately fine

of or containing large quantities of ( Includes clay forms silt and clay. clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy Sometimes subdivided into classes. texture. ) ( See soil texture. )

2.288 Firm - A term describing the consistency of a moist soil that offers distinctly noticeable resistance to crushing but can be crushed with moderate pressure between the thumb and forefinger. ( See consistency. ) 2.289 Fixation - The holding of nutrients in soil after the soluble forms are converted into less soluble or insoluble forms, as fixation of nitrogen. 2.290 Flood Plain - The land bordering a stream, built up of sediments from overflow of the stream and subject to inundation when the stream is at flood stage.
2.291 Flow Velocity ( of

-transferred per unit oftime of the net flow.

Water in Soil ) - The volume of'water and per unit of area normal to the direction

conduit for conveying water by creating 2.292 Flume - Open obstructions to a canal. The entire canal is elevated above natural Also called as aqueduct. Grade control structure having a ground. relatively steep slope. 2.293 Foliar Diagnosis - An estimation of the extent to which plants are getting certain necessary chemical elements from the soil by examination of the colour and grorirth habits of the foliage of the plants. 2.294
Forest Soils or Forest Land

a) Soils developed under forest vegetation. b) Soils formed in temperate ( European usage ). climates under forest vegetation

2.295 Foot Valve - Check valve opening upwards installed at the inlet end of the suction pipe to retain water in the pump for priming. 2.296 Forced Outlet - Basin or box outlet for a tile line in which the discharge will fill the basin and flow away over the ground surface. Used where a free fall outlet is not available. 2.297 Fragipan - Dense and brittle pan or layer in soils that owe their hardness mainly to extreme density or compactness rather than high clay content or cementation. Removed fragments are friable, but the material in plane is so dense that roots cannot penetrate and water moves through it very slowly. 26

IS:11077-1984 2.298 Free Flow by submergence. Flow through or over a structure and not effected not bounded of the

2.299 Free Ground Water - Ground or confined by impervious strata. 2.300 Free Weir tail water. 2.301 2.302 ~Friability crumbling of soils.

water in aquifers

Weir that is not affected Seeblind drain.

by the elevation

French Drain -

A consistency term ( See consistency. )

pertaining

to

the

case of

2303 Friction Head - Energy required to over come friction due to fluid movement with respect to the walls of the conduits or containing medium. 2.304 Frost, Concrete a virtually solid block. Ice in the soil in such quantity as to constitute

2.305 Frost, Honey Comb - Ice in the soil in insufficient quantity to be continuous. Thus giving the soil an open, porous structure permitting the ready entrance of water. 2.306 Fallic Acid - A mixture of organic substances remaining solution upon acidification of a dilute alkali extract from the soil. 2.307 Furrow left by ploughing. in

Small ditch for conveying irrigation water. Depression G

2.308 Gauge pressure, etc.

Device for registering

water level,

discharge,

velocity,

2.309 Gauging Station - Selected section in a stream channel equipped with a gauge or facilities for obtaining stream ilow data. 2.310 Gate ( Irrigation ) - Structure of flow into or from a canal or ditch. or device for controlling the rate

2.311 Gilgai - The micro relief of soils produced by expansion and Found in soils that contain large contraction with changes in moisture. amounts of clay which swells and shrinks considerably with wetting and drying. Usually a succession of microbasins and microknolls in nearly .level areas or of microvalleys and microridges parallel to the direction of the slope. ( See microrelief. ) debris that has been transported by 2.312 Glacial Drift - Rock glaciers and deposited, either directly from the ice or from the melt water. The debris may or may not be heterogeneous. 27

1S:11077

- 1984

2.313 Gleyzation - A soil-forming process resulting in .the development of gley soils. ( Scc h anic gley soil and dark grey gleysolic soil. ) 2.314 Graded Contour Furrow - Furrow irrigation system in which the furrow grade deviates from the contour by a small, set amount. r 2.315 Gradient - Change of elevation, characteristics per unit length. 2.316 Grain Density velocity, pressure or other

Seeparticles density. is relatively non-

2.317 Granule - A natural soil aggregate which porous. ( See soil structure and soil structure types. )

2.318 Gravel Filter - Graded sand and gravel aggregate placed around a drain or well screen to prevent the-infiltration of fine materials from the aquifer into the drain or well. or significant amounts 2.319 Gravelly - Containing appreciable gravel ( used to describe soil or land ). ( See coarse fragments. ) 2.320 Gravitational Potential See soil water. or of

2.321 Gravitational Water - Water which moves into through, out of the soil under the influences of gravity. 2.322 Gravity Dam overturning and sliding. Dam which depends

on its weight to resist is not

2.323 Gravity Irrigation - Irrigation' in which the water pumped but flows by gravity, including sprinkler system. 2.324 -Gravity Outlet water flows by gravity.

Outlet for a drain line or system where the

2.325 Green Manure - Quick maturing green material, grown on the land, and incorporated in the soil to increase organic matter and fertility. 2.326 Green Manure ( See green manure. ) 2.327 Ground surface. Rainfall Crop A crop grown for use as green manure.

The portion of rainfall received on the soil

2.328 Ground Water - Water in soil beneath the soil surface, usually under conditions where the pressure in the water is greater than the atmospheric pressure, and the soil voids are substantially filled with the water. 2.329 Ground Water Aquifer Seeaquifer. 28

1s: 11077 -1984 2.330 Ground Water Flow - Flow of water in an aquifer or soil. That portion of the discharge of a stream which is derived from ground water under hydraulic gradient. 2.331 Ground-Water Laterite Soil - A great soil group of the intrazonal order and hydromorphic suborder, consisting of soil characterized by hardpans or concretional horizons rich in iron and aluminium ( and sometimes manganese ) that have formed immediately above the water table. 2.332 Ground-Water Podzol Soil - ,!I great soil group of the intrazonal order and hydromorphic suborder, consisting of soils with an organic mat on the surface over a very thin layer of acid humus material underlaid by a whitish-grey leached layer, which may be as much as 0.6 or 0.9 metre in thickness, and is underlaid by a brown or very dark-brown cemented hardpan layer, formed under various types of forest vegetation in cool to tropical, humid climates under conditions for poor drainage. 2.333 Ground Water Runoff - That part of the groundwater is discharged into a stream channel as spring or seepage water. which

2.334 Gully - A channel resulting from erosion and caused by the concentrated but intermittent flow of water usually during and immediately following heavy rains. H 2.335 Head - Energy in the system expressed as the equivalent height to which a column of water rises, or would rise, above a given datum. 2.336 Head Ditch - Ditch across upper side of field buting water to irrigation furrows or checks. used for distrito in

2.337 Head Gate - Water control structure; the gate at the entrance a conduit or diversion on a large canal or stream. 2.338 Head Loss - Energy loss due to friction, velocity or direction of flow. ( See friction head. ) 2.339 Head conduit. Works Diversion structures at eddys, the upper changes

end of a

2.340 Horizon -

A series of soil layers overlying one another.

2.341 Hue - One of the three variables of colour. It is caused by light of certain wave lengths and changes with the wave length. ( See munsell -colour system, chroma, value, and colour. ) 2.342 Humic Acid - Any of the alkali soluble end products of the decomposition of organic matter in the soil and composts. Weak acid which forms salty. 29

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.343 Humification - The processes involved in the decomposition organic matter and leading to the formation of humus. 2.344 Humin - The fraction of the soil organic matter dissolved upon extraction of the soil with dilute alkali. 2.345 Hummock A small, rounded knoll or ridge. that of

is not

2.346 Humus - Well-decomposed, more or less stable part of organic matter of the soil which has lost its original structure but has not yet been reduced to the simple end products. 2.347 Hydraulic Conductivity

a) The ratio of the flow velocity to the driving force for the viscous flow under saturated conditions of a specified liquid in a porous medium. Physical dimensions will depend on the equation selected to express the flow. b) Practical Units - The ratio v!i = K, where v is the flow velocity of a specified liquid under saturated conditions, and i is the hydraulic gradient in the Darcy's equation v = Ki. 2,348 Hydraulic Head - The hydraulic head has a value at each point in the soil water system and is defined as the height with respect to a standard datum at which water stands in a riser ( or piezometer or manometer ) which connects to the point in question. In soil-water, the Kinetic energy head associated with velocity is usually negligible compared with the pressure and gravity heads. Porous cups make it possible to measure the hydraulic head in saturated soil. Hydraulic head has the dimensions of length. 2.349 Hydraulic Soil - Soil developed under the influence of water standing within the profile for considerable periods, formed mainly in cold, humid regions. 3.350 Hydrograph - Graphical rate with respect to time. or tabular representation of runoff

2.351 Hydrologic Cycle - A group of numerous arcs which represents the different paths through which the water in nature circulates and is transformed. dealing with water on the earth, its 2.352 Hydrology - Science occurrence, circulation and on or in the earth and its reaction with the environment. 2.353 Hodrostatic Pressure - Force liquid due to its elevation above a point. 30 per unit of area exerted by a

IS:11077 2.354

- 1984

Hydras Mica - A silicate clay with 2 : 1 lattice structure, but of indefinite chemical composition since usually part of the silicon in the silica tetrahedral layer has been replaced by aluminium, and containing a considerable amount of potassium which serves as an additional bonding between `the crystal units, resulting in particles larger than normal in montmorillonite and, consequently, in a lower cation-exchange capacity. Sometimes referred to as illite. ( See clay mineral. )

2.355 Hygroscopic saturated atmosphere

Moisture - Moisture absorbed by a soil from a and not available to plants in any way.

2.356 Hygroscopic Water - Water adsorbed by a dry soil from an atmosphere of high relative humidity, water remaining in the soil after `air drying' or water held by the soil when it is in equilibrium with an atmosphere of a specified relative humidity at a specified temperature, usually 98 percent relative humidity at 25�C.
I

2.357 Igneous Rock - Rock formed from the cooling and solidification of original molten material and that has not been changed appreciably since its formation. 2,358 Illuvial Horizon - A soil layer or horizon in which material carried from an overlying layer has been precipitated from solution or deposited from suspension. The layer of accumulation. ( See eluvial horizon. ) 2.359 Illnviation - The process of deposition of soil material removed from one horizon to another in the soil, usually from an upper to a lower horizon in the soil profile. ( See elluviation. ) 2.360 Impeded Drainage - Condition in which the downward ment of gravitational water in soil is restricted. 2.361 Impermeable
Boundary See impermeable

move-

layer.

2.362 Impermeable Floor -of a ditch or reservoir. 2.363 Impermeable water, air or roots.
Layer -

Impervious

bottom, such as in the bottom by

Layer of soil resistant to penetration

2.364 Immature Soil - A soil having horizons with distinct clay accumulations; immature soils.

a profile with compact subsoil moderately weathered and

2.365 Immobilization - The conversion of an element from the inorganic to the organic form in microbird tissues or in plant tissues, thus rendering the element of readily available to other organism -or to plants. 31

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.366 Impervioue Resistant to penetration by thuds or by roots. A commercial soil or site as a true

2.367 Incomplete Fertilizer ( Single Carrier ) fertilizer not having all three of the fertilizer elements. 2.368 Indicator condition. Plants Plants characteristic

of specific or rock-like,

3.369 Indurated Soil - Cemented, hardened hardpan, which will not soften when wetted. 2.370 Infiltration -

The downward entry of water into the soil.

2.371 Infiltration Rate - The maximum rate at which a soil, in a Also, the maximum given condition at a given time, can absorb water. rate at which a soil will absorb water impounded on the surface at a shallow depth when adequate precautions are taken regarding border or fringe effects. Defined as the volume of water passing into the soil per unit of area per unit of time, it has the dimensions of velocity ( LT-1). 2.372 Inflitrometer - A device for measuring the rate of entry of fluid into a porous body when applied uniformally over the area, for example, water into soil. 2.373 Infinite Soil development. Soil of essentially unlimited depth for plant root

2.374 Inlet - Surface connection to a tile drain; structure at the diversion end of a conduit; upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.2;375 Intake - Head-works of a conduit; the place of diversion; infiltration by soil. water

2.376 Intercepter Drain - Surface or subsurface drain, or a combination of both designed and installed to collect subsurface flow before it resurfaces. 2.377 Inter Flow - That portion of rainfall which infiltrates into the soil and moves laterally through the upper soil horizons until intercepted by a stream channel or until it returns to the surface at the same point down slope from its point of infiltration. 2.378 Intergrade - A soil that possesses moderately well-developed distinguishing characteristics of two or more genetically related great Soil groupr. 2.379 Internal Drainage natural or artificial. Drainage 32 of the soil profile; may be either

IS:l1077-1984 2.380 Interstices
soil aggregates. property 2.381 Intrinsic Permeability 3The that relates to the ease with which gases or liquids The Darcy `K' multiplied by nleg; Intrinsic where n e g is the viscosity is the density'of is the acceleration of the fluid in poises; the fluid in g/cma, and of gravity in cm/sec2. ) element, in which irrigated, or group of and soil water. charged Permeability I-- ICC of a porous material can pass through~ it.

-

Voids,

pores

or

spaces

between

soil

particles

or

b

( See permeability 2.382 Ion elements. An electrically

particle,

2.383 Iron-pan principal cementing

An indurated agent.

soil horizon

iron oxide is the principally as

2.384 Irrigable Area - Area capable regards quality and elevation of land.

or being

2.385 Irrigation Stream - Flow used for irrigation of a particular tract of land; flow of water distributed at a single irrigation or that in a single farm lateral. 2.386 Irrigation - Artificial of supplying moisture essential application of water to plant growth. to soil for the purpose

by 2.387 Irrigation Efficiency - The ratio of the water consumed crops of an irrigated farm or project to the water diverted from a river or other natural water source into the farm or project canals. 2.388

Irrigation

Frequency -

Time

interval

between

irrigations.

2.389 Irrigation Methods - The manner in which water is artificially applied to an area. The methods and the manner of applying the water are as follows.

2.389.1 Border-strip - The water is applied at the upper end of a strip They have slope in with earth borders to confine the water to the strip. the direction of irrigation.
2.389.2 CIzeck-basin - The plots surrounded by levels. water is applied rapidly to relatively The basin is a small check; 33 level

IS 2 11077 - 1984 2.309.3 Corrugation - The water is applied to small, closely-spaced furrows running down from the head ditch frequently in grain and forage crops, to continue the flow of irrigation water to one direction.

2.389.4 Flooding - The water is released from field ditches and allowed to flood over the land. 2.389.5 Furrows - The by tillage implements. water is applied to row crops in ditches made

3.389.6 Sprinkler - The water is sprayed over the soil surface through nozzles from a pressure system. 2.339.7 li;i;suntil
. 2389.8 Sub-irrigation -

the water

The water is applied in open ditches or tile table is raised sufficiently to wet the soil for crop

and distribution

Wild-Jooding -

The water is released at high points in the field is uncontrolled.

- The replacement of one atom by 2.390 Isomorphous Substitution another of similar size in a crystal lattice without disrupting or changing the crystal structure of the mineral.

J
2.391 Junction

Point of intersection of two or closed~ drains; accessory used to effect a junction between two tile lines.
-

2.392 Junction Box - A rectangular serves to join one or more drains. K 2.393
Kaolin

manhole or other structure which

a) An aluminosilicate mineral of the 1 : 1 crystal~lattice group; that is, consisting of one silicon tetrahedral layer and one aluminium oxide-hydroxide octahedral layer. b) The 1 : 1 group of~family of aluminosilicates.
L 2.394 Laminar Flow - Flow in which viscous forces are so strong, related to the internal forces and where the fluid particles move in defined parallel streamlines. Laminar flow is sometimes called streamline or viscous flow.

2.395

Laminar

Velocity

-

Velocity 34

at which flow is laminar.

IS:11077 2.396

-1984

Land Capability - Classification of land units for the purpose of showing their relative suitability for some specific use, such as crop production with minimum erosion hazard.

2.397 Land Classification -The arrangement of land units into various categories based upon the properties of the land or its suitability for some particular purpose. 2.398 Land Leveler - Equipment slope and plane the soil surface. designed to smooth with continuous

2.399 Landscape - All the natural features such as fields, hills, forests, water, etc, which distinguish part of the earth's surface from another. Usually, that portion of land or territory which the eye can comprehend in a single view, including all its natural characteristics.
- Process of eliminating 2.400 Land Smoothing irregularities without changing the general contours finishing operation in land levelling. 2.401

minor surface of the land; the

Land-use Planning - Development of plans for the use of land that will, over a long period, best serve the general public.

2.402 Land, Wild - Uncultivated land; it may or may uot be maintained by the owner ~for its productive vegetative cover or for wood, forage production, recreation, or wildlife. 2.403 Lateral - Secondary or side channel, ditch or conduit. called branch line or drain, spur, lateral ditch, group lateral, etc. Also

2.404 Lateritic Soil - A suborder of zonal soils formed in warm, temperate, .and tropical regions and including the following great soil group: yellow podzolic, red podzodic, yellowish - brown lateritic, and lateritic. ( See classification, soil and latosol. ) 2.405 Latosol - A suborder of zonal soils including soils formed under forested, tropical, humid conditions and characterized by 10~ silicasesquioxide ratios of the clay fractions, low base-exchange capacity, low activity of the clay, low content of most primary minerals, low content of soluble constituents, a high degree of aggregate stability, and usually having a red colour. ( S do c 1assification, soil and lateritic soil. ) 2.406 Lattice - A three dimensional grid of lines connecting representing the centres of atoms or ions in a crystal. the points

2.407 Lattice Energy - The energy required to separate the ions of a crystal to an infinite distance from each other. 2.498 Leaching - The process of removal of soluble material from soil by the passage of water through the soil. This is a primary step in the improvement of saline roils. 35

IS : 11077 - 1984 2309 Leaching Requirement - The fraction of the water entering the soil that must pass through the root zone in order to prevent soil Leaching requirement is used salinity from exceeding a specified value. primarily under steady state or large-time average conditions. 2.410 Lime - Strictly, calcium oxide ( CaO ), but as commonly used in calcium carbonate ( CaCOa ) and calcium agricultural terminology, Agricultural lime refers to any of hydroxide Ca ( CH )z are included. these compounds, with or without magnesia, used as an amendment for acid soils. 2.411 Lime Concretion - An carbonate, or of other material carbonate. 2.412 Lime Elements calcium and magnesium. applied as found in lime. 2.413 Lime-pan aggregate cemented of by precipitated precipitated calcium calcium

The essential primary lime elements are, They are so called because they are usually carbonate.

A hardened layer cemented by calcium

2.414 Lime Requirement - The mass of agricultural limestone, or the equivalent of other specified liming material, required per acre to a soil depth of 15 centimetres ( or on 2 million pounds of soil ) to raise the #H of the soil to a desired value under field conditions. 2415 Liquid Limit - The minimum percentage ( by mass ) of moisture at which a small sample of soil will barely flow under a standard treatment. Synonymous with `upper plastic limit'. 2.416 Lithosequence - A group of related soils that differ one from the other in certain properties primarily as a result of differences in the parent rock as a soil forming factor. 2.417 Lithosols - A great soil group of a'zonal soils characterized by an incomplete- solum and not clearly expressed soil morphology and consisting of freshly and imperfectly weathered mass of rock. 2.418 Loamy - Intermediate in texture and properties between fine-textured and coarse-textured soils. Includes allytextural classes with the words `loam' or `loamy as a part of the class name, such as clay ( See soil texture. ) loam or loamy sand. 2.419 Loess - Material transported and deposited by wind and consisting of predominantly silt sized particles. 2.420 Loose - A soil with particles or small aggregates that are independent of each other or are weakly cohering, with a maximum of pore space and the minimum resistance to forces tending to cause rupture. 36

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.421 Luxury Consumption - The consumption of an element above the point at which the element increases growth and resulting in an increase in content of that element in the plant. 2.422
a)

Lysimeter A vessel or container placed below the ground surface to intercept and collect water moving downward through the soil. losses from a )

b) A device for measuring percolation and leaching column of soil under controlled conditions.

c) A device for measuring gains ( precipitation and condensation and losses ( evapotranspiration) by a column of soil. M

2.423 Macronutrient - A chemical element necessary in large amount for the growth of plant and usually applied artificially as fertilizer or liming materials ( `macro' refers to quantity and not to the essentiality of the element ). ( See micronutrient. ) 2.424 Main Canal supply to the laterals. Principal canal for the conveyance of a water

2.425 Main Ditch - Principal ditch, channel, or stream, natural, improved, or constructed, serving one or more drainage enterprises. Local names of streams, rivers or channels are often used for identification. Also called main outlet ditch, community ditch, main canal, main line, trunk channel, outlet ditch, master ditch, main outlet, major outlet, and outlet channel. 2.426 Main Drain ( Subsurface Drainage ) - Principal drain which conducts drainage water from the collection ( lateral ) drains and subAlso called major drain, outlet drain, and trunk mains to an outlet. drain. 2.427 Manometer fluid displacement. Instrument which measures fluid pressure Also called a differential of U-tube manometer. by

2.428 Mature Soil - A soil with well-developed soil horizons produced by the natural processes of soil formation and essentially in equilibrium with its present environment. 2.429 Maximum Water-Holding hold water against gravity. Capacity Capacity of soil to

2.439 Meadow Podtol or Depression Podzol - Poorly drained depressional soils of the grassland and parkland regions of Canada with bleached AZ horizons and finer-textured B horizons. Also referred as slough podzol. 37

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.431 Medium-Texture - Intermediate between fine-textured and coarse-textured ( soils ). ( It includes the following textural classes: very fine sandy loam, silt loam, and silt ). 2.432 Metamorphic Rock - Rock derived from pre-existing rocks but that differ from them in physical, chemical, and mineralogical properties as a result of natural geological processes, principally heat and pressure, originating within the earth The pre-existing rocks may have been igneous, sedimentary, or another form of metamorphic rock. 2.433 Mhos charge. Reciprocal ohms. A unit of conductance of an electrical

2.434 Microclimate from the modification

- The climatic condition of a small area resulting of the general climatic conditions.

2435 Micronutrient - A chemical element necessary in only extremely small amounts ( less than 1 ppm in the plant ) for the growth of plants. Examples are: B, Cl, Cu, Fe, Mn, and Zn ( `micro' refers to the amount used rather than to its essentiality ). ( See macronutrient. ) 2.438 Microrelief - Small-scale, local differences in topography, including mounds, swales, or pits that are only a few feet in diameter and with elevation differences of up to 6 feet. ( Set gilgai. ) 2.437 Mineralization - The conversion of an element from an organic form to an inorganic state as a result of microbial decomposition. 2;438 Mineralogical Analysis - The estimation or determination the kinds or amounts of minerals present in a rock or in a soil. of

2.439 Mineral Soil - A soil consisting predominantly of, and having its properties determined predominantly by, mineral matter. Usually contains less than 20 percent organic matter, but may contain an organic surface layer up to 30 cm thick. 2.440 Minor Elements - The essential elements needed in but small amounts ( iron, copper, zinc, manganese, boron, and molybdenum j. 2.441 Moderately Coarse-Texture - Consisting predominantly of ( In soil textural classification, it includes all the sandy coarse particles. Ioams except the very fine sandy loam. ) ( See coarse texture. ) 2.442 Moderately Fine-Texture - Consisting predominantly of intermediate-size ( soil ) particles. ( In soil textural classification, it includes clay loam, sandy clay loam, and silty clay loam. ) ( See fine texture. ) 2.443 Moisture Content on wet weight in a sample. Percentage 38 by weight of moisutre based

IS

:11077 -1984

2.444 Moisture Density - Mass of water per unit volume. When expressed in grams per cubic centimetre, it is numerically equal to the percentage of total space occupied by the water.
2.445 Moisture Equivalent - The moisture retained in air-dried, screened sample of soil which has been wetted and drained in a standard manner and centrifuged for 30 min in a centrifugal field equal to 1 000 times gravity. Moisture equivalent is expressed as moisture percentage on a dry-weight basis and approximates field capacity for many medium and fine-textured soils. 2.446 Moisture Penetration - Depth to which moisture penetrates following irrigation or rainfall before the rate of downward movement becomes negligible. 2.447 Moisture Percentage - The percentage of water in soil and plant usually expressed on a dry-weight basis. If otherwise expressed, the basis should be stated. 2.448 Moisture-Retention Curve -A graph showing the soil moisture percentage ( by weight or by volume ) versus applied tension ( or pressure ). Points on the graph are usually obtained by increasing ( or decreasing ) the applied tension or pressure over a specified range. 2.449 Moisture Tension - The equivalent negative gauge pressure, or suction, in the soil moisture. Soil moisture tension is equal to the equivalent negative or gauge pressure to which water must be subjected in order to be in hydraulic equilibrium, through a porous permeable wall or membrane, with the water in the soil. 2.450 Moisture Volume Percentage - The ratio water in a soil to the total bulk volume of the soil. of the volume of

2.451 Moisture Weight Percentage - The moisture content expressed ( See dry-weight as a percentage of the over-dry weight of soil. percentage. ) 2.452 Montmorillonite - An alumine silicate clay mineral with a 2 : 1 expanding crystal structure that is with two silicon tetrahedral layers enclosing an aluminium octahedral layers. Considerable expansion may be caused along the C axis by water moving between silica layers of continuous units. ( S ee montmorillonite saponite group. ) 2.453 Mentmorillonitedaponite Group - Clay mineral with 2 : 1 crystal lattice structure; that is, two silicon tetrahedral layers enclosing Consists of montmorillonite,- beidellite, an aluminium octahedral layer. nontronite, saponite, and others. 2.454 Mar - Wetlands imperfectly with sufficient organic matter. 39 drained and which are clay loams

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.455 Mottled Zone - A layer that is marked with spots or blotches The pattern of mottling and of different colour or shades of colour. the size, abundance, and colour of the mottles may vary considerably and should be specified in soil description.

2.456 Mottling - Spots or blotches of different colour interspersed with the dominant colour. 2.457
Mulch

colour

or shades or

a) Any material such as straw, sawdust, leaves, plastic film, loose soil, etc, that is, spread upon the surface of the soil to protect the soil and plant roots from the effects of rain drops, soil crushing, freezing, evaporation, etc. b) To apply mulch to-the soil surface. 2,458 Mulch Tillage - Tillage or preparation that plant residues are left on the surface. of soil in such a way

2.459 Mull - A type of forest humus in which the F layer may or may not be present and in which there is no H layer. The Al horizon consists of an intimate mixture of organic matter and mineral soil with gradual transition between the Al and the horizon beneath. ( Sometimes differentiated into tirum mull, sand mull, coarse mull, medium mull, and fine mull. ) 2.460 Munsell Colour System - A colour designation system that specifies the relative degree of the three simple variables of colour : hue, value and chroma. For example: 1OYR 614 is a colour ( of soil ) with a hue = IOYR, value = 6, and chroma = 4. These notations can be translated into several different systems of colour names as defined. ( See chroma, hue, value, and colour. ) N 2.461 Neutral Soil - A soil in which the surface layer, normal plough depth, is neither acid nor alkaline in reaction. soil, alkaline soil, PH, and reaction, soil. ) -2.462 Nitrate nitrite form.
Reduction -

at least to ( See acid to An

The biochemical

reduction

of nitrate

2.463 Nitrification - Formation of nitrates from ammonia. oxidation process carried on in the soil by micro-organism. 2.464 Nitrogen Assimilation - The incorporation organic cell substances by living organisms. 40

of nitrogen into

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.465 Nitrogen Cycle - The sequence of biochemical changes undergone ~by nitrogen wherein it is used by a living organism, liberated upon the death and decomposition of the organism, and converted to its Nrriginal state of oxidation. 2.466 Nitrogen Fixation - Conversion compounds by symbiotic or non-symbiotic of free nitrogen to nitrogen microbial activity.

2467 Non-saline Alkali Soil - A soil which contains sufficient -exchangeable sodium to interfere with the growth of most crop plants and does not contain appreciable quantities of soluble salts. The exchangeable sodium percentage is greater than 15, the conductivity of the saturation extract is less than 4 millimhos per centimetre ( at 25�C ) .and the pH of the saturated soil usually ranges between 8'5 and 10.0.

2.468 Observation Well - Hole bored to a desired depth ground surface, used for observing the water table level.

below

the

2.469 One-third Atmosphere Percentage - The moisture retained in an air-dried and screened sample of soil that has been wetted and this brought to equilibrium on a permeable membrane at a soil moisture tension of 345 cm~of water. This characteristic moisture value for soils is expressed in terms of moisture percentage, dry-weight basis, and closely approximates the moisture equivalent and field capacity for many soils. 2.470 Organic Soil - A soil which contains a high percentage than 15 or 20 percent of organic matter throughout the solurn. greater

2.471 Osmotic Pressure - The pressure that would have to be applied to a solution to give it the same escaping tendency as the solvent. For example, if a solution is contained in a rigid semipermeable membrane which is immersed in water, it-is found that in order to preventtransfer of water through the membrane,-either the pressure on the water must Abe decreased or the pressure on the solution increased. The pressure difference required for equilibrium across the memberane is the osmotic pressure. Osmotic pressure ordinarily is determined by freezing point measurements, using the formula: OF w 12.06 n where OP = osmotic pressure of the solution in atmospheres, and G = freezing point depression in degrees centrigrade. 41 0.21 02,

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.472 Out Fall drain. Point where water flows from a conduit, disposal from a stream, dried at stream river, or

2.473 Outlet - Point of water tidewater, or artificial drain. 2.474 Oven-dry Soil reaches constant weight.

lake,

Soil which has be& P

105�C

until it

2.475 Pans - Horizons or layers, in soils, that are strongly compacted, indurated, or very fragipan, and hardpan. 2.476 Pan, Genetic - A natural subsurface soil layer of low or very low permeability, with a high concentration of small particles, and differing in certain physical and chemical properties from the soil immediately above or below the pan. ( See fragipan, and hardpan, all of which are genetic pans. ) 2.477 Pan, Pressure or Induced having a higher bulk density and directly above or below it, as a result by normal tillage operations or by referred to as ploughpan, ploughsole, A-subsurface horizon or soil layer a lower total porosity than the soil of pressure that has been applied other artificial means. Frequently, or traffic pan.

and more or less 2.478 Parent Material - The unconsolidated chemically weathered mineral or organic matter from which the column of soil is developed by pedogenic processes. 2.479 Parshall Flume - A calibrated device, based on the principle of critical flow, used to measure the flow of water in open conduits. Formerly termed the improved venturi flume. ' ~2.480 Particle Density - The average density of the soil particles excluding air spaces. Particle density is usually expressed in grams per cubic centimetre and is sometimes referred to as `real density' and `real specific gravity'. 2.481 Particle Size - The effective diameter of a particle measured by sedimentation, sieving, or micrometric methods. 2,482 Particle-Size Analysis - Determination of the various amounts of the different separates in a soil sample, usually by sedimentation, sieving, micrometry, or combinations of these methods. 2,483 Particle-Size Distribution - The amounts of the various separates in a soil sample, usually expressed as weight percentage, 42 soil

IS:

11077 -1984

2.484 Parts

Per Milllon ( ppm ) - Weight units of any given substance per one million equivalent weight units of oven-dry soil; or in the case of soil solution 01: other solution, the weight units of solute per million weight units of solution.

2.485 Peat - Unconsolidated soil material consisting largely of undecomposed, or only slightly decomposed, organii: matter accumulated under conditions of excessive moisture. 2.486 Peat Soil - An organic soil containing more than 50 percent organic matter. `Peat' referring to the slightly decomposed or undecomposed deposits and `muck' to the highly decomposed materials. 2.487 Ped - A unjt of soil structure such as an aggregate, crumb, prism, block, or granule, formed by natural processes ( in contrast with a clod, which is formed artificially ). 2.488 Penetrability - The ease with which a probe can be pushed into the soil. May be expressed in units of distance, speed, force, or work depending on the type of penetrometer used. 2.499 Perched Water Table - A water table, usually of limited area, maintained above the normal ground water supply by the presence of an intervening, relatively impervious confining stratum. 2.490 Percolating Water - Subsurface water which passes downward through the soil or rocks due to the action of gravity.
2.491 Percolation, Soil Water

through soil. Especially, nearly saturated soil. 2.492 Percolation 2.493 Permanent percentage.
Rate -

the

- The downward movement of water downward flow of water in saturated or

See permeability. ( Wilting Co-efficient ) See wilting

Wilting

2.494 Permanent Wilting Percentage - Soil moisture content below which plants cannot readily obtain water and permanently wilt. Also called permanent wilting point. 2.495 Permeability - The specific property of a soil which is a measure of the readiness with w~hich the soil transmits water. The permeability is a velocity, and for agricultural purposes, it can be conveniently expressed either in inches per hour or in centimetres per hour. For most soils, both the chemical nature of the water used and the history and treatment of the sample greatly affect the permeability. 2.496 pH - The common logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a system. pH 7 is neutral,pH less than 7 is acidic and pH more than 7 is basic or alkaline. 43

IS:

11077 - 1984

Soil - A subdivision of a soil type or other unit of classification having characteristics that affect the use and management of the soil but which do not vary sufficiently to differentiate it as a separate type. A variation in a property or characteristic such as degree of slope, degree of erosion, content of stones, etc. 2.498 Photomap - A mosaic map made from aerial photographs physical and cultural features shown as on a planimetric map. planisaic and toposaic. ) 2.499 Phreatic SurfacesGround water table. with ( Set

2.497 Phase,

2.500 Physical Proportions ( of Soils ) - Those characteristics, processes, or reactions of a soil which are caused by physical forces and which can be described by, or expressed in, physical terms or equations. Examples of physical properties are bulk density, water-holding capacity, hydraulic conductivity, porosity, poro-size distribution, etc. 2.501 Physical Weathering - The break down of rock and mineral particles into small particles by physical forces such as frost action. ( See weathering. ) 2.502 Piezometer - A device used to measure pressure, Used in measuring height of water table. different kinds of

2.503 Piezometric Head - Combined position and pressure head as measured by the height of the water column in a piezometer above a reference plane. 2.504 Piezometric Line or Surface - Line or surface having an In ground water flow it is the same as an equiequal piezometric head. potential line or surface. ( See equipotential. ) 2.505 Pjping inflowing water. Washing of fine materials in the tile line by the

2.506 Plasticity ( Soil ) - Property of a soil which allows deformed without appreciable volume change or cracking.

it to be staff or

2.507 Point Gauge -- Sharp pointed rod attached to a graduated. or vernier scale for measuring water surface elevation. 2.508 Polder - Area of low-lying land river by the protection of dikes or levees. 2.509 Pond works, Small body of water, reclaimed from by sea,

lake

usually

confined

constructed

2.510 Pore-Size Distribution - The volume of the various sizes of pores in a soil. Expressed as percentages of the bulk volume ( soil plus pore space ). 44

IS:11077

9 1984

2.511 Porosity - The fraction of the soil volume not occupied by the In other words, porosity is the ratio of the sum of the soil particles. volumes of the liquid and gaseous phases to the sum ~of the volumes of the solid, liquid, and gaseous phases of the soil. 2.512 Poverty Adjustment - The element through which an increase increase in plant growth. range of supply of a limiting in that element brings about an

2.513 P.P.M. ( Parts Per Million) - The concentration of a substance ~expressed as the number of unit weights of that substance per million units of weight of solution. 2.514 Precipitation Intensity or Rainfall precipitation, generally expressed as centimetres Intensity per hour. Rate of

2.515 Precipitation Interception or Rainfall Interception stopping, interrupting and temporary holding of precipitation form by a vegetative canopy or vegetation residue. 2.516 Pressure - Total load or force acting upon a surface as a weight per unit area. 2.517 Pressure Head -

- The in any

expressed

Weight per unit area exerted on an object.

2.518 Pressure Membrane -A membrane permeable to water and only very slightly permeable to gas when wet, through which water can escape from a soil sample in response to a pressure gradient.. 2.519 Primers ( Pump ) - Device attached to a pump for the purpose of pumping out the air and causing the water to prime~or fill . the pump through the suction pipe. - Soil productivity is the capacity of a soil, in its 2.520 Productivity normal environment, for producing a specified plant or sequence of plants under a specified system of management. 2.521 Productive Soil - A soil in which the chemical, biological conditions are favourable for the economic crops suited to a particular area. physical and production of all its

2.522 Profile, Soil - A verticle section of the soil through horizons and extending into the parent material.

2.523 Puddled Soil - Soil condition resulting from the handling of a soil when it is in a wet, plastic condition, so that when dried, it becomes bard, cloddy and almost impervious to air and water. 2.524 Pump an outlet. Drainage Drainage system which pumps the water into

45

IS:11077

-1984

Q
2.525 Quadrat Method - A study of vegetation involving marking of a square area of determined size and recording frequency of the various species found in this area. R 2.526 Rainfall Component - That part of the flow of a channel can be attributed to rainfall directly on the surface of the channel. 2,527 Rainfall runoff. Excess The part of rainfall excluding that

subsurface

usually expressed in years, 2.528 Rainfall Frequency - Frequency, at which a given rainfall in intensity and duration can be expected to be equalled or exceeded. 2.529 Rainfall Intensity - Rate of rainfall for any given time interval, usually expressed in centimetres per hour. 2.530 Rate of Application, Sprinkler - Rate at which water is applied from a sprinkler or sprinkler system, usually based on the sprinkler system output and nominal area covered per setting. 2.531 Rate of Storage - Inflow to a body subsurface ) less the outflow per unit time, of water ( surface or

2.532 Reaction Soil - The degree of acidity or alkalinity of a soil, usually expressed as a PH value. Descriptive terms commonly associated with certain ranges in @H are: extremely acid, less than 4.5; very strongly acid, 4'5-5'0; strongly acid; ,5*1-5.5; moderately acid, S-6-6*0; slightly acid, 6.1-6.5; neutral 6.6-7.3; slightly alkaline, 7.4-7~8; moderately alkaline, 7.9-8'4; strongly alkaline, 8.5-9.0; and very strongly alkaline greater than 9.1. 2.533 Real Density - Mass per unit volume of the oven dry solid ( soil matter ), pore space excluded. When expressed as grams per cubic centimetre, it is equal numerically to the specific gravity of the solids. 2.534 Recession hydrograph. Curve DPscending portion of a stream flow or flood is added to the zone of

2.535 Recharge - Progress by which water saturation, as recharge of an aquifer.

2.536 Red Desert Soil - A zonal great soil group consisting of soils formed under warm-temperate to hot, dry regions under desert type vegetation, mostly shrubs. 2.537 Regur -. An intrazonal group of dark calcareous soils high in clay, which is mainly montmorillonitic, and formed mainly from rocks low in quartz; occurring extensively on the Deccan plateu of India. 46

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.538 Relative Humidity - Ratio of the amount of water present in the air to the amount required for saturation at the same dry bulb temperature and barometric pressure. May be computed from vapour pressure, mole fraction or from weight data. 2.539 Rendzina - A great soil group of the intrazonal order and calcimorphic suborder consisting of soils with brown or black friable surface horizons underlain by light grey to pale yellow calcareous material, developed from soft, highly calcareous parent material under grass vegetation or mixed grasses and forest in humid and semiarid climates. 2.540 Reservoir - A natural or constructed collected and stored for use. 2.541 Residual Soil - Unconsolidated materials accumulated by disintegration place in which water is

and partly weathered mineral of consolidated rock in place. the bulk volume of soil as

2.542 Residual Shrinkages - The decreasein in addition to that caused by the loss of water.

2.543 Retention - Precipitation on an area that does not escape run OR, the difference between total precipitation and total runoff.

2.544 Retentive Profile, Soil - A graph showing the retaining capacity of a soil as a function of depth. The retaining capacity may he for water, at any given tension, for cafians, or for any other substances held by soils. 2.545 Return Flow - That portion of the water diverted from a stream which finds its way back to the stream channel, either as surface or underground flow. 2.546 Reversion - The reappearance of the character after a lapse of due to character being recessive or being one or more generations, dependent on complementary factors, as a result of back mutation. 2.547 Riparian - The doctrine of water right according to which a landowner along a stream is entitled to have the water flow by natural channel undiminished and unpolluted. Modification in the irrigated area allows for reasonable use ~of water for irrigation purposes. 2.548 Riser Outlet Plug ( Sprinkler ) - Threaded close a riser outlet where a sprinkler is not used. 2.-549 Riser Pipe ( Sprinkler ) -- Pipe used to elevate head above ground or crop level. plug used the to

sprinkler

2.550 River Wash - Barren alluvial land, usually coarse textured, exposed along streams at low water and subject to shifting during normal high water. A miscellaneous land type. 47

IS : 11077- 1984 frequent rock outcrops and 2.551 Rock Land - Areas containing shallow soils. Rock outcrops usually occupy from 25 to 90 percent of the area. A miscellaneous land type. 2.552 Root penetrate. Zone That depth of soil which plant roots readily

2.553 Rotation Irrigation System - System of irrigation in which a number of irrigators rotate a portion of the entire flow in turn for a limited period of time. 2,554 Rough Broken Land - Land with very steep topography numerous intermittent drainage channels but usually covered vegetation. See miscellaneous land type. and with

2.555 Row Crop - Crop planted in rows for enough apart to allow cultivation between rows during the growing season. 2-556 Rubble Land - Land areas with 90 percent or more of the surface covered with stones and boulders. A miscellaneous land type. on an area which is 2.557 Runoff - That portion of the precipitation discharged from the area through stream channels as surface or subsurface flow. Runoff Co-efficient - Percentage of rainfall in a storm which is specified magnitude that may be expected to flow as runoff from a watershed. 2.558
of a

2.559 Runoff Plots - Areas of land, usually small, from which and transported soluble materials and soil may be measured. S

runoff

2.560 Saline-Alkali Soil - A soil containing sufficient exchangeable sodium to interfere with the growth of most crop plants and containing appreciable quantities of soluble salts. The exchangeable sodium percentage is greater than 15 and the conductivity of the saturation extract is greater than 4 millimhos per centimetre ( at 25�C ). The PH of the saturated soil is usually less than 8.5. 2.561 Saline Soil - A non alkali soil containing soluble salts in such quantities that they interfere with the growth of most crop plants. The conductivity of the saturation extract is greater than 4 millimhos per centimetre ( -at 25�C ) , the exchangeble sodium percentage is less than 15, and the pH of the saturated soil is usually less than 8.5. 2.562 Salinity Concentration of salt in a given fluid or material, of salts in the soil.

2.563 Salinization

The process of accumulation 48

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.564 Salt-Affected Soil - Soil that has been adversely modified for the growth of most crop plants by the presence of soluble salts, exchangeSee saline soil, saline-sodic soil and sodic soil. able sodium,~or both.

2.565 Salted Soil - A generic term applying to all soils having characteristics which are caused by exposure to excessive amounts of soluble salts. 2.566 Sand a) A soil particle between 0.05 and 2.0 mm in diameter.

b) Any one of five soil separates, namely; very coarse sand, coarse ( See soil separates ). sand, medium sand and very fine sand. c) A soil textural -2.567 Sand Lens bonded material. class. ( See soil texture ). band of sand in distinctly sedimentary

Lenticular

2.568 Sand Trap - Device, often a simple~enlargement in a ditch or conduit for detaining sand and other heavy particles carried by ~water. May also include means for removing such material. ( Applied to any 2.569 Sandy - Containing a large amount of sand. one of the soil classes that contains a large percentage of sand. ) ( See class, soil and soil texture ). 2.570
Sat-rate

a) To fill all the voids between soil particles with a liquid. b) To form the most concentrated solution possible under a given set of a physical conditions in the presence of an excess of the adsorption complex with a cation species; for example, if saturated. 2.571 Saturated Flow under saturated condition. Flow of water ( See saturate ). through a porous material

2.572 Saturation Extract - The solution obtained by pressure or vacuum filtration of a soil paste that has been made up to a saturated condition by adding water while stirring. 2.573 Saturation Percentage - The moisture content of a sample of soil that has been brought to saturation by adding water while stirring. Expressed as grams of water per 100 g of dry soil. 2.574 Saturation Point - That point at which a soil or aquifer will no longer absorb any amount of water without losing an equal amount. 49

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.575 Sedimentary Rock - A rock formed from materials deposited from suspension of precipitated solution and usually being or less consolidated. The principal sedimentary rocks are sand stones, shales, limestones, and conglomerates. 2.576 2.577 Seepage Movement of water into, through, or from soil. for measuring rate of seepage. Seepage Meter -

Device

2.578 Self-Matching Soil - A soil in which the surface layer becomes so well aggregated that it does not crust and seal and serves as a surface mulch upon drying. 2.579 Semiarid - Term applied to an area where the climate is neither entirely arid nor humid but intermediate between the two conditions. 2.580 Side Dressing - The placement the row after the row is established. of fertilizers along the side of

2.581 Sierozem - A zonal great soil group consisting of soils with plate greyish. A horizons grading into calcareous material at a depth of 1 -foot or less, and formed in temperature to cool, arid climates under a vegetation of desert plants, short grass, scattered under a vegetation of a desert plants, short grass and scattered brush. 2.582 Silt a) A soil separate consisting ofparticles between 0.05 and 0*002 mm in equivalent diameter. See soil separates. See soil texture. b) _A soil textural class. sediments in stream 2.583 Silting - The deposition of water-borne channels, lakes, reservoirs, or an flood plains, usually resulting from a decrease in the velocity of the water. 2.584 Silt Loam and small quantities A soil textural class containing large amount of silt of sand and clay. 12 to 27 percent clay.

2.585 Silt Clay - A soil textured class containing a relatively large amount of 40 percent or more silt and clay and a small amount of sand. ( See soil texture and class, soil ) . 2.586 Silty Clay Loam - A soil textural class containing a relatively large amount of silt, a lesser quantity of clay ( 27 to 40 percent ), and a still smaller quantity of sand ( 20 percent ). 2.587 Site a) In ecology, an area described or defined by its biotic, climatic, and soil conditions as related to its capacity to produce vegetation. 50

IS:11077 b) An area sufficiently uniform in biotic, climatic, to produce a particular climate vegetation, 2.588 Site Index a) A quantitative evaluation growth under the existing b) The height in metres of or calculated to an index

-1984

and soil conditions

of the productivity of a soil for forest or specified environment. the dominant forest vegetation taken at age, usually 50 or 100 years.

2.589 Slickers - Fine-textured materials separated in placer mining and in ore-mill operations; may be detrimental to plant growth unless A miscellaneous land type. confined in specially constructed basin. 2.590 Slick Spots - Small areas in a field that are somewhat alkali when wet due to alkali or high exchangeable sodium. 2.591 Slope - Degree of deviation of a surface usually expressed in percent or degrees. 2.592 Sodic Soil a) A soil containing sufficient exchangeable sodium to interfere with the growth of most crop plants. b) A soil in which the sodium - adsorption ratio of the saturation extract is 15 or more. 2.593 Sodium Adsorption Ratio ( SAR ) - A ratio for soil extracts and irrigation waters used to express the relative activity of sodium zones in exchange reaction with soil:
SAR -

black

from

the horizontal,

2/ ( Ca++

__

.Na+

x Mg++ )/2
are expressed in meq.

-~-

where the sodic concentrations
NOTE meq = milli-equivalent.

2.594 Sodium Percentage - The percentnge of total cations in water that is sodium. Calculations are based on milli equivalents rather than weight. 2.595 Soil

4 b)

The unconsolidated mineral materials on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land plants. The unconsolidated mineral matter on the surface of the earth that has been subjected to and influenced but genetic. and environmental factors of parent material, climate ( including moisture and temperature effects), macroand microorganisms, 51

IS : 11077 - 1984 and topography, all acting over a period of time and producing a product - soil - that differs from the material from which it is derived in many physical, chemical, biological and morphological properties, and characteristics. 2.596 Soil Aeration - Movement of air into the soil as water is drained out. A process by which air and other gases in the soil are renewed. 2.597 Soil Association a) A group of defined and named taxonomic soil units occurring together in individual and characteristic pattern over a geographic region, comparable to plant associations in many ways. ( Sometimes called `natural land type'. ) b) A mapping unit used on genera1 soil maps in which two or more defined taxonomic units occurring together in characteristic pattern and combined because the scale of the map or the purpose for which it is being made does not require delineation of the individual soils. a 2.598 Soil Auger - A tool for boring into the soil and withdrawing small sample for field or laboratory observation. Soil augers may be classified into several types as follows: a) those with worm-type bits, unenclosed; b) those with worm-type bits enclosed in a cylinder; 2.599 Soil Chemistry chemical constitution, tions of soils. 2.600 2.601 Soil Colloids 0'001 mm in diameter. and

c) those with hollow cylinder with a cutting edge at the lower end. - A division of soil science concerned with the the chemical properties, and the chemical reacsee classification, charged soil. soil particles smaller than

Soil Classification

Negatively

2.602 Soil %omplex - A mapping unit used in detained soil surveys where two or more defined taxonomic units are so intimately intermixed geographically that it is undesirable or impractical, because of the scale being used to separate them. 2.603 Soil Conservation

4

Protection of the soil against physical loss by erosion or against chemical deterioration; that is, excessive lossof fertility by either netural or artificial means. 52

IS : 11077 - i984

b) A combination of all management and land use methods which safeguard the soil against depletion or deterioration by natural or by man induced factors. c) A division of soil science concerned with soil conservation (a) and (b). 2;604 Soil Conserving Crops retardance to erosion and maintain organic matter. Crops that offer an appreciable or replenish rather than deplete soil

2.605 Soil Depleting Crops - Crops that do not offer an appreciable retardance to erosion and which tend to deplete organic matter in the soil, and to permit deterioration of soil structure. 2.606 Soil Erosion - Detachment and movement of soil from the land surface by wind or water, including normal soil erosion and accelerated erosion -- ( see gully erosion, rill erosion, sheet erosion, splash erosion, wind erosion ). 2.607 Soil Extract - The solution separated from a soil suspension or from a soil by filtration, centrifugation, suction or pressure ( may or may not be heated prior to separation ). 2.608 Soil-Formation Factors - The variables, usually interrelated, natural agencies that are active in and responsible for the formation of soil. The factors are usually grouped into five major categories as follows: (a) Rock, (b) Climate, 2.609
Soil Genesis

(c) Organisms,

(d) Topography,

and (e) Time.

a) The mode of origin of the soil with special reference to the processes or soil-forming factors responsible for the development of the solum, or true soil, from the unconsolidated parent material. b) A division of soil science concerned with soil genesis (a). geography 2.610 Soil Geography - A subspecialization of physical concerned with the area1 distributions of soil types.

2.611 Soil Horizon - A layer of soil or soil material approximately parallel to the land surface and differing from adjacent genetically related layers in physical, chemical, and biological properties or characteristics, such as colour, structure, texture, consistency, kinds and numbers of organisms present, degree of acidity or alkalinity, etc. 2.612 Soil Management Groups Groups of taxonomic soil units with similar adaptations or management reauirements for one or more specific purposes, -such as adapted crops or' crop rotations, drainage practices, fertilization, forestry, highway engineering, etc. 53

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.613 Soil Map - A map showing the distribution soil mapping units in relation to the prominent features-of the earth's surface. of soil types or other physical and cultural

2.614 Soil Mechanics and Engineering - A subspecialization of soil science concerned with the effect of forces on the soil and the application of engineering principles to problems involving the soil. 2.615 Soil Microbiology - A subspecialization of soil science concerned with soil-inhibiting micro-organisms and their relation to agriculture, including both plant and animal growth. 2.616 Soil Minerology - A subspecialization of soil science with the homogeneous inorganic material found in the earth's depth of weathering or of sedimentation. concerned crust to the

2.617 Soil Moisture Stress - The sum of the soil moisture tension and the osmatic pressure of the soil solution. It is the suction or negative pressure to which water must be subjected to be at equilibrium through a semipermeable membrane with the solution in soil. 2.618 Soil Moisture the moisture content Deficiency - Amount of soil to field capacity. of water required to raise mass

2.619 Soil Moisture Potential of water in a soil from an arbitrary

Work required to move a unit datum to the point in question.

2.620 �oil Moisture Tension - The equivalent negative pressure or suction in the soil moisture. This tension may be expressed in any convenient pressure units. In the 1 atmos,phere tension range, it is the negative pressure to which water in porous cup must be subjected in order to bring the water in the CUP into static equilibrium through the porous wall with the moisture in the soil. 2.621 Soil Monolith the soil and mounted - A vertical section for display or study. of a soil profile removed from

2.622 Soil Morphology - The physical constitution of the soil including the texture, structure, porosity, consistency and colour of the various soil horizons, their thickness and their arrangement in the soil profile. 2.623 Soil organic Matter - The organic fraction of the soil; includes plant and animal residues at various stages of decomposition, cells and tissues of Foil organisms, and substances synthesized by the soil population. Usually determined on soils which have been sieved through a 2.0 mm sieve. 2.626 Soil Permeability ( See permeability ). 2.625 Soil Plasticity Capacity of the soil to transmit fluids.

See plasticity. 54

IS : 11077- 1984

2.626 Soil Population plants and animals.

-

All organisms

living

in the soil, including

2.627 Soil Pores - That part of the bulk volume of soil not occupied by soil particles, interstices and voids. 2.628 Soil Profile - Vertical section of the soil through all its horizons into the parent material. from the surface

2.629 Soil Science - That science dealing with soils as a natural resource on the surface of the earth including soil formation, classification and mapping, and the physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to their management for crop production. 2.630 Soil Separates - One of the several grain size groups into which the soil is separated by mechanical analysis. Mineral particles, less than 2-O mm in equivalent diameter ranging between specified size limits. 2.631 Soil Series - The basic unit of soil classification being a subdivision of a family and consisting of soils which are essentially alike in all major profile characteristics except the texture of the A horizon. 2.632 Soil Solution - The liquid phase of the soil and its solutes consisting of ions dissociated from the surface of the soil ~particles and of other soluble materials. 2.633 Soil Structure - The combination or arrangement of primary soil particles into secondary particles, units, or peds. These secondary units may be but usually are not, arranged in the profile in such a manner as to give a distinctive characteristic pattern. The secondary units are characterized and classified on the basis of size, shape, and ( See degree of distinctness into classes, types, and grades, respectively. soil structure classes, soil structure grades, and soil structure-types ). 2.634 Soil Structure Classes - A grouping of soil structural units peds on the basis of size. ( S ee soil structures, soil structure types ). or

of soil 2.635 Soil Structure Grades - A grouping or classification structure on the basis of inter and intra-aggregate adhesion, cohesion, Four grades of strumcturedesignated from or stability of the profile. 0 to 3 are recognized as follows: 0) Structureless - no observable aggregation or no definite and Massive, if orderly arrangement of natural lines of weakness. coherent; single grain, if noncoherent. 1) Weak - poorly in place. formed indistinct peds, barely, observable durable on

2) Moderate - well formed distinct peds, moderately evident but not distinct in undisturbed soil. 55

IS:11077-1984 3) Strong - durable peds that are quite evident in undisturbed
adhere weakly to one another, withstand become separated when the soil is disturbed. displacement, soil, and

2.636 Soil Structure Types - A classification of soil structure based on the shape of the aggregates or peds and their arrangement in the profile. ( See soil structure, soil structure classes, soil structure grades ). 2.637 Soil Survey - The systematic examination, description classification, and mapping of soils in an area. Soil surveys are classified according to the kind and intensity offield examination. 2.638 Soil Texture - The texture is the term indicating the courseness or fineness of the soil. The amount and quantity of each of the grain size group of particle that constitute the soil. 2.639 Sand - Soil material that contains 85 percent or more of sand, percentage of silt, plus I.5 times the percentage of clay, shall not exceed 15. 2.640 Coarse Sand - 35 percent or more very coarse and coarse sand, and less than 50 percent any other one grade of sand. 2.641 Sand - 35 percent or more very coarse, coarse, sand, and less than 50 percent fine or very fine sand. and medium

2.642 Fine Sand - 50 percent or more fine sand ( or ) less than 25 percent very coarse, coarse, and medium sand and less than 50 percent very fine sand. 2.643 Very Fine Sand 50 percent or more very fine sand. that contains at the upper limit percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the 15; at the lower limit it contains not the percentage of clay does not and

2.644 Loamy Sand - Soil material 85 to 90 percent sand, and the percentage of clay is not less than less than 70 to 85 percent sand, and exceed 30.

2.644.1 Loamy Coarse Sand 7 25 percent or more very coarse coarse sand, and less than 50 percent any other one grade of sand.

2644.2 Loamy Sand -- 25 percent or more very coarse, coarse and medium sand and less than 50 percent fine or very fine sand. 2.644.3 Loamy Fine Sand - 50 percent or more fine sand (or) less~than 25 percent very coarse, coarse and medium sand and less than 50 percent very fine sand. 2.644.4 Loamy Vev Fine Sand 50 percent or more very fine sand. 56

IS:11077-1984
Loam - Soil material that contains either 20 clay or less and the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage exceeds 30 percent and 52 percent or more sand, or less than 7 clay, less than 50 percent silt, and between 43 percent and 52 sand.

2,645 Sandy

percent of clay percent percent

2.645.1 Coarse Sandy Loam - 25 percent or more very coarse, and coarse sand and less than 50 percent any other one grade of sand. 2.645.2 Sandy Loam - 30 percent or more very coarse, coarse and medium sand, but less than 25 percent very coarse sand, and less than 30 percent very fine or fine sand. 2.645.3 Fine Sandy Loam - 30 percent or more fine sand and 30 percent very fine sand (or) between 15 and 30 percent very coarse, coarse and medium sand. 2.645.4 Very Fine Sandy Loam - 30 percent or more fine (or) 40 percent fine and very fine sand, at least half of which is very fine sand and less than 15 percent very coarse, coarse, and medium sand. 2.646 Loam - Soil material that contains 7 to 27 percent 50 percent silt, and less than 52percent sand. clay, 28 to

2.647 Silt Loam - Soil material that contains 50 percent or more silt and 12 to 27 percent clay (or) 50 to 80 percent silt and less than 12 percent clay. 2.648 Silt - Soil material than 12 percent clay. that contains 80 percent or more silt and less

2.649 Sandy Clay Loam - Soil material that contains 20 to 35 percent clay, less than 28 percent silt, and 45 percent or more sand. 2.650 Clay Loam - Soil material clay and 20 to 45 percent sand. that contains 27 percent to40 percent that contains 27 to 40 percent

2.651 Silty Clay Loam - Soil material clay and less than 20 percent sand.

2.652 Sandy Clay - soil material that contains 35 percent or more clay and 45 percent or more sand and less than 20 percent silt. 2.653 Silty Clay - Soil material and 40 percent or more silt. that contains 40 percent or`more clay, clay less

2.654 Clay - Soil material that contains 40 percent or more than 45 percent sand, and less than 40 percent silt.

2.655 Soil Type - The lowest unit in the natural system of soil classification; a subdivision of a soil series and consistmg of or describing soils that are alike in all characteristics including the texture of the A horizon. 57

IS : 11077 - 1984 2,668 Sprinkler Irrigation -

spraying through nozzie.

The application

of water to the soil by

required to apply 2.669 Sprinkler Systems - All the equipments water to a given area from the source of water to sprinkler nozzle. 2.669.1 Boom Type - An elevated, cantilevered sprinkler(s) mounted on a central stand. The sprinkler boom rotates about a central pivot. 2.669.2 Farm System - System which will required amount of water to the entire farm. 2.669.3 Field System - That part of a farm field or area for which it is designed. properly system distribute covers the one

which

2.669.4 Hand Move - Method of moving the sprinkler system by uncoupling and picking up the pipes manually requiring no special tools. This includes systems in which lateral pipes are loaded and unloaded manually from racks or trailers used to move the pipes from one lateral setting to another. 2.669.5 Mechanized - System which is moved either by engine power tractor power, water power or hand power on wheels or skids. Generally considered as any type of system that can be moved without carrying manually. 2.669.6 Permanent - System consisting of permanent underground piping with either permanent risers for sprinkers, or quick coupling valves, in such a manner that sprinklers may be attached. powered system which 2.669.7 Self-Propelled System - Portable May rotate about a pivot in the moves continuously when in operation. centre of field or move laterally across the field in a predetermined direction. 2.669.8 Semiportable - Systems designed with permanent units and mains, but with portable sprinkler laterals. pumping

2.669.9 Side-Roll System - System mounted on wheels, usually employing the lateral pipeline as an axle, where the lateral is moved at right angles to the mainline by rotating the pipeline either by hand or by engine power.
2.669.10 Solid Set - System, either permanent or portable, which covers the complete field with pipes and sprinklers in such a manner that all the field can be irrigated without moving any of the system. 2.669.11 Towed SystemSystem where lateral lines are mounted on wheels, casters, sleds, or skids, and are pulled or towed in the field to be irrigated in a direction approximately parallel to the lateral. 59

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.678 Structure Index - Any measurement of a soil physical property, such as aggregation, porosity, permeability to air and water or bulk density, that denotes or indicates the structural condition of soil. 2.679 Sub drain Tile line. 2.680 Sub irrigation - Application of water by percolating from widespaced furrows to an impermeable Iayer in the soil with a temporary This practice requires rise of water table to wet the entire soil body. an impervious subsoil layer, a porous surface soil, and a uniform topography of moderate slope. 2.681 Submerged Flow - Flow across any critical depth measuring structure where the downstream water depth is high enough to interfere with establishment of critical velocity at the control section. Submergence is usually expressed as the ratio of down stream to upstream water level. 2:682 Submerged free water surface. Orifice Orifice which discharges water below a

2.683 Submerged Weir - Weir not having free discharge conditions, due to downstream conditions affecting the flow depth through the weir. ( See submerged flow ). 2.684 Sub Soil - That part of the soil beneath the top that not having an appreciable organic matter content. soil, usually

2.685 Subsoiling - Tillage operation that is primarily concerned with altering the soil below plough depth. This includes chiselling or other means of breaking into subsoil. 2.686 Substrate a) That which is laid or spread under, an underlying layer, such as the subsoil. b) The substance, base or nutrient on which an organism grows. c) Compounds or substances that are acted upon by enzymes or catalysts and changed to other compounds in the chemical reaction. 2.687 Subsurface Drains - Subsurface channels used primarily to remove subsurface water from soil. Also known as underdrains and internal drains or tile drains. 2.688 Subsurface Tillage - Tillage~with a special sweeplike plough or blade which is drawn beneath the surface at depths of several centimetres and cuts plant roots and loosens the soil without inverting it or without incorporating the surface cover. 61

IS : 11077 - 1984 2.689 Summation Curve, Particle Seize - A curve showing the cumulative percentage by weight of particles within increasing ( or decreasing ) size limits as a function of diameter; the percent by weight of each size fraction is plotted cumulatively on the ordinate as function of the total range of diameters represented in the sample plotted on the abscissa. 2.690 Sump - Pit, tank, or reservoir stored for withdrawal by a pump. 2.691 Supplemental Irrigation to supplement rainfall. in which water which is collected is used and or

Irrigation

primarily collapse of

2.692 Surface Compaction - Moulding together structure of surface soil when subjected to pressure. 2.693 Surface Inlet - Structure for diverting open ditch or a tile line. May be called drain open inlet, surface well, direct inlet.

surface water inlet structure

into an intake, is used as

2.694 Surface Irrigation - Irrigation where the soil surface a conduit as in furrow and border irrigation. 2.695 Surface Sealing particles in the immediate impermeable to water.

The orientation and packing of dispersed soil surface layer of the soil, rending it relatively

2.696 Surface Soil - The uppermost part of the cultivated soil, ordinarily moved in tillage, or its equivalent in uncultivated soils and ranging in depth from 3 to 4 inches ( 8 to 10 centimetres ). Frequently designated as the ` plough layer `. The ' Ap layer ' or the ' Aphorizon `. 2.697 Surface Tension - Free energy in a liquid surface produced the imbalanced inward pull exerted by underlying molecules upon layer of molecules at the surface. by the

2.698 Surface Waste - That portion of the irrigation water which has been applied to crops and appears at the lower levels of the irrigated areas on the surface, not having been absorbed or evaporated as it passes over the irrigated land. Also called field waste. 2.699 Surface the soil. Water Water stored on or flowing over the surface of

2.700 Swamp - An area saturated with water through out the year but with the surface of the soil usually not deeply submerged. Usually characterized by free or shrub vegetation.; 2.701 Swelling ( Soil ) - Physical expanding of the soil mass, usually caused by anincrease in moisture content in an expanding type clay. 62

IS:11077-1984 2.702 Symbiosis dissimilar organisms, The living together in intimated the cohabitatron being mutually association beneficial. of two

2.703 Symmetry Concentration - That quantity of cations ( or anions ) equivalent to the exchange capacity of a soil. For example, if the cation-exchange capacity of a soil is 10 meq/lOO g of soil, then one symmetry concentration is 10 meq of any cation. NOTE - meq = milli-equivalent. 2.704 Symmetry Value - The percentage of the adsorbed or released when one symmetry concentration of another one is added. T 2.705 Tank ( Earth ) An excavation for impounding water.

2.706 Tankage - Fertilizer prepared out of the meat and bone products of carcasses of animals slaughtered or which have died of natural causes. 2.707 Tensiometer - A device water is heldin the soil. 2.708 Tension distance. Gradient to measure in soil the tension with moisture tension which with

Change

2.709 Terminal Velocity - Final steady state velocity of fall for rain drops or sprinkler discharge drops. 2.710 Thermal Analysis ( Differential Thermal Analysis ) - A method of analyzing a soil sample for constituents, based on a differential rate of heating of the unknown and standard samples when a uniform source of heat is applied. 2.711 Tight Soil - A compact, relatively impervious soil ( or subsoil ) which may or may not be plastic. and tenacious

2.712 Tile Drain - Concrete or ceramic pipe placed at suitable depths and spacings in the soil or subsoil to provide water outlets from the soil. - Land drainage 2.713 Tile Drainage lines laid at a specified depth and grade. by means of a series of tile

2.714 Tile Drainage System - Drainage system consisting of a The laterals remove drainage outlet tile main, submain and laterals. free water from the soil and the submains and main convey water to the outlet. between two drain tiles through which 2.715 Tile Joint -Opening water from the surrounding soil flows. ( See crack width ). 2.716 Tile Outlet Point of discharge of a tile drain system. 63

IS:11077 2.711 Till

- 1984

a) Unstratified glacial drift deposited directly by the ice and consisting of clay, sand gravel, and boulders intermingled in any proportion. b) To plough and prepare for seeding; to seed or cultivate the soil. 2.718 Tilth - The physical condition of soil as related to its ease of tillage fitness as a seedbed, and its impedance to seeding emergence and root penetration.
2.719 Toposequence Topsoil a)

the other, primarily 2.720

- A sequence of related soils that differ, one from because of topography as a soil-formation factor.

The layer of soil moved in cultivation.

See surface soil.

b) The A horizon. c) The AI horizon. d) Persumeably fertile gardens, and lawns. soil material used to topdress roadbanks, force with

2.721 Total Moisture Stress which water is held in the soil.

The osmotic and physical

2.722 Total Suction Head - The vertical head, in metres, from the water level to the centre line of the pump plus velocity head, entrance losses and friction losses in suction line, including foot valves, strainers, and fittings. 2.723 Transpiration Ratio ( Water Requirement ) - Ratio weight of water absorbed and transpired by, the plant to the weight the dry matter produced. Evaporation from soil not included. 2.724 Trapezoidal trapezoidal notch.
Weir -

of of

A liquid

flow measuring

device

with a

2.725 Triangular Weir - A contracted measuring sides that form an angle with its apex downward.

weir notch with

an 2.726 Turbulent Flow - Flow in which the fluid particles movein irregular random manner and for which the head loss in approximately proportional to the second power of the velocity. In pipes, it usually occurs above a Renolds number of 2 000. U 2.727 Unavailable adhesion. Water ( Moisture ) Soil water hel,d so firmly by

64

fS : 11077 - 1984 2.728 Uniform profile. Soil Soil having uniform properties throughout its in is the

2.729 Unit Stream - Amount of water, to each border strip during irrigation.

per metre of width, turned of water in a soil which in which

2.730 Unsaturated Flow - The movement not filled to its field capacity with water.

2.731 Unsaturated Zone - That part of the soil profile voids are not completely filled with water. 2.732 Upper Plastic Limit See liquid V limit.

2.733 Vapour Pressure - The pressure exerted on the liquid surface by its own vapour when vapour and liquid surface are in equilibrium. It may be the pressure exerted by the vapour present. 2.734 Vapour Pressure vapour pressure and that temperature. Deficit - Difference between the existing of a saturated atmosphere at the same dry due to the velocity of a moving fluid, velocity divided by twice the acclerairrigation line

2.735 Velocity Head - Head equal to the square of the mean tion due to gravity.

2.736 Vent - Open, vertical pipe riser from a tile or which allows air to enter or escape from the pipe system. 2.737 Vertical Drain - The disposal inlets or walls into a pervious subsoil. 2.738 Viscous Flow - Flow and flow lines are parallel. in which of excess water

through

surface

the viscous

effects predominate

2.739 Volume Weight ( Apparent Specific Gravity ) - The ratio of the weight of a given volume of dry soil to the weight of an equal volume ( See bulk of water. It signifies the relative compaction and air space. density ). W 2.740 Wasteland--Land of value. A miscellaneous 2.741 Water Application soil root zone to the amount not suitable land type. for producing material or services stored in

Efficiency - The ratio of water of water delivered at the farm. 65

IS : 11077 - 1984
Water Conservation - The physical control, protection, management, and use of water resources in such a way as to maintain crops, grazing and forest lands, vegetal cover, wildlife and water supplies for maximum sustained benefits to people, agriculture, industry, commerce and other segments of the national economy. 2.742

2.743 Water Control ( Soil and Water Conservation ) - Physical control of water by measures such as conservation practices on the land, channel improvements, and installation of structures for water retardation and sediment detention. 2.744 Water Disposal System - Complete system for removing excess water from land with minimum erosion. For sloping land it may include a terrace system, terrace outlet channels, dams, and grassed waterways. For level land it may include only surface drains or both surface and subsurface drains. 2.745 Water Gate - Gate in a fence hung across a ditch, to prevent live stock from passing through during low water and to allow debris to pass through during high water. 2.746 Water Level - Water datum; gauge height; stage. surface; also its elevation above any

2.747 Waterlogging - Addition of excessive water to a soil, resulting in loss of structure of soil and a water stagnating condition. 2.748 Water Resources - Supply of water in a given area or watershed, usually interpreted in terms of availability of surface or underground water. 2.749 Water Rights - Legal rights to water supplies common law, court decisions or statutory enactments. derived from

2.750 Watershed Management - Use of land in a watershed in accordance with predetermined objectives, such as the control of erosion, stream flow, sedimentation, floods, water storage, etc. 2.751 Watershed Planning - Planning the use and treatment of land and water for optimum long range benefit of both the individual farmers and all other residents of a watershed. 2.752 Water-Stable Aggregate - A soil aggregate which is stable to the action of water such as falling drops, or agitation as in wetsieving analysis. 2.753 Water Table - The upper surface of ground water, locus of points in soil water at which the hydraulic pressure is equal to atmospheric pressure. 66

IS : 11077 - I984 2.754 Water Table, Perched - The upper surface of a body of free ground water in a zone of saturation separated by unsaturated material, from an underlying body of ground water in a different zone of saturation. 2.755 Waterway Natural constructed outflow course for the flow~of water. of groundwater and surface

2.756 Water Yield - The total runoff from a watershed.

2.757 Weep Holes - Opening left in retaining walls, aprons, livings or foundations to allow drainage for preventing buildup of pressure. 2.758 Weir Box - Box installed in a channel to provide an enlargement of the waterway velocity of approach to the weir. upstream from a weir thereby reducing the

2.759 Wetness Index - Numerical quantity, usually expressed in percentage, used to designate the relation of preciptitation or annual runoff of a stream or drainage basin for a given year to the coverage over a considerable period of years. 2.760 Wetted Perimeter - Length of the wetted contact of a liquid, measured along a plane at right angles to the direction of flow. 2.761 Wilting Percentage, or Permanent Wilting Percentage The moisture content of soil at which plants wilt and fail to recover turgidity when placed in a dark, humid chamber. The permanent wilting percentage approximately, for practical purposes, the minimum moisture found in soils under plants in the field at depths below the influence of surface evaporation. 2.762 Wilting Point - The percentage of water in soil ( based on dry weight soil ) when permanent wilting of plants occurs. 2.763 Wind Break - Planting of trees, shrubs, -or other vegetation, usually perpendrcular to the principal wind direction, to protect soil, crops, homesteads, roads, etc, against the effects of winds, such as wind erosion and the drifting of soil and snow. 2.764 Wind Erosion - Detachment, transportation, and deposition of soil by the action of wind. The removal and redeposition may be in more or less uniform layers or as localized blowouts and dunes. X 2.765 Xerophytes materials. Plants that grow in or extremely 67 dry soils or soil

2.766

Zeta Potential

-

See electrokinetic

potential.

2.767 Zone of Aeration which the soil or permeable zone. )

Subsurface zone above the water table in rock is not saturated. ( See unsaturated soil and

2.768 Zone of Saturation - Layer of earth (may be both underlying strata ) containing gravitational or free water.

68

