( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS:4561(PartIV)-1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
PART IV Lubricating
Chairman !%nu R. C. TANWN
MtfllbGTS

FOR OIL CANS
SPOUT OIL CANS EDC 63

DETACHABLE

Equipment Sectional Committee,
Representing Railway Board ( Ministry

of Railways

)

MAJ I. J. S. B/&I MAJ M.R. SATCEUDANANDHAM

Ministry

of Defence

(

DC1 )

Heavy Electricals ( India ), Bhopal SHR~ A.K. CIUXTERJEE Heavy Engineering Corporation Limited, Durgapur SHIU A. K. DASGUPTA Tecalemit ( Hind ! Limited, Calcutta SHR~ A. DONALD SXRI S. K. DEY (Alternate ) Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dehra Dun Sxar P. K. GOEL SHRI B. D. GUJRATI (Alternate ) Fritz and Singh Private Limited, Calcutta S~ru GURM~T SINCH SHRI J. P. BANERJEE ( ALcmak ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI S. KRISHXWN Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute SHRI R. K. MIJKHFZRJEE ( CSIR ), Durgapur SHRI L. A. CHATEL~ER ( Al&note) Ashok Leyland Limited, Madras SHRE R. RANA~RISHNAN The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Sindri SHRI B.K. SEN Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SHRI B. R.SINixi SHRI SUBINAL GHOSH ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ek-o&cio Membn ) SHRI M.V. PATANKAR, Director ( Mech Engg) Secrcra~ SHRI B.L. Assistant Director RAINA JSI ( Mech Engg),

(Al-1

Panel for Oil Cans, EDC 63 : P3

SHRI S. P. TRXPATHI

Chief

Inspectorate of General Defence j, Kanpur

Stores

( Ministry

of

SHRT M. L. DHUPAR ( dllrmate to Shri S. P. Tripathi )

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADLJR DELHI NEW

INSTITUTION
SHAH 2XFAR MARG

I6:4561(PartIV)-1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
PART IV DETACHABLE

FOR .OIL CANS
SPOUT OIL CANS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (Part IV ) was adopted by the. Indian Standards Institution on 23 May 1968, after the draft finalized by the Lubricating Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved `by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council.
0.2 Detachable spout oil cans are commonly used for oiling the machine parts through the oiler holes. The oil cans consist of a container made from tinplates. The lid of the oil can is provided with an opening with a sliding cover and the body is provided with a detachable spout. The fixing of the spout to the body is done by means of a union nut. The plunger is held in normal closed position by means of a spring thereby plugging the When in use the top of the plunger is pressed which opens the opening. hole and oil is released and flows out through the spout. 0.3 This standard is being issued in the following five parts: Light duty oil cans, Part I Part II Conical oil cans, Part III Feeding oil cans, Part IV Detachable spout oil cans, and Part V Lever type oil cans. 0.4 While preparing this standard assistance has been derived from Specification No. IND/GS/1251 ` Cans oil, lubricating feeders 200 ml with detachable spout ' issued by the Chief Inspectorate of General Stores, Kanpur, Ministry of Defence, Government of India. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for general purposes.
*Rules for roundingoff numericalvalues
(

for detachable
).

spout oil cans

m&cd

2

ISr4561(PartIV)-1968 2. NOMENCLATURE 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the nomenclature
in Table 1 shall apply. as given in figure

3. MATER& 3.1 The body, lid, handle, guide plate, side plates, boss, knob and spout
shall be manufactured from 0.64 mm nominal Grade ( BC ) conforming to IS : 597-1962*.. thick tmplate, Best Coke thick from

3.2 The bush and stopper shall be made from 0.98 mm nominal tinplate, Best Coke Grade ( BC ) conforming to IS : 597-1962*. 3.3 The LL ' piece, nut, neck and valve rod shall be manufactured electro-tinned low carbon steel.

3.4 The boss handle shall be made from 2.5 mm tinned wire conforming to IS : 280~1962t. 3.5 The spring shall be manufactured forming to IS : 727-1964$. 3.6 The washer shall lx manufactured leather. from hard drawn steel wire confrom 1*6 mm thick curried buffalo

4. CAPACITY

AND DIMENSIONS
1. spout oil cans shall

4.1 The capacity and main dimensions for detachable
be as given in Table

5. MANUFACTURE

5.1 The lid, neck and handle shall be tightly fitted to the body and securely soldered alround. The threads on the neck and the nut shall be fully and accurately formed so as to effect complete engagement.
6. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH

6.1 The oil cans shall be free from splits, cracks, dents, burrs and other
defects. --___
*Specification for black plate for tidning, and tinplate ( pack rolled ) ( revi.rcd). tspecification for mild steel wire for general engineering purposes ( mid for hard drawn carbon steel wire for spring for general ). engineering FurfSpecification

poses( rcuid ).

Isr4!%1(Partrv)-1966 L \,:, 6.2 The
joints joints shall be neatly formed and fuIly pressed. shall be neat, continuous and sound.

Soldering of all

6.3 The washer shall be of uniform thickness, free from cracks, uneven edges and such other defects which may cause leakage qf the 011 through the joint. : 6.4 The release mechanism shall work freely without any undue stiffness or play and shall completely cut off the flow of oil when the knob is not pressed. I 7. DESIGNATION 7.1 The detachable spout oil cans shall be designated by: a) commonly used name, b) capacity, and c) number of this standard; Example: A detachable spout oil can of capacity designated as: Oil Can 250, IS : 4561 ( Part IV ). 8. MARKlNG 250 ml shall be

6.1 Each can shall be clearly stamped on the body with the manufacturer's name, initials or a recognized trade-mark.
8.1.1 The oil cans may also be marked with the IS1 Certification Mark.
use of the ISI CertificationMark is governed by the provisions of the NOTE -The Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) .%ct, and the Rules and Reqlations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality conrrol during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certificatioh. Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9.

PACKING
Fluid conforming to IS : 1153-1957* is one

9.1 Each oil can shall be given a flow coating with any corrosion preventive fluid at room temperature. *Specification for temporarycorrosionpreventive,fluid,hard film, solvent deposited. 5

ISr4561(PartIV)-1968 of the suitable fluids for this purpose. The oil can shall be securely wrapped in waxed paper and then packed in good quality waterproof The packings shall be securely encased in wooden cases paper packings. and shall be marked with the manufacturer's name or trade-mark and the description of the contents. 9.1.1 The wooden cases may also be marked with the ISI Mark ( see Note under 8.1.1). 10. SAMPLING 10.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and the supplier the sampling plan as given in Appendix A shall be followed. For further information reference may be made to IS : 2500 ( Part I )-1963*. 11. TESTS 11.1 Performance Test - The oil can shall be filled with lubricating oil and subjected to practical test consistent with its general use. The oil can shall function satisfactorily and shall show no sign of leakage through any of the joints. II.2 Resilience Test - The valve rod spring and slide plate spring when completely closed and released 200 times in quicksuccession shall show no sign of permanent set. Certification

APPENDIX
SCALE OF SAMPLING A-l. SCALE OF SAMPLING AND CRITERIA

A
FOR CONFORMITY

( CZause 10.1 >

A-l.1 Lot - In any consignment, all the oil cans manufactured from the same material under essentially similar conditions of production shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. A-1.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the lot to the requirements of the specification, tests shall be carried out for each lot separately. The number of oil cans to be selected at random for this purpose shall be in accordance with co1 1 and 2 of Table 2. *Sampling inspectiontables : Part I Inspection 6
by attributes and by count

of defect,

IS : 4561( Part IV ) - 1968
TABLE 2 SAMPLE SIZE AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY

( Clauses A-1.2, NUMBER OF OIL CANS
IN THE LOT Jv

A-1.4 ami 12-2.1 )
SAMPLE .%zE

PmuussraL~ NWER OF DEFECTIVES

n

(1)
up 51 151 to ,, ,, 50 150 300

(2)
5 8 13

(3) 0 1 1

500 301 501 aid above

32"

2 3

A-l.3 The oil cans for the testing shall be selected at random from the lot. In order to ensure the randomness of selection, random number tables shall be used. In case such tables are not available, the following procedure for selection may be adopted: Starting from any oil can in the lot, count them in one order as 1, 2, 3, . . . . . . . . , up to r and so on, where r is the integral part of N/n ( Jv being the lot size and n the sample size ). Every rth oil can thus counted shall be selected to constitute the sample. A-1.4 When the oil cans for the sample are to be selected from the packaged cases, a suitable number of cases ( not less than 20 percent of the total cases in the lot subject to a minimum of 2 cases ) shall be first chosen at random. From each of the cases so chosen, an approximately equal number of cans shall be picked up from different parts so as to obtain the required number of cans for the sample as specified in co1 2 of Table 2. A-2. NUMBER A-2.1
capacity

OF TESTS

AND CRITERIA

FOR

CONFORMITY

The oil cans selected according to A-l.2 shall be examined for and dimensions ( see 4 ), manufacture ( see 5 ), workmanship and finish ( see 6 ), and performance test ( see 11.1 ). The lot shall be considered as having satisfied the requirements of the standard, if the number of cans failing to meet the requirements for any one or more of the characteristics, is less than or equal to the permissible number of defectives given in co1 3 of Table 2.

