Indian Standard

1s : 4343 - 1983 ( Reaffirmed 2003 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TREATMENT OF WATER FOR HIGH PRESSURE BOILERS (

First Revision

)

Second Reprint AUGUST

1992

UQC

621.187.12:621.181.987:006.76

BUREAU

OF

JNDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

1s : 4343 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TREATMENT OF WATER FOR HIGH PRESSURE BOILERS

( First Revision
Boiler Water Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI P. C. D. G. SAMUEL Members Madras Refineries

) CDC 57

Representing Ltd, Madras

SHRI J. N. BHOWMIK West Bengal State Electricity Board, Calcutta SHRI A.K. SANTRA(A~&C) Delta Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SRRI D. CHATTERJEE DIREOTOR ( CM ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DEPUTY RDSO, LUCKNOW ASSISTANT C WEMIST & METALLURGIST, WR, BOMBAY ( Alternate ) Industrial and Agricultural DR N. DEVARAJ~N Engineering Co ( Bombay ) Ltd, Bombay SERI DEV RAJ Power Engineers Training Society, New Delhi Ministry of Industry ( Department of Industrial SHRI S. C. DEY Development ), New Delhi SHRI SHOMNATR GHOSH Jai Guru Engineering Co ( India ), Calcutta SURI ANANDAMAY GROSH ( Alternate ) DR .4. K. GUPTA Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd, Durgapur SRRI A. K. SEN~UPTA ( Alternate ) The Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, SHRI G. T. JADEJA Bombay . SHRI G. M. RAWAL ( Alternafe ), Central ElectricitpAuthority, New Delhi SHRI J. JRA Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi DR V. M. KELKAR SHRI G. L. RAJANI ( Afternate ) Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore SHRI K. R. KRISHNASWAMY SRRI P. S. RAJALAKSHMI ( Alternate ) Central Electrochemical Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI N. KRITHIVASAN Karaikudi SRRI T. M. BALASUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate ) Chemical Consultants, Madras SHRI S. MAHADEVAN SHRI C; S. RAQHAVAN ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyrirht 1983 OF INDIAN STANDARDS

BUREAU

Tbii publication is protected under the Indian Coplrighl Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the onblisher shall be deemed to be an infrin&ment of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 4343- 1983
( Continued from page 1 ) hh-mbers Representing

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR P. K. MATHUR Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Kyderabad SHILIR. NATAXA JAH SHRI T. R. NAOARAJAN (,&mate I ) Drc A. PRABHAXAI~ RAO ( Alternate II ) Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. NATABAJAN Src~r SUBASH VERF~A ( Altirnnle ) National Thermal Power Corporation SHRI RAM Gop.4~ New Delhi SIIRI R. K. DWIVEDI ( Alternate ) Ion Exchange ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. RAMACHANU~AN SHRI S. CHANI~RASXKHAR (. Alternate ) The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India DR S. K. ROY Calcutta Projects & Development India Ltd, Sindri DR v. K. SETH Development Consultants Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHHI S. K. SHOME SHRI R. N. BANERJEE ( Alterna!c ) Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SI~RI D, P. SlNCH SHILI K. B. CHHABRA ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SK&I G. P. Ssc~ S~nr A. P. SINKA ( Alfernatc ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHIZI S. K. MATHUR, Head ( Chem ) Sccrctary SRRI A. K. BAHL Assistant Director ( Chem ), BIS

Ltd.

Ltd,

2

IS : 4343 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TREATMENT OF WATER FOR HIGH PRESSURE BOILERS

( First Revision
0. 0.1 This FOREWORD

)

,Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Star&ards Institution on 7 January 1983, after the draft finalized by the Boiler Water Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 The terms low, medium, and high, used *with pressure in boiler However, it is customary to call practice, are not definite but relative. those' boilers which operate at pressures below 2.0 MN/m2 ( 20 kg/cm2 ) as low pressure boilers; those working between 2.0 and 5.9 MN/m2 ( 20 and 60 kg/cm2 ) as medium pressure boilers; and those operating at pressures above 5.9 MN/m2 ( 60 kg/cm2 ) as high pressure boilers. 0.3 The treatment of water for low pressure boilers, is given i? IS : 16801982*, which, though mainly prepared for the guidance of operation of low pressure boilers, is also applied to the operation of. medium pressure boilers with the conditions given for them where necessary. The procedures laid down in this code are for. general guidance of high pressure boilers only and each case has to be treated on its own merit, taking into equipinent design and plant and process consideration the plant cycle, requirements. High pressure boilers are not riveted, they are welded and stress relieved. This fact has been one of the guiding considerations in formulating this code. 0.4 Earlier version of this code which was published in 1967, covered boilers operating at pressures above 4.1 MN/m2 ( 42 kg/cm2 ). As per the general practice, this revised ,standard has now been made applicable to boilers operating at pressures above 5.9 MN/m2 ( 60 kg/cm'- ). It also includes new sections on: a) Condensate b) Control purification ( Jet 3.2 ); of solids in boiler water ( see 4.3 ); of concentration
tfeatment

*Code.of practice for ( third revision ).

of water for low and medium pressure land boilers

3

IS : 4343 - 1983 c) Protectidn of idle boilers ( see 5 ); and boilers during condenser tube

d) Care of high pressure drum-type leakage ( see 6 ).

However, chemical compositions of feed water, boiler water and condensate for water-tube boilers have not been given in this standard. These are given In IS : 10496-1983* along with recommendation for the application of the limits. Characteristics of water for on& through boilers have also been gi+en in that standard. 0.5 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from BS 2486 : 1978 `Recommedations for treatment of water for land boilers', issued by the British Standards Institution.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code deals with the chemical methods of attaining the conditions to be aimed at in the water side of boilers operating at pressures above 5.9 MN/m2 ( 60 kg/cm2 ) at the drum. 2. OBJECT OF TREATMENT

2.1 The chief object of treatment is to prevent corrosion of the boiler and fittings. For this purpose the composition of feed water, boiler water and condensate are maintained as given in IS : 10496-1983*. The water used for make up- has to be of a very high purity, introducing as few harmful impurities in the feed as practicable. In most cases, the return condensate is the bulk of feed water and the make up is obtained from evaporated water or demineralized water. Thus it is free from any dissolved solids and the question of scale formation does not arise. 3. METHODS OF TREATMENT the make up is obtained from the following

3.1. As stated in 2.1, alternative sources:

a) Condensate OY Evaporated Water - Care shall be taken that it is free from oil. If any oil is present it shall be removed with the help of special oil-removal plants. The water shall be sufficiently alkaline, # being above 8.5. If necessary an alkali is added to obtain this condition. It should.contain very little silica. If the make up is obtained from evaporated water, and if it is softened by the lime-soda process before evaporation, addition of magnesium hydroxide or magnesium oxide along with softening chemicals would remove silica.
*Specification for feed water, boiler water

and condensatefor high pressure boilers.

4

IS : 4343 b) Demineralized 3.2 Condensate or Deionized Water With silica removal

- 1983

Purification

3.2.1 Condensate purification is a means of recovering contaminated condensate for re-use as feed water. Otherwise, it may have to be discarded and replaced by treated make-up water at extra expense. The principal sources of contaminatton are as follows:

4

During commissioning and early operation of a boiler plant the condensate is usually contaminated with, mill scaIe and other debris which increases the risk of corrosion of the tubes in a water-tube boiler. In a once-through boiler they may lead to abnormal prevsure drops and unacceptable contamination of the steam. Silica can also be particularly troublesome during the period and the commissioning may be delayed by excessive demands for water brought about by the large amount of blowdown required to limit the levels of silica in boiler water and steam. Condensate is often contaminated for a period of several hours after start-up following an overnight or weekend shut-down and it may be necessary to reject such condensate from the system with a consequent increase in demand on the water supply. Some contamination of condensate by products of corrosion of the materials of construction occurs during normal operation and, even if other contamination is absent, purification plant may be necessary to meet the highest standards for chemical. quality of feed water. Where steam is used for industrial process heating and is recovered as condensate, it may be contaminated by untreated water Precautions or by chemicals used in the `industrial process. should be taken to prevent these contaminated condensates being returned to the boiler plant without treatment. Wherever possible such contamination of condensate should be prevented at source.

b)

cl

4

3.2.1.1 The decision to install condensate purification plant and the capacity and type of equipment depend upon the design, duty and feed water specifications of the' individual boi!er plant, and comparative costs. 3.2.1.2 When the condensate contains more than a trace of impurity it may be more economical to rerurn it up-stream of the make-up water treatment plant rather than to install a separate plant to purify the condensate if the ionic load permits. 3.2.1.3 condensate If economic an automatic consideratiom instrument 5 favour partial should be used rejection of the to monitor the

IS : 4343 - 1983 contamination and operate the rejection or recovery devices in accordance with the varying quality of the condensate. 3.2.2 Copdensate Polishing - A plant is often provided for purification of slightly contaminated condensate that forms the major part of the feed to high pressure boilers. Such removal of traces of impurities, usually iron and copper, is referred to as `condensate polishing'. This provision is of particular importance with once-through boilers and where condensate is recovered from industrial processes or heating. 3.2.2.1 Mixed bed ion-exchange, preferably externally regenerated to avoid contamination by regenerants, is an.essential part of condensate polishing. It may be preceded by integral or separate cation exchange, with or without a filtration stage. Several types of filters have been used successfully, including precoat filters, paper cartridge filters and fibrewound candles. Magnetic separators have also been used. 3.2.2.2 The purpose of the filter is to reduce the quantity of suspended solids reaching the iron-exchange units and hence lower the risk of fouling the resins. The integral or separate cation exchange unit also protects the mixed. bed resins by removing a proportion of the suspended solids and, by reducing the cationic load to the mixed beds, helps to ensure that the highest quality of purified condenstate is obtained. The cation resin may be used either in the hydrogen or in the ammonia form; the former gives greater purity but the latter may be cheaper to operate in some cases. 3.2.2.3 Two other system have also been successfullymxed beds alone and filters precoated with expendaWe powdered or'microbead resins, installed either alone or as a component of the condensate polishing plant. 3.2.3 Condensate Contamination by Coo&g Water - Entry of cooling water into the steam and condensate system is a common cause of contamination of condensate. The cooling water may be fresh, brackish or sea water from once-through cooling systems, or treated water from a circulating evaporative cooling system in which dissolved solids have concentrated. 3.2.3.X Condensates contaminated in this manner may usually be purified by treatment in a plant similar to that used for treatment of makeup water or, if the proportion of condensate is small, by adding the condensate to the raw water going to the make-up water treatment plant. 3.2.4 C&&nsatc Contamitration by Oil - Every effort should be made to aviod contammation of feed water by oil, if necessary by rejecting oily condensate. 6

IS : 4343 - 1983 3.2.4.1 Vegetable oils introduced into alkaline boiler water are usually converted into soaps that can rapidly form a stable foam on the, surface of the boiler water and may lead to severe contamination of the steam. Where this risk exists, continuous addition of an antifoam is prudent even when contamination is not apparent. 3.2.4.2 Mineral oil introduced&to the boiler may form non-wettable films on heat transfer surfaces and interfere with the detachmentqf steam bubbles so that the surfaces are inadequately cooled by the boiler water. As a consequence severe corrosion or failure of such surfaces may occur. 3.2.4.3 If sludge in a boiler absorbs oil it may become less mobile and Similar obstruction may occur in condensate lines obstruct circulation. and steam traps owing to the presence of oil, which is carried forward with the steam. 3.2.4.4 Various treatment processes are available for substantially removing small amounts of oil in condensate. Some of these processes are: Coagulation, flocculation and sedimentation in alkaline conditions in a sludge-blanket clarification plant followed by filtration through an anthracite filter, is capable of handling the greatest variations in oil contamination, Conventional coagulation and flocculation in a sedimentation plant, followed by anthracite filter, in alkaline conditions filtration through an

Absorption of the oil by a pre-coat of aluminium hydroxide or ferric hydroxide upon a filter bed of anthracite or sand is capable of handling large flow rates at low levels of contamination, Absorption onto an expendable fixed bed of activated substantially removes low levels, 1 to 2 mg/l, of oil. carbon

Filtration and absorption by a pre-coat of diatomaceous earth upon a filter candle is suitable for small flow rates and low levels, for example, 5 mg/l, of oil contamination. 3.2i4.5 The choice of treatment depends upon the amount of contamination, the type of oil and the amount and temperature of the conIt is difficult to measure accurately small condensate to be treated. centrations of oil in water. It is recommeded that treatment to remove Oil should reduce it to a level- that is not detectable by the method described in IS : 3025-1964*.
*Methods of sampling and test ( physical and chemical ) for water used in industry.

7

IS:

4343-

1983

3.2.4.6 Each case needs individual consideration; but as a general guide methods that use diatomaceous earth or sand filtration may not be suitable, if a feed water low silica content is required; and an anthracite filter bed should be used; methods based on continuous coagulation may be unsuitable where feed water of low dissolved solids content is required, unless the purified condensate is subsequently treated in a demineralizing plant.

of

3.3 The water obtained in 3.1 is mechanically de-aerated to remove air and dissolved gases. For water to be used for boilers operating above 5.9. MN/m2 ( 60 kg/cm2 ) a high degree of removal of oxygen should be attained; dissolved oxygen should preferably be less than 0.005 mgjl in the feed. 3.4 The to 3.4.3. de-aerated and degassed water is conditioned `as given in 3.4.1

3.4.1 For the removal of traces of oxygen dissolved in the water, a suitable amine is used. Sodium sulphite, which is used in low and medium pressure boilers is unsuitable for use in high pressure boilers as it decomposes at high temperatures to produce sulphur dioxide or sodium The amine used generally is aulph.?de or both, which are corrosive. hydrazine. It reacts with oxygen from the water to form nitrogen and Thus neither the total solids are increased nor any corrosive water. substances produced in the boiler. 3.4.1.1 At higher temperatures in the boiler, hydrazine decomposes Ammonia and hydrazine being volatile, a into ammonia and nitrogen. portion of these two substances returns to the condensate. This makes the condensate alkaline and protects the condenser line from corrosion. 3.4.2 Phosphate is added to the boiler water in the drum to ensure the removal of any hardness-causing salts that might have accidentally found access to the feed water. 3.4.3 A certain amount of alkali is added to maintain the desired The alkali to be used may be ,amines alkalinity in the boiler feed water. or ammonia. A volatile amine such as cyclohexylamine or morpholine Amines make the condensate `alkaline. also may be added. 4. CONTROL

OF TREATMENT

4.1 Control of treatment is effected by examining feed water, boiler water, Feed water is examined for hardness, dissolved steam .and condensate. oxygen, silica, hyd,razine, PH, iron, copper, oil, conductivity,and oxygen consumed in 4 hours. Boiler water is examined for pH, hardness, caustic alkalinit.y, dissolved solids, silica, phosphates, chlorides, and hydrazine. Condensate should be tested for pH, hardness, oil, silicas ammonia, sodium, dissolved oxygen and iron and copper, and demineralized water should also be tested for PH, silica and hardness from time to time.
8

IS : 4343 - `1983 4.2 In some modern high pressure boiler plants, instruments are fitted in the condensate line, feed system and stream lines which indicate and record conductivity, PII value and dissolved oxygen in the feed water; conductivity, and dissolved oxygen in condensate; and conductivity, and sodium in steam. These are often provided with warning alarms set at desired values. These aids are valuable in the operation of the boiler plant. 4.3 Control of Concentration of Soilds in Boiler Water

4.3.1 When a water containing dissloved impurities is boiled and the vapour ( steam ) is driven off, most of the salts remain and concentrate in the diminishing bulk of water; thus the dissolved solids content increases. If the evaporation is continued some of the impurities come out of solution as scale or as suspended solids. These particular impurities will cease to concentrate as dissolved solids, but the suspended solids so formed concentrate. 4.3.1.1 In boiler design it is difficult to prevent the entrainment of small amounts of boiler water with the steam though this can be greatly limited. This entrainment normaIIy increases with continuing concentration of dissolved and suspended solids and alkalinity. In order to limit the amount of solids in the steam it is necessary to control the concentrations of dissolved and suspended solids in the boiler water. At pressures greater than 3.9 MN/m2 ( 40 kg/cm* ) some solids have a significant solubility in steam. 4.3.1.2 In practice one or several impurities in the boiler feed water may be critical with respect to their concentration in the boiler water. The following are examples: a) The level of dissolved steam purity. solids should be restricted to maintain

b) The silica content may have to be restricted to limit the level of silica in the steam or the formation of silica scales in the boiler. c) In high pressure boilers the limited to minimize corrosion. level of chloride ion should be

d) The level of alkalinity should be limited purity and minimize caustic attack.

to maintain

steam

e) The level of suspended solids should be restricted to below that at which adherent deposits form, or steam purity or circulation are impaired. 9

IS:4343 - 1983 4.3.1.3 The limits for these and other critical constituents are given In certain special cases of design or operation limiin IS : 10496-1983*. tations may have to be imposed that are not covered by that standard; it is then normal for a boiler manufacturer to recommend values for the In general these `limits may be set from exmaximum concentration. Once set they should be scrupulously perience or determined by trial. observed. 4.3.2 Blowdown -- Blowdown may be continuous or intermittent, or a combination of both. It may be manually or automatically controlled.
blowdown is a continuous 4.3.`2.1 Continuous blowdown - Continuous removal of boiler water controlled by a specially designed adjustable valve or by an orifice plate. The installation of heat recovery equipment niay be economically justified. Suspended solids may block or erode the adjustable valve or orifice plate and continuous blowdown is, therefore, usually limited to the control of dissolved solids. Additional manual blowdown is necessary to control suspended solids and prevent the build-up of sludge. 4.3.2.2 Intemittent Blowdown Intermittent blowdown may be effected by specially designed valves either operated by hand or automatically controlled, for example,, by timers, feed water flow or conWhere automatic valves are installed the manual blowdown ductivity. valve shall be operated at intervals to ensure that the latter is clear. It should be noted that the most effective and economic use of all types of intermittent blowdown valves is achieved by frequent full-open operation for short periods rather than extended use at infrequent intervals. It is usually not practicable to recover waste heat from infrequent intermittent blowdown. 5. PROTECTION

OF IDLE

BOILERS

5.1 Neglect

of boilers during standing periods frequently,leads to serious corrosion in the steam and water spaces from which further attack may develop during susbsequent working periods. Various methods of corrosion protection may be applied although the choice of method usually depends upon the length of time for which the boiler is to be stored. Procedures for the protection of the fire-side of an idle boiler are outside the scope of this standard. 5.2 Stqrage Overnight or for a Few Days - It is usually sufficient to allow the boiler to stand-by with the water conditions recommended for normal steaming provided these are maintained during the idle period. Any feed water that is added susbsequently should have been adequately *Specification for feed water, boiler water and condensate for high pressure-boilers. 10

IS : 4343 - 1983 The space above the water should preferably be kept filled de-aerated. Special with steam or nitrogen at a pressure great& than atmospheric. precautions may have to be taken to protect superheaters and expert advice should be sought. 5.3 Storage for Extended Periods

5.3.1 H'et Method - If the boiler is likely to be out of service for more than a few days, but. may be needed for steaming at short notice, it should be completely filled with correctly conditioned water. Nondrainable superheaters should be filled only with condensate.quality water treated with volatile chemicals such as hydrazine or ammonia. It is most important that .pockets of air are not allowed to remain in the boiler and there should be no leakage. 5.3.1.1 When completely filling the boiler with water, su@cient ammonia and hydrazine should be added t6 combine with the dissolved oxygen and leave an excess of 100 mg/l to 200 mg/l hydrazine. In addition, sufficient ammonia should be added to ensure that a )JH value of 9.5 to 10 is maintained. Distribution of these chemicals throughout the bulk of the water should be ensured by filling with a premixed solution or by use of a circulating pump or by heating the boiler when psrtially filled and then topping up with conditioned water. 5.3.1.2 It is recommended that the aircock on the drum or shell should be connected to a surge tank located at a higher level. This will compensate for any volumetric change and ensure a positive pressure, thus preventing admission of oxygen to the unit. This tank should be covered and kept dosed with oxygen scavenger and alkali. Alternatively, the pressure on the system should be-maintained by-using & small pump. 5.3.1.3 The oxygen scavenger reserve and th?PH value or alkalinity should be checked regularly and additiona treatment chemicals may have to be added at intervals and distributed t6 inaintain the treatment levels within the recommended `range. Any additional water added to the boiler, should contain the -appl-opriate Gltantities of treatment chemicals. 5.3.1.4 When required for service, the boiler shouId be drained down to normal working level before firing. Phosphate or other conditioning reserves should be re-established as soon as possible. 5.3.1.5 This method of storage is not recommended if there is any likelihood of frost damage occurring, Wet storage is not recommended for periods longer than two to three months. It also tends to promote condensation of atmospheric moisture and hence corrosion, in the fluegas side; where this proves troublesome dry storage is to be preferred. 11

IS : 4343 -2983 5.3.2 Dry Method - When a boiler is not likely to be required for a long period it is advisable to empty it compIetely and dry it thoroughly. Particular attention should be paid to any parts that are not self-draining. Where possible the boiler should be blown through with a stream of warm air to make sure that all surfaces are completely dry. Any deposits should be removed, since they tend to retain moisture. To avoid the ingress of moisture into the boiler it is advisable to remove and blank-off all connectiops.
el or quick lime should be placed inside 5.3.2.1 Trays of silica the boiler drum or shell, whit $1 should then be sealed. A typical quantity in practice is 1'*5' kg/ma. Inspections should be made at intervals, initially after one week, .and the desiccant dried or replaced as necessary. The `trays and their contents: should be removed before the boiler is restored to service. 6. CARE OF HIGH PRESStJRB

CONDENSER

DRUM TYPE `BOILER DURING TUBE, LEAKAGE

6.1~ Boiler water regime requires careful monitoring control and adjustThe ment whenever condenser tube leakage is suspected or `confirmed. condenser tube leakage brings large amount.of chlorides into i the condensate and, consequently into the feed water. This is more predominant in sea water cooled power stations where inagnesium `chloride and other These are hardness salts forms of chlorides can leak in large quantities. and acid forming in nature due to hydrolysis reaction at high temper; Whenever the feed water gets contaminated by the cooling ature. water leakage from'the condenser the following changes take place in the boiler water in. the drum:
a) &H of ,boiler water drops rapidly of condenser leakage salts. due to the acid forming nature

b) The phosphate, level of,bpiler water drops down very low. This is, due to consumption of the residual phosphate by its reaction .with hardness in leakage salts to form sludge constituents. c) Conductivity of boiler water rises due to increasing salt concentration brought about by condenser leak. 6.2 ,Under these,circumstances;,experience indicates accelerated corrosion of boiler tubes and consequent tube failures can be caused even if such In such a situation, the followa operation is limited only to a few hours. It should be realised that opera: ing course of action is recommended. tion of the boiler with a condenser leak requires extreme care.and judgement. Failure to follow instructions would lead to tube failure at, a later stage. a) Immediately start chemical .:,injection pumps to maintain phosphate and pH conditions ,in boiler water as below: excess

IS:4343Cliaraclcrislic

1983

Limits Recommended ~~~_~~~~_h~_~~-~_~-~ For boiler pressure For hoiler pressure 6.0 to 9.8 MN/m2 9.9 MN/m8 ( in ( in the clrum ) the drum ) and above 5 to 40 9.1 to 10.4 5 to 20 9.1 to 10.1

Pllosphatcs mg/l fiH value

( as PO4 ),

The phosphate and pH measurements in boiler water should be made every 30 minutes and the phosphate pump should be operated based on the measurements to maintain the above regime. This would require, depending on the severity of tube leakage, extra dosage of phosphate. This can be done either by increased running of the phosphate pump at the maximum capacity or by increasing the strength of the phosphate solution charged to the tank. Some operators rely on dosing caustic soda ( NaOH ) in boiler drum under such conditions torestore quickly the boiler waterpH. Caustic soda dosing should be done with utmost care, as concentration of free hydroxide may lead to corrosion of boiler tubes. In such cases caustic and phosphate ( preferably disodium phosphate ) shall be combinedly dozed together ,and the PH and phosphate content shall be closely monitored such that PH for the corresponding phosphate residual does not fall above the curve ( Fig. 1 j. The region above the curve indicates the presence of free hydroxide.
NOTE -

Operation

above

the

curve,

which

results

in free hydroxide,

is to

be avoided.

1~) Increase blow down to the extent possible in boiler within the limits given below: Boiler Pressures ( in the Drum ), MN/m2 6.0-9.8 9-9-l I.8 11.9 and above c) Monitor the following at an interval either from

to keep the conductivity

Specijc Electrical Conductiuio at 25"C, Microsiemens/cm 400 200 100 of every 30 minutes. ejector or from hot well for

i) Condensate sample conductivity. ii) Boiler water sample

for PH, phosphate, 13

and conductivity.

IS : 4343 - 1983 d) Isolate the condenser section one by one for locating the damaged section and isolate and repair the damaged section. ( If damaged condenser section connot be isolated and repaired, shut down the unit. ) e) Do not continue to operate the unit if FH of boiler water cannot be maintained above 8.0 or the conductivity as given 6.2(b). f) Avoid unnecessary use of desuperheater spray reheat temperature to fall or by reducing load. by permitting

g) If the unit is shut down-for condenser repair, drain and flush the system to the extent possible and establish wet lay-up of boiler unit and auxiliary equipment during condenser repair.

PHOSPHATES FIIJ. 1

(AS

PQ&mg/l'--

RECOW,S.NDED COORDINATED PHOSPHATE CURVE

14

R,UREAU
Headquerters :

OF

INWAd

ST,ANDA,,Rq/S

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones

: 331 01 31
331 13 75

Telegrams

: Manaksansths

Regional Offices :
Central
l

(Common to all Office3 Telephone 331 01 31 i 333: ;e3 :26 21843 41 29 16 8 32 92 95

: Marrak Bhavan. 9. Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg.
l

Eastern Northern Southern Western

l

t

NEW DELHI 110002 1114 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. V.I.P. Road,.Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANtXGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalava. E9 MIDC. Marol. Andheri (East). . ~.. BOMBAYhg0093 380001

Brunch Offices :

: Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD Road. BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th F&r, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003

2 63 48 39 49 56 564021 53627 2 87 05 _ 8-71 19 96 33177 231083 63471 21 88 76

Plot No. 82183, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 761002 Kalai Kathir Building, 8/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking Centre, N.H. IV, N.I.T., FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road. 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-B-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, ( Nampally Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Nagar, Kanpur Rosa. Plot No. A-9, House No. 561/63, LUCKNOW 226005 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA District Industries Centre Complex. SRINAGAR 190011 Sindhu 800013 Bagh-e-Ali Maidan.

,

'

5 55 07
6 23 05

'
621 04

T. C. No. 14/1421, University P. O., Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034

fnspection Offices (With Sale Point) :
`Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Souare, NAGPUR 440010 institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. PUNE 411005 62 51 71 5 24 35

-

`Sales Office Calcutta is at-5 Chowringhee Approach,
P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY
iS

27 68 00 89 65 28 22 39 71

$ Salesioffice BANGALORE

at Unity Building,

Narasi_mharaja Square.

Reprography

Unit,

BIS,

New Delhi,

India

