RAT Alte IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


WAT ALT чето ent TT ATT HA on 
fore dite четат — ffr ват 
STEHT 1 ATA AASA RATÉ 
( ат GRIT ) 


Concrete Structures for Retaining 
Aqueous Liquids — Code of Practice 
Part 1 General Requirements 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.10; 91.010.30; 91.080.40 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH MT, 4% faccfl — 110002 


— ám МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 9 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


The design and construction methods in reinforced concrete and pre-stressed concrete structures for retaining 
aqueous liquids are influenced by the prevailing construction practices, the physical properties of the materials 
and the climatic condition. To lay down uniform requirements of structures for the retaining liquids giving due 
consideration to the above mentioned factors, this standard has been published in four parts. The other parts in 
the series are: 


Part 2 Plain and reinforced concrete 
Part 3 Prestressed concrete 
Part 4 Design tables 


This standard was first published in 1965 and subsequently revised in 2009. The present revision has been 
brought out with a view to keeping abreast with the rapid development in the field of construction technology and 
concrete design and also to bring further modifications in the light of experience gained while applying the earlier 
version of this standard. In this revision, the title of the standard has been modified from ‘Concrete structures for 
storage of liquids — Code of practice: Part 1 General requirements’ to ‘Concrete structures for retaining aqueous 
liquids — Code of practice: Part 1 General requirements’ for better representation of the contents of the revised 
standard. 


While the common methods of design and construction have been covered in this standard, for design of structures 
of special forms, or in unusual circumstances, special literature may be referred to or special systems of design 
and construction may be permitted on production of satisfactory evidence regarding their adequacy and safety by 
analysis or test or by both. 


In this standard it has been assumed that the design of liquid retaining structures, whether of plain, reinforced or 
pre-stressed concrete is entrusted to a qualified engineer and that the execution of the work is carried out under the 
direction of a qualified and experienced engineer. 


The concrete used in liquid retaining structures should have low permeability. This is important not only for its 
direct effect on leakage but also because it is one of the main factors influencing durability, resistance to leaching, 
chemical attack, erosion, abrasion and frost damage; and the protection from corrosion of embedded steel. The 
standard, therefore, incorporates provisions in design and construction to take care of this aspect. 


The requirements of IS 456 : 2000 ‘Plain and reinforced concrete — Code of practice (fourth revision)’ and 
IS 1343 : 2012 ‘Prestressed concrete — Code of practice (second revision)’, in so far as they apply, shall be deemed 
to form part of this standard except where otherwise laid down in this standard. For long term performance of 
the structure, use of dense, nearly impermeable and durable concrete, adequate concrete cover without macro 
defects in cover concrete, proper detailing practices, control of cracking, effective quality assurance measures in 
line with IS 456 and good construction practices particularly in relation to construction joints should be ensured. 
Designer should take appropriate measures to the need for chemical resistance while dealing with liquids or 
sewage/effluents. 


Following are the significant modifications incorporated in this revision: 


a) Scope and provisions of the standard have been updated to reflect the applicability of the standard to 
concrete structures retaining all aqueous liquids. 

b) Design recommendations are generally applicable to the storage/retaining of aqueous liquids having 
temperature not exceeding 50 ?C, and the same has been indicated. 


c) Clause on terminology giving definitions of the various terms has been added. 


d) Clause on ‘Exposure conditions’ has been modified. Parts of the structure retaining the liquid or enclosing 
the space above the liquid shall be now considered as subject to at least ‘severe’ condition as per IS 456. 
The provision of assuming the underside of the roof to be exposed to ‘very severe’ condition, for tank 
retaining chlorinated water, has been added. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


CONCRETE STRUCTURES FOR RETAINING 
AQUEOUS LIQUIDS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) lays down general 
requirements for the design and construction of 
plain, reinforced or pre-stressed concrete structures, 
intended for storage or retaining of aqueous liquids. 
A concrete structure or member may function as liquid 
retaining, when the amount of liquid permeating 
through its thickness, under hydraulic gradient, is 
practically negligible. 


The recommendations are generally applicable to the 
storage/retaining of aqueous liquids having temperature 
not exceeding 50 °C and no detrimental action on 
concrete and steel or where sufficient precautions have 
been taken to ensure protection of concrete and steel 
from damage due to action of such liquids. 


The requirements applicable specifically to plain and 
reinforced concrete and pre-stressed concrete liquid 
retaining structures are covered in IS 3370 (Part 2), and 
IS 3370 (Part 3), respectively. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the requirements for 
concrete structures for storage/retaining of hot liquids, 
hazardous materials and liquids of low viscosity and 
high penetrating power such as petrol, diesel and 
oil. This standard also does not cover dams, pipes, 
pipelines, tunnels and damp proofing of basements. 


This standard does not cover all the requirements of 
pressurised tanks, floating structures and tanks having 
the additional requirement of gas tightness. The 
selection and design of coatings and linings are not 
covered in this standard. 


1.3 The criteria for design of RCC staging for overhead 
water tanks are given in IS 11682. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated at Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Blinding Layer— A base layer of lean concrete 
that is laid on the ground to provide a clean, level and 
dry working surface, sealing in the underlying material 
and levelling off the surface. 


3.2 Capacity — The net volume of liquid, that the 
structure can hold between the full supply level (FSL) 
and the lowest supply level (LSL) that is, the level 
of the lip of the outlet. Gross capacity includes dead 
storage as well as the quantity of the liquid which may 
occupy space above FSL, if so specified for design 
considerations. 


3.3 Contraction Joint — A cut, partial or full, 
constructed by forming, sawing or grooving inaconcrete 
structure to create a weakened plane to regulate the 
location of crack resulting from dimensional changes 
being restrained. 


3.4 Construction Joint — A joint in the concrete, such 
as between two successive wall lifts, introduced for 
convenience in construction at which special measures 
are taken to achieve subsequent continuity without 
provision for further relative movement. 


3.5 Dead Storage — The volume of liquid in the tank 
below normal outlet level or lowest supply level (LSL). 


3.6 Design Liquid Depth — The full height of the 
storage/retained liquid which shall include freeboard 
zone to account for the rise in liquid for the purpose of 
design or process, whichever is higher. 


3.7 Freeboard — The space above FSL measured 
as a vertical distance from FSL up to soffit of beam 
supporting the roof slab or dome or the lowest point of 
roof or up to the overflow level. 


3.8 H/t Ratio — The ratio of the liquid head, 
H (in mm) and the thickness, ¢ (in mm) of the liquid 
retaining member. 


3.9 Joint Filler — A compressible, preformed material 
used to fill an expansion joint to prevent the infiltration 
and to provide support for sealants. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.10 Joint Sealant — An impermeable ductile material 
that provide a liquid tight seal by adhesion to the 
concrete throughout the range of movements. 


3.11 Kicker — A small concrete step used at the bottom 
of columns and walls to ensure the correct alignment 
and location of the columns/walls is maintained 
between the floor slabs. 


3.12 Leakage — The flow of liquid through the 
concrete member, under hydraulic gradient, from its 
one face to another. Appearance of only wet patch on 
concrete surface may not constitute as leakage. 


3.13 Lift — Height of concrete between two successive 
horizontal construction joints in a vertical RCC 
member. 


3.14 Liquid Retaining Structure — Structure member 
which prevents percolation or loss of liquid flowing 
through its concrete thickness, such as units of water 
treatment plants, channels and liquid storage structures. 


3.15 Liquid Storage Structure — Structure enclosing 
the liquid on all sides preventing its loss, such as water 
tanks. 


3.16 Screed Layer — A layer of concrete prepared in 
profile (other than form-work or shuttering) to provide 
a firm surface. 


3.17 Shear-friction — The shear transfer across an 
interface, such as construction joint, crack or between 
the concretes cast at different times. 


3.18 Shear Key — An arrangement to allow transfer of 
shear mechanically through an interface, between two 
adjoining concrete parts cast at different times. 


3.19 Stress Raiser — The condition of external restrain 
on a member, which increases internal stress as a result 
of change in strain due to temperature, shrinkage and 
moisture, in concrete. 


3.20 Sympathetic Cracking — Crack produced in 
a concrete member at a location just adjacent to the 
movement joint in the adjoining concrete member. The 
crack opening in first concrete is called as sympathetic 
to the joint movements. 


3.21 Water-bar (Water-stop) — А continuous 
preformed strip of durable impermeable material 
embedded in concrete and anchored on the two sides 
of a joint, designed and constructed such that the 
passage of liquid through the joint is prevented without 
incurring any permanent deformation. 


3.22 Water Path — The most probable path along 
which water can travel under hydraulic gradient. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 The materials used in the construction of liquid 
retaining concrete structures shall conform to 
the requirements given in IS 456 and IS 1343 for 
reinforced concrete and pre-stressed concrete members 
respectively, except where stated otherwise. 


4.2 Aggregates 


Aggregates conforming to IS 383 shall be used. The 
use of porous aggregates, such as slag, crushed over 
burnt brick/tile, bloated clay aggregates and sintered 
fly ash aggregates shall not be allowed for parts of 
structure either in contact with the liquids on any face 
or enclosing the space above the liquid. 


4.3 Reinforcement 


Reinforcement shall conform to the requirements 
given in IS 456. Additionally, galvanized bars or bars 
conforming to IS 13620 and IS 16651 may also be used 
to have additional protection against corrosion. 


4.4 Admixtures 


4.4.1 Mineral Admixtures 


Mineral admixtures, if used, shall conform to the 
requirements given in IS 456. For liquid retaining 
concrete, use of mineral admixtures are advantageous 
as permeability of concrete reduces by using mineral 
admixtures. 


4.4.2 Chemical Admixtures 


Chemical admixtures, if used, shall conform to 
IS 9103. For liquid retaining concrete, use of chemical 
admixtures are advantageous to control water-cement 
ratio, reduce permeability and achieve desired 
workability. 


4.5 Jointing Materials 


Joint fillers, water-bars and joint sealants bars shall 
comply with the requirements given in 12. The jointing 
materials used shall not have any adverse effect on the 
quality of liquid to be stored/retained. 


5 EXPOSURE CONDITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, parts of the structure 
retaining the liquid or enclosing the space above the 
liquid shall be considered as subject to at least ‘severe’ 
condition as per IS 456. In case of members exposed 
to ‘very severe’ or ‘extreme’ conditions, the relevant 
provisions of IS 456 shall apply. 


For structures in which chlorine is dissolved in water 
or break-point chlorination exists, the underside of 
roof shall be assumed to be exposed to ‘very severe’ 
exposure condition, the nascent chlorine being highly 
corrosive to concrete. 


6 CONCRETE 


Provisions given in IS 456 and IS 1343 shall apply 
for reinforced concrete and pre-stressed members 
respectively subject to the following further 
requirements: 


a) The concrete shall conform to Table 1. 


b) The cement content excluding mineral admixtures, 
such as flyash and ground granulated blast furnace 
slag (GGBS), should not be used in excess of 
400 kg/m’, unless special consideration has been 
given in design to the increased risk of cracking 
due to drying shrinkage in thin sections, or to early 
thermal cracking and to increased risk of damage 
due to alkali silica reactions. 

c) Cement plaster, if applied to internal surfaces of 
concrete, should not be treated as an alternative to 
impermeable concrete. 

Table 1 Minimum Cementitious Content, 
Maximum Free Water-cementitious Ratio and 
Minimum Grade of Concrete 


[ Foreword, Clause 6 (a) ] 


SI Concrete Minimum Maximum Minimum 
No. Cementitious Free Water- Grade of 
Content Cementitious Concrete 
kg/m’? Ratio 
D MEE MEM б. 
i) Plain 250 0.50 M 20 
concrete 
ii Reinforced 350 0.45 M30 
concrete 
iii) Prestressed 380 0.40 M 40 
concrete 
NOTES 


1 Cementitious content mentioned in this table is inclusive of mineral 
admixtures mentioned in IS 456 and is irrespective of the grades of 
cement. 


2 For small tanks having gross capacity up to 50 m° at locations where 
there is difficulty in providing M30 grade concrete, the minimum grade 
of concrete may be taken as M25 (with minimum cementitious content 
as 350 kg/m). However, this exception shall not apply in coastal areas, 
or the area where air pollution is high, or liquid retained is aggressive 
like sewage. 


7 DURABILITY 


7.1 The provisions for durability shall be followed as 
specified in IS 456 for plain and reinforced concrete 
structures, and as per IS 1343 for pre-stressed concrete 
structures unless specified otherwise in this standard. 


7.2 Special attention is needed where chlorinated water 
is retained by concrete. Roof members over chlorinated 
water may need protective coating (anti-chlorine 
treatment). Presence of other gases (like, hydrogen 
sulphide) may also require suitable coatings. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


7.3 Nominal Cover to Reinforcement 


The minimum nominal cover to all reinforcement shall 
be as per IS 456 for relevant exposure conditions. 


8 SITE CONDITIONS 


The following siting conditions should be considered 
during the design and construction of the liquid 
retaining structure: 


a) Physical characteristics of soil in which the 
liquid retaining structure may be partly or wholly 
enclosed and also the physical and geological 
features of the supporting foundations such as: 


1) Earth pressure — Allowance should be made 
for the effects of any adverse soil pressure 
on walls, according to the compaction and/or 
surcharge of the soil and the condition of the 
structure during construction and in service. 
No relief shall be given for beneficial soil 
pressure effects on the walls of liquid retaining 
structure in the container full condition. 


2) Settlement and subsidence — Geological 
faults, mining, earthquakes, and existence 
of subsoils of varying bearing capacities 
may give rise to movement or subsidence of 
supporting strata which may result in serious 
cracking of structure. Special considerations 
should be given in the preparation of the 
design, to the possible effect of subsidence 
or movement of the foundation strata for 
example, subdivision of the structure into 
smaller compartments and provision of joints 
to outlet pipes and other fittings. Joints in 
structures in mining subsidence areas will 
need special consideration to provide for extra 
movement. 


b) Chemical properties of the soil and of the ground 
water — Chemical analysis of the soil and ground 
water is essential in cases where injurious soils 
are expected to exist, as concrete structure may 
suffer severe damage in contact with such soils. 
Where concrete is likely to be exposed to sulphate 
attack, requirements specified in IS 456 shall be 
followed. An isolating coat of bituminous or other 
suitable materials may be provided. 


с) Extent of floatation at the site — If in the siting of 
a liquid retaining structure, water-logged ground 
cannot be avoided, the danger of the external 
water pressure shall be carefully guarded against 
by the following: 


1) Designing the structure to resist such pressure 
under empty or partially empty conditions and 
taking precautions to prevent floating (uplift) 
and ensuring stable equilibrium under all 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


conditions of internal and external loads. The 
stability of the structure should be checked 
against uplift using a factor of safety of 1.25. 
Overall uplift force shall be estimated as the 
volume of ground-water displaced by the 
structure. 


Where uplift force acts on unsymmetrical 
structure, the loss of stability may be due 
to tilting or rotation. In such a case, factor 
of safety should be not less than 1.4 against 
rotational stability. 


Consideration should be given to uplift 
force due to water entering the sides of tank 
(a transient condition) as a result of heavy 
rains, even if ground water table may be below 
the tank. 


2) Providing effective drainage to reduce the 
level of external water. 


3) Providing relief valves discharging into the 
liquid retaining structure when the external 
pressure exceeds the internal pressure; this 
arrangement is feasible only in cases when 
the liquid retaining structure is not required 
for the storage of liquids which should not be 
contaminated. 


4) Designing both internal and external faces of 
the walls and floor as water retaining faces, 
where the walls and floors of the liquid 
retaining structure are submerged in water or 
water bearing soils. 


5) Considering the possibility of sudden change 
in ground water table or pore pressure in soil 
or sudden accumulation of water in ground, 
even for small periods due to heavy rains, in 
the design. 


9 CAUSES AND CONTROL OF CRACKING 


9.1 Causes 
9.1.1 Effects of Applied Loads 


Direct or flexural tension in concrete arising from 
applied external service loads, temperature gradients 
due to solar radiation, or retaining the liquids at 
temperatures more than ambient temperature, may 
cause cracking in the concrete. 


9.1.2 Temperature and Moisture Effects 


Changes in either the temperature of the concrete and 
reinforcement or the moisture content of the concrete 
causes dimensional changes which, if resisted internally 
or externally may cause cracking in the concrete. The 
distribution and width of such cracks may be controlled 
by reinforcement, together with the provision of the 
movement joints. 


Heat is evolved as cement hydrates, and the temperature 
will rise for a day or more after casting and then fall. 
Cracking usually occurs at this time, while the concrete 
is still weak. Subsequent lower ambient temperature 
and loss of moisture when the concrete is mature will 
open these cracks although the loss of moisture at the 
surface under external drying conditions is usually 
low. A structure built in the summer but not filled or 
an external structure standing empty will usually be 
subjected to greater drops in temperature than the same 
filled structure. 


9.2 Methods of Control 


9.2.1 Plain concrete liquid retaining structures or 
members may be designed by allowing direct tension 
in plain concrete, the permissible tensile stress for M20 
and M25 concrete being 1.2 N/mm? and 1.3 N/mm’? 
for direct tension and 1.55 N/mm? and 1.75 N/mm? 
for flexural tension respectively. The gross capacity 
of such tanks made of plain concrete shall not exceed 
25 m°. However, nominal reinforcement in accordance 
with the requirements given in IS 456 shall be provided 
for plain concrete structural members. 


9.2.2 The most important factor affecting drying 
shrinkage is the amount of paste (water + cementitious 
matter) per unit of concrete. Water may be reduced 
by use of both plasticizing admixtures and by using 
minimum amount of cementitious material, consistent 
with quality. The concrete mix should have the largest 
practical coarse aggregates (compatible with detailing 
and good workmanship) as this will reduce the cement 
content. To reduce shrinkage, total cementitious content 
should be as low as possible while meeting the strength 
requirements and those given in Table 1. 


9.2.3 Cracking may be controlled by avoiding or 
reducing the gradient of steep changes in temperature 
and moisture of the concrete, especially during early 
ages by, 


a) curing the structure/members for a period not less 
than 14 days. 


b) keeping structures and thin sections below FSL 
damp, during construction. 


c) covering the concrete surface by 
plastic/polyethylene or tarpaulin sheet to protect 
the surface from drying. 


d) reducing the restraints on the free expansion or 
contraction of the structure by providing a sliding 
layer when long walls or slabs are founded at or 
below ground level. 


9.2.4 Structures may be provided with movement joints 
if effective and economic means cannot otherwise be 
taken to avoid unacceptable cracking. 


9.2.5 In making the calculations either for ascertaining 
the expected expansion or contraction or for 
strengthening the concrete section, the coefficient of 
expansion of concrete shall be in accordance with the 
provisions given in IS 456. 


9.2.6 Cracking of concrete can be controlled, to some 
extent, by filling the tank slowly for the first time. The 
rate of filling shall be nearly uniform and not more than 
1.2 m per 24 h. 


9.2.7 Whenever development of cracks or overstressing 
of the concrete in tension cannot be avoided, the 
concrete section should be suitably reinforced. Correct 
placing of reinforcement bars, use of deformed bars, 
closely spaced bars and use of small size bars lead to 
diffused distribution of cracks, and hence are preferred 
practices. 


9.2.8 Crack control in ground supported tanks may be 
done in following two ways: 


а) А combination of external restraint апа 
reinforcement — If along the length of member, 
restraint is continuous, the crack spacing will be 
small and probable crack widths are finer. For 
ground supported tanks, continuous external 
restraint is offered by the friction due to roughness 
between structural member and ground. However, 
such restraint may not be uniform along the 
length and hence, partial internal restraint is to 
be provided by reinforcement. For construction 
without joints, satisfactory control over cracking 
may be obtained by increasing the reinforcement, 
which provides internal restraint. Requirement of 
reinforcement increases as the length increases 
more than 20 m. The reinforcement calculated 
as per the crack width requirements shall be 
provided. 


b) А combination of movement joints and 
reinforcement — To economize reinforcement, 
movement (or partial movement) joints are 
introduced. For joints to accommodate the 
movement, external restraint is to be reduced by 
providing a separation layer between structural 
member and ground support. To allow slip 
between structural layer and supporting material 
below (lean concrete), the top surface of this 
supporting material shall be in plane and smooth, 
which normally is achieved by float finish. 


Usually bottom surface of tank floor is not plane. Floor 
is provided with slopes, pockets and extra thickness at 
different places. All these restrict the possible movement, 
and therefore positions of these features govern the 
locations of the movement joints. For each panel 
between successive movement joints, the bottom surface 
of structural concrete (floor slab) should be plane. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


With introduction of joints, the requirement of 
reinforcement is to be estimated as per 11.3 and 
Annex A of IS 3370 (Part 2). 


9.2.9 Structural Fibres 


Structural fibres, such as steel, may be added to improve 
performance of concrete during the service life with 
respect to the following parameters: 


a) Ductility, 

b) Toughness and impact resistance, 

c) Flexural and tensile strength, 

d) Crack propagation, crack width and spacing, and 
e) Fatigue and post cracking behaviour. 


The designer shall, however, ensure the improvement 
in performance before considering the use of fibres 
in concrete by duly testing or findings based on 
experimental research. 


10 STABILITY OF THE STRUCTURE 


Stability of the structure shall be checked as per the 
provisions of IS 456, except where stated otherwise. 
The equilibrium and safety of structure and parts of it 
against sliding and overturning, especially when the 
structure is founded on a side of long or sloping ground, 
shall also be checked. In combination with earthquake 
induced forces, the resistance to sliding is important for 
sloping terrain. 

A structure subjected to underground water pressure 
shall be designed to resist floatation [as given in 8 (c)] 
and requirements given in 10.1 and 10.2. 


10.1 Overturning 


The stable equilibrium of a structure as a whole 
against overturning shall be ensured so that the 
restoring moment shall not be less than the sum of 
1.4 times the maximum overturning moment due to the 
characteristic dead and imposed load and 1.2 times the 
maximum overturning moment due to the characteristic 
wind/seismic action. Restoring moment due to imposed 
loads shall be ignored. Restoring moment due to earth 
pressure should consider only active earth pressure 
with factor of 1. 


To ensure the safety against overturning, stability shall 
be checked for the load factors for earth pressure, liquid 
load and uplift taken as 1.6, 1.0 and 1.4, respectively. 
Liquid load in tank shall be taken as the most critical 
value between empty to full capacity. 


10.2 Probable Variation in Loads 


To ensure stability at all times, probable variations 
in dead load, liquid load and earth pressure during 
construction, repair or other temporary measures shall 
be taken into account. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


11 DESIGN, DETAILING 
MANSHIP OF JOINTS 


AND WORK 


11.1 The joints should be minimized or avoided, 
as far as possible, in liquid retaining structures. 
Joints are source of weakness and leakages, and 
also need periodic maintenance during the service 
life. The recommendations about movement joints 
(expansion and contraction type) pertain to ground 
supported or underground structures. For elevated 
tanks, movement joints are usually not required as the 
restrains for temperature shrinkage movements are far 
less compared to ground supported tanks. 


Joints are designed to control the occurrence of random 
cracking, which otherwise will require much higher 
amount of reinforcement to control the cracking. 
The positions and details of all the joints proposed 
in a structure, should be checked and specified by 
the designer. The joints shall be placed at accessible 
locations to permit inspection and maintenance as the 
material of the joints and sealants usually have a smaller 
life compared to the rest of the concrete structure and 
hence need periodic replacement to prevent leakage. 


Concreting shall be, however, carried out continuously 
between the joints. 


11.2 Joints may be categorized as follows: 


a) Movement joints — A movement joint is intended 
to accommodate relative movement between 
adjoining parts of a structure, with the special 
provisions made to maintain the water tightness 
of the joint. Water-bars shall be provided in the 
movement joints, wherever required. Following 
are the three main types of movement joints: 


1) Expansion joint — A movement joint which 
has no restraint to linear movement and is 
intended to accommodate either expansion 
or contraction of the concrete. There is 
complete discontinuity in both reinforcement 
and concrete (see Fig. 1). An expansion type 
water-bar shall be provided either centrally in 
a wall (see Fig. 1A) or on the soffit of the floor 
(see Fig. 1B). A centre bulb water-bar may be 
used in walls. Water-bar may be provided on 
a liquid retaining face of the member, and in 
such case water-bar is to be fixed to the sides 
through proper detailing. 


In general, such a joint requires the provision 
of an initial gap (of the order of 15 to 25 mm) 
between the adjoining parts of a structure 


2) 


which by closing or opening accommodates 
the expansion or contraction of the structure. 
The design of the initial gap should provide for 
the expected movement and the permissible 
compressibility and extensibility of filler and 
sealing materials. 


Design of the joint so as to incorporate sliding 
surface, is not, however, precluded and may 
sometimes be advantageous. Usually, a 
relative displacement is allowed in the plane 
of the members (perpendicular to the joint). 
All other possible displacements, such as 
out-of-plane movements, shall be restrained 
through external restraints or the use of dowels 
(see Fig. 1C). 


Contraction joint — A movement joint with 
a deliberate discontinuity but no initial gap 
between the concrete on either side of the 
joint, the joint being intended to accommodate 
contraction of the concrete. 


A distinction should be made between a 
complete contraction joint (see Fig. 2) and 
a partial contraction joint (see Fig. 3). In a 
complete contraction joint, both concrete 
and reinforcing steel are interrupted and in a 
partial contraction joint, only the concrete is 
interrupted, the reinforcement continues across 
the joint. While the complete contraction 
joints are not restrained to movement and are 
intended to accommodate only contraction 
of the concrete, the partial contraction joints 
provide some restraint but are intended to 
accommodate some contraction of concrete. 


A water-bar shall be provided either centrally 
in a wall (see Fig. 2A and Fig. 3A) or on the 
soffit of the floor (see Fig. 2B and Fig. 3B). 
To cater for shear across the face, a shear key 
may be provided. In a partial contraction joint, 
a water-bar may be provided, if necessary, 
preferably centrally in a wall or on the soffit of 
a floor. Dowels may be provided to resist shear 
at concrete interface. 


An induced contraction joint is a type of partial 
contraction, where the concrete is cast as 
continuous. While casting concrete, a groove 
is created by inserting a strip or preformed 
water-bar. The groove induces the development 
of a crack at that location. Arrangements shall 
be made to seal the grove to prevent leakage 
through the joint (see Fig. 4) 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


NON ABSORBENT 
NON ABSORBENT JOINT FILTER 
SEALING COMPOUND ON JOINT PIETER, SEALING NO STEEL 
ONE OR BOTH FACES NO STEEL COMPOUND CONTINUITY 
CONTINUITY 


CENTRAL BULB 


INITIAL GAP FOR 
WATER BAR EXPANSION 
EXPANSION TYPE INITIAL GAP FOR 
WATER BAR EXPANSION 
1A WALL JOINT 1B FLOOR JOINT 


SEALING COMPOUND ON 


CAP TO PROVIDE SPACE 
ONE OR BOTH FACES 


FOR MOVEMENT 


DOWEL BARS DE - BONDING 
COMPOUND 
1C DOWELS IN EXPANSION JOINT 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL EXPANSION JOINT 


NO CONCRETE CONTINUITY 
AND NO INITIAL GAP 


NO STEEL 
CONTINUITY 


NO CONCRETE CONTINUITY 
AND NO INITIAL GAP 

JOINT SEALING 
NO STEEL 
CONTINUITY COMPOUND 


SEALING COMPOUND ON 
ONE OR BOTH FACES 


CENTRAL BULB 
WATER BAR 


EXPANSION TYPE WATER BAR 


2AWALL JOINT 2B FLOOR JOINT 


FiG. 2 TvPICAL COMPLETE CONTRACTION JOINT 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


NO CONCRETE CONTINUITY 


AND NO INITIAL GAP 


STEEL 
CONTINUITY 


SEALING COMPOUND ON 
ONE OR BOTH FACES 


CENTRAL BULB 
WATER BAR 


3A WALL JOINT 


NO CONCRETE CONTINUITY 
AND NO INITIAL GAP 


STEEL 
CONTINUITY 


JOINT SEALING 


EXPANSION TYPE WATER BAR 


3B FLOOR JOINT 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL PARTIAL CONTRACTION JOINT 


INDUCED CRACK 


WET FORMED OR SAWN 
SEALED LATER 


EXPANSION TYPE WATER BAR 


WITH CRACK INDUCED UPSTAND 


Fic. 4 TvPiCAL INDUCED CONTRACTION JOINT IN FLOOR 


3) Sliding joint — A movement joint which 
allows two structural members to slide relative 
to one another with minimal restraint. This has 
complete discontinuity in both reinforcement 
and concrete at which special provision is made 
to facilitate relative movement in the place 
of the joint. A typical application is between 
wall and floor in some cylindrical tank designs 
(see Fig. 5). 

b) Construction joints — A joint in the concrete, such 
as between two successive wall lifts, introduced 
for convenience in construction at which special 
measures are taken to achieve subsequent 
continuity without provision for further relative 
movement. A typical construction joint provided 
between successive wall lifts is shown in Fig. 6. 


In general, construction joints should be provided 
within middle third of the clear span, preferably 
near the point of contraflexure [see 4.4.2 (b) and 
(c) of IS 3370 (Part 2)]. At construction joint, 
concrete section should be checked under direct 
shear for shear friction resistance. In slabs, 
construction joints shall not be provided along the 
main reinforcement bar. 


Full structural continuity is assumed in design at 
the construction joint and should be realized in 
practice. If necessary, construction joints should 
be grouted. 


Shear key at the construction joint is normally 
not required, unless the shear stress is higher than 
half the shear strength of concrete. If shear key is 
required to be provided, width or thickness of the 
member shall be at least 300 mm. 


It is not necessary to incorporate water-bars in 
properly executed construction joint, unless H/t 
ratio is more than 15 (see 11.5.1). If water-bar is 
required to be provided, the thickness of member 
shall be at least 250 mm. 

Temporary open joints — A gap temporarily 
left between the concrete of adjoining parts of 
a structure which after a suitable time interval 
and before the structure is put into use, is filled 
with concrete either completely (see Fig. 7A) or 
as provided below, with the inclusion of suitable 
jointing materials (see Fig. 7B). In the former 
case, the width of the gap should be sufficient 
to allow the sides to be prepared before filling. 


"n 2 m 
Ы 4 
4 4 3 
T a Aa 
PREPARED SLIDING ` 
SURFACE OR RUBBER JOINT ma а ча 
5 а 
4044 "EU 
4 4 4 
2 4 


IS 3370 (Part 1): 2021 


The time interval between casting of main parts 
of structure and the gap in member shall be such 
that maximum shrinkage in concrete is allowed 
to take place, as well the temperature of the main 
concrete structure is as less as possible, to take 
advantage of maximum strain already taken place, 
and remaining strain will be smaller, after the gap 
is cast, thus cracking of structure is controlled. 


Where measures are taken for example, by the 
inclusion of suitable jointing materials to maintain 
the water tightness of the concrete subsequent 
to the filling of joint, these type of joints may 
be regarded as being equivalent to a contraction 
(partial or complete) as defined earlier above. 


STRIP PAINTING 


JOINT SEALING 
COMPOUND 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL SLIDING JOINT 


PREPARED JOINT 
SURFACE 


CONTINUITY 
OF STEEL 


Fic. 6 TvPICAL CONSTRUCTION JOINT 


9 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


INITIAL GAP LATER 
FILLED WITH CONCRETE 


PREPARED JOINT 
SURFACE 


7A 


INITIAL GAP 
LATER FILLED WITH 
STRIP 
PAINTING PONGREIE 


JOINT SEALING 
COMPOUND 


7B 


Fic. 7 TYPICAL TEMPORARY OPEN JOINTS 


11.3 Design and Detailing of Joints 


Design of a movement joint should aim at obtaining 
the following desirable properties for its efficient 
functioning: 


a) Thejoint should accommodate repeated movement 
of the structure without loss of water tightness. 


b) The design should provide for exclusion of grit 
and debris to prevent the closing of the joint. 


c) The material used in the construction of movement 
joints should have the following properties: 


1) It should not suffer permanent distortion or 
extrusion and should not be displaced by fluid 
pressure. 


2) It should not slump unduly in hot weather or 
become brittle in cold weather. 


3) It should be insoluble and durable and should 
not be affected by exposure to light or by 
evaporation of solvent or plasticizers. 


4) In special cases, the materials should be 
non-toxic, taintless or resistant to chemical and 
biological action as may be specified. 


Congestion of reinforcement should be avoided during 
detailing. Various methods, such as choosing the 
diameter and grade of steel carefully and bundling of 
reinforcement, if required, should be adopted. 


11.4 Spacing of Movement Joints 


The provision of movement joints and their spacing 
are dependent on the design philosophy adopted, 
that is, whether to allow for or restrain shrinkage and 
thermal contraction in walls and slabs. At one extreme, 
the designer may exercise control by providing a 
substantial amount of reinforcement in the form of 
small diameter bars at close spacing with no movement 
joints. On the other extreme, the designer may provide 
closely spaced movement joints in conjunction with a 


10 


moderate proportion of reinforcement. Between these 
two extremes, control may be exercised by varying the 
reinforcement and joint spacing, an increase in spacing 
being compensated for by an increase in the proportion 
of reinforcement required. 


To allow the movement to take place in a movement 
joint, the top of sub-base shall be in-plane, flat and 
smooth. Flatness & smoothness of the surface should 
be specified and controlled. Even if the smoothness 
is within specified limit, the very small roughness of 
sub-base will cause the concrete above to set and offer 
some friction. Hence a separation (or bond breaking) 
layer should be put in between to allow in-plane 
shear deformation between bottom and top layers. 
Normally, thick polyethylene sheet conforming to 
IS 2508 is specified with smooth top sub-base. It should 
be noted that local thickening of structural concrete 
should not create projections below the interface 
allowing movements. Such projection, if provided, will 
lock the free movement and induce unwanted cracks. 


The three main options for the designer are summarized 
in Table 2 as follows: 


a) In Option 1 (Design for full restraint) — No 
contraction joints are provided within the area 
designed for continuity; and crack widths 
and spacing are controlled by reinforcement. 
Construction joints become part of the crack 
pattern and have similar crack widths. 

b) In Option 2 (Design for partial restraint) — 
Cracking is controlled by the reinforcement, but 
the joint spacing is such that some of the daily 
and seasonal movements in the mature slab or 
structural member are accommodated at the 
joints, so reducing the amount of movement to be 
accommodated at the cracks between the joints. 

c) In Option 3 (Design for freedom of 
movement) Cracking 15 controlled by 


proximity of the joints, with a moderate amount 
of reinforcement provided, sufficient to transmit 
movement at any cracked section to the adjacent 
movement joints. Significant cracking between 
the adjacent movement joints should not occur. 


The options given in Table 2 are considered in terms of 
horizontal movement, but vertical movement in walls 
should also be considered. Two cases are as follows: 


1) It is possible for horizontal cracks to occur at 
any free-standing vertical end because of the 
change in horizontal restraint with respect 
to height. For bays of any height the vertical 
strain arising from this warping effect may 
be taken as approximately half the horizontal 
strain, and the vertical steel ratio should not be 
less than the critical ratio, р... 


2) The vertical restraint exerted on a newly 
cast bay at a vertical construction joint may 
be assumed to develop at the depth of 2.4 m 
from the free top surface. Thus design for 
freedom of movement (Option 3) may be used 
for vertical reinforcement in the top 2.4 m of 
a lift of wall. The design for partial restraint 
(Option 2) is appropriate for vertical steel 
below this depth. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


The choice of design imposes a discipline on 
construction. It is desirable to achieve minimum 
restraint to early thermal contraction of the immature 
concrete in walls and slabs even though the finished 
structure may be designed for full continuity. Cracks 
arising from thermal contraction in a roof supported 
on columns may be minimized or even prevented 
if the roof slab is not tied rigidly to the walls during 
constructions. 


11.5 Making of Joints 


Joints shall generally be made according to the broad 
principles discussed in 11.5.1 to 11.5.3. 


11.5.1 Construction Joints 


11.5.1.1 Construction joints shall be located at accessible 
locations to permit working and good workmanship at 
the interface like cleaning and roughening. 


Time lag between the two concrete phases is an important 
parameter for the behaviour of the joint. The time lag is 
to be measured from the instance of mixing of concrete 
of first phase to the instance when second phase concrete 
is compacted against the first phase concrete already 
laid. When the time lag is less than that of 80 percent 
of the initial setting time of first phase concrete and also 


Table 2 Design Option for Control of Thermal Contraction and Restrained Shrinkage 
( Clause 11.4 ) 


SI Option Construction Type and Movement Joint Spacing Steel Ratio Comments 
No. Method of Control (see Note 2) 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 1 Continuous: For full No joints, but expansion joints at wide spacing Моге than p... Use small size bars at 
restraint (>> 40 т) may be desirable in walls and roofs close spacing to avoid 
that are not protected from solar heat gain high steel ratios well 
or where the retained liquid is subjected to a in excess of p... 
substantial temperature range. 
ii) 2 Semi-continuous: For 3) Complete joints: € 15 m More than p... Use small size bars 
partial restraint b) Alternate partial and complete joints but less steel than in 
(by interpolation): < 11.25 m Option 1 
c) Partial joints: € 7.5m 
iii) 3 Close movement joint a) Complete joints (in metres): 2/3 p.i m 
spacing: For freedom of 
w 
movement <4.8+ — 
E 
b) Alternate partial and complete joints 
(in metres): 
«05s, £244 T. 
ax E 
с) Partial joints: 
x 
$5. og 
NOTES 


1 References should be made to Annex A and Annex B of IS 3370 (Part 2) for the description of the symbols used in this table and for calculating 


Peri? Smax and c. 


2 In options 1 and 2, the steel ratio will generally exceed p „„ to restrict the crack widths to acceptable values. In option 3, the steel ratio of 2/3 p... 


rit 


will be adequate. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


while second phase concrete is still plastic, it results in a 
monolithic concrete across the joint, else the construction 
joint is assumed to form. 


The time lag may be in minutes, hours or in days. As the 
time lag increases, temperature and shrinkage effects set 
in as the two concrete are in different phases of setting. 
Hence due to differential movement (strains), slip 
develops and reduces the bond between the two concrete. 
Formation and development of cracks takes place at lower 
values of strain. Hence, the design and specifications at 
the joint depends upon the probable time lag at the joint. 


Concrete in both phases (earlier and later) should 
be fully compacted to remove macro pores, and the 
interface should result in an impermeable joint. In 
each phase, care is needed to compact the concrete 
without segregation, simultaneously avoiding 
loose aggregate and porosity. While ensuring full 
compaction, there is a possibility that at the joint, top 
few millimetre concrete (earlier pour) may be over 
vibrated due to which coarse aggregates may sink and 
only mortar may remain at top, and this portion of 
mortar should be removed. Removal of mortar portion 
may be carried out by applying a surface retarder 
immediately after concreting the earlier pour. For 
vertical surfaces, the surface retarder may be applied 
to the formwork. Alternately, roughening is done by 
mechanical methods. 


Sprayed curing membranes and form-release agents 
should be thoroughly removed from joint surfaces. 
As soon as possible after concrete is set, surface 
laitance, mortar layer, portions of un-compacted 
concrete if any, loose aggregates or those having 
cavities around, etc shall be removed. The laitance 
can be removed by wire brushing or applying a jet of 
water. If the joint surface is not roughened before the 
concrete is hardened; in that case, the laitance should 
be removed by sand blasting or by a scrubber. 


At joint interface, concrete surface of the earlier 
pour should be prepared rough to increase the bond 
strength and achieve mechanical friction through 
aggregate interlock, preventing the relative movement 
(shear slip). Concrete surface at interface should be 
prepared rough with clean coarse aggregates projecting 
out from matrix. Joint surface should expose larger 
aggregates, leaving solid and rough concrete surface, 
by removing some mortar from it. Mean roughness 
(measured as half the average height of valley to peak 
of the surface undulations) should be one-sixth to 
one-fourth of the maximum size of the aggregate that is, 
3 to 5 mm for 20 mm maximum size of aggregate. 


Roughening can be done by wire brushing while 
concrete is still green without dislodging or disturbing 
the coarse aggregates. At higher ages, this may be done 
by sand blasting, shot blasting, hydro blasting, milling 
tool, bush hammer, chiselling, or any other established 


12 


method. Use of excessive energy, causing damage by 
dislodging or fracturing aggregates shall be avoided. 
In the case of construction joints at locations where 
the previous pour has been cast against shuttering, the 
recommended method of obtaining a rough surface 
for the previously poured concrete is to expose the 
aggregate with a high pressure water jet or any other 
appropriate means. 


From the surface of first phase concrete which is 
already roughened, all loose material shall be removed, 
and washed clean by jet of water. The cleaned joint 
surface should be dampened for at least 6 h prior to 
placing new concrete. 


Before placing fresh concrete, the old concrete should 
be saturated, without surface water at the joint (that is, 
surface dry). New concrete should be fully compacted 
against old, without voids and segregation. All 
horizontal construction joints where H/t ratio is more 
than 15 and all vertical construction joints should be 
properly grouted. For grouting, cement may be mixed 
with finer fly ash or GGBS. As H/t ratio increases above 
30, the importance of workmanship increases to get a 
joint with sufficiently low permeability. 


Provision of groove or shear key at construction joint 
is not necessary if the shear stress is less than the 
shear friction (say half the shear strength of concrete). 
Joint should be designed for the shear strength. Where 
high shear resistance is required, shear keys shall be 
provided. 


Water-bars may be provided if thickness of the tank 
wall exceeds 300 mm. 


11.5.1.2 Height of fall of concrete on hard surface and 
segregation 


At a horizontal joint, placing of the concrete of second 
phase involves fall of concrete. While, the fresh 
concrete falls on the hard surface, the particles of 
coarse aggregate rebound and collect near the surface 
of form work, thus introducing segregation. From the 
concrete of first fall, some paste adheres to shuttering 
surface and reinforcement during falling; thus the paste 
demand is little higher in initial quantity of concrete 
pour. Higher the free fall of concrete, more will be 
the rebound and segregation of the aggregates. After 
a padding layer of concrete is deposited, aggregate 
from the falling concrete gets embedded in the padding 
concrete and segregation is not seen at the formed 
surface of concrete. Hence, at horizontal construction 
joint, honeycomb is seen only for few cm heigt. 
This height of likely honeycomb depends up on the 
height of free fall of concrete. To avoid this problem, 
concrete for initial few cm height should be placed by 
chute/pipe without any freefall. Any other suitable 
method(s) may also be adopted to prevent freefall/ 
segregation of concrete. 


11.5.2 Movement Joints 


These require the incorporation of special materials in 
order to maintain liquid tightness whilst accommodating 
relative movement between the sides of the joint 
(see 11.5). 


Movement joints, particularly those in floor and roof, 
also require protection against the entry of debris which 
may interfere with the closing of the joints. 


11.5.2.1 Contraction joints 


The joints face of the first-cast concrete should be 
finished against a stopping-off board, or vertical end 
shutter which, in case of a partial contraction joint, 
should be notched to pass the reinforcement. 


Steps should be taken to prevent any appreciable 
adhesion between the new and the old concrete. 


The joint should be suitably treated with water-stops 
and joint sealants so as to maintain liquid tightness 
during movement of the joint and prevention of debris 
entering the joints (see Fig. 8 and 12). 


11.5.2.2 Expansion joints 


These require the provision of an initial gap between 
the concrete faces on the two sides of the joints and 
this can be conveniently done by the use of materials 
discussed in 12. The initial width of this gap should 
be specified by the engineer and should be sufficient 
to accommodate freely the maximum expansion of 
the structure. In determining jointing materials due 
consideration should be given to the requirements 
of the initial width. These will normally require the 
maintenance of a certain minimum width of gap during 
maximum expansion of the structure. The joint should 
be suitably treated so as to maintain liquid tightness 
during movement of the joint (see Fig. 9). 


11.5.2.3 Sliding joints 


The two concrete faces of a sliding joint should be 
plane and smooth. 


Care should be taken by the use of a rigid screening 
board or other suitable means to make the top of the 
lower concrete as flat and smooth as possible. This 
surface may be improved by finishing with a steel float 
and rubbing down with carborundum. 


13 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Bond between the concrete of the two components 
should be prevented by painting, or by inserting 
building paper, or other suitable material. 


The joint should be suitably treated so as to maintain 
liquid tightness during movement of the joint. 


11.5.3 Temporary Open Joints 


The concrete on both sides of the joints should be 
finished against stopping off boards. 


In order to minimize the extent of subsequent 
movements due to shrinkage the joint should be left 
open until shortly before the reservoir is put into service 
and then filled in with concrete or mortar of specified 
properties. Where possible, the joint should be filled 
when the temperature is low. 


Immediately before filling the gap, the joint faces 
should be thoroughly cleaned and prepared in the same 
way as for construction joints (see 11.5.1). 


Where it is intended to treat this type of joint as 
equivalent to a contraction joint for the purpose of this 
standard, the joint should be suitably sealed so as to 
maintain liquid tightness during subsequent movement 
of the joint. 
NOTE — Figures | to 9 given in this standard are only 
diagrammatic, and are intended merely to illustrate the 


definitions and principles given in the standard and may not be 
treated as preferred designs. 


11.5.4 Joints in Ground Slabs 


The floor of a structure may be designed to permit 
thermal contraction and shrinkage by minimizing 
restraints to movement or fully restrained against 
shrinkage and thermal contraction and cast directly 
onto the blinding concrete. 


A separating layer of polyethylene conforming to 
IS 2508 should be provided between the floor slab and 
the blinding concrete. Panels may be cast in single 
bays or in larger areas with induced joints. Frequently, 
in large structures, the floor is designed as a series of 
continuous strips with transverse induced complete 
contraction joints provided to ensure that cracking 
occurs in predetermined positions. Longitudinal joints 
between the strips should form complete contraction 
Joints. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


METALLIC 
WATER BAR 


8A 


STRIP PAINTING 


JOINT SEALING 
COMPOUND 


8C 


POLYVINYL CHLORIDE 
WATER BAR 


8B 


MOULDED 
WATER BAR 


8D 


Fic. 8 TYPICAL DETAILS SHOWING USE or JOINTING MATERIALS 
IN MOVEMENT JOINTS (CONTRACTION ТҮРЕ) 


11.5.5 Joints in Walls 


Walls may be designed as fully restrained against 
thermal contraction and shrinkage, or the restraints 
may be reduced by providing movement joints in 
accordance with Table 2. Where the wall is designed 
to be monolithic with the base slab, a kicker of at 
least 75 mm height may be cast at the same time as, 
and integrally with, the slab to enable the next lift of 
formwork to fit tightly and avoid leakage of cement 
grout from the newly deposited concrete. The joint in 
this position will be a construction joint, and although it 
is recommended that wall panels are cast in one lift, any 
necessary extra horizontal joints will be construction 
joints. 

In walls to circular structures, one of the predominant 
forces from the liquid pressure is horizontal hoop 
tension. For structural design purposes, the horizontal 
reinforcement should be completely continuous at 
vertical joints. A central water-bar may be used together 
with sealing compounds on both faces. 


11.5.6 Joints in Roofs 


Where roof slabs are designed as flat slabs, all interior 
joints should be construction joints so that the slab 
is structurally monolithic, considering early thermal 
effects and subsequent temperature effects. Roofs, even 
those covered by soil, may be subjected to a larger 
thermal change than the walls and floor. However, the 


14 


subsequent temperature effects may be disregarded, if 
the roof is not connected monolithically to the wall. 
Where roofs and walls are monolithic, movement 
joints in roofs should correspond with those in the 
walls to avoid the possibility of sympathetic cracking. 
If, however, provision is made by means of a sliding 
joint for movement between the roof and walls, 
correspondence of the joints is less important. 


12 JOINTING MATERIALS 


The joints described in 11.2 require the use of 
combinations of jointing materials, which may be 
classified as: 


a) Joint fillers, 
b) Water-bars, and 
c) Joint sealants (including primers, where required). 


These materials are inaccessible once the liquid 
retaining structure is commissioned and hence, 
the same should be considered during the design. 
Satisfactory adhesion between joint sealants and the 
concrete surfaces between which they are to provide a 
liquid tight seal shall be ensured. Notwithstanding the 
presence of joint sealants, water-bars should always be 
provided in movement joints. 


When proprietary materials or products are used, 
the recommendations of the manufacturer should be 
followed. 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


JOINT SEALING 


COMPOUND METALLIC WATER BAR 


JOINT SEALING METALLIC 
COMPOUND WATER BAR 


JOINT FILLER JOINT FILLER 


9A 9B 


JOINT SEALING 
COMPOUND TWO COAT 


WATER BAR STRIP PAINTING 


JOINT FILLER 


9C 


PRECAST COVER 


JOINT SEALING 
COMPOUND TWO COAT 


STRIP PAINTING 


Za 


5$ 


ХХХ 


4. РИ 


- Z 


JOINT FILLER 
9E 


Fic. 9 TYPICAL DETAILS SHOWING USE or JOINTING MATERIALS 
IN MOVEMENT JOINTS (EXPANSION TYPE) 


15 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Jointing materials should be capable of accommodating 
repeated movement without permanent distortion or 
extrusion, and they should not be displaced by liquid 
pressure. The jointing materials should not have any 
detrimental effect on concrete and steel. 


12.1 Joint Fillers 


Joint fillers are usually compressible sheet or strip 
materials used as spacers. Only non-rotting and 
non-absorbent materials should be used as joint fillers. 


They are used in expansion joints and are fixed to the 
face of the first placed concrete and against which 
the second placed concrete is cast. They provide the 
initial separation between the faces of the concrete 
and compress under the predetermined expansion 
from each face of the concrete. It is important that the 
joint filler accommodates the compression without 
transferring appreciable load across the expansion joint 
and recovers so that the joint remains filled when the 
concrete faces subsequently move apart. 


Joint fillers, may themselves function as liquid-tight 
expansion joints. These may be used as support for 
an effective joint sealant in floor and roof joints. But 
they may only be relied upon as spacers to provide the 
gap in an expansion joint, the gap being bridged by a 
water-bar (see Fig. 9). 


12.2 Water-bars 


Water-bars are preformed strips of impermeable 
material which are wholly or partially embedded in the 
concrete during construction so as to span across the 
joint to provide a permanent liquid tight seal during the 
whole range of joint movement. 


For example, water-bars may be strips with a central 
longitudinal corrugation (see Fig. 8A and Fig. 9A), 
Z shaped strips (see Fig. 9B) and a central longitudinal 
hollow tube (see Fig. 8B and Fig. 9C) with thin 
walls with stiff wings of 150 mm - 250 mm width. 
The material used for the water-bars are metal sheet, 
natural or synthetic rubbers and plastic, such as 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Galvanized iron sheets 
may also be used with the specific permission of the 
engineer-in-charge provided the liquids stored or the 
atmosphere around the liquid retaining structure is not 
excessively corrosive, for example, sewage. While 
selecting the materials for water base, the possible 
corrosion aspects, chemical resistance, joint movement 
capacity, and design temperature range should be kept 
in mind. 

With all water-bars, proper compaction of the concrete 
placed around the water-bars shall be ensured. The 
bar should have such shape and width that the water 
path through the concrete round the bar should not be 
unduly short. 


16 


The holes, sometimes provided on the wings of 
water-bars to tie it in position or to increase bond, 
shorten the water path and may be disadvantageous. 
The water-bar should either be placed centrally in the 
thickness of the wall or its distance from either face of 
the wall should not be less than half the width of the 
bar. The specified concrete cover to all reinforcement 
should be maintained. 


The strip water-bars at present available in the newer 
materials need to be passed through the end shutter of 
the first-placed concrete. It can be appreciated, however, 
that the use of newer materials makes possible a variety 
of shapes or sections. Some of these designs, for 
example, those with several projections (see Fig. 9D), 
would not need to be passed through the end shutter 
and by occupying a bigger proportion of the thickness 
of the joint would also lengthen the shortest alternative 
water path through the concrete. 


The hydrophilic water-bars, which swell in the presence 
of water to seal the joint, may be placed in the middle 
of the construction joints providing suitable cover on 
both sides with the help of a suitable adhesive. 


The design of the structure should generally provide 
for the continuity of the water-bar system across all 
joints and particularly junctions between floor and 
wall systems. Surface water-bars should be used only 
in situations where there is sufficient pressure from the 
outside to ensure that the water-bar remains in position. 


12.3 Joint Sealants 


Joint sealants conforming to IS 11433 (Part 1), IS 12118 
(Part 1) or IS 1834 or any other suitable material based 
on asphalt, bitumen, or coal tar pitch with or without 
fillers, such as limestone or slate dust, asbestos fibre, 
chopped hemp, rubber or other suitable material. 


They are impermeable ductile materials, which are 
required to provide a liquid-tight seal by adhesion to 
the concrete throughout the range of joint movements. 
The sealing performance is obtained by permanent 
adhesion of the sealant to the concrete each side of 
the joint only, and most sealants should be applied in 
conditions of complete dryness and cleanliness. There 
are joint sealants that are produced for application to 
surfaces that are not dry. These are usually applied 
after construction or just before the reservoir is put into 
service by pouring in the hot or cold state, by trowelling 
or gunning or as preformed strips ironed into position. 
These may also be applied during construction, such 
as by packing round the corrugation of a water-bar. A 
primer is often used to assist adhesion and some local 
drying of the concrete surface with the help of a blow 
lamp is advisable. The length of the shortest water path 
through the concrete should be extended by suitably 
painting the surface at the concrete on either side of 
the joint. 


The main difficulties experienced with this class of 
material are in obtaining permanent adhesion to the 
concrete during movement of the joint whilst at the 
same time ensuring that the material does not slump or 
is not extruded from the joint. 


In floor joints, the sealant is usually applied in a chase 
formed in the surface of the concrete along the line of 
the joint (see Fig. 9A). The actual minimum width will 
depend on the known characteristics of the material. In 
the case of an expansion joint, the lower part of the 
joint is occupied by a joint filler (see Fig. 9E). This type 
of joint is generally quite successful since, retention of 
the material is assisted by gravity and, in many cases, 
sealing can be delayed until just before the reservoir 
is put into service so that the amount of joint opening 
subsequently to be accommodated is quite small. The 
chase should not be too narrow or too deep to hinder 
complete filling and the length of the shortest water 
path through the concrete on either side of the joint. 
Here, again a wider joint demands a smaller percentage 
distortion in the material. 


An arrangement incorporating a cover slab, similar 
to that shown in Fig. 9E, may be advantageous in 
reducing dependence on the adhesion of the sealant in 
direct tension. 


13 CONSTRUCTION 


13.1 Unless otherwise specified in this standard, the 
provisions of IS 456 and IS 1343 shall apply to the 
construction of reinforced concrete and pre-stressed 
concrete liquid retaining structures, respectively. 


During construction or initial life, tank shall not be kept 
empty for a period of more than 3 days and should be 
filled with water/liquid of minimum 300 mm depth to 
avoid drying shrinkage cracks in the concrete structure 
and plaster, if any on inside face of wall. At the end of 
liquid-tightness test (see 14), the tank should be cleaned 
and disinfected before commissioning for normal use. 


A wearing apron (wearing coat) may be provided on 
a member where abrasion loss can occur at concrete 
surface such as where liquid falling from a height of 
more than 6 m or liquid flowing at a speed of more than 
2 m/s. 


13.2 Joints 


Joints shall be constructed 
requirements of 11. 


in accordance with 


13.3 Construction of Floors 
13.3.1 Floors Founded on the Ground 


13.3.1.1 Where walls or floors are founded on the 
ground, a layer of lean concrete not less than 75 mm 
thick and weaker than M15, as specified in IS 456 shall 
be used. Where, however injurious soils or aggressive 
ground water are expected, the concrete should not be 


17 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


weaker than M20, and if necessary, sulphate resisting 
cement conforming to IS 12330 or other special cement, 
as per IS 456 should be used. 


13.3.1.2 Following a layer of lean concrete, the floor 
shall be cast in a single layer. If movement joints 
are provided as per 9.2.8(b), a separating layer of 
polyethylene sheet conforming to IS 2508 should be 
provided in between the floor slab and the layer of lean 
concrete. The top surface of PCC shall be rendered 
smooth before laying separating layer. If structure 
is designed continuous without movement joints as 
per 9.2.8(a), the lean concrete top may be allowed to 
be rough, and the concrete floor over it without any 
separating layer. 


13.3.1.3 Minimum thickness of floor slab on ground 
shall be 160 mm, if having reinforcement on each face. 
Suspended floor slab shall be minimum 180 mm thick, 
for span greater than 3.5 m. 


13.4 Construction of Walls 


13.4.1 The height of any lift should be as large as 
possible. It is desirable to place the concrete to full 
height of the member in one go. Thorough compaction 
by vibration shall be ensured. 


13.4.2 All vertical joints should extend the full height 
of the wall in unbroken alignment. 


13.4.3 Wall thickness 200 mm or more is normally 
recommended. However, minimum thickness of wall 
may be 160 mm for small tanks of height less than 2 m. 
In treatment plants, walls of channels/lounder may be 
125 mm thick if single layer bar mesh is required. 


13.5 Surface Finish to Prestressed Concrete 
Cylindrical Tanks 


The circumferential prestressing wires of a cylindrical 
tank should be covered with a protective coat, which 
may be pneumatic mortar, having a thickness that will 
provide a minimum cover of 40 mm over the wires. The 
protective coat shall have specifications designed to get 
a long life service expectancy for prestressing wires. 


13.6 Formwork 
13.6.1 Removal of Formwork 


The requirements shall conform to IS 456. 


13.6.2 Bolts passing completely through liquid retaining 
slabs for the purpose of securing and aligning the form 
work should not be used unless effective precautions 
are taken to ensure liquid tightness after removal. 


13.7 Lining of Tanks 


The type of liquid to be stored should be considered 
in relation to the possibility of corrosion of the steel 
or attack on the concrete. Provision of an impermeable 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


protective lining should be considered for resistance to 
the effects of corrosive liquids. Certain liquids exhibit 
corrosive characteristics and in such cases it is important 
to obtain a dense impermeable concrete and with a 
higher cement content. An increased cover to the steel 
in also desirable. The use of sulphate resisting Portland 
cement conforming to IS 12330, Portland pozzolana 
cement conforming to IS 1489 (Part 1), and Portland 
slag cement conforming to IS 455 may, in certain cases, 
can be advantageous. Poly-aluminium chloride tanks 
and alum solution tanks shall be provided with acid 
resistance coating or lining. 


14 TEST OF STRUCTURE 


14.1 General 


In addition to the structural tests given in IS 456, 
liquid retaining structures shall also be tested for liquid 
tightness at full supply level (or design capacity) as per 
14.2. Further, the roofs of the liquid retaining structures 
shall be tested as per 14.3. 


14.2 Testing of Structures 


The structure should be cleaned and initially filled to 
the normal maximum level with the specified liquid at 
a uniform rate of not greater than 2 m in 24 h. When 
first filled, the liquid level should be maintained by the 
addition of further liquid for a stabilizing period while 
absorption and autogenous healing take place. The 
stabilizing period may be 7 days for maximum design 
crack width of 0.1 mm or 21 days for 0.2 mm or greater. 
After the stabilizing period, the level of the liquid 
surface shall be recorded at 24 h intervals for a test 
period of 7 days. During this 7 day test period, the total 
permissible drop in level, after allowing for evaporation 
and rainfall, should not exceed the maximum of 1/500" 
of the average water depth of the full tank and 10 mm 
or another specified value, mutually agreed between 
the parties to contract. 


In case of underground tanks whose top is covered, the 
total permissible drop in the surface level over a period 
of 7 days shall not exceed 20 mm. 


Notwithstanding the satisfactory completion of the test, 
any evidence of seepage of the liquid to the outside 
faces of the liquid retaining walls should be assessed 
against the requirements of the specification. Any 
necessary remedial treatment of the concrete, cracks, 
or joints should, where practicable, be carried out from 


18 


the liquid face, if grouts, such as cement based grouts, 
are used which can’t perform in the presence of liquid, 
or from the outer face, if grouts, such as polyurethrane 
grouts, are used whose efficacy in presence of water/ 
liquid is well established. Where a remedial lining is 
applied to inhibit leakage at a crack, it should have 
adequate flexibility and have no adverse reaction with 
the stored liquid. 


14.2.1 If the structure does not satisfy the 7 day test, 
then it should be retested after the completion of the 
remedial work. Remedial work may be undertaken 
in presence of water, if repair materials, such as 
polyurethrane grouts, are used whose efficacy in 
presence of water is well established. However, if 
grouts, such as cement based grouts, are used which 
can’t perform in presence of water, remedial treatment 
shall be carried out only after emptying the tank. The 
tank should be accordingly refilled and, if necessary, 
left for a further stabilizing period; a further test of 
7 days’ duration be undertaken in accordance with 14.2. 


14.3 Testing of Roofs 


The roofs of liquid retaining structures should be liquid 
tight and should be tested on completion by flooding 
the roof with water to a minimum depth of 25 mm for 
24 h or longer, if so specified. Where it is impracticable, 
because of roof slopes or otherwise, to contain a 
25 mm depth of water, the roof should have continuous 
water applied by a hose or sprinkler system to provide 
a sheet flow of water over the entire area of the roof 
for not less than 6 h. In either case, the roof should be 
considered satisfactory if no leaks or wet patches show 
on the soffit. 


14.3.1 If the structure does not satisfy the test given 
in 14.3, then it should be retested after the completion 
of the remedial work in accordance with this clause. 
The roof insulation and covering, if any, should be 
completed as soon as possible after satisfactory testing. 


15 LIGHTNING PROTECTION 


The Паша retaining 
protected against lightning 
IS/IEC 62305 (Parts 1 to 3). 


structures shall be 
іп accordance with 


16 VENTILATION 


The ventilation shall be provided in plan and elevation, 
as mutually agreed between parties to contract. 


IS No. 


383 : 2016 


455 : 2015 


456 : 2000 


1343 : 2012 


1489 (Part 1) : 


1834 : 1984 


1893 (Part 1) : 


1893 (Part 2) : 


2508 : 2016 


3370 (Part 2) : 


3370 (Part 3) : 


2015 


2016 


2014 


2021 


2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Coarse and fine aggregates 
for concrete — Specification 
(third revision) 


Portland slag cement — 
Specification (fifth revision) 


Code of practice for plain 


and reinforced concrete 
(fourth revision) 

Code of practice for 
prestressed concrete 


(second revision) 


Portland pozzolana cement— 
Specification: Part 1 Fly ash 
based (fourth revision) 


Hot applied sealing 
compounds for joints in 
concrete Specification 
(first revision) 


Criteria for earthquake 
resistant design of structures: 
Part 1 General provisions 
and buildings (sixth revision) 


Criteria for earthquake 
resistant design of structures: 
Part 2 Liquid retaining tanks 
(fifth revision) 


Polyethylene films апа 
sheets — Specification 
(third revision) 

Concrete structures for 


retaining aqueous liquids — 
Code of practice: Part 2 Plain 
and reinforced concrete 
(second revision) 


Concrete structures for 
retaining aqueous liquids — 
Code of practice: 
Part 3 Prestressed concrete 
(first revision) 


19 


IS No. 


3370 (Part 4) : 2021 


11433 (Part 1) : 
1985 


11682 : 1985 


12118 (Part 1) : 
1987 


12330 : 1988 


13620 : 1993 


16651 : 2017 


16714 : 2018 


IS/IEC 62305 
(Part 1) : 2010 


IS/IEC 62305 
(Part 2) : 2010 


IS/IEC 62305 
(Part 3) : 2010 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Title 


Concrete structures for 
retaining aqueous liquids — 
Code of practice: Part 4 
Design tables (first revision) 


Specification for one part 
gun-grade polysulphide- 
based joints sealants: Part 1 
General requirements 


Criteria for design of RCC 
staging for overhead water 
tanks 


Two-part polysulphide-based 
sealants Specification: 
Part 1 General requirements 


Specification for sulphate 
resisting portland cement 


Fusion bonded epoxy 
coated reinforcing bars — 
Specification 


High strength deformed 
stainless steel bars and wires 
for concrete reinforcement — 
Specification 


Ground granulated blast 
furnace slag for use in cement, 
mortar and concrete 
Specification 


Protection against lightning: 
Part 1 General principles 


Protection against lightning: 
Part 2 Risk management 


Protection against lightning: 
Part 3 Physical damage to 
structures and life hazard 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 02 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam P.O., 


Thiruvalla 689 583) 

ACC Ltd, Mumbai 

Ambuja Cements Limited, Ahmedabad 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 

Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 

Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 

Cement Manufacturers' Association, Noida 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Conmat Technolgies Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 

Construction Chemical Manufacturers' Association, 
Mumbai 

CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR — Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Science and Technology, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


20 


Representative(s) 


Suri Jose Kurian (Chairman) 


SHRI RAJESH J. Мор 
Dr ManisH V. KARANDIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI UMESH P. SONI 

SHRI SUKURU RAMARAO (Alternate) 
Suri L. R. BIsHNo! 

SHRI SOURAV ACHARYA (Alternate) 
SHRI SUSHANTA KUMAR BAsU 

Suni D. R. SEKor (Alternate) 


Suni C. N. JuA 


Dn V. RAMACHANDRA 
Ms SHASHWATI GHOSH 


Sarı D. К. GARG 

SHRI NAVEEN KUMAR BANSAL (Alternate) 
DiRECTOR 

SHRI U. S. VIDYARTHI (Alternate) 
Director (CMDD) (N&W) 

Deputy Director (CMDD) (NW&YS) (Alternate) 


Dn A. K. CHATTERJEE 
Dr Susrato CHOWDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER 
SHRI NILOTPOL Kar (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH GURRAM (Alternate) 


Dr RAKESH KUMAR 
Dn V. V. L. KANTA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr K. RAMANJANEYULU 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


SHRI LAXMAN SINGH 
SHRI VAY SHANKAR (Alternate) 


Suni S. S. Кони 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
ӛнкі ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHRIRAM B. KULKARNI 
SHRI RAHUL BIRADAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI MUKESH VALECHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Organization 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 
Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Army HQ, New Delhi 

Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 
National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


Nuvoco Vistas Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Tamil Nadu, 
Chennai 


The India Cements Limited, Chennai 


The Indian Hume Pipe Company Limited, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 

The Ramco Cements Limited, Chennai 

Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education, New Delhi 


In personal capacity [B-803, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi 
Garden City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Road, Nagpur) 


21 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Representative(s) 

SHRI MAHESH TANDON 

SHRI GANESH JUNEJA (Alternate) 
SHRI VIVEK NAIK 

SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 
Dr SHASHANK BISHNOI 

Dr Dipti RANJAN SAHOO (Alternate) 
Dr Devpas MENON 

Dr MANU SANTHANAM (Alternate) 
Dn V. K. GUPTA 

Dr BHUPINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. NIRMAL 

Suri R. V. PATIL (Alternate) 
МАЈ GEN S. K. SRIVASTAV 

SHRI MAN SINGH (Alternate) 
Suri Y. BALAKRISHNA 

SHRI SANJEEV Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI V. V. ARORA 

Dn S. K. CHATURVEDI (Alternate) 
Suri D. V. S. PRASAD 

Dr боміт NeEoai (Alternate) 
SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 

Suri RAGHUPATI Roy (Alternate) 


SHRI PRANAV DESAI 
SHRI RAVINDRA KHAMPARIA (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri P. R. BHAT 
Suri S. J. SHAH (Alternate) 


Dr H. C. VISVESVARAYA 
Suri S. Н. Jain (Alternate) 


Suri BALAN K. Moortuy 
SHRI ANIL Kumar Рша (Alternate) 


SHRI SURYA VALLURI 
Dn M. R. KALGAL (Alternate) 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri B. MukHopapuyay (Alternate) 


SHRI A. К. JAIN 


Ѕна L. К. JAIN 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari 
Nagar, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri R. C. WASON 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist “Е” (Civi. ENGINEERING), BIS 


and 


ӛнкі MILIND GUPTA 
SCIENTIST “С? (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Concrete Subcommittee, CED 2:2 


Organization 


In personal capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam P.O., 


Thiruvalla 689 583) 
ACC Limited, Mumbai 


Ambuja Cement Limited, Ahmedabad 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 


New Delhi 


Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, 
Bhopal 


Bureau Veritas India Ltd, Mumbai 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 
Ghaizabad 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, 
New Delhi 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Department of Science and Technology Ministry of 
Science and Technology, New Delhi 


Elkem South Asia Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


22 


Representative(s) 
SHRI Jose Kurian (Convener) 


SHRI PRAHLAD MUJUMDAR 
SHRI ANIL KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri Омеѕн P. Soni 
SHRI SUKURU RAMARAO (Alternate) 


Suri MANISH MOKAL 


SHRI AVINASH D. SHIRODE 
Suri K. K. MEGHASHYAM (Alternate) 


SHRI L. R. BIsHNoI 
SHRI SOURAV ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA 


SHRI S. K. KHARE 
ӛнкі BHAGWATI PRASAD Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri D. К. GARG 

Suri RAJESH KHARE (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 

Suri RA) Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI AMAN DEEP 

SHRI MANIK CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 
Dr RAJESH DEOLIA 

Suri H. С. Arora (Alternate) 
SHRI J. B. SENGUPTA 

SHRI SATISH PANDEY (Alternate) 
Dr B. H. BHARATHKUMAR 

Dr P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 
Suri S. S. Кони 


SHRI BRAJESH MALVIYA 

SHRI SURENDRA SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 

SHRI ANURAG SINHA (Alternate) 


Organization 
Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Society of Structural Engineers, Mumbai 


Irrigation and Power Research Institute, Amritsar 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology Warangal, Warangal 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Pidilite Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Ready Mixed Concrete Manufacturers’ Association, 
Mumbai 


Research, Design & Standards Organisation (Ministry 
of Railways), Lucknow 


RDC Concrete (India) Pvt Ltd, Thane 

Shapoorji Pallonji and Company Private Limited, 
Mumbai 

Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


Ultra Tech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Water Resource Department, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, 


Mumbai 


In personal capacity (452 Sector 14, Sonipat, Haryana) 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Road, Nagpur) 


23 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SUDEESH RAJENDRAN 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI KHATARBATCHA JIMMETAIN (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. TAYADE 
SECRETARY GENERAL (Alternate) 


Dn B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr SHASHANK Bisuwor (Alternate) 


Dn SUDHIR MISHRA 


Dr MANU SANTHANAM 
Dn RADHAKRISHNA G. PILLAI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI UMESH JosHi 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (RESEARCH) 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Dr B. SIVARAMA SARMA 
SHRI S. MANOHAR (Alternate) 


МАЈ GEN S. K. SRIVASTAV 
SHRI MAN SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. PATHAK 
Suri A. K. PANDEY (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. YADAV 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. ARORA 
Suri P. N. Oma (Alternate) 


Dn C. B. KAMESWARA RAO 
Dr D. Rama Sesuu (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri N. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr SuGuna МАІК 


SHRI VIJAYKUMAR R. KULKARNI 
SHRI SRIRANG SONDUR (Alternate) 


Jr Director Stprs (B&S)/CB-I 
Jr Director Stprs (B&S)/CB-II (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL BANCHHOR 
SHRI SIMRANJIT SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH BONDE 
Suri D. N. VISHWANATH (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
ӛнкі Vinay GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. DIWAKAR 
SHRI Manos Kumar Dk (Alternate) 


Dr V. RAMACHANDRA 
Dn A. K. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. KHARE 
Suri B. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. JAIN 
Suri L. К. JAIN 


IS 3370 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization 
In personal capacity [B-803, Oberoi Exquisite, Oberoi 
Garden City, Goregaon (East), Mumbai] 
In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, 
Hari Nagar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (M1 ЕІ VGN Minerva Apartments, 
Guruswamy Road, Nolambur, Chennai) 


Representative(s) 
SHRI A. K. JAIN 


Suri R. C. WASON 


Dr C. RAJKUMAR 


Panel for Review/Revision of IS 3370, CED 2:2/P1 


Organization 


In personal capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, 
Wardha Road, Nagpur) 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Gammon Engineers & Contractors Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Government College of Engineering, Pune 
Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


In personal capacity (Grace Villa, Kadamankulam P.O., 
Thiruvalla 689 583) 


In personal capacity (428/374, Ekta Apartments, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110 063) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Mother Dairy Road, Patparganj, Delhi 110 092) 


In personal capacity (K-L/2, Kavi Nagar, 
Ghaziabad 201 002) 


In personal capacity (House No. 2103 Sector 7D, 
Faridabad 121 006) 


In personal capacity (EA-92, Maya Enclave, Hari 
Nagar, New Delhi) 


24 


Representative(s) 
Suni L. К. JAIN (Convener) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG 
SHRI MANIK CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


Dr B. H. BHARATHKUMAR 
Dr P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. W. DESHPANDE 
Suri Мокомр C. BUTALA (Alternate) 


Dr NAMpEo А. HEDAOO 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI MUKESH VALECHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr Dipti RANJAN SAHOO 
Dr SHASHANK BIsHNo! (Alternate) 


Dn Аѕнок К. JAIN 


SHRI J. B. SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 
Suri T. V. G. Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. PALEKAR 
Sur! S. KRISHNA (Alternate) 
SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
SHRI ARVIND KUMAR 
DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Dn A. K. MITTAL 


SHRI HARISH KUMAR JULKA 


Suri R. C. WASON 


(Continued from second cover) 


e) Table 1 has been modified to include values for cementitious content. 


— 


f) Galvanized, epoxy coated and stainless steel bars have been permitted for use. 
g) The H/t ratio has been introduced in various design recommendations. 
h 


j 


wm 


Factor of safety against uplift has been enhanced. 


wa 


The clause on ‘Joints’ has been renamed to ‘Design, detailing and workmanship of joints’ and enlarged to 
include detailed guidance regarding the types, spacing and making of the joints. Additionally, new figures 
showing induced contraction joint and water bars on the soffit of the floors in various types of movement 
joints, and sub-clauses on joints in ground slabs, walls and roofs have been included. 


k 


— 


Existing sub-clause on ‘Jointing materials’ has been made into a new clause to give due emphasis to the 
topic with the revised content. 


m 


x 


Enabling provisions for the use of hydrophilic water-bars and polyurethane grout have been included. 
n) Clause on ‘Test of structure’ has been revised to provide better guidance. 
p 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS 8007 : 1987 ‘Code of practice for design 
of concrete structures for retaining aqueous liquids’, British Standards Institute. 


wm 


Title of the standard has been modified to address the actual coverage. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 02 (13638). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 СІТ. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


