IS 15087:2001

#r**

Indian Standard
PLA~ING AND DESIGN OF DRAINAGE IN IRRIGATION PROJECTS -- GUIDELINES

ICS 93.160

0 BIS 2001

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

NEW DELHI 110002
December 2001

Price Group 2

Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee, WRD 6

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. There is no 1S0 standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on the practices prevalent in the field in India. The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particul~ requirement of this standard is complied witli, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, kbould be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 15087:2001

Indian Standard
PLANNING AND DESIGN OF DRAINAGE IN IIUUGATION PROJECTS -- GUIDELINES
1 SCOPE

This standard lays down the guidelines for planning and design of drainage system in irrigation projects including the guidelines for dealing with the problem of drainage in the command areas of irrigation projects. 2 SOIL MOISTURE AND PLANT GROWTH
2.1 The particular moisture content of a soil which

about 1 m can be seen causing no rise of moisture at the surface and not permitting sufficient growth of crops. 5 FACTORS LEADING TO RISE IN SUB-SOIL WATER TABLE a) b) c) d) e) f) Seepage from water bodies; Over-irrigation; Excessive rainfall; Inadequate natural drainage; Obstruction to drainage; Poor subsoil condition;

is best for plant growth is the optimum moisture content. It varies for soils of different texture and to some extent on different types of crops. The plant roots extract water from the thin film surrounding the soil particles. The amount of water adhering to the particles in fine grained soil is greater than in a coarse grained soil on account of greater surface area of the fine particles. The optimum moisture content corresponds closer to the amount which renders the soil most tliable and in the best condition for cultivation. When moisture exceeds this optimum limit, the pore space becomes partly filled with moisture, aeration becomes deficient and the conditions are less favorable for cultivation and plant growth. This results in what is commonly known as water-logging. 2.2 In water-logged soils the air content of the soil is low because most pores are filled with water. The exchange between the remaining air in the soil and air in the atmosphere above gets restricted by these conditions. In consequence, plant respiration is restricted by oxygen deficiency while at the same time carbon dioxide accumulates to toxic levels. This impairs root growth and the roots ability to absorb nutrients. The water-logging also indirectly affects the plant growth by its adverse effects on soil biological life and on the structure of the soil. The excess water in the soil also adversely affects the soil workability and the farm operations are impaired. 3 ZONES OF ROOT GROWTH A zone of soil sufficient for the growth of roots of deep rooted crops is essential. Usually a depth of about 1 to 1.5 m of unsaturated soil is sufficient for expansion and growth of the root system of the crops. 4 CAPILLARY ACTION In fine grained and well compacted soils the capilhuy action is greatest. In fine grained soils water rises to the extent of 1.2 to 1.5 m by capillary action bringing the salts to the surface. On the other hand in coarse grained soils even free ground water to a depth of 1

@ Adverse gee-hydrologic regime ( say, existence of hard pan at shallow depth, etc ); and h) Leakage and spillage from canals and field channels.

6 SALINITY
6.1 When ground water table rises, water in the sub soil rises to the surface by capillary action. When water reaches the surface it evaporates due to the action of wind and temperature leaving behind the dissolved salts on or near the surface. This phenomenon is known as salt-efflorescence and leads to formation of saline lands.

6.2 The real trouble is not due to salt-eftlorescence because this can be washed out of soil by flooding following drainage, but due to the effect of alkalinity on heavy soil. Alkalies have dispersing or defloculating action on clay causing the soil to lose its tilth and become impervious and highly retentive. The circulation of air is completely stopped with the result nothing is able to grow in the soil. Areas of this type are devoid of vegetation. 6.3 The salinity of a soil is measured by electrical conductivity ( EC ) of the soil samples in water suspension 1:2. Soils with EC value Oto 1 mmhos/ cm are termed as non saline, those with values be~een 1 to 3 mmhos/cm are termed as slightly saline and soils with EC values greater than 3 mmhos/cm are termed as saline soils. There are some salt resistant crops like rice which can be grown upto EC value of4 mmhosl cm. 6.4 The alkaline deposits changes the pH value of

IS 15087:2001

the soil. ThepH value of 7.0 to 8.5 gives normal yield. When the value is between 8.5 to 9.0, the yield decreases. WhenpHrises above ll.O, thesoil islikely to become infertile.
7 DRAINAGE 7.1 Necessity SYSTEMS of Drainage

7.3.1.4 A carrier drain is a drain which collects water from seepage/tield drains and carries it to the main drain. 7.3.1.5 Main drain or outfall drain is normally a drain constructed along natural drainage path by remodeling the existing drainage path. The carriers drains normally outfall in the main drain. Sometimes, seepage/fields drains also directly outfall in the main drains. 7.3.2 Sub-Surface Drains

Suitable drainage of agricultural land is a necessity for high level agricultural production. Drainage maintains the productive capacity of soil by removing excess water, improving the soil structure, improving the air circulation and reducing salt content and erosion. When large areas are brought under irrigation atleast a part of the land warrants proper drainage. Irrigation and drainage are complimentary practices.
7.2 Types of Drains 7.2.1 Ground water drainage is based on the principle

Sub-surface drainage is useful for laying drainage system quickly and where deeper outfalls are available. This also saves the land for cultivation. No culverts/ crossing are required in sub-surface drainage system.
7.4 Design Criteria of Surface Drain 7.4.1 The designed capacity of the surface drain will

depend on the following: a) Area to be drained, b) Pattern of rainfall, c) Soil characteristics, d) Crops grown, and e) Natural ground slope.
7.4.2 The area to be drained successively increases for afield drain, carrier drain and main drain. Surface drains are designed for removal of excess rainfall in a predetermined period. Usuallythe basis is the maximum rainfall occurring in 24 hours once in five years. The surface run-off depends on the infiltration characteristics, natural ground slope and vegetative cover of the soil. The run-off coefficient will vary with the different soils. The excess rainfall can not be disposed off immediately, a period of 3 days is generally allowed for paddy, sugarcane, banana, etc, and 1 to 1.5 days for other food crops and vegetables. The surface drains designed for disposal of run-off from rainfall are generally adequate for disposal of excess irrigation water. 7.4.3 The indicative designed capacities are as given

that controlling the ground water level can provide the best unsaturated conditions for the plant growth. The ideal situation is to control the water within certain limits, which means enabling the water in the saturated zone to move from the soil body to some outfall where the natural lateral movement of ground water exists. This should be permitted by artificial gravitional means. Where the ground water is locked in the area it means taking the water out against gravity.
7.2.2 Horizontal and Vertical Drainage

There are two types of ground water drainage. Horizontal through pipes or open ditches and vertical by lifting or pumping from wells. The horizontal drainage system usually consists of pipes or open ditch system. . In some cases particularly in flatter areas, vertical drainage may be a better approach. The water received from vertical drainage may be suitably mixed in canal water provided it is of suitable quality or may be disposed off by surfacelsub-sur face drainage.
7,3 Types of Drainage System

There are two main types of drainage systems. a) b) Surface drains; and Sub-surface drains.

in Table 1 in Litres/Second/Hectare. 7.5 Design Criteria Sub-surface
7.5.1 Drainage Coefficient Drain

7.3.1 Surface Drains
7.3.1.1 Surface drainage is the orderly removal of excess

water from land surface through constructed or improved natural channels and supplemented by grading of land surfaces. 7.3.1.2 Seepage drains are provided along the canals to intercept seepage water. 7.3.1.3 A field drain is a graded channel that collects excess water from a field or a holding. 2

Based on the experience in the Deccan Canals the expected drainage discharge in the drains is of the order of 30 litres per second for a 100 hectare block. The designed discharge is usually taken 1.5 times this discharge allowing for excess drainage factor for safety. The expected drainage discharge is a fimction of type of soil, the crops grown, topography, method of application of irrigation water and may vary from place to place.

IS 15087:2001 Tablel Indicative Designed Capacities ( Clause 7.4.3)

sl
No.

Zone

Design Rainfall in 24 h mm (3) 250

Soils

Run-Off Coefficient

Design Runoff mm (6) 125

Availaabk Time days (7) 3

Design Runoff mm/days (8) 42

Design Capcity I/s/ha (9) 5

(1) i)

(2) Heavy rainfall

(4) Paddy fields and clayey soils Mummy soils Clayey soils Murumy soils

(5) 0.5

ii) iii) iv)

Heavy rainfall Other areas Other areas

250 100 100

0.25 0.5 0.25

62 50 25

1.5 1.5 1.5

42 33 16

5 4 2

7.5.2

Gradient

of the Drain

The bed slope of the drain should allow a non-silting velocity and the gradient should as far as possible be uniform. Depending on the topography and other conditions, gradient may vary between 1:150 to 1:1000. 7.5.3 Spacing of Drains The spacing of the drain is given by equation given below:
~=

taking preventive measures to see that the land does not get damaged and resort to artificial drainage only when it becomes necessary. In the preventive measures the most effective method will be application of controlled irrigation water so that no excessive water accumulates within the root zone. 10 MAINTENANCE Proper maintenance of the drainage system is very essential for successful drainage. If drains are not properly maintained lands will not be adequately drained and will result in darnages due to water-logging and salinity, The main items ofmaintenance are removal of silt, removal of vegetative growth, repairs of side slopes and maintenance of road bank and other structures.
11 MONITORING OF IRRIGATED AREAS

8 KhD
L2

where drainage discharge ( recharge) ( m/day ), hydraulic ( m/day), conductivity or of coefficient the soil

height of water table midway between the drains ( m), equivalent depth to impermeable substratum ( m ) accounting for radial flow and any depth of the impermeable layer, and spacing between the drains ( m). Knowing the values of K, D, h and q, the spacing of drains can be computed fkom above equation. 8 PILOT DRAINAGE PROJECTS Before the drainage system in the affected command area is constructed, it is advisable to take up a few pilot projects. As per the experience gained, the drainage system in full affected conunand area may be constructed. 9 PREVENTIVE MEASURES Drainage problems can best be tackled mainly by

To identi~ the problem of water-logging well in time, it is necessary to monitor the ground water table conditions. For this purpose observations of ground water table using existing wells in the command area as well as by making auger holes where necessary is essential. The ground water table should be monitored twice in a year that is before and atler monsoon. The quality of water as well as soil should also be regularly tested for EC value to ascertain the salinity problem. Where the tendency of ground water is to rise above the root zone, preventive measures by controlled irrigation as well as effective drainage schem~s should immediately be taken. While executing the distribution network for irrigation project, it would be better to reshape the existing natural drains in such a way that the command area is well drained and remains free from water-logging. Subsequently atler the irrigation application and monitoring the area if damages are noticed, drainage schemes in the form of laterals joining the natural drains may be constructed to reclaim the area.

3

IS 15087:2001

ANNEX

A

( F'oreword )
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee, WRD 6
Organization Central Water Commission, Bhakra New Delhi Representative(s) SHRIR. S. PRASAD MEMBER ( WP&P ) ( Chairman ) DIRECTOR ( DESIGN) DEPUTY SECRETARY ( Planning) SHRIC. V. J. VERMA SHRIP. K. KUMAR SHRIS. D. DUBEYA ( Alternate ) CHIEFENGINEER ( PAO ) DIRECTOR PA ( North ) ( Alternate ) DR A. K. SINHA of Andhra Pradesh, CHIEFENGINEER ( Major Irrigation ) " SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER( World Bank ) ( Alternate) CHIEFENGINEER ( R&D) SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( CDO ) ( Alternate) DIRECTOR CHIEFENGINEER DIRECTOR ( Plant Designs ) ( Alternate ) SHRIN. D. VADNERE SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER & DEPUTY SECRETARY ( 1. M. ) ( Alternate ) CHIEFENGINEER DIRECTOR ( Design Research) ( Alternate ) ( Alternate )

Beas Management Board, Chandigarh

Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi Central Water Commission, New Delhi Geological Survey of India, Lucknow Irrigation Department, Hyderabad Irrigation Department, Government

Government

of Haryana, Chandigarh

Irrigation Department, Irrigation Department,

Government of Karnataka,

Bangalore

Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Government of Maharashtra, Nagpur

Irrigation Department,

Irrigation Department, Irrigation Department,

Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow

CHIEFENGINEER ( Yamuna Valley ) Surmrurvmwmw ENGINEER ( Irrigation Construction Circle ) ( Alternate ) DR S. MAUDGAL DR ( SHRIMATI ) NALINIBHAT( Alternate ) SHRIR. N. KHAZANCHI SHRIMATI O. R. LALITA ( Alternate ) Jouw ADVISER ( I&CAD ) DEPUTY ADVISER ( I&CAD) ( Alternate )

Ministry of Environment National Hydroelectric Planning Commission,

and Forests, New Delhi Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad New Delhi Government of Tamil Nadu, Chennai Government of Madhya Pradesh,

Public Works Department, Water Resources Bhopal

ENGINEER-IN-CHIEF Jonrr CHIEFENGINEER ( Alternate ) CHIEFENGINEER ( BODHI ) DIRECTOR ( RATES& COST) ( Alternate ) DR A. K. SINGH DR A. SINGH( Alternate ) PROFU. C. CHAUBE DR NAYAN SHARMA( Alternate ) SHRIS.S. SETHI,Director& Head ( WRD ) [ Representing Director General ( Ex-oficio )]

Department,

Water Technology Centre ( IARI ), New Delhi University of Roorkee, BIS Directorate General Roorkee

Member-Secretary SHRIR. S. JUNEJA Joint Director ( WRD ), BIS

4

Bureau

of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 6 ( 191 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 3230131,3233375,3239402 Regional Offices: Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern: 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P, Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBA1400 093 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 { 3378626,3379120 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDER4BAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH.PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRWANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing
Press, Khurja, India

