Waa HAF IS 16905 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


(Reaffirmed 2022) 


Wael aed — he ASNA 
att aferrat — ott aam 


Automotive Vehicles — Front 
Underrun Protective Devices 
(FUPDs) — General Requirements 


ICS 43.040.80 


© BIS 2018 


aR AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 geigasg AHL AM, Ae fercit-110002 
Vee” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2018 Price Group 4 


Passive Safety Crash Protection Systems Sectional Committee, TED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized bythe Passive Safety 
Crash Protection Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


The purpose of this standard is to offer effective protection against front underrunning of vehicles of category M1 
or N1 in the event of front collision with vehicles of categories N2 and N3. 


While preparing this Indian Standard considerable assistance is derived from : 


a) ECER93 
b) AIS 069 Automotive vehicles — Front underrun protective devices (FUPDs) — General requirements 
c) Uniform provisions concerning the approval of: 

1) Front Underrun Protective Devices (FUPDs), 

2) Vehicles with regard to the installation of an FUPD of an approved type, and 

3) Vehicles with regard to their Front Underrun Protection (FUP). 


IS 16905 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — FRONT UNDERRUN 
PROTECTIVE DEVICES (FUPDs) — GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard applies to the front underrun 
protection offered by complete vehicles of categories 
N2, and N3 as defined in IS 14272 : 2011 ‘Automotive 
vehicles — Types — Terminology’. 


1.2 The requirements of this standard do not apply to: 


a) off-road vehicles of categories N2G and N3G; 
and 

b) vehicles such that their use is incompatible 
with the provisions of front underrun 
protection. 


1.3 This standard applies to: 


a) front underrun protection devices which are 
intended to be fitted to vehicles of categories 
N2 and N3. 

b) the installation on vehicles of categories N2 
and N3 of FUPDs which have been type 
approved by this standard. 

c) vehicles of categories N2 and N3 with regard 
to its front underrun protection (FUP), 
equipped with an FUPD which has not been 
separately approved according to 4 of this 
standard or so designed and/or equipped that 
their component parts can be regarded as 
fulfilling the function of the FUPD. 


1.4 Vehicles of categories N2 with a maximum mass 
not exceeding 7.5 tonnes shall comply only with the 
ground clearance requirement of 450 mm set out in 
this standard. 


1.5 The purpose of this standard is to offer effective 
protection for vehicles of category M1 or N lagainst 
underrunning of vehicles mentioned in 1 of this standard 
in the event of a frontal collision. 


2 REFERENCE 


2.1 The following standard contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Maximum Weight of the Vehicle — Means the 
weight stated by the vehicle manufacturer to be the 
maximum technically permissible. 


3.2 Unladen Vehicle — Means the vehicle in running 
order unoccupied and unladen but complete 
with,coolant, lubricant, tools and a spare wheel (if 
provided as standard equipment by the vehicle 
manufacturer) and 90 percent fuel. 


3.3 Approval of an FUPD — Means the approval of 
such a type of FUPD with respect to the requirements 
laid down in 5. 


3.4 Type of FUPD — Means FUPD which do not 
differ with respect to the essential characteristics such 
as shape, dimensions, attachment, materials and the 
markings cited in 8.2. 
3.5 Front Underrun Protection (FUP) — Means the 
presence at the front of the vehicle of either: 

a) aspecial device (FUPD); or 

b) body work, chassis parts or other components, 

such that by virtue of their shape and 


characteristics, these elements can be regarded 
as fulfilling the function of the FUPD. 


3.6 Approval of a Vehicle — Means the approval of 
a vehicle type: 


a) with regard to the installation of an FUPD of 
an approved type according to 4, or 

b) with regard to its FUP for requirements given 
in 6. 


3.7 Vehicle Type — Means vehicles which do not 
essentially differ in such aspects as: 


a) The width of the foremost axle measured at 
the outermost part of the tyres excluding the 
bulging of the tyres close to the ground. 

b) The structure, the dimensions, the shape and 
materials of the front part of the vehicle in so 


IS 16905 : 2018 


far as they have a bearing on the requirements 
of the relevant part of this standard. 

c) The approved FUPDs fitted to the vehicle, 
where the application is pursuant to satisfying 
requirements laid down in 5. 

d) The maximum weight of the vehicle type. 


4 REQUIREMENTS FOR FUPDs 


4.1 The FUPD shall offer adequate resistance to forces 
applied parallel to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle 
and also satisfy certain dimensional requirements. 
These shall be demonstrated in accordance with the 
test procedure and conditions specified in Annex A to 
this standard. 


4.2 The section height of the FUPD cross-member shall 
not be less than 100 mm for category N2 vehicles and 
120 mm for vehicles of category N3. The lateral 
extremities of the cross-member shall not bend to the 
front or have a sharp outer edge; this condition is 
fulfilled when the lateral extremities of the cross- 
member are rounded on the outside and have a radius 
of curvature of not less than 2.5 mm. 


4.3 The device may be so designed that its position at 
the front of the vehicle can be varied. In this event, 
there shall be a guaranteed method of securing it in the 
service position so that any unintentional change of 
position is precluded. It shall be possible for the 


L J 


MAXIMUM GUARD WIDTH 


MINIMUM GUARD WIDTH 


MUDGUARD 


operator to vary the position of the device by applying 
a force not exceeding 40 daN. 


4.4 The outermost surfaces of every front guard installation 
shall be essentially smooth or horizontally corrugated save 
that domed heads of bolts or rivets may protrude beyond 
the surface to a distance not exceeding 10 mm. 


5 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR 
FUPD OF AN APPROVED TYPE 


5.1The maximum weight of a vehicle type for which 
approval is requested shall not exceed the value 
indicated on the type approval communication form of 
each approved FUPD intended to be installed on that 
vehicle. 


5.2 The vehicle with the FUPD installed shall satisfy 
certain dimensional requirements specified in Annex 
A taking into account the test conditions and 
information submitted as per 8. 


5.3 The FUPD shall be so fitted to the vehicle that the 
horizontal distance measured in the rearward direction 
from the foremost part of the vehicle to the front of the 
FUPD does not exceed 400 mm diminished by the 
recorded deformation measured at any of the points 
where the test forces have been applied during the type 
approval of the FUPD in conformity with the provisions 
of 4 (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


NOTE — The shape of FUPD is only an example. 


Fic. 1 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FUPD (VEHICLE FRONT VIEW) 


MAXIMUM 400 
AFTER TEST 


FRONT UNDERRUN 
PROTECTION IN EXTREME 
REARWARDS POSITION 


IS 16905 : 2018 


MAX. 495 YM. 
AFETR TEST 
MAX. 445 AS 


INSTALLED 


MAX. 500 
AFTER TEST 


Fic. 2 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FUPD 


5.4 In measuring these distances, any part of the vehicle 
which is more than 2 m above the ground shall be 
excluded. 


5.5 The maximum ground clearance with respect to 
the underside of the FUPD shall be no more than 450 
mm, as specified in A-2.2, between the two points P, 
in the installed condition. Outboard of each point P, 
this height may be greater than 450 mm providing the 
underside is not above a plane passing through the 
underside of the FUPD directly below the point P, 
and forming a slope at 15° above the horizontal 
(see Fig. 3). 


5.6 The height above the ground of the points of 
application of the test forces applied to the FUPD 
according to 4 shall not exceed 495 mm as specified 
in A-2.2. 


5.7 The maximum ground clearance with respect to the 
underside of the FUPD between the two points P, shall 
be no more than 500 mm taking into account their 
movement during the application of the test load, 
according to 4. 


5.8 The width of the FUPD shall at no point exceed the 
width of the mudguards covering the wheels of the 
foremost axle nor shall it be more than 100 mm shorter 
on either side than the foremost axle measured at the 
outermost points of the tyres, excluding the bulging of 
the tyres close to the ground (see Fig. 1), or 200 mm 


shorter on either side, measured from the outermost 
points of the access steps to the driver’s cabin. 


6 REQUIREMENTS FOR A VEHICLE WITH 
FUPD 


6.1 Any vehicle in one of the categories N2 or N3 will 
be deemed to satisfy the condition set out in 6.2 
provided that the vehicle is equipped with an FUPD 
which has not been separately approved to of this 
standard or is so designed and/or equipped at the front 
that, by virtue of their shape and characteristics, its 
component parts can be regarded as replacing the front 
underrun protective device. Components whose 
combined function satisfies the following requirements 
are considered to form a front underrun protective 
device. 


6.2 The FUP shall offer adequate resistance to forces 
applied parallel to the longitudinal axis of the vehicle. 
The FUP shall also satisfy certain dimensional 
requirements. These shall be demonstrated in 
accordance with the test procedure and conditions 
specified in Annex A. 


6.3 For application pursuant to 6, the section height of 
the FUPD cross-member (not separately approved to 4 
shall not be less than 100 mm for category N2 vehicles 
and 120 mm for vehicles of category N3. 


6.4 The device may be so designed that its position at 


IS 16905 : 2018 


the front of the vehicle can be varied. In this event, 
there shall be a guaranteed method of securing it in the 
service position so that any unintentional change of 
position is precluded. It shall be possible for the 
operator to vary the position of the device as specified 
by the manufacturer byapplying a force not exceeding 
40 daN. 


6.5 The FUP shall have sufficient strength that the 
horizontal distance measured in the rearward direction 
between the foremost part of the vehicle after the 
application of the test forces (specified in Annex A) 
and the test ram contact surface on the vehicle does 
not exceed 400 mm. 


6.6 In measuring these distances, any part of the vehicle 
which is more than 2 m above the ground shall be 
excluded. 


6.7 The maximum ground clearance with respect to 
the underside of the FUP shall be no more than 450 mm, 
as specified in A-2, between the two points P,. Outboard 
of each point P, this height may be greater than 450 mm 
providing the underside is not above a plane passing 
through the underside of the FUP directly below the 
point P, and forming a slope at 15° above the horizontal 
(see Fig. 3). 


6.8 The maximum ground clearance with respect to 
the underside of the FUP between the two points P, 
shall be no more than 500 mm taking into account their 
movement during the application of the test load. 


6.9 The width of the FUP shall at no point exceed 
the width of the mudguards covering the wheels of 
the foremost axle nor shall it be more than 100 mm 
shorter on either side than the foremost axle 
measured at the outermost points of the tyres, 
excluding the bulging of the tyres close to the ground 
(see Fig.1), or 200 mm shorter on either side, 
measured from the outermost points of the access 
steps to the driver’s cabin. 


7 MODIFICATION AND EXTENSION OF 
APPROVAL 


7.1 Every modification of a type of FUPD or vehicle 
shall be notified to the Test Agency, which approved 
the type. The Test Agency may then either: 


a) consider that the modifications made are 
unlikely to have an appreciable adverse effect 
and that in any case the FUPD or vehicle still 
complies with the requirements; or 

b) require a further test report from the Test 
Agency responsible for conducting the tests. 


7.2 Confirmation or refusal of approval, specifying the 
alterations shall be communicated to the parties. 


8 TECHNICAL INFORMATION TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE COMPONENT / VEHICLE 
MANUFACTURER 


8.1 The application for approval to a part of this 
standard shall be submitted by the manufacturer of the 
type (vehicle/FUPD) or his duly accredited 
representative. 


8.2 For each type the application shall be accompanied 
by: 


a) Documentation and latest version 
authenticated drawings in triplicate giving a 
description of the technical characteristics of 
the type (vehicle/FUPD): its dimensions, lines 
and constituent materials, in so far as required 
for the purpose of this standard. 

b) In case of FUPD sample of the type: the 
sample shall be clearly and indelibly marked 
on all its main components, relevant to the 
front underrun, with the applicant’s trade name 
or mark and the type designation; 


c) A representative of the type of device or 
vehicle to be approved shall be submitted for 
each test to the Test Agency responsible for 
conducting the approval tests; 

d) For applications pursuant to 5 or 6, a vehicle 
not comprising all the components proper to 
the type may be accepted for test provided that 
they do not adversely affect the front underrun 
protection. 

e) Identification of the positions of the points P. 
P, and P, as defined in Annex A. For 
applications pursuant to satisfying 4, these 
shall take into account the requirements of 5. 


8.3 Applications pursuant to satisfying 5 shall be 
accompanied by: 


8.3.1 A list of the FUPDs intended to be fitted to the 
vehicle type. 


8.4 Applications pursuant to satisfying 5 and 6 shall be 
accompanied by information on the vehicle type as 
defined in 3.1.7. 


9 CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 


9.1 FUPDs and vehicles approved to this standard shall 
be so manufactured as to conform to the type approval 
by meeting the requirements set forth in this standard. 


9.2 In order to verify that the requirements of 9.1 are 
met, suitable controls of the production shall be carried 
out. 


9.3 The holder of the approval shall in particular: 


a) Ensure existence of procedures for the 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


effective control of the quality of the vehicle 
or the device; 

Have access to the testing equipment 
necessary for checking the conformity to each 
approved type; 

Record data of test results and annexed 
documents, which shall remain available for 
a period to be determined in accordance with 
the Test Agency; 

Analyse the results of each type of test, in 
order to verify and ensure the stability of the 
vehicle or the device characteristics making 
allowance for variations of an industrial 
production; 

Ensure that for each type of vehicle or device 
sufficient checks and tests are carried out 
regarding the dimensions, materials and 
performance of the components, which fulfil 
the function of the FUP and of those for the 
installation on the vehicle; and 


Ensure that any set of samples or test pieces 
giving evidence of non-conformity with the 
type of test considered shall give rise to 
another sampling and another test. All the 
necessary steps shall be taken to re-establish 
the conformity of the corresponding 
production. 


SE 


FRONT OF 
TRUCK 


POINT P, 


450 mm 


SE 


Fic. 3 MAXIMUM GROUND CLEARANCE WITH RESPECT TO THE UNDERSIDE OF THE FUPD 


IS 16905 : 2018 


9.4 The Test Agency which has granted type-approval 
may at any time verify the conformity control methods 
applicable to each production unit. 


9.4.1 In every inspection, the test books and production 
survey records shall be presented to the visiting 
inspector. 


9.4.2 The inspector may take samples at random which 
will be tested in the manufacturer’s laboratory. The 
minimum number of samples may be determined 
according to the results of the manufacturer’s own 
verification. 


9.4.3 When the quality level appears unsatisfactory or 
when it seems necessary to verify the validity of the 
tests carried out in application of 9.4.2 the inspector 
may select samples to be sent to the Test Agency which 
has conducted the type approval tests. 


9.4.4 The Test Agency may carry out any test 
prescribed in this standard. 


9.4.5 The normal frequency of inspections authorized 
by the Test Agency shall be one per two years. In the 
case when negative results are recorded during one of 
these visits, the Test Agency shall ensure that all 
necessary steps are taken to re-establish the conformity 
of production as rapidly as possible. 


SURFACE DEFINING 
UPPER LIMIT OF THE 
ENDS SLOPED 
LOWER EDGE. 


IS 16905 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 4.1, 5.2, 6.2, 6.5 and 8.2.5) 
TEST CONDITIONS AND PROCEDURES 


A-1 TEST CONDITIONS FOR FUPDs 


A-1.1 At the request of the manufacturer the test may 
be conducted either: 


a) Ona vehicle of the type for which FUPD is 
intended; in that case the conditions set out in 
A-2.2 shall be observed; or 

b) Onapart of the chassis of the vehicle type for 
which the FUPD is intended; this part shall 
be representative of the vehicle type(s) in 
question; or 

c) Onarigid test bench. 


A-1.2 In the case of A-1.1(b) and A-1.1(c) above the 
parts used to connect the FUPD to part of the vehicle 
chassis or to the rigid test bench shall be equivalent to 
those which are used to secure the FUPD when it is 
installed on the vehicle. 


A-1.3 At the request of the manufacturer and with the 
consent of the Test Agency the test procedure described 
in A-3 may be simulated by calculation or another such 
method provided that its equivalence is demonstrated. 


A-2 TEST CONDITIONS FOR VEHICLES 


A-2.1 The vehicle may, if necessary to achieve the test 
forces required in A-3.1, be restrained by any method, 
this method to be specified by the vehicle manufacturer. 


A-2.2 Dimensions shall be taken as if the vehicle were 
in the following condition: 


a) The vehicle was unladen, 

b) The vehicle was at rest on a level, flat, rigid 
and smooth surface, 

c) The front wheels were in the straight-ahead 
position, and 

d) The tyres were inflated to the pressure 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer. 


Vehicles equipped with hydro pneumatic, hydraulic or 
pneumatic suspension or a device for automatic 
levelling according to load were in their normal running 
condition specified by the manufacturer. 


A-2.3 Vehicles of categories N2 with a maximum mass 
not exceeding 7.5 tonnes shall comply only with the 
ground clearance requirement of 450 mm set out in 
this standard. 


A-3 TEST PROCEDURE 
A-3.1 Points P, are located up to 200 mm from the 


longitudinal planes tangential to the outermost points 
of the tyres on the front axle, excluding the bulging of 
the tyres close to the ground; points P, are symmetrical 
to the median longitudinal plane of the vehicle at a 
distance from each other of 700 to 1 200 mm inclusive. 
The exact positions shall be specified by the 
manufacturer. 


A-3.2 The height above the ground of points P} and 
P, shall be defined by the vehicle manufacturer within 
the lines that bound the front face of the device. The 
height shall not, however, exceed 495 mm when the 
vehicle is unladen. P, is in the vertical longitudinal 
median plane of the vehicle (see Fig. 1). 


A-3.3 The test forces set out below shall be applied to 
each of the test points in separate tests on the same 
vehicle or device or, if requested by the manufacturer/ 
agent;in advance, on different vehicles or device 
samples. 


A-3.3.1 Ifthe structure and components of the vehicle 
relevant to the front underrun protection are located 
substantially symmetrical to its longitudinal median 
plane the tests at points P, and P, shall be carried out 
only on one side otherwise the forces mentioned 
in A-3.3.3 and A-3.3.4 shall be applied successively to 
points P, and P, on both sides. 


A-3.3.2 When tested the forces shall be applied as 
rapidly as possible and the device or vehicle shall 
withstand the forces in the following clauses for at least 
0.2s. 


A-3.3.3 A horizontal force equal to 50 percent of the 
maximum weight of the vehicle or intended vehicle 
type(s) but not exceeding 80 x 10? N shall be applied 
to points P}. 


A-3.3.4 A horizontal force equal to 100percent of the 
maximum weight of the vehicle or intended vehicle 
type(s) but not exceeding 160 x 10° N shall be applied 
to points P}. 


A-3.3.5 If the device is discontinuous and is reduced 
in cross-section area between the two points P,, then 
the tests shall continue with the application of a 
horizontal force applied to the point P, the same as 
that to the points P, 


A-3.4 The maximum horizontal and vertical 
displacements of each test point during the application 
of the above forces shall be recorded and the highest 
recorded on the communication document. 


A-3.5 Whenever a practical test is performed to verify 
compliance with the above-mentioned requirements, 
the following conditions shall be fulfilled: 


a) For application pursuant to 6, an FUPD (not 
separately approved to 4) shall be connected 
to the chassis side members of the vehicle or 
to whatever replaces them or a structure with 
demonstrated equivalent performance 
capabilities. 

b) The specified forces shall be applied by rams 


IS 16905 : 2018 


which are suitably articulated (for example by 
means of universal joints) and shall be parallel 
to the median longitudinal plane of the vehicle 
via a surface not more than 250 mm in height 
(the exact height and width shall be indicated 
by the manufacturer) and not more than 
400 mm wide, with a radius of curvature of 
5 +1 mm at the vertical edges; the centre of 
the surface is placed successively at points 
P, P, and P}. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 29 (1028). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : CUT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


