WaT ATH IS 16135 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


Ram witetars dn Wart вит 
Wer зат sit femen — 
Afa fear 


Dry Lining and Partitioning Using 
Gypsum Plasterboard — 
Code of Practice 


ICS 91.060.10 


© BIS 2014 


чї AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
е "IW чая, 9 чете AHL НИ, Чї #<еей-110002 
лещи, MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in  www.standardsbis.in 


May 2014 Price Group 13 


Building Lime and Gypsum Products Sectional Committee, CED 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Building 
Lime and Gypsum Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


The internal surfaces of walls and ceilings of most of the buildings are finished internally by applying plaster in 
one or more coats. In order to reduce the demand of site labour, the use of building board, such as gypsum 
plasterboard, fibre hard board, cement coir board and asbestos cement building board as covering for walls and 
ceiling is increasing steadily. Gypsum boards have the specific advantage of being lighter than the boards of 
similar nature, such as fibre hard boards and asbestos cement building boards. Gypsum boards also possess better 
fire-resisting, thermal and sound insulating properties. 


Gypsum boards are manufactured as plain, laminated and reinforced boards. Reinforcing materials generally 
used are glass fibres, paper, vegetable fibres, etc. The boards may be used to provide dry lining finishes to 
masonry walls, to ceilings, to steel or timber frame partitions, or as ceilings to structural steel columns and 
beams, or in the manufacture of prefabricated partition panels. Laminated gypsum boards are used for laying for 
concrete ceiling. With concrete it combines firmly and represents readymade interior plastering. 


This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to fixing of gypsum boards by nailing, 
screwing, etc. or sticking with gypsum based or other adhesives. The provisions were intended to provide the 
users of this standard, comprehensive information than those in IS 1414 : 1989 ‘Code of practice for fixing of 
wall coverings (first revision) . 


Dry lining is an alternative to the traditional wet plastering of walls and ceilings to provide surfaces suitable to 
receive various decorative treatments. The method involves the fixing of a sheet material, which is subsequently 
jointed in the appropriate manner, to the face of the walls or ceilings. This standard confines itself to 
recommendations for dry lining using gypsum boards; it is not intended to apply to other sheet materials. 


This standard provides guidance on the selection of a dry lining system and lists factors that should be taken into 
consideration in the selection process. It gives recommendations for methods of dry lining to a variety of solid 
backgrounds and to timber and metal framing. Recommendations for on-site methods of working are also included 
together with detailed descriptions of the materials, components and accessories used in the dry lining process. 


This standard is developed to suit Indian context and is largely based on the technical provisions as given in 
BS 8212 : 1995 ‘Code of practice for dry lining and partitioning using gypsum plasterboard’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16135 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


DRY LINING AND PARTITIONING USING GYPSUM 
PLASTERBOARD — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard gives recommendations for dry lining 
walls, ceilings and partitioning using gypsum 
plasterboards. Composite products such as gypsum 
plasterboard backed with insulation materials are also 
included. This standard does not deal with linings to 
heated ceilings. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contains provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. АП standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreement based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 2469, IS 2547 (Part 1), IS 2547 (Part 2), IS 2095 
(Part 1), IS 2095 (Part 2) and IS 2095 (Part 3) and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Face — It is the surface of gypsum plasterboard 
on which the paper extends continuously to cover the 
edges lengthwise. 


3.2 Back — It is the surface of gypsum plasterboard 
having a double thickness of paper along the two edges. 


3.3 Insulating Gypsum Wallboard — The gypsum 
wallboard backed with a film having a surface of low 
emissivity, for example, aluminium, to improve thermal 
insulation when used in conjunction with an air space. 


3.4 Thermal Wallboard Laminate — The gypsum 
wallboard backed with an insulating material such as 
expanded polystyrene, polyurethane, phenol 
formaldehyde foam or synthetic mineral fibre 
materials. 


3.5 Predecorated Gypsum Wallboard — The 
gypsum wallboard faced with either paper or cloth 
backed vinyl film. 


3.6 Laminated Gypsum Plasterboard Partitions — 
Three or more layers of gypsum wallboard bonded 
together and fixed at the perimeter to a steel or timber 
frame. 


3.7 Relocatable Partitions — Partitions that permit 
reassembly after removal and relocation. 


3.8 Metal Furring Channel — Galvanized steel 
section for the attachment of wallboard linings to solid 
backgrounds. 


3.9 Resilient Fixing Channel — Galvanized steel 
section for securing gypsum wallboard to the 
supporting background by a resilient mounting. 


3.10 Nailable Fixing Plug — Galvanized steel nail 
with an expandable plastics sleeve. 


3.11 General Purpose Bonding Compound — An 
adhesive made from retarded calcium sulphate 
hemihydrate and additives. 


3.12 Thermal Wallboard Laminate Adhesive — An 
adhesive made from synthetic resin emulsion with 
fillers used for bonding thermal wallboard laminates 
to plastered walls. 


3.13 Resilient Wallboard Adhesive — An adhesive 
made from synthetic rubber/resin used to bond 
plasterboard to plasterboard. 


3.14 Decorative Textured Coating — Plastics based 
textured coating used as a decorative finish. 


4 EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 


When preparing dry lining details the designer should 
take into account the following points. 


a) The choice of dry lining systems to be used 
in various parts of the building depends on 
functional requirements and the nature of the 
background. The background, including 
building and manufacturing tolerances, and 
its dry lining should therefore receive 
consideration together. This is particularly 
important where plasterboard is to be fixed 
to trussed rafters. A thickness of rafter 
conforming to IS 4891 and perfectly adequate 
from a structural point of view may be 
unsuitable to permit adequate fixing of the 
end of the plasterboard in accordance with 
the recommendations given in 8.3.3. 

b) Thetype of surface finish and any other points 
affecting the final appearance, particularly the 
compatibility of the dry lining with the 
proposed decorative finish. 


IS 16135 : 2014 


c) The area and types of finish and thickness 
required together with sufficient details of the 
nature of the surfaces to be dry lined and the 
junctions with window frames, door frames, 
ceilings and linings, so that the most suitable 
dry lining materials and methods can be 
selected. 

d) The effect of the thickness of the dry lining 
on, 

1) the finished sizes and heights of rooms 
or other spaces; 


2) thethickness of grounds; timber framing 
requirements; 

3) frames which are to be flush both sides 
in thin walls and partitions; 

4) the positioning of frames and other 
joinery relative to dry lining faces; 

5) grooves in joinery that are to receive dry 
lining; 

6) the positioning of and provision of 
adequate support for heating appliances 
and other installations, fixtures and 
fittings; and 

7) any other items, the specification for 
which can be drawn up in detail only after 
the dry lining thicknesses have been 
determined. 


e) The preparation of the different building 
surfaces to receive the various types of 
cornices, arrises, corner treatments, metal 
accessories (such as angles and beads), 
expansion joints, coves, mouldings, dado 
treatments and enrichments. 


f) The work in other trades, particularly in 
connection with service pipes, conduits and 
wiring, which are to be covered by or 
contained in the dry lining; the pre- 
determined position of any heating appliances 
and their dry lining treatment. Care should 
be taken not to destroy the structural integrity 
of the dry lining or partitioning. 

g) The suitability of materials that may be in 
contact with different types of dry lining as 
well as of any protective treatment that may 
be necessary. 


Exchange of pertinent information should take place 
as soon as possible after contract among those 
responsible for the execution of backgrounds, the dry 
lining, internal plastering and subsequent decoration 
and with other trades whose work shall affect or be 
affected by the dry lining. The dry lining contractor 
should be furnished with all necessary specifications 
and appropriate working drawings and should visit the 
site to become acquainted with building progress. 


A record should be kept of all dates in connection 
with construction and preparation of backgrounds and 
of the different operations of dry lining and decoration 
in the various parts of the building. There should be a 
full exchange of information regarding site 
conditions. 


5 TIME SCHEDULE 


When preparing a time schedule for the building 
operations, it should be ensured that the various trades 
follow one another in correct sequence and that they 
do not interfere unduly with each other's work. For 
guidance on project time management, a reference may 
be made to IS 15883 (Part 2). 


The time schedule for the whole of the building work 
should be planned in the initial stages before operations 
are begun and in consultation with those who shall be 
responsible for carrying out the work of each of the 
trades concerned. 


The time schedule should allot times for the 
construction and preparation of the backgrounds to 
receive dry lining and allow sufficient intervals for 
drying out, either by natural or artificial means, after 
the structure has been made weatherproof, so that the 
dry lining work may proceed without subsequent 
damage to it or its decoration. 


The time schedule should provide for the completion of 
the works of preceding trades prior to commencement 
on site of the dry lining contractor. 


Sufficient areas of work should be made available in 
sequence so that the dry lining or partitioning work 
can start and continue as part of the programme. 


Itis essential that the areas to be dry lined or partitioned 
are watertight, weatherproof and dry. This is of 
particular importance as dry lining materials are 
vulnerable to wet or high humidity conditions. Screeds 
should be completed and dry before partitions and 
linings are erected. 


Door frames, window frames and other joinery first 
fixings should be in position. The relevant first fixings 
of other trades and services should be finished prior to 
the commencement of dry lining work. Where door 
frames are a second fixing operation, provision should 
be made for their installation. 


On projects where hollow metal stud plaster board 
partitions are specified to be erected between the 
structural soffit and the floor, the metal framework and 
plaster board to one side should be fixed prior to the 
installation of any horizontal or vertical services to 
ensure that proper fixing and alignment of the partition 
can be achieved. The period of partial completion 
should be kept to a minimum. The primary support 


members for suspended ceilings should also be in 
position prior to the installation of services. 


Sufficient working areas should be clear and clean prior 
to the commencement of the dry lining and partitioning 
work. 


The time schedule should also allow for the necessary 
drying out time after completion of dry lining using 
water mixed joint system, prior to the application of 
decoration or other finishes. This is of particular 
importance in the winter period as the hardening and 
drying time of many materials used in the wet treatment 
of joints is dependent on atmospheric conditions. 


The time schedule should be carefully planned to avoid 
the risk of serious damage to the dry lining by 
subsequent work and to avoid any question of last 
minute alterations in the sequence of operations. If 
permanent decoration is delayed, the boards should 
be given an appropriate treatment (see 10.7) 


Allowance should also be made in the time schedule 
for decorator's preparatory work which may become 
necessary, if finished and jointed wallboard surfaces 
are likely to be subjected to adverse atmospheric 
conditions or damage by other trades. This is 
particularly relevant for long term contracts. 


6 MATERIALS, 
ACCESSORIES 


COMPONENTS AND 


6.1 Materials 
6.1.1 Gypsum Plasterboard 


Gypsum plasterboard for dry lining and partitioning 
should conform to specifications laid down in 
IS 2095 (Parts 1 to 3). 


Where thermal wallboard laminates incorporate a 
backing of synthetic mineral fibre, the backing should 
be of sufficient density to resist compression under 
normal usage. Thermal properties of insulating 
materials are given at Annex C of IS 3792. 


6.1.2 Gypsum Cove 


Lightweight gypsum cove such as a gypsum core 
encased in a paper liner suitable to receive direct 
decoration can be used as a cornice at the angle between 
wall and ceiling. It should be fixed with a suitable 
adhesive. 


6.2 Components and Accessories 
6.2.1 Framing Members 


Framing members should be selected from the 
following: 


a) Timber framing — Structural timber, for 
example, framed wall, partitions and floor and 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


IS 16135 : 2014 


ceiling joists should be in accordance with 
IS 3629 and should be a suitable size on the 
face to permit the plasterboard to be 
adequately fixed (see 8.3). 

All timber sizes should be in accordance with 
the dimensions for softwood given in IS 190 
and IS 1326. 

Metal framing — А variety of non-load 
bearing plasterboard lined steel framed 
partition, separating wall and lining systems 
is available to meet specifiers requirements. 
Metal framing members conforming to 
relevant Indian Standards (if any) can be used 
in conjunction with galvanized steel channel 
(conforming to IS 3954) of similar minimum 
thickness to provide a framework to which 
one or more layers of plasterboard can be 
screw fixed. 

Relocatable and load bearing partition 
systems based on metal studs and channels 
are available. Independent wall linings using 
‘T profile studs which impart greater stiffness 
can accommodate gypsum plasterboard fixed 
from one side only. 

Metal furring channels — Metal furring 
channels provide framing systems to walls 
and for suspended ceilings. The steel sections 
should be manufactured from galvanized mild 
steel strip with zinc coating of type Z275 and 
a nominal thickness of 0.55 mm (see Tables 
1 to 4 given in IS/ISO 16163 for tolerances). 
For other steel sections with added/duly 
strengthened properties, a minimum of 0.5 
mm may also be used. 

For walls the channel should be of a suitable 
profile to provide an upstand with a minimum 
bearing surface of 40 mm and have a series 
of slots on its long edges to provide a key for 
the gypsum adhesive dabs used to secure and 
align the channels to solid backgrounds. 

For ceilings the channel should be of suitable 
profile to provide upstand with a minimum 
bearing surface of 50 mm, when used to 
provide a horizontal framing system. 
Resilient fixing channel — Resilient fixing 
channels can be used to improve the sound 
insulation performance of timber frame 
construction and should be manufactured 
from galvanized mild steel strips with zinc 
coating of type Z275 nominal thickness of 0.5 
mm, with a free standing flange of 40 mm 
minimum width (see Tables 1 to 4 given in 
IS/ISO 16163 for tolerances). 

Channel to engage with 19 mm wallboard — 
Channel to engage with 19 mm wallboard 


IS 16135 : 2014 


should be of a minimum nominal thickness 
of 0.7 mm with zinc coating of type Z275 and 
should be capable of taking an insert of 19.5 
mm to 21 mm thickness, with 19 mm 
(minimum) supporting flanges (see Tables 1 
to 4 given in IS/ISO 16163 for tolerances). 
However, for 12.5mm and 15 mm wallboards, 
minimum nominal thickness of channels is 
0.5 mm. 

f) Movement joint section — Movement joint 
sections should be stainless steel or zinc alloy 
sections profiled to incorporate a tapering 
recess between perforated shoulders to 
provide a featured movement joint. 


6.2.2 Adhesive Fixing Materials 
The following adhesive fixing materials should be used: 


а) Gypsum based adhesives: 
1) general purpose bonding compound. 

b) Resin based adhesives: 
1) thermal wallboard laminate adhesive; and 
2) resilient wallboard adhesive. 


6.2.3 Mechanical Fixing Devices 


The following mechanical fixing devices should be 
used: 


a) Plasterboard nails — Nails used for fixing 
gypsum plasterboard and gypsum wallboard 
laminates to timbers should be hot dip 
galvanized, zinc electroplated or sheradized 
steel. Nails should have a shank of minimum 
finished diameter 2.5 mm and a head of 
minimum diameter 7.0 mm. Minimum length 
of nails should be as follows: 


Board thickness : Not less than 
9.5 mm 30 mm 
Board thickness : Not less than 
12.5 mm 40 mm 
Board thickness : Not less than 
15 mm 40 mm 
Board thickness : Not less than 
19 mm 50 mm 
Double board thickness : Not less than 
12.5 mm on 12. 5 mm 50 mm 
Double board thickness : Not less than 
12.5 mm on 19 mm 65 mm 
Double board thickness : Not less than 


15 mm on 15 mm 65 mm 


For thermal laminate boards, nails of a length at least 
25 mm more than the total laminate thickness should 
be used. 


b) Dry wall screws — Screws used for fixing 
gypsum wallboard and gypsum wallboard 
laminates to metal or timber should be zinc 
electroplated or black phosphate oiled steel 
self drilling and tapping dry wall screws 
having trumpet countersunk and cross 
punched heads. Minimum lengths of screws 
should be as follows: 


Thickness Metal Timber 
mm mm 
Board thickness 9.5 mm 22 32 
Board thickness 12.5 mm 22 36 
Board thickness 15 mm 25 36 
Board thickness 19 mm 32 42 
Double board thickness 
12.5 mm on 12. 5 mm 36 50 
Double board thickness 
12.5 mm on 19 mm 42 60 
Double board thickness 
15 mm on 15 mm 42 60 


The length of screws used for fixing thermal 
wallboard laminates to metal and timber 
should be at least 10 mm and 25 mm greater 
respectively, than the thickness of the 
laminate. 


c) Framing screws — Framing screws for fixing 
metal to metal should be zinc electroplated 
or black phosphate oiled steel self drilling and 
tapping screws with cross punched low profile 
or pan heads. They should be fully threaded 
to the flat underside of the head to facilitate 
the pulling together of metal framing sections. 


6.2.4 Surface Treatment Materials 
6.2.4.1 Dual purpose primers 


As a single application, dual purpose primer equalizes 
suction and provides an even texture. It also facilitates 
the removal of wallpaper. If used in two applications, 
it provides additional resistance to moisture vapour 
movement. 


6.2.4.2 Decorative textured coatings 


Decorative textured coatings are used, in conjunction 
with the manufacturer's proprietary tape, as an 
alternative to jointing tapered edge boards and 
decorative treatments. 


Ready-mixed finishing compounds should not be used 
for bedding the tape. 


6.2.5 Jointing Material 


Proprietary materials manufactured for the jointing of 
plasterboards should be used for seamless jointing. 


They include paper jointing tape, tape bedding 
compounds, joint finishing compounds and compounds 
suitable for both bedding and finishing. 


External angle corner tape, which has two parallel hot 
dipped galvanized, zinc electroplated, or painted steel 
reinforcement strips bonded to a paper tape may be 
used to reinforce external corners. 


6.2.6 Sealants 


Elastomeric sealants can be used at the perimeter of 
the dry lining or partitioning to provide an airtight 
construction. 


6.2.7 Beads 


Galvanized steel beads, for example, edge beads and 
corner beads shall preferably be used. Plastics 
extrusions in various profiles can be used as trim, edge 
beads and joint battens. 


7 DESIGN 


7.1 Selection of a Dry Lining System 


The following factors can influence the choice of a 
dry lining system and should be considered: 


a) Type of building occupancy and use; 
b) Thickness of dry lining system; 

с) Accuracy of background; 

d) Provision for services; 

е) Decoration; 

f) Loadings, reduction of dead load; 

е) Exposure to knocks and abrasions; 
h) Space utilization; 

j) Temperature and humidity conditions; 
k) Sealing; 

m) Thermal insulation; 

n) Sound insulation; and 


p) Fire protection, fire resistance, surface spread 
of flame, cavity barriers. 

It is important that a decision is made as early as 
possible as to whether the dry lining system is to be 
applied as a finish to masonry construction, or 
incorporated as an integral part of the building to take 
full advantage of the systems available, for example, 
non-load bearing partitions and wall and ceiling linings 
incorporating thermal and sound insulation. 


7.2 Thickness of Dry Lining System 
7.2.1 General 


The overall protection of the lining will vary according 
to the type of dry lining system selected. An allowance 
should be made for the insulation material where 
appropriate, the fixing method, and any tolerance which 


IS 16135 : 2014 


might be associated with the particular type of 
background (see 8). 


7.2.2, Lining to Solid Backgrounds 


Where the direct bond method of fixing to solid 
backgrounds is used, generally, the thickness of 
gypsum based adhesive will be not less than 10 mm or 
more than 25 mm. Where a resin based adhesive is 
used, its thickness will be approximately 3 mm. The 
minimum design allowances from the face of the 
background to the face of the lining should be as given 
in Table 1. 


7.2.3 Independent Wall Linings 


Various methods of providing independent wall linings 
are available. These may take the form of plasterboard 
systems assembled in-situ or framing systems based 
on timber or metal studs. 


Laminated linings should be constructed using 19 mm 
gypsum wallboard (plank), positioned vertically, and 
fixed to perimeter timber framing. Channels to engage 
19 mm wallboard [see 6.2.1 (e)] folded back to back 
should be fixed to the edge of adjoining planks to 
provide alignment and support at mid-height. A further 
layer of plank, with joints staggered, should be stuck 
with gypsum based adhesive and secured to the 
perimeter framing. 


Load bearing or non-load bearing timber and frames 
should have studs positioned at centres not exceeding 
610 mm. Gypsum wallboard should have a minimum 
total thickness of 12.5 mm and should be positioned 
vertically unless additional timber supports have been 
provided to coincide with the horizontal joint in the 
boards. Where more than one layer is required, bound 
edges should be staggered. 


Non-load bearing metal stud frames should be 
assembled to provide stud supports at (nominal) 600 
mm centres. Gypsum wallboard should have a 
minimum total thickness of 12.5 mm and should be 
positioned vertically and screwed to the framing. 
Where more than one layer is required, bound edges 
should be staggered. 


Most metal framing systems are designed for partition 
use with boards fixed to both sides. A significant 
reduction in strength can, therefore, be expected when 
boards are fixed to one side only of metal framing. 
The maximum heights will therefore depend upon the 
structural strength of the metal frame sections. Fixings 
to the structure from the steel framework may be 
provided which will impart extra stability and increase 
maximum heights. 


Recommendations for minimum thickness and 
maximum height of independent wall linings are given 
in Table 2. 


IS 16135 : 2014 


Table 1 Design Allowance for Thickness of Linings to Solid Backgrounds 
(Clause 7.2.2) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


51 Lining Minimum Design Allowance 
No. 
Gypsum Based Adhesive Resin Based Adhesive 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 9.5 mm gypsum wallboard 20 13 
ii) 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard 23 16 
iii) 25 mm thermal wallboard laminate 35 28 
iv) 32 mm thermal wallboard laminate 42 35 
v) 40 mm thermal wallboard 50 43 
vi) 50 mm thermal wallboard laminate 60 53 


Table 2 Typical Independent Wall Linings 


(Clause 7.2.3) 
SI No. Minimum Thickness Description Maximum Height 
mm m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) 42 Laminated gypsum plank 2.6 
ii) 50 Prefabricated gypsum wallboard panel 2.4 
iii) 57 Prefabricated gypsum wallboard panel 2.4 
iv) 63 Prefabricated gypsum wallboard panel 3.6 
v) 60 Galvanized steel “Г section, minimum 48 mm with 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard 2.7 
vi) 73 Galvanized steel ‘T’ section, minimum 48 mm with two layers of 12.5 mm gypsum 
wallboard (joints staggered) 3.0 
vii) 72 Galvanized steel ‘I’ section, minimum 48 mm with 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard 3.6 
viii) 85 Galvanized steel “Г section, minimum 48 mm with two layers of 12.5 mm gypsum 
wallboard (joints staggered) 4.2 
ix) 79 Galvanized steel “С” section, 48 mm, 60 mm, 70 mm, 92 mm and 146 mm with (see Note) 
a) two layers of 9.5 mm gypsum wallboard 
b) one layer of 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard 
c) one layer of 15.0 mm gypsum wallboard or 
d) two layers of 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard 
X) 81 Timber stud 75 mm wide with one layer of 9.5 mm wallboard 2.4 
х1) 100 Timber stud 89 mm wide with one layer of 12.5 mm wallboard 3.0 


NOTE — Suitable to any height for wall lining applications, if adequately supported at 1 m intervals or if boxed with mid-height 


support fixing up to 3 m intervals. 


7.3 Deviations and Tolerances 


NOTE — The tolerances given in 7.3 do not include residual 
deflections resulting from, for example, heavy fittings. 


7.3.1 Background 


Deviations from verticality or straightness of a wall 
lining system will depend primarily on the trueness of 
the background to which it is fixed [see 8.1 (d) and 
8.2.2]. 


Dry linings which are fixed by nails, screws or thin 
contact adhesives will always follow the contour of 
the solid background or framing to which they are 
applied. 


A satisfactory finish to dry lining, to the tolerances given 
in 7.2.2, can only be obtained, if the alignment of the 
background is such that any deviation in excess of those 
required for the final finish can be accommodated by 
the method of fixing of the wallboard. 


7.3.2 Setting Out of Partitions and Independent Linings 


Where the framework of a partition or a lining is 
independent of the structure, the deviation from the 
setting out positions should be within the following 
tolerances: 


a) Offset on plan from an agreed line : + 3 тт 
or position, measured at the 
setting out level (ceiling or floor) 

b) Offset from vertical, measured : #5 mm 

above or below the setting 


out position (ceiling or floor) 


7.3.3 Finished Surfaces of Partitions and Independent 
Linings 


The deviations in the position of a finished surface of 
a partition or lining from the straight line connecting 
end points of the partition should be within a band of 
10 mm as shown in Fig. 1. 


DEVIATION 


SMALLEST OFFSET 


BAND(10 maximum) 


LARGEST OFFSET 


IS 16135 : 2014 


PARTITION SURFACE 


eee с}! REFERANCE LINE + 


Fic. 1 DEVIATION BAND FOR SURFACE OF A PARTITION OR LINING 


The measurements should be taken at approximately 
600 mm above finished floor level and should be 
accompanied by measurements of the partitions or 
linings vertically at the measuring points and should 
be within the 10 mm band. 


The method of measurement should be by laser or 
optical instruments. In small buildings, for example, 
housing, a simplified method of measurement may be 
used on partition or lining runs up to 5 m (see Fig. 2). 


7.3.4 Finished Surfaces of Linings to Solid 
Backgrounds 


Provided the trueness of the solid background is such 
that it can be accommodated within the thickness of 
the particular adhesive used (see 7.2.2), the deviations 
in the position of the finished surface should be as given 
in 7.3.3. 


Where the trueness of the background cannot be 
corrected by the thickness of adhesive (see 7.2.2) 
consideration should be given to the following 
measures: 


a) Correction of the background to which the 
lining is to be applied. 

b) Adjustment of framing members, window 
boards, linings and grounds around openings 
in the background. 

c) Modifications which may be required to 
accommodate the position of services, for 
example, switch boxes have to be packed out 
or chased in. 


The above measures are likely to lead to an increase in 
the width of the zone occupied by the wall and may 
have an effect on adjacent components such as 
suspended ceiling grids. 


7.3.5 Localized Build-Up of the Surface 
7.3.5.1 Crown of joint 


The maximum increase should not exceed 3 mm when 
measured using a 450 mm straightedge. Measurements 


should be taken with the ends supported on board to 
board surfaces [see Fig. 3(a)]. 


7.3.5.2 External angles 


The maximum increase should not exceed 4 mm 
projection from either face when measured as shown 
in Fig. 3(b) using the external angle reference edge 
shown in Fig. 4. 


7.3.5.3 Internal angles 


The maximum increase should not exceed 5 mm 
projection from either face when measured as shown 
in Fig. 3(c) using the external angle reference edge 
shown in Fig. 4. 


7.3.5.4 Boxed studs 


The increased thickness of the partition should be not 
more than 4 mm. 


7.3.5.5 Around openings (door heads, access panels 
and backing plates) 


The maximum increase should allow the partition or 
lining to conform to 7.3.3. 


7.3.6 Thickness of partitions 


The thickness of a partition in its finished state should 
be within a tolerance of +5 mm. 


7.3.7 Prepared openings in partitions 


Door, access panel or other openings in partitions 
should be within the following tolerances: 


* 40 


Width : 5 


Height : _ 
7.4 Partitions 


7.4.1 General 


Timber and steel frameworks can be used for the fixing 
of gypsum wallboard to form a light weight internal 


IS 16135 : 2014 


LHSISH A3HOLS-GIIN 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 STRAIGHTNESS OF WALLS IN ANY 5 m LENGTH 


IS 16135 : 2014 


3 THICK x 40 MACHINED METAL PADS 
FIXED TO ENDS OF STRAIGHTEDGE 


STRAIGHT EDGE 
WITH PARALLEL EDGE 


450 


a) 300 mm WIDE STRAIGHT JOINT 


L.C 2222222 2222222 


b) EXTERNAL ANGLE 


в me И са Wy o., 
2ZzzzzzzzzzzzzzzZ2z22) 


STEEL 
STRAIGHT EDGE 


LLLLLLLLLILLLLLL LLL LLL 


c) INTERNAL ANGLE 


NOTE — For illustration purposes jointing material thickness shown is exaggerated. 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 3 PERMISSIBLE DEVIATIONS OF JOINTING 


IS 16135 : 2014 


450 


5 THICK MACHINED METAL PAD 
FIXED TO STRAIGHTEDGE 


ТРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРРВ 


INTERNAL ANGLE REFERENCE EDGE 


EXTERNAL ANGLE REFERENCE EDGE 
(LLLLLLL LLL 


METAL STRAIGHT EDGE WITH 
PARALLEL EDGE 


4 THICK MACHINED METAL PAD 
FIXED TO STRAIGHT EDGE 


200 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 4 STRAIGHT EDGE FOR MEASURING DEVIATIONS AT EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL ANGLES 


partition system. The system allows for services to be 
installed within the framework. 


Various requirements for sound insulation and fire 
resistance can be achieved by the use of different 
thicknesses and combinations of gypsum wallboard 
linings. The system is normally constructed with taped 
joints to give a flush finish. It can be used to carry 
fixtures and fittings including, for example, wash 
basins, shelving and pictures. 


7.4.2 Trueness of Partitions 


Deviations of completed partitions should be within 
the tolerances given in 7.3.2 to 7.3.7. 


When other components are applied on to or 
immediately adjacent to the partition surface, for 
example, ceiling/wall junctions, rigid skirting, 
architraves (lintels) and worktops, the use of an 
intermediary component, for example, shadow batten 
or foam strip, should be considered. 


The installation of services within the partitions and 
door frames, access panels, noggins, etc, may have an 
effect on the final construction line and perpendicular 
finish. Particular attention should be paid to the 
following items: 


a) Degree and multiplicity of services resulting 
in cutting away of the main metal framing 
within the partition to the extent of impairing 
the stability requirements of the partition. 

b) Size and intensity of perforations through the 

partition, for example, door openings, pre- 

plumbed panels, glazed screens, etc. 


c) Increase of residual deflection in partitions 
where areas of framing are unboarded or only 
boarded on one side. 

d) Installation of large timber elements within 
the cavity which can set up extensive drying 
out movements and cause deflection in 
partition line. 

e) Installation of suspended ceilings at differing 
heights on either side of the wall causing 


reverse pressures and deflection in partitions. 


Surface loadings on the partitions and 
subsequent effect on the residual deflection. 


g) Atmospheric conditions (see 9.2). 


h) Construction of metal framing over door 
heads, sills and around perforations of similar 
type give rise to a localized build up of metal 
and subsequently leads to tolerances outside 
those given in this clause. 

j) Where partitions exceed 3.6 m in height the 
tolerance shall again increase. 

k) Taping and filling of joints and external and 
internal angles create a crowning effect (see 
7.3). 

In general the dimensions of the floor and 
ceiling channel shall be greater than that of 


the stud. 


m) 


NOTE — These tolerances do not include residual 
deflections resulting from, for example, heavy fittings. 


7.5 Provision for Services 


Many dry ling systems are based on a framing system 
which ensures that adequate provision is available for 


the inclusion of most services. In the case of the direct 
bonding method to masonry walls, the depth of the 
space available may be inadequate, necessitating 
chasing of the background. Where a partition system 
employs multi-layer boards, as in the case of pre- 
fabricated panels and laminated partitions, it may be 
possible to recess or remove parts of the core or narrow 
sections of the board directly behind the exposed board 
in order to incorporate services. Where board or 
framing members have to be modified or removed for 
this purpose, the area should be kept to a minimum to 
avoid impairing the properties of the system. 


Positions for all services should be clearly and precisely 
determined before dry lining commences. Services 
should be installed prior to lining. Where services are 
to be incorporated in partitions, entry points or 
connections should be located on the centerline of the 
partition. 


Consideration should be given to the possible adverse 
effects of incorporating unprotected electrical services 
in thermal insulating materials. 


7.6 Ceramic Wall Tiling 


Tiling is suitable for a wide range of applications but 
the severity of the conditions shall differ considerably 
according to their use. These may range from splash 
backs in domestic situations to shower cubicles in 
public buildings. 


Ceramic tiling should be applied to moisture resistant 
gypsum wallboard, depending upon the severity of the 
conditions. The tiles should be applied to the face of 
the wallboard, which may be square edged, but where 
an area of lining is to remain untiled, tapered edged 
wallboard should be used in order to permit the jointing 
of the exposed area to be completed to receive the 
decorative treatment. The remaining areas of joint 
should be filled with the ceramic tile adhesive. 


Gypsum wallboard may be used to receive ceramic tiles 
in localized areas such as splash backs behind kitchen 
sinks and hand basins. In other areas where there is 
splashing of surface water, as in the case of showers, 
gypsum wallboard treated on the face with two coats 
of dual purpose pigmented primer or, preferably 
gypsum moisture resistant board (where the board 
offers a protected core as well as lining) should be used. 
Alternatively, a moisture resistant adhesive should be 
used, making sure that the adhesive covers and protects 
the entire wall surface. 


In specifying a suitable system to support the tiles, 
consideration should be given to the intensity of usage 
by occupants. 


Where tiling is to be applied to a dry lining system, 
care should be taken to ensure that the framing 


IS 16135 : 2014 


members and the lining boards offer adequate support 
to prevent flexing taking place, particularly in the case 
of partitions where there may be tiles on one side only. 


It is essential that the detailing adopted at junction, 
angles and perimeters should be such that moisture 
penetration does not occur at these points. 


Tiled areas not extending to the floor should be 
supported horizontally. 


The recommendations for the fixing of the gypsum 
wallboard background are given in Table 3 and cover 
the use of tiles up to 12.5 mm thick of a maximum 
mass/unit area of 32 kg/m?, in accordance with 
IS 15622 using thin-bed adhesive (nominally 3 mm 
thick). Further information may be obtained from 
IS 4101 (Part 3) and technical specification sheets from 
the ceramic tile industry. 


7.7 Decoration 


The face of gypsum wallboard is suitable to receive 
most forms of decoration. Jointed tapered edge 
wallboards provide a smooth seamless surface ready 
for decoration including decorative textured coatings 
on walls when the jointing is dry. Alternatively, featured 
open joints or cover trims may be used. 


For ceilings to receive a decorative textured coating, 
square edge wallboard should be used, with face 
exposed, with an allowance of up to 3 mm gap around 
the perimeter of each board. 


Recommendations for decorative treatments are given 
in 10. 


Where the dry lining is fixed and may be subject to 
delays in decoration the lining should be treated with 
a suitable primer within a few days of the final jointing 
operation (see 10.7). 


7.8 Mass/Unit Area of Wall Lining and Partitioning 
Systems 


The values of mass/unit area given in Table 4 should 
be used for design purposes. They are based on the 
following typical values for gypsum wallboard: 


9.5 mm : 6.5 kg/m? - 8.5 kg/m? 
12.5 mm : 9.5 kg/m? - 12.0 kg/m? 

: 12.0 kg/m? - 14.5 kg/m? 
: 14.0 kg/m? - 17.5 kg/m? 


15 mm 
19 mm 


7.9 Knocks and Abrasions 


7.9.1 General 


Dry lining systems, whilst suited to applications of 
normal day to day use in housing, may require attention 
to details in those areas where excessive wear and tear 
can be expected, for example, corridors and stairwells 


IS 16135 : 2014 


in public buildings. Consideration should be given to 
the strategic placing of hand or trolley rails, deep 
skirtings or the use of hardwearing decorative treatment 
which shall all assist in reducing the risk of damage 
and abrasion. A range of protective components such 
as end stops and internal and external angle sections 
are available. The use of double layer boards shall 
improve impact resistance. 


7.9.2. Treatment of External Angles to Improve 
Resistance to Damage and Abrasion 


One of the following treatments to improve resistance 
to damage and abrasion of external angles should be 
used depending on the magnitude of protection 
required: 


a) External angle corner tape — A flexible 
metal reinforced paper tape should be used 
to strengthen angles where the risk of damage 
is low, for example, window reveals. 

b) Dry lining corner bead — А metal bead 
conforming to relevant specification should 
be used to reinforce external angles that need 
a high level of protection, for example, 
vertical angles exposed to frequent traffic. 
Full length corner beads can also improve the 
appearance of the arris. 
c) Corner mouldings and protectors — 
Proprietary corner mouldings or extrusions 
which are available in metal, timber and 
plastics should be superimposed to protect the 
arrises as an alternative to corner beads in 
vulnerable areas, for example, in schools, 
hospitals and factories. Alternative forms of 
protection should be incorporated in the 
design to meet special needs. 


7.10 Environmental Conditions 


Dry lining should not be used to isolate dampness or 
where high humidity conditions are likely to prevail 
for long periods, for example, laundries and swimming 
pools. It should not be subjected to temperature 
conditions where the surface of the board is likely to 
rise above 50 °C. 


Where the wallboard is to be exposed for short periods 
to humidity or moisture, for example in Kitchens or 
bathrooms, moisture resistant wallboard should be 
used. 


7.11 Sealing 


The nature, behaviour, tolerances and application of 
the extensive range of materials used in the construction 
of buildings inevitably results in gaps occurring 
between adjoining materials. A number of critical 
situations can develop, if adequate precautions are not 


12 


taken during construction to minimize or eliminate 
these conditions. Fire protection performance, sound 
insulation and thermal insulation are all dependent 
upon the integrity of the dry lining being maintained. 
These critical situations should be identified and 
suitably detailed. 


For example, floor to wall, ceiling to wall and wall to 
wall junctions may need to be fire stopped to prevent 
the spread of flame and smoke. The fire stopping also 
contributes to the integrity of the lining by preventing 
air movements through the cavity formed by the lining. 


7.12 Thermal Insulation 


Gypsum plasterboard provides a low thermal capacity 
lining which can be used in conjunction with most 
thermal insulating materials. Gypsum plasterboard 
lining can be applied to conceal and protect the 
insulation fixed between framing members to wall, 
floors and roofs. Alternatively, as in the case of masonry 
walls, thermal wallboard laminate can be fixed directly 
by an adhesive method or fastened to timber battens 
or galvanized steel furring channels. 


Care should be exercized in the choice and position of 
insulation materials taking into account the amount of 
heating or cooling to be provided, provision of 
adequate ventilation, the permeability of the structure 
and its components. Every effort should be made to 
avoid cold bridging. 


For masonry external walls and masonry walls adjacent 
to unheated spaces, the optimum thermal insulation 
from a dry lining system will be achieved when the 
background is imperforate and the dry lining has been 
sealed at the perimeter in accordance with 7.11. 


NOTE — The normal joint treatment of adjacent boards and at 
junctions to abutting elements provides an adequate seal to 
the face of the dry lining. 


7.13 Water Vapour Checks 


Dry lining elements may need to have a vapour check 
to resist the flow of moist air, either as a part of the 
lining or as a separate membrane. Care should be taken 
at the design stage to achieve the required performance 
for the vapour check. Periodic water checks may be 
performed until completion of the lining. 


7.14 Sound Insulation 


Sound insulation performance requirements of various 
parts of the building are the responsibility of the 
designer. If optimum sound insulation performance is 
to be achieved, it is important that the adjoining 
elements offer similar sound insulation performance. 
The dry lining systems should be assembled in 
accordance with the specification, ensuring that no air 
paths exist, particularly at perimeters. 


Table 3 Dry Lining to Receive Ceramic Wall Tiling 


IS 16135 : 2014 


(Clause 7.6) 
SI Description Board Support Additional Support Maximum Comments 
No. Thickness Centres Height 
mm mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Timber frame 12.5 a) 407 - 457 No 3 600 — 
b) 610 Timber noggins 600 mm 3 600 
centres vertically 
ii) Timber battens 12.5 407 Battens at head, base and 3 600 — 
intermediate positions not 
exceeding 1 200 mm centres 
ii) Direct bond 9.5 457dabs of Horizontal dabs at 1/3 3 600 Complete at least 
adhesive centres in height 10 days before tiling 
iv) Direct bond (Thermal 12.5 610 dabs of Horizontal dabs at 1/3 3 600 Complete at least 
laminates) adhesive centres in height 10 days before tiling 
v) Metal furring 12.5 407 metal Metal furring stops at head, — Complete at least 
furring sections base and intermediate positions 10 days before tiling 
not exceeding 1 200 mm centres 
vi) Resin base adhesive 12.5 Normal bands — — — 
(Thermal laminates) 
vii) Independent steel stud 
lining 
48 mm 2x12.5 407 Mid-point support 3 000 
60 mm 3 600 
70 mm 3 600 > 
92 mm 3 600 
viii) 48 mm metal stud 2x 12.5 407 — 3 600 — 
partitions 
іх) 70mm metal stud 2x12.5 407 — 3 600 — 
partitions 
x) 146 mm metal stud 2x 12.5 610 Additional stud at 3 600 — 
partitions 300 mm up to tile height 
xi)  Pre-fabricated 50 — 2 400 — 
gypsum 57 Normal 2 700 
wallboard panel partitions 63 specification 3 600 
xii) Laminated 50 Normal — 2 600 Complete at least 
partition 65 specification 2 800 10 days before tiling 


In all dwellings where a wall or floor separates one 
dwelling from another part of the same building, the 
sound insulation requirements are prescribed in 
IS 1950. 


Where existing separating walls require upgrading, an 
independent frame should be erected and fixed at the 
ceiling and floor only. Glass or rock fibre mat not less 
than 50 mm thick should be inserted between framing 
members. The frame should be lined with at least two 
layers of 12.5 mm wallboard, joints staggered, jointed 
and all perimeters sealed. 


Another means of improving sound insulation which 
can be applied to both new and existing masonry walls 
is the use of mineral fibre thermal laminates. The 
laminates which should be fixed in accordance 
with 10.2.2.2, can be applied to one or both sides of 
the separating walls, depending upon the improvement 
required, and to the flanking walls. 


7.15 Fire Protection 


Plasterboards conforming to IS 2095 (Parts 1 to 3) are 


13 


required to have a Class 1 surface spread of flame when 
tested in accordance with IS 1642 and IS 12777. 


The National Building Code of India, SP 7 : 2005 also 
provides the minimum thickness of plasterboards for 
fire resistance of definite time period. 


The fire resistance of a wide range of elements of 
structure can be increased by the addition of a gypsum 
plasterboard lining. 


Secondary mechanical fixings should be used in 
conjunction with thermal wall laminates, if the 
protective potential of the lining is to be realized. 


7.16 Cavity Barriers 


In addition to its functions as a lining, gypsum 
plasterboard can be used as a cavity barrier. It can be 
used as a single board of 12.5 mm thickness with 
suitable steel or timber framing members to satisfy the 
requirements for small cavity barriers (where a square 
with 1 m sides cannot be accommodated) and as large 
cavity barrier (where a square with 1 m sides can be 


IS 16135 : 2014 


Table 4 Typical Mass/Unit Area of Gypsum Wallboard Wall Lining and Partitioning Systems 


(Clause 7.8) 


SI Description Approximate 
No. Mass/Unit Area 
kg/m? 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Wall linings: 
a) Direct bond method: 
1) 9.5 mm wallboard 13 
2) 12.5 mm wallboard 16.25 
b) Independent wall lining method lined one side with: 
1) 12.5 mm wallboard (single layer): metal stud 13 
2) 12.5 mm wallboard (double layer): metal stud 24 
3) 12.5 mm wallboard (single layer): 38 mm x 75 mm timber stud 15 
4) 12.5 mm wallboard (double layer): 38 mm x 75 mm timber stud 26 
5) 19.0 mm wallboard (double layer): laminated 43 
ii) Partitions: 
a) Metal stud systems lined both sides with: 
1) 12.5 mm wallboard (single layer) 22 
2) 9.5 mm wallboard (double layer) 30 
3) 12.5 mm wallboard (double layer) 43 
4) 15.0 mm wallboard (single layer) 28 
5) 15.0 mm wallboard (double layer) 53 
6) 19.0 mm wallboard (single layer) 31 
7) 19.0 mm + 12.5 mm wallboard (double layer) 55 
b) Timber stud systems lined both sides with: 
1) 12.5 mm wallboard (single layer): 38 mm x 75 mm timber stud 24 
2) 12.5 mm wallboard (double layer): 38 mm x 75 mm timber stud 45 
3) 15.0 mm wallboard (single layer): 38 mm x 75 mm timber stud 29 
4) 19.0 mm + 12.5 mm wallboard (double layer): 38 mm x 89 mm twin frames 45 
c) Laminated partition system: 
1) 50 mm thick triple layer gypsum wallboard partition 40 
2) 65 mm thick triple layer gypsum wallboard partition 52 
d) Pre-fabricated gypsum wallboard panel partition: 
1) 50 mm thick with 9.5 mm gypsum wallboard 18 
2) 57 mm thick with 9.5 mm gypsum wallboard 18 
3) 63 mm thick with 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard 20 


NOTE — See also IS 2095 Parts (1 to 3) for specification of gypsum wallboards. 


accommodated) where the partition element has 
achieved a performance of 30 min, 30 min and 15 min 
for load bearing capacity, integrity and insulation. 


7.17 Movement Joints 


Consideration should be given to the inclusion of 
movement joints at 10 m intervals in long and 
continuous partitions, walls and ceiling linings. 
Movement joints should also be incorporated to 
coincide or relate to movement joints in structural 
elements with no direct bridging of mechanical parts 
of the system. 


Where there is a possibility of deflection of the 
structural floor or beams, consideration should be given 
to the provision of a deflection detail to the partition. 


7.18 Humid Bonding and Humidified Deflection 


For guidance on bonding properties and deflection 
characteristics at humid condition, the following may 
be considered. 


14 


7.18.1 Humidified Deflection 


Cut three sample in machine direction and, if required, 
three sample in cross direction (A), at least 150 mm 
from the edges and ends of the plasterboard size 
300 mm width by 625 mm long. Condition these 
samples for 24 h laid flat in at atmosphere at 45 + 2 
°C. Place these sample with face paper downwards in 
an enclosure at 30 + 2 °C and 90 + 3 percent relative 
humidity (RH) on two supports 600 mm. apart, 
allowing the sample to move freely between the 
supports. Prevent the sample to cool down before being 
introduced in the 30 °C and 90 percent RH, if not 
condensation may occur and impact the result. 
Immediately record the deflection (to within 0.1 mm) 
of sample under their own weight as fọ. Take the same 
measurement again after 48 h of conditioning as f}. 
Record the deflection (f, - fọ) per unit time. 


7.18.2 Humid Bonding 


Six samples shall be made up from a lot. The specimen 
size should be 150 mm x 300 mm. The specimen shall 


be placed in an atmosphere of 30 + 2?C and 90 + 5 
percent RH for 2 h + 5 min. In the case of special use, 
place sample for 24 + 4 h. 


7.18.2.1 Remarks 


If, after 2 h, moisture indicated 15 a lower value than 
50, the sample must remain in the referred atmosphere. 
They shall be tested only, when they reach this level of 
50 measure with the moisture register. On a routine 
basis, test after 24 h will be conducted only, if the 2 h 
tests fail. 


7.18.2.2 Procedure 


On each side, score the paper of the board with a knife 
and break the sample. In a bending movement put the 
two faces of the sample together after plying the paper. 
Pull on one of the face so as to try separating the plaster 
core from the paper. Repeat this on the other half of 
the tested sample. Then separate both pieces of the 
board by pulling off the paper along the entire sample. 
If the bond is found to be good on all the surface of the 
sample, record the test as a 100 percent. If the paper 
separates from the core over the entire length (100 mm), 
record it as a 0 percent. Paper bonding should be more 
than 65 percent. 


8 BACKGROUNDS 


8.1 Condition of Background 


The background may require attention prior to the 
application of dry lining, if the finished product is to 
achieve its purpose. 


The following factors should be considered when 
examining the condition of walls to receive dry lining: 


a) Moisture level of background — New 
construction will inevitably contain moisture 
to varying levels but this should not prevent 
dry lining being carried out provided the 
building is well ventilated (see also 9.2) 

b) Surface of background — The surface should 
be sound and capable of providing a good 
bond. Where surfaces are friable, 
contaminated or of extremely high or low 
porosity, remedial action should be taken. This 
should consist of one or more of the following 
treatments: 

1) Treatment with chemicals or solvents to 

remove contamination; 


2) 
3) 


Hacking or brushing the surface; and 

Treatment with bonding agents, for 
example, PVAC conforming to IS 4835. 
Background structure — Backgrounds should 
be structurally adequate to carry the weight 
of linings and their fixtures. Where 


c) 


IS 16135 : 2014 


backgrounds are friable or unsound near the 

surface, deep fixing methods should be used. 
d) Alignment — A satisfactory finish to the dry 
lining, to the tolerances given in 7.3, can only 
be obtained, if the alignment of the 
background is such that any deviations in 
excess of those required for the final finish 
can be accommodated by the method of fixing 
the wallboard (see 8.2.2). 
Integrity — Masonry backgrounds should be 
imperforate with all the joints filled. 


e) 


Perimeter gaps — There should be no gaps 
at the perimeters of all openings and 
penetrations. 


8.2 Solid Backgrounds 
8.2.1 Classification 


Bearing in mind the different methods that are available 
for fixing wallboard to solid backgrounds (see 10.2), 
such backgrounds may be classified as follows: 


a) Low suction, dense, strong and smooth 
materials — These include high density, clay 
or concrete bricks and blocks and dense 
concrete, either precast or cast in situ 
(excluding limestone aggregate). They have 
no porosity, little suction and smooth surfaces. 
b) Medium suction, moderately strong and 
porous materials — These comprise most clay 
or concrete bricks and blocks [other than those 
in 8.2.1 (a)], calcium silicate bricks and some 
medium density concrete. These backgrounds 
usually afford some suction. 

c) High suction, moderately weak and porous 
materials — These consist mainly of blocks 
and other forms of lightweight concrete, 
either aerated or made with lightweight 
aggregate, and some bricks of relatively low 
strength. These backgrounds usually have 


high suction. 


NOTE — Variations in moisture content of the 
background shall lead to variation in suction 
characteristics. 


8.2.2 Trueness of Solid Backgrounds 


Certain dry lining techniques are capable, to a limited 
extent, of correcting minor misalignment or undulation of 
the surfaces of solid backgrounds (see also 10.2.2, 10.2.5 
and 10.4.2.1). 


Where the direct bond method of fixing to solid 
backgrounds is used, the thickness of adhesive should 
be not less than 10 mm or more than 25 mm. The 
minimum design allowances from the face of the 
background to the face of the lining board are given 
in 7.2.2. 


IS 16135 : 2014 


The thicknesses referred to in 7.2.2 determine the sizes 
of linings required at door and window reveals and 
other perforations; they may be insufficient, if the 
background wall is badly out of line and plumb as all 
setting out is from the high spot on the wall with 
minimum thicknesses as indicated. 


In-situ concrete should be free from projecting fins 
and the joints of brickwork should be free from surplus 
mortar. 


8.3 Timber Backgrounds 
8.3.1 General 


Dried timber should be used for all timber framing 
which is to receive dry linings. To minimize subsequent 
shrinkage of the timber frame, with possible attendant 
cracking at the joints of the dry lining, its moisture 
content at the time of dry lining should not exceed 
20 percent. 


Where the timber framing is part of a factory 
prefabricated system, in which regularized timber is 
used and the frame is bench-made on a jig, increased 
accuracy in the spacing of the framing can be expected. 
Also, where the building itself is of timber frame 
construction, with no wet trades involved, the timber 
would be subjected to smaller changes in moisture 
content with a corresponding reduction in moisture 
movement. 


8.3.2 Walls and Partitions 


The minimum bearing surface of timber other than 
furring battens to receive the abutting edges of boards 
should be 38 mm. This shall accommodate the 
requirement that fastenings are set not less than 10 mm 
from the edge of the board and not less than 6 mm 
from the edge of the timbers and takes into account 
the gap between boards (see Fig. 5 and 10.1.2). The 
designer should also take into account the maximum 
negative tolerance of 5 mm in the board width and 
possible tolerances in construction and setting out of 
the timbers. 


Table 5 Spacing of Timber Supports in 
Walls and Partitions 
(Clause 8.3.2) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


SI Thickness of Maximum Centres 
No Gypsum Wallboard 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) 9.5 457 
ii) 12.5 and 15 610 
iii) 610 


19 (plank only) i 
814 (board fixed horizontally) 


16 


The spacing of the timber supports should be in 
accordance with the recommendations given in 
Table 5. 


8.3.3 Ceilings 


Boards should be fixed with the paper covered edge at 
right angles to the joists with ends staggered with a 
gap up to 3 mm (see 10.1.2). АП edges and ends of 
boards should be supported unless spacings of supports 
are reduced (see Table 6). Where plank is used, support 
of the edges is not required unless a vapour check is 
provided. Edges of vapour check wallboard should be 
supported to ensure that the joints are backed. 


Generally the face width of sawn or processed timber 
to receive the boards should be not less than 41 mm 
and fastenings should be set not less than 13 mm from 
cut ends and not less than 6 mm from the edge of 
timbers (see Fig. 6). 


Provision should be made in the arrangement of the 
timber supports for accommodating tolerances on the 
board size [see IS 2095 (Parts 1 to 3)] and tolerances 
in construction and setting out of the timbers. 


Noggins to receive jointed edges should be a minimum 
basic thickness of 38 mm. Perimeter framing to receive 
one edge or cut end should be a minimum basic 
thickness of 25 mm. 


The recommended maximum centres where edges are 
supported or unsupported are given in Table 6. 


NOTE — There are two cases where experience has shown 
that these fastening recommendations can be modified. 

a) In the case of trussed rafters having a span of not more 
than 11 m, and being fixed in a building in which the 
plasterboard ceiling (maximum thickness 12.5 mm) shall 
not be affected by regular foot traffic from above, the face 
width of the timber should be not less than 35 mm as 
measured in accordance with IS 3629. No negative 
tolerance is permissible on the 35 mm dimension. 

b) Inthecase of domestic floor joist supporting a plasterboard 
ceiling the face width of sawn or processed timber should 
be not less than 38 mm as measured in accordance with 
IS 3629. 


Table 6 Spacing of Timber Supports 
in Ceilings 
(Clause 8.3.3) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


SI Thickness of Gypsum Maximum Centres 


No. Wallboard x UU —— ———., 
Supported Edges Unsupported Edges 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 9.5 457 407 
ii) 12.5 and 15 610 457 
iii) 19 810 610 


10 Min 


IS 16135 : 2014 


SUPPORTING TIMBER 


FASTENINGS (AT RIGHT 
ANGLES TO THE BOARD) 


GAP BETWEEN 
BOARDS UP TO 3 


10 Min 


a) FASTENINGS NEAR BOUND EDGES OF THE BOARDS 


CUT END 


6 Min DE 


13 Min 


Еа 


SUPPORTING TIMBER 


FASTENINGS (AT RIGHT 
ANGLES TO THE BOARD) 


GAP BETWEEN 
BOARDS UP TO 3 


wm 


BOUND EDGE 
10 Min 


b) CUT END/BOUND JOINT 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 5 JOINTS OVER TIMBER SUPPORTS IN WALLS AND PARTITIONS 


8.3.4 Trueness of Timber Backgrounds 


Timber framing for walls and partitions should be 
aligned to an accuracy of, 


a) Vertically : 5 mm in 2.5 m 


b) Horizontally : 5 mm in 3.6 m 
8.4 Metal Backgrounds 
8.4.1 General 


Metal framing systems can be used to support linings 
to walls, partitions and suspended ceilings. 


The metal frame members may consist of channels 
fixed to the floor and ceiling to support studs, furring 
channels for wall linings or furring channels for 
suspended ceilings. Metal members should conform 
to 6.2.1. Care should be taken in handling, storage and 
use to ensure that the protective coating is not damaged. 


Whilst metal framing members facilitate the fixing of 
drywall screws to within 3 mm of the edge, it is 
important that the edges of adjoining boards should 
be located centrally on the supports. In the case of 
systems involving more than one lining or layer of 


IS 16135 : 2014 


SUPPORTING TIMBER 


FASTENINGS (AT RIGHT 
ANGLES TO THE BOARD) 


GAP BETWEEN 
BOARDS UP TO 3 


NOTE — Due allowance should be made for deviation in the setting out of timbers (see 4.3.3). 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 6 JOINTS OVER TIMBER SUPPORTS IN CELLINGS : FAsTENINGS NEAR Cut Емрѕ or BOARDS 


boards each consignment should, wherever possible, 
be used to complete one area. 


8.4.2 Walls and Partitions 


The spacing of metal supports for walls and partitions 
should be in accordance with the recommendations 
given in Table 7. Gypsum wallboards should be fixed 
with the long edge vertical in the case of partitions 
and wall linings. 


Table 7 Spacing of Metal Supports in 
Walls and Partitions 
(Clause 8.4.2) 


All dimensions in milimetres. 


SI Thickness of Maximum Centres 
No. Gypsum Wallboard 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) 9.5 407 
1) 12.5 and 15 610 
iii) 610 


19 (Plank only) i 
814 (board fixed horizontally) 


8.4.3 Ceilings 


In the case of ceilings, gypsum wallboards should be 
fixed at right angles to the framing. As there is not the 
same opportunity to provide noggins to support the 
long edges of the board as with timber framing, the 
centres should be reduced in accordance with the 
recommendations given in Table 8. 


Where primary members are used to support the furring 
channel, these should be fixed direct to the structural 
soffit or suspended by means of metal straps or wire 
hangers at centres not exceeding those recommended 
by the manufacturer. Hangers should be fixed to the 
side of timber joists with two screws positioned not 


lower than 25 mm from the bottom of the timber. 


For fire protection applications, the fixing for the 
hanger should be positioned on the side of the joist, 
not lower than mid-height. In the case of concrete or 
masonry, fixings containing plastics or other 
combustible plugs should be avoided unless evidence 
is available to substantiate fire resistant qualities. 


Table 8 Spacing of Metal Supports in Ceilings 
(Clause 8.4.3) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


SI Thickness of Gypsum Maximum Centres 
No. Wallboard 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 12.5 457 
ii) 15 610 
iii) 19 (Plank only) 610 


8.4.4 Trueness of Metal Backgrounds 


Metal framing should be aligned vertically to an 
accuracy of 5 mm in 2.5 m. 


The following minimum design allowance from the 
face of the background to the face of the lining board 
should be made: 


Lining of 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard : 25 mm 


Lings of 12.5 mm vapour check : 33mm 


gypsum wallboard 


Where thermal wallboard laminate is specified, the 
cavity depth should be not less than 15 mm. 


The above dimensions determine the sizes of linings 
required at door or window reveals. They may be 
insufficient, if the background is badly out of line. 


9 SITE CONSIDERATIONS 


9.1 General 


Consideration should be given to the need for good 
site administration to avoid unnecessary costs. For 
guidance on construction project management, a 
reference may be made to IS 15883 (Part 1). 
Inappropriate project planning in relation to the dry 
lining and partitioning operations can lead to the need 
for costly patching and making good. Blemishes caused 
to the surface of the lining in this way may lead to 
delays in obtaining acceptance of the finished surface. 


It should also be appreciated that the full economic 
use of the labour available can only be achieved by 
creating conditions which permit a full continuity of 
work. 


9.2 Environmental Conditions 


The environmental conditions of a building under 
construction shall vary considerably depending upon 
its state of completion, time of the year, the weather 
and number of wet trades involved. Where possible, 
the lining, and in particular the ceiling installation, 
should be programmed to a time when conditions shall 
have improved and close to occupancy, when the 
external doors and windows have been fitted. 


Whilst it may be difficult to exercize control over the 
ventilation of the building outside working hours 
because of the need to retain suitable levels of security, 
windows and doors should be opened, whenever 
possible to remove excess moisture. In extreme 
conditions where excess moisture is present and 
conditions are not conducive to early improvement, 
consideration should be given to the use of drying 
methods using forced ventilation equipment. 


In those buildings where design permits rapid 
weatherproofing, and wet operations are kept to a 
minimum, dry lining may contribute to early 
completion and handover. 


9.3 Organization Prior to the Commencement of 
Dry Lining and Partitioning Works 


Sufficient areas in proper sequence should be available 
to enable the dry lining or partitioning work to 
commence and maintain reasonable continuity as part 
of the programme. 


The areas to be dry lined or partitioned should be 
watertight, weatherproof and sufficiently dry to ensure 
that the fixed wallboard will not suffer subsequent 
deterioration due to moisture absorption. 


Window frames and other joinery first fixings should 
be in position. The relevant first fixings of other trades 
should be finished. 


IS 16135 : 2014 


Working areas should be clean and free from 
obstructions. 


9.4 Storage of Materials 


For general guidance on stacking and storing 
construction materials, (see IS 4082). 


It is essential that stockists, contractors and users are 
aware of the need to maintain and protect materials 
and components, if best results are to be achieved from 
dry lining. Damage from poor storage and handling 
can result in unnecessary making good and wastage. 
Additional handling can be minimized by storage 
adjacent to the working area and by ensuring that 
different types of board are kept separate. 


Gypsum wallboard, thermal wallboard laminates and 
wallboard panels should be stacked on a level surface, 
not in contact with the ground, and in a dry place, 
preferably inside a building and protected from 
weather. It is important that boards remain flat and dry 
at all times otherwise permanent deformation may 
result in their rejection for dry lining purposes. Boards 
should be stacked to a height consistent with the 
structural capacity of the floor but not greater than 1 m 
to permit ease of manual handling. The boards should 
be nearly aligned and stacked in areas where they are 
least likely to be damaged by impact or abused by other 
site trades. Insulating gypsum wallboards should be 
stacked with the veneers face to face. 


Powdered gypsum based adhesives and powdered 
jointing materials are supplied in paper sacks. Care 
should be taken to avoid puncturing the sacks before 
use. They should be stored on a dry surface. Powdered 
materials shall usually deteriorate with age; each sack 
is stamped with the date of manufacture and 
consignments should be used in date rotation. The shelf 
life shall vary according to the type and constituents 
of the material. Users should consult the manufacturer 
of the material for advice. 


Gypsum cove should be stored dry, supported along 
its entire length. 


Timber used for jointing battens for plasterboard 
systems should be stored in a dry place and securely 
bundled in cut lengths until required. Loose timbers 
tend to twist and bow making them useless for the 
intended purpose. 


Metal and PVC accessories for plasterboard systems 
should be stored under cover in clean dry conditions 
and should not be allowed to come into contact with 
cement, lime or plaster even when dry. Components 
and sections should be stacked flat and suitably 
supported along their entire length. 


Ready mixed jointing compounds, plasterboard primer 


IS 16135 : 2014 


and sealants, need to be stored within suitable 
temperature ranges and based on the advice of the 
manufacturer. Resin based adhesives should be stored 
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions to 
avoid any potential fire risk. 


9.5 Lighting 


Adequate lighting should be provided to facilitate the 
production of a good standard of finish in any area. It 
is essential that the intensity and angle of this lighting 
15 similar to that under which the final inspection shall 
be made (see Annex B). 


9.6 Scaffolding 


Suitable scaffolding should be provided for the 
performance of the works; mobile scaffolds are not 
necessarily suitable. For safety requirements while 
working with scaffolds, [see IS 3696 (Part 1)]. 


9.7 Hoisting 


A platform hoist should be used for hoisting dry lining 
materials. 


9.8 Protection of the Work 


Completed dry lining and partition work should be 
adequately protected against damage. Where necessary, 
suitable heating and ventilation should be provided to 
prevent high humidity conditions which may adversely 
affect the completed areas. 


10 WORK ON SITE 


10.1 Cutting and Installation of Gypsum Wallboard 
10.1.1 Cutting 


The board layout should be planned to minimize 
cutting. Where cutting is necessary, boards should be 
cut by scoring using a sharp knife, breaking and cutting 
the folded paper on the opposite side, or by sawing, 
working from the face. Holes for pipes and fixtures 
and other small openings should be cut with a pad- 
saw or scored on the face and back in outline before 
removal of the cut-out portion with а saw or special 
tool. АП cut edges and ends should be smooth to obtain 
neat fitting joints. Thermal wallboard laminates should 
be cut by sawing from the plasterboard face. Special 
care should be exercized when cutting vapour check 
board. 


10.1.2 Installation 


Gypsum wallboards should be set out as shown in 
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. Boards should generally be applied 
first to the ceiling where they should be butted tight to 
the perimeter walling. Application to the partitions or 
walls should be carried out as soon as possible after 


20 


lining the ceiling with the boards providing firm contact 
with the ceiling (see Fig. 9). 


Boards should be fixed with their edges and ends lightly 
butted. Where possible, cut ends or edges should occur 
at internal angles and around openings. Cut ends or 
edges should be sanded to remove paper burrs. The 
gap between the boards should not exceed 3 mm. 


Where ceiling wallboards are installed to receive 
decorative textured coatings, they should be square 
edged with up to 3 mm gap around the perimeter of 
each board. Boards should be fixed with face exposed 
and all edges supported. 


In multi-layer systems ends and edges of boards should 
staggered. 


10.1.3 Fastenings 


Fastenings for timber should be plasterboard nails or 
drywall screws. Fastenings for metal should be dry wall 
screws (see 6.2.3). 


Fastenings should be not less than 10 mm from paper 
bound edges nor less than 13 mm from cut ends of 
boards. Fastenings should be not less than 6 mm from 
the edges of timber frame members. 


АП fastenings should be driven straight and the heads 
should be set slightly below the plane of the surface 
but without the head breaking the paper. This can be 
achieved by using a dimple head hammer which also 
provides a recess for spotting nail heads. Care should 
be taken to avoid damage to the face or core of the 
plasterboard. Where damage does occur, another 
fastening should be driven approximately 60 mm away 
from the damaged area. 


While driving fastenings the board should be held in 
firm contact with the framing. Application of the 
fastenings should proceed from the centre of the board 
towards the edges and the ends. АП edges and ends 
should occur over framing members. End joints on 
ceilings should be staggered. 


10.2 Fixing to Solid Backgrounds 
10.2.1 General 


Dry lining can be fixed with gypsum or resin based 
adhesives, by nailing or screwing timber battens, by 
screwing to metal channels or by proprietary fixing 
systems. Boards should be cut and installed as 
described in 6.1. 


Care should be taken to ensure that all backgrounds 
are sound. 


Surfaces should be dry, and when adhesives are used 
the surfaces should also be clean and dust free. 


IS 16135 : 2014 


a) EXTERNAL ANGLE JUNCTIONS RECOMMENDED BOARD LAYOUTS 


b) ABUTMENTS 


Fic. 7 SETTING Our BOARD : EXTERNAL ANGLES AND ABUTMENTS 


21 


IS 16135 : 2014 


a) SINGLE LAYER SYSTEM 


b) DOUBLE LAYER SYSTEM 


Fic. 8 SETTING OuT BOARD : INTERMEDIATE JOINTS ON STUDS 


10.2.2 Fixing with Gypsum Based Adhesives to Vertical 
Surfaces 


10.2.2.1 Wallboards 


General purpose bonding compounds are suitable for 
direct application to most masonry backgrounds. 
However, the use of a proprietary bonding agent such 
as an emulsion of PVAC may be required to improve 
adhesion to the surface of smooth dense concrete or to 
control the suction of high suction backgrounds. 
Alternatively, specialized gypsum based adhesives 
recommended by the manufacturer of the wallboard 
for the particular type of background may be used. 


The accuracy of the background should be checked to 
ensure that the fixing technique to be used shall be 
capable of giving the required standard of accuracy of 
the dry lining. 


The boards should be securely fixed to the background 
by a pattern of adhesive dabs as shown in Fig. 10 and 


22 


to the accuracy given in 3.3.3. Each dab should be 
50 mm to 75 mm wide and approximately 200 mm 
long, positioned vertically at approximately 300 mm 
centres, and of sufficient thickness to provide a 
substantial bond when the wallboard is positioned and 
tapped back into true alignment. Dabs should be 
applied horizontally between vertical rows, at floor and 
ceiling line to support the board ends. 


The total area of contact between the adhesive and 
board surface should not be less than 20 percent of the 
board area. 


The pattern of adhesive dabs should be adjusted to 
allow for the width and thickness of the wallboard 
specified (see Table 9). The dabs should be applied for 
one board at a time, making sure that those adjacent to 
the joints between the boards are approximately 25 mm 
back from the edge to avoid bridging the joint. 


The boards should fit tightly against the ceiling board 
and the leading edge should be plumb with vertical 


IS 16135 : 2014 


Fic. 9 WALL TO CEILING JUNCTION 


edges lightly butted. Temporary support should be 
provided beneath the bottom edge of the board until 
the adhesive has set. Reveal linings and narrow widths 
should be fixed by applying dabs of adhesive to their 
backs and pressing them into position. 


Where a cavity barrier is required to close the cavity 
or where solid fixing is required, boards should be fixed 
with continuous vertical ribbons of adhesive not less 
than 25 mm wide of sufficient thickness to give 
continuous contact when the board is fixed. 


Table 9 Fixing of Wallboard and Thermal 
Wallboard Laminate with Gypsum Based 
Adhesives 
(Clause 10.2.2.1) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


SI Thickness of | Width Adhesive Rows of 
No. Wallboard Centres Dabs/Board 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

1) 9.5 900 457 3 

ii) 9.5 ] 200 407 4 

iii) 12.5 ] 200 610 3 


23 


10.2.2.2 Thermal wallboard laminates 


The procedure for fixing thermal wallboard laminates 
with plastics foam insulation is similar to that for 
gypsum wallboard. A regular pattern of at least two 
nailable plugs per board fixed into the solid background 
should also be specified and recommendations of 
individual manufacturers should be followed. 


10.2.2.3 Mineral fibre thermal laminates 


Thermal wallboard laminates incorporating a backing 
of synthetic mineral fibre mat may be fixed by a 
modified version of the direct bonding system. 


The modified direct bonding method can be used for 
laminates of 900 mm width. Laminates should be cut 
13 mm short of the floor to ceiling height. Channel 
spacer clips should be used to allow provision for 
secondary and timber skirting fixings and to minimize 
the risk of localized compression. The channel spacer 
clip should be inserted behind the wallboard and 
engaged on the edge of the mineral fibre in positions 
as shown in Fig. 11. 


To prepare the laminates for assembly, a thin layer of 


IS 16135 : 2014 


I 

I 

| 

| 

I 
MECHANICAL FIXING | 
FOR THERMAL | 
WALLBOARD LAMINATES | 
I 

I 

| 

| 


FOR SOME APPLICATIONS 
THE BOTTOM LINE OF 
DABS MAY NEED TO BE 
CONTINUOUS 


гттт<-- 


Fic 10 SUGGESTED ADHESIVE DAB FIXING PATTERN FOR GYPSUM WALLBOARD AND 
THERMAL WALLBOARD LAMINATES 


CHANNEL SPACERS FOR 
SECONDARY FIXING 
AT THESE POINTS 


LAMINATE 


NAILABLE PLUG 
SECONDARY FIXING 
OF LAMINATE 


| CHANNEL SPACERS 
ПЕЕ | FOR SKIRTING FIXING 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 11 CHANNEL SPACER CLIP 


24 


gypsum based adhesive should be applied to the 
perimeter and across the centre of the mineral fibre in 
a band of 200 mm wide. The laminate should be fixed 
by the direct bond method described in 10.2.2.1 and 
shown in Fig. 10. Nailable fixing plugs should be used 
in accordance with the recommendations of the 
manufacturers as secondary fixing. 


10.2.3 Fixing with Resin Based Adhesive to Vertical 
Surfaces 


This method should only be used where the background 
has a flat, smooth surface free of dust and 
contamination, for example, dry plastered walls. 


Where thermal wallboard laminates are used, it is 
essential that at least two secondary mechanical fixings 
are employed in order to maintain the fire protection 
afforded by the plasterboard. These fixings should be 
in accordance with the manufacturer's recommend- 
ations and should be used to secure the plasterboard 
through the insulation materials to the background. The 
fastener should penetrate at least 25 mm into the solid 
background. 


The adhesive should be applied to the wall in 200 mm 


IS 16135 : 2014 


wide vertical bands in positions approximately 50 mm 
from the vertical edges and in the centre of the board. 
The adhesive band should also be placed horizontally 
at the top and bottom of the wall to ensure continuous 
contact near the perimeter of the board (see Fig. 12). 
The adhesive application should be approximately 
6 mm thick and should be combed with a notched 
applicator of one board at a time. The thermal 
wallboard laminate, cut neatly to fit between floor and 
ceiling, should be placed in position and tamped back 
firmly using a heavy straightedge, ensuring that the 
vertical edges are vertical and that the accuracy is in 
accordance with 7.3.3. 


10.2.4 Plastics Foam Coated Self-Adhesive Pads 


Plastic foam coated self-adhesive pads may be used to 
fix thermal wallboard laminates where the backing to 
the laminate and the wall surface are suitable. They 
should be used in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. The pads should be positioned at centres 
not exceeding 610 mm in both directions. In some cases 
the pads may require to be set in adhesive to ensure 
satisfactory bond. This method should only be adopted, 
if secondary fixings are used to secure the wallboard. 


MECHANICAL FIXING 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 12 Frxinc THERMAL WALLBOARD LAMINATES WITH BASED ADHESIVE 


25 


IS 16135 : 2014 


10.3 Installation and Fixing to Timber Framing 
10.3.1 Nailing and Screwing 


Nails and screws should be of the length and gauge 
given in 6.2.3. 


Nails for single nailing should be eight nails/metre 
spaced at approximately 300 mm for intermediate 
supports in walls and ceilings. The spacing of single 
nailing around the edges of the boards should be as 
recommended for single nailing. 


Where screws are used they should be five screws/metre 
spaced at approximately 230 mm centres for ceilings 
and eight screws/2 m spaced at approximately 300 mm 
centres for walls. 


10.3.2 Timber Stud Walls and Partitions 


The position of the walling plumb lines for timber head 
and sole plates should be marked out. Sole and head 
plates should be butted together and securely fixed at 
floor and soffit at centres not exceeding 600 mm. A 
fixing should be made at approximately 75 mm from 
the ends of each head and sole plate. 


Framing members should be installed within the limits 
for plumbness and alignment given in 7.3. Maximum 
spacing of timber studs in relation to thickness of 
wallboard used should be as shown in Table 5. Timber 
studs should be arranged, whenever possible, to avoid 
widths of board less than 300 mm. 


Any stud abutting other walls should be fixed at 600 
mm centres. Framing should be provided at openings 
and corners to permit boards to be supported at their 
perimeters. 


Partition timber framework should be a minimum width 
of 38 mm. 


Timber framing should be checked to ensure that it is 
straight, true and of uniform dimensions and provides 
a firm backing for the fixing of the gypsum wallboard. 


Holes for services should be kept to a minimum. Where 
services are required to run through timber members 
holes should be central and of a size that shall not 
impair the structural integrity of the partition. The 
possibility of fastenings penetrating any services should 
be avoided. 


Wallboard may be fixed vertically or horizontally. In 
vertical applications, boards should be located centrally 
on the studs for fixing by nail or screw application. 
Wallboards should be fitted tight against the ceiling. 
Wallboards applied horizontally should avoid butt ends 
where possible and joints should be located centrally 
on studs. The recommendations of 10.1.3 should be 
followed for fastener application. Wallboard joints 
should be staggered. 


26 


To achieve sound insulation, a 6 mm bead of sealant 
should be applied around the perimeter of the partition 
wallboard. This compresses the sealant into firm 
contact with the adjacent surfaces to form a permanent 
air-tight seal. 


10.3.3 Timber Furring Battens 


Gypsum wallboards and composite laminates can be 
fixed by nailing or screwing to battens. 


To reduce the risk of splitting, the minimum bearing 
surface for nailing battens should be 44 mm and the 
minimum basic thickness should be 38 mm. Where 
increased thermal insulation is required to fit between 
the battens they should be thick enough to 
accommodate the appropriate thickness of insulation. 


The battens should be plumbed and aligned by packing 
out and rigidly fixed at centres not exceeding 610 mm 
using 12.5 mm gypsum wallboards. Gypsum 
wallboards and thermal wallboard laminates are 
normally fixed to walls with their long edges vertical. 
The boards should be fixed tight to the ceiling with a 
gap of up to 3 mm between boards. Boards may be 
fixed horizontally but this method normally requires 
an increased quantity of timber. All edges should be 
supported by battens or noggins. Boards should be 
fixed with appropriate nails or screws (see 6.2.3). 


10.3.4 Independent Wall Linings 


Timber sizes and spacing and the method of fixing 
should be as described in 10.3.2 with wallboard being 
applied to one face only. The minimum thickness of 
single wallboards should be 12.5 mm. 


10.3.5 Internal Ceiling Linings 


Where the primary timber components such as joists 
or trussed rafters do not provide adequate support for 
the plasterboard fixing in accordance with 8.3, counter 
battening should be considered. The dimensions of the 
counter battening should be such that it provides a 
stable support for the gypsum plasterboard. The depth 
shall be related to the distance between supports and 
the minimum bearing surface should be 44 mm. The 
centres for the counter battening should not exceed 
the recommendations given in Table 6 (unsupported 
edges). These conditions shall also apply to battens 
fixed direct to concrete soffits. 


Battens should be securely fixed straight and level to 
the supporting framework or background. 


Wallboards should be fixed with paper bound edges at 
right angles to the battens with the end joints staggered 
and lightly butted. Fastening should be set at 13 mm 
from the cut ends and 10 mm from the bound edges. 


10.3.6 Steel Beam and Column Encasement 
10.3.6.1 General 


Typical examples of beam and column encasement are 
described in 10.3.6.2 and 10.3.6.3 and illustrated in 
Fig. 13. Other systems may be used. 


Fic. 13 TYPICAL EXAMPLES OF BEAM AND 
COLUMN ENCASEMENT 
10.3.6.2 Column encasements 


Four sections of 44 mm x 44 mm timber should be cut 
to the length of the steel column. Two ladders 
approximately 90 mm wider than the web width of the 
column should be prefabricated by inserting noggins 
of minimum size 44 mm x 44 mm at a maximum of 
600 mm centres, ensuring that a support is located at 
head and base. 


The framework should then be offered to the column 
and completed by inserting noggins, cut to the width 
of the flange, then nailed or screwed at a maximum of 
600 mm centres, including head and base. 


Boards should be fixed to the framework with all cut 


27 


IS 16135 : 2014 


end joints, angles and nail locations staggered. Where 
more than one layer is used the second layer should be 
independently fixed and supported on all four edges. 


Two base layers of 12.5 mm wallboard should be cut 
to the width of the framing and two to the depth of the 
framing plus 25 mm, and fixed to the timber framework 
with plasterboard nails [see 6.2.3 (а) | at a minimum of 
150 mm centres. The procedures should be repeated 
for subsequent layers, fixing with plasterboard nails 
of a suitable length [see 6.2.3 (a)]. 


10.3.6.3 Beam encasements 


A timber ladder 90 mm wider than the width of the 
steel beam should be prefabricated as described in 
10.3.6.2 to form a soffit. Two sections of timber at least 
44 mm x 44 mm should be cut to the length of beam. 
Noggins should be cut 44 mm shorter than the beam 
depth, and nailed to the timber sections at a maximum 
of 600 mm centres, commencing and finishing with a 
noggin. One of these assemblies should be placed on 
each side of the beam and fixed to the structural soffit 
at a maximum of 600 mm centres. To complete the 
framework, the soffit ladder should be placed in 
position and fixed by nailing or screwing into the ends 
of the vertical noggins. 


Wallboards should be fixed to the framework with all 
cut end joints, angles and nail locations staggered. Where 
more than one layer is used, the second layer should be 
independently fixed and supported on all four edges. 


The base layer of 12.5 mm wallboard should be cut to 
the width of the soffit framing plus 25 mm and fixed 
to the framework with suitable wallboard nails 
[see 6.2.3 (а) | at a maximum of 150 mm centres. Two 
pieces of wallboard should be cut to fit between the 
beam soffit and the ceiling and fixed to each side of 
the framing with plasterboard nails at a maximum of 
150 mm centres. The procedure should be repeated 
for the face layer using suitable length plasterboard 
nails [see 6.2.3 (a)]. Drywall screws at a maximum of 
300 mm centres may be used in place of plasterboard 
nails [see 6.2.3 (c)]. 


10.3.6.4 Angles 


All external angles should be reinforced with external 
angle corner tape or angle bead. 


10.3.6.5 Cutting and installation 

Boards should be cut and installed as described in 10.1. 
10.4 Installation of and Fixing to Metal Framing 
10.4.1 Steel Stud Partitions (see Fig. 14) 

10.4.1.1 General 


The position of the plumb lines for top and bottom 


IS 16135 : 2014 


HEN 
HERD 


a) COMMON STUD TYPES 


NS v: 
a 


ш: а 
ща 
E 
a 
Га 
"T 
154 - 
4, 47 
ге 
a 
š: 
E 
г. 


b) TYPICAL VERTICAL SECTION 
NOTE — Sealants, sole plate and skirting have been omitted. 


Fic. 14 TYPICAL STEEL STUD PARTITIONS 


28 


floor channels should be marked out. Channels should 
be tightly butted and securely fixed at floor and soffit 
at centres not exceeding 610 mm. A fixing should be 
located within 50 mm of each end of the channel 
section. 


Steel studs should be cut cleanly and straight with hand 
tools 5 mm short of the internal channel to channel 
dimension. Channels may be fixed direct to floors or 
to securely fixed timber sole plates. Where provision 
15 to be made for an additional minus tolerance in length 
to accommodate floor deflection or expansion in the 
case of fire, the minimum penetration of the stud into 
the ceiling channel should be 19 mm. This may require 
an increase in the flange dimensions of the ceiling 
channel. The studs should be inserted into floor and 
ceiling channels and located at centres not exceeding 
600 mm. 


Extra studs should be provided at openings, corners 
and stop ends. Studs at corners, stop ends, T junctions 
and openings should be fixed to floor and ceiling 
channels by metal framing screws or pierce punching. 
Intermediate studs should not be fixed to floor or 
ceiling channels to allow for adjustment when 
boarding. 


10.4.1.2 Single layer boarding 


Boards and studs should be arranged to avoid widths 
of board less than 300 mm. Board joints should be 
staggered layer to layer and from one side of the stud 
to the other. The wallboards should be firmly held 
against the framework after being cut to allow 5 mm 
to 8 mm height clearance and fixed tightly to the soffit. 
The boards should be lightly butted against each other 
and the board screw fixed with eight screws per 2 па 
spaced at approximately 300 mm centres along all studs 
and channels (see 8.4). This shall consolidate the 
framing until the partition is completed on both sides. 


10.4.1.3 Multi-layer boarding 


In multi-layer boarding the boards should be fixed as 
for single layers. When services are to be 
accommodated in the cavity one side should be boarded 
but not jointed. After services have been installed and 
tested and provision made for other supports and 
fixings, the other side should be boarded including any 
additional layers of wallboard required. Both sides 
should then be jointed and the partition completed by 
fixing jointing and finishing. 


When the length of the wallboard is less than the floor 
to ceiling height the horizontal joints should be 
staggered from layer to layer. 


To achieve sound insulation, a 6 mm bead of sealant 
should be applied around the perimeter of the partition 
so that the first layer of wallboard compresses the 


29 


IS 16135 : 2014 


sealant into firm contact with the adjacent surfaces to 
form a permanent airtight seal. 


The finishing of gypsum wallboard is described in 10.5. 
10.4.2 Internal Wall Linings 
10.4.2.1 Metal furring channels 


Metal furring channels should be fixed vertically to 
masonry walls by means of gypsum based adhesive 
(The adhesive shall provide thickness to allow for 
undulations in the wall surface but the space may be 
inadequate for the inclusion of services without the 
need for chasing). Care should be taken to ensure that 
all backgrounds are sound and that the surfaces are 
dry, clean and free of dust. The channels should be 
spaced vertically at a maximum of 610 mm centres to 
receive 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard or thermal 
wallboard laminates and supported by dabs of gypsum 
based adhesive approximately 200 mm long at 
approximately 457 mm centres along the length of 
channel. 


Care should be taken to locate the high spot of the 
wall surface on which to project the position of the 
new lining. The thickness of the furring channel and a 
nominal 2 mm minimum for adhesive behind the 
channel should be allowed for at the tightest position, 
in addition to the thickness of the board, example 
gypsum wallboard, 12 mm; thermal wallboard 
laminates, 15 mm; insulation gypsum wallboard, 20 
mm. Care should be taken when placing the dabs of 
gypsum based adhesive to ensure that they extend to 
the ends of the furring. The furring should be placed 
on the gypsum based adhesive and aligned plumb with 
the ceiling and floor. This operation is facilitated by 
the use of guidelines. 


Either continuous horizontal lengths of metal furring 
channels, above and below the vertical furring, should 
be used, or short lengths of furring channel should be 
inserted between the vertical channels at the top and 
bottom of the wall, using the same fixing method to 
provide support around openings, at the ceiling/wall 
angle for skirtings at floor level. 


Gypsum wallboards should be fixed vertically and 
fastened at centres not exceeding 300 mm with dry wall 
screws (see 6.2.3) of such length to allow a minimum 
penetration of 10 mm into the metal and to avoid 
contact with the background. 


Thermal wall laminates should be fixed in a similar 
manner to wallboards, unless the manufacturer 
recommends an alternative method. 


Where partitions adjoin the lining, particularly where 
the lining comprises thermal wallboard laminates, and 
there is a requirement for sound insulation, fire 


IS 16135 : 2014 


protection or cavity barriers the partitions should be 
erected first or the furring channel should be 
continuously supported with gypsum adhesive and 
fixed behind the lining to provide a cavity barrier. 


10.4.2.2 Independent wall lining 


Metal frames for independent wall linings should be 
assembled by fixing the channel to floor and ceiling at 
610 mm maximum centres, ensuring that the sections 
are straight and plumb. Studs should be inserted at 
600 mm minimum centres. Services should be 
accommodated prior to the insulation and lining being 
applied. 


Thermal insulation materials should be compressed and 
friction fitted between the studs. The thermal insulation 
materials can be in separate pieces but should be 
assembled to form a continuous layer. 


Boards should be applied vertically to the studs and 
screw fixed at approximately 300 mm centres with 
drywall screws (see 6.2.3). 


10.4.3 Internal Ceiling Linings 
10.4.3.1 Fixed direct to the structure 


Ceiling linings consist of gypsum wallboards screw fixed 
to hot dipped galvanized steel furring channels. Furring 
channels should be fixed direct to the underside of the 
structural soffits or structural support member at centres 
not exceeding 1 200 mm to support furring channels at 
457 mm centres ensuring all sections are level. 


10.4.3.2 Suspended beneath the structure 


Suspended steel furring channels should be connected 
to primary support sections set at maximum of 
1200 mm apart and suspended from the structure 
normally at 1 200 mm centres with steel strap or steel 
angle hangers. The furring channel should be 
positioned at right angles to the primary support at 457 
mm maximum centres and fixed with self tapping 
framing screws, wire ties or preformed wire clips 
depending upon the performance characteristics of the 
ceiling. Perimeter support angle or channel should be 
fixed to the adjoining structure at 600 mm maximum 
centres to provide support for the ceiling furring 
channel and serve as a perimeter fixing ground for the 
plasterboard lining. 


Wallboards should be fixed transversely to the 
underside of the furring channel with end joints 
staggered. In two layer systems, all joints in the second 
layer should be staggered in relation to the first layer. 
Boards should be screwed to the furring channels at 
230 mm maximum centres except at perimeters where 
fixing should be at 150 mm centres, with drywall 
screws giving a minimum penetration of 10 mm into 
the supporting metal sections. 


30 


10.4.4 Steel Beam and Column Encasement 


Beam and column encasement systems which consist 
of steel straps, studs and angle sections and various 
thicknesses of gypsum wallboard should be assembled 
at centres not exceeding 600 mm to provide a framing 
system with supporting sections parallel to the 
structural steel and additional bracing to support ends 
should be provided. In the case of steel beams 
supporting concrete floors fixing devices should be 
located close to the beam at a maximum of 600 mm 
centres. Alternatively channels or angle sections should 
be site fixed to the steel or to the adjoining concrete. 


The frame should be constructed and fixed so as to 
provide a stable background. 


The wallboard should be cut and applied to suit the 
length and shape of the structural steel with the paper 
covered edge parallel to the steel to minimize the 
number of joints. Paper covered edges should be fixed 
to the framing members. Multi-layer board systems 
should allow board joints to be staggered. Boards 
should be fixed to the metal using drywall screws. The 
penetration into the metal should be kept to the 
minimum of 10 mm to reduce the risk of damaging 
concealed services. 


10.4.5 Movement Joint Sections 


The position of movement joints shall be pre- 
determined by the position of existing movement joints 
in structural elements or indicated for insertion by the 
designer due to the length of the continuous lining. 


A gap, corresponding to that shown in the 
manufacturer’s instructions for the particular 
movement joint section, should be allowed between 
all components used to support adjoining wallboards. 
In the case of partitioning, this should take into account 
the thickness of two wallboards 12.5 mm thick secured 
to the web of the studs to provide fire protection 
(see Fig. 15). 


Lining fixed to masonry backgrounds should have a 
continuous band of gypsum adhesive applied close to 
the joint on each side making sure that the adhesive 
does not extend to bridge or restrict the movement of 
the section. 


Strips of 25 mm thick rock fibre mat of density not 
less than 23 kg/m? or glass fibre, should be inserted 
between framing components to ensure that any 
required fire resistance or sound insulation of the 
structure is not impaired. 


The gypsum wallboard lining should be installed to 
maintain the gap recommended by the manufacturer. 
The movement joint section should be applied and 
secured with 13 mm galvanized or stainless steel staples 


IS 16135 


a) TYPICAL MOVEMENT JOINT SECTION 


JOINT COMPOUND STAPLE FIXED 


TO BOARD 


b) WALL OR CEILING LINING 


ROCK FIBRE BATT METAL STUD 


MOVEMENT JOINT 


LE SECTION 


DOUB 
LAYER BOARDS 
JOINTING COMPOUND 
FEATHERED 


c) STEEL STUD PARTITION 


Fic. 15 MOVEMENT JOINTS 


31 


: 2014 


IS 16135 : 2014 


at 150 mm centres. Jointing compound should be 
applied in two applications, feathering the edges of 
the second application. 


10.4.6 Cutting and Installation 


Boards should be cut and installed as described in 10.1. 


10.5 Jointing 
10.5.1 General 


For the purpose of this standard, jointing refers to the 
filling of joints formed from the tapered edges or ends 
of gypsum wallboards. In some situations, it will be 
necessary to join cut edges but these joints should be 
kept to a minimum by following the procedure 
described in 10.1. 


The jointing operations, which are usually carried out 
in stages, can be by manual or machine application. 
Only those materials specifically manufactured for 
machine application should be used for that purpose. 


Jointing operations should be carried out in the 
following order: 


a) Internal angels; 
b) Tapered edge joints; 
c) Cutedge joints; and 
d) External angles. 


10.5.2 Preparation 


The boards should be securely fixed and in their correct 
positions. Protruding screw or nail heads should be 
driven home without fracturing the paper surface, the 
compound should be mixed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instructions appropriate to the 
compound type. Mixing should be carried out using 
potable water and clean mixing containers and tools. 


Scuff marks and paper damage should be treated with 
compound as the jointing operation proceeds. Any void 
exceeding 4 mm in depth and any gaps greater than 3 
mm between the boards should be completely filled 
with gypsum based jointing compound and allowed to 
set before proceeding further. Fillings should be left 
flush with the gypsum wallboard surface. 


10.5.3 Tapered Edge Joints 


Bedding compound should be applied to the depression 
between the gypsum boards. The jointing tape should 
be cut to length, centered over the depression between 
the boards and firmly bedded in the compound, free 
from air bubbles, with not less than 1 mm thickness of 
compound beneath the tape. The tape should then be 
covered with compound which should be struck off 
flush with the face of the gypsum wallboard, removing 
any excess material. An intermediate coat of finishing 
compound should be applied over the joint and 


32 


feathered out approximately 50 mm to 60 mm beyond 
each side of the first coat application. The jointing 
operation should be completed by applying a final coat 
of finishing compound extending 50 mm to 60 mm 
beyond each edge of the previous application and 
carefully feathered out. Blemishes should be removed 
by sanding. Care in the final operation shall reduce 
the need for excessive sanding. 


10.5.4 Internal Angles 


The procedure described in 10.5.3 for tapered edges 
should be followed except that the tape should be 
folded along the crease provided. A build-up of 
materials at the apex of the corner under the tape should 
be avoided. 


10.5.5 Cut Edge Joints 


Cut edge joints should be kept to a minimum. The paper 
edges should be lightly sanded to remove any burrs. 
The jointing method described in 10.5.3 should be 
followed. 


10.5.6 External Angles 


External angles should be formed by using one cut 
edge to mask the cut edge of the adjoining board. The 
angle should be reinforced with external angle corner 
tape or dry lining corner bead (see Fig. 16). 


External angle corner tape should be cut to length and 
creased firmly to allow the reinforcement strips to be 
located close to the wallboard surface. A 50 mm wide 
band of bedding compound should be applied to each 
side of the angle and the tape pressed firmly on to the 
angle, making sure that arris formed by the tape is 
straight. Further coats of compound should be applied 
as described in 10.5.3. Finishing compound may be 
used as a final finishing coat. 


Dry lining corner bead should be used where maximum 
protection to external angles is required. The bead 
should be cut to length, a 50 mm wide band of bedding 
compound should be applied to the side of the angle 
and the bead pressed firmly on to the side of the angle 
and the bead pressed firmly on to the angle with the 
outer edges touching the gypsum wallboard surface. 
Further coats of compound should be applied as 
described in 10.5.3. Finishing compound may be used 
as a final finishing coat. 


10.5.7 Dry Lining Edging Bead 


Dry lining edging bead is dual purpose and can be fixed 
exposing either the short flange as a feature or the 
perforated flange is exposed the jointing procedure 
described in 10.5 should be followed. 


10.5.8 Machine Application 


Jointing may be machine applied using air drying 


IS 16135 : 2014 


a) ANGLE BEAD 


b) CORNER TAPE 


Fic. 16 ANGLE JOINTS 


jointing compounds. The procedure described in 10.5.3 
should be followed. 


Special care should be taken with the final coat 
application to avoid heavy sanding when the jointing 
compound is dry. Correct setting of machine finishing 
tools shall ensure neat feather edges. Tools should be 
kept clean, in good repair and properly adjusted. Edges 
should be smoothed and feathered, removing any high 
spots to ensure a smooth even finish. 


Gypsum based setting compounds (Class B) should 
not be used for machine application. 


10.5.9 Surface Preparation 


When the jointing process has been completed and 
allowed to dry, the surface should be lightly sanded to 
remove any minor imperfections. Dust from the 
sanding operation should be removed prior to priming. 


Priming should follow immediately (see 10.7.1). 


33 


10.6 Partitions 


10.6.1 Prefabricated Gypsum Wallboard Panel 
Partitions 


Prefabricated gypsum wallboard panels should be 
assembled on a timber sole plate using timber battens 
to adjoining wall and ceiling surfaces (see Fig. 17). 
Timber joint battens should be inserted between 
adjoining panels. All timber required to be inserted into 
the panel or its edges, including short lengths to provide 
supports for fixings and service outlets, should be 
dressed on two opposite faces with the corners planed 
off to facilitate entry into the panel. Dimensions of 
timbers should be as shown in Table 10. 


Panels should be cut 3 mm shorter than the sole plate 
to ceiling height with the cut end located at the bottom 
of the partition. The partition should be assembled by 
engaging the ceiling and wall batten where appropriate. 
Joint battens should be inserted between panels. Panels 


IS 16135 : 2014 


should be nailed to timbers at centres not exceeding 
225 mm. Door openings should be accommodated 
within the body of the partition. If the partition is to be 
erected between fixed points the final panel to be 
assembled should be located between other panels, not 
at a wall junction. 


10.6.2. Laminated Gypsum Plasterboard Partitions 


Laminated gypsum plasterboard partitions which are 
erected in-situ should comprise a perimeter timber or 
metal framing member and three layers of gypsum 
plasterboard stuck together with a gypsum based 
adhesive (see Fig. 18). Several thicknesses of partitions 
can be constructed, which incorporate a 19 mm thick 
core with 12.5 mm, 15 mm or 19 mm gypsum 
plasterboards fixed each side to provide partitions of 
50 mm, 55 mm and 65 mm respectively. 


A continuous timber frame should be fixed to adjoining 
wall, floor and ceiling surfaces at not more than 
600 mm centres in the centerline of the partition. 
Dimensions of timber frame members should be as 
shown in Table 11. At door openings, the timber 
member should extend to the full storey height with a 
head piece in between. A clearance of 10 mm should 
be allowed where door sets are to be fixed at a later 
stage. Rebated frames should allow 4 mm tolerance in 
the partition thickness. 


The first layer of gypsum wallboard or plank should 
be cut 6 mm shorter than the floor to ceiling height. 
With the face outwards, the first board should be placed 
against the vertical batten and raised tight to the soffit. 
Each board should be secured to the horizontal battens 
using two and three nails per 600 mm and 900 mm 
wide boards, respectively. Vertical battens should be 
nailed at centre not exceeding 300 mm. The first layer 
should be completed with board joints closely butted. 
The joints should be set out to avoid coinciding with 
the line of window or door frame jambs. They should 


also be screw-nailed together on the inner side with 
38 mm panel pins using three per joint commencing a 
distance of approximately 600 mm from the ends of 
the board. 


Stippled bands of adhesive should be applied 
approximately 60 mm wide and 5 mm thick with an 
applicator brush at not more than 300 mm centres to 
the inside of the first layer of boards ensuring that the 
joints of the boards are covered. Only sufficient 
adhesive should be applied to allow the positioning of 
one core board at a time. 


Square edge gypsum plank should be cut to fit between 
the floor and ceiling timber members and pressed into 
position, flush with the framing. Areas of the core board 
should be removed where required to incorporate 
services or the supports for heavy fixings. The middle 
layer should be completed followed by further 
applications of adhesive to enable the other outer board 
to be fixed as before. AII joints should be staggered 
and adhesive bands positioned to coincide with those 
of the outer layer. Finally, boards should be tamped 
into position with a straightedge to ensure alignment 
after which time the partition should not be disturbed 
for at least 4 h. Ultimate strength will only be attained 
after approximately 4 days. The partition should be 
completed without delays occurring between 
laminating operations. 


Where 2 h fire resistance (as determined by the method 
of IS 3809) is required from the 65 mm partition, 
50 mm x 2.65 mm galvanized nails should be skew- 
nailed at not more than 300 mm centres (150 mm from 
side to side) approximately 25 mm from the edges of 
adjoining boards (see 7.15). 


Consideration should be given to the use of a damp- 
proof membrane in those situations where the partition 
is likely to be placed on damp concrete or newly laid 
floor screeds. 


Table 10 Dimensions of Timbers 
(Clause 10.6.1) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


SI Panels Timber Members (Finished Dimension) 
No. А еее DOQOcdAÁ a —^O—— o" 
Thickness Maximum Sole Plate Joint Batten Ceiling and 
Height (see Note) Wall Batten 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 50 2 400 50 x 25 30 x 37 30 x 19 
ii) 57 2 700 57x25 37 x 37 37 х 19 
iii) 63 3 600 63 x 25 37 х 37 37 х 19 


NOTE — It can be omitted in Ше case of timber floors or adjusted in thickness to increase panel lengths to storey height. 


CEILING BATTEN 


START BATTEN 
AT JOINT 


SOLE PLATE 


NOTE — Sealants and skirting have been omitted. 


Fic. 17 PREFABRICATED GYPSUM WALLBOARD PANEL 


35 


IS 16135 : 2014 


IS 16135 : 2014 


NOTE — Sealants and skirting have been omitted. 


= 
j 
‘i 
nl. 
НЕ 
И 
siz 
ИІ. 
ДЕ 


Fic. 18 LAMINATED PARTITION 


10.7 Decoration 
10.7.1 General 


Immediately after the jointing is dry, a dual purpose 
pigmented primer should be applied by brush or roller 
to the dry lined surface. Such a primer shall reduce 
moisture absorption and the risk of discolouration. It 


36 


shall also equalize the suction, provide an even texture 
and facilitate the subsequent removal of wallpaper or 
fabrics. In view of the wide range of materials available 
as finishes, the manufacturer should be consulted as to 
the suitability of the above treatment. 


Decoration should be applied to the face of the gypsum 
wallboard as soon as possible after jointing and should 


be in accordance with the recommendations of IS 2395 
(Parts 1 and 2). 


10.7.2. Decorator's Preparatory Work 


Surfaces should be cleaned of all dirt, dust, plaster 
splashes and other foreign matter, minor defects such 
as pinholes, paper scuffs and damage should be made 
good and all stopping and filling carried out. 


Where movement has disturbed the original stopping 
treatment of screws and nails, additional preparatory 
work should be carried out in accordance with the 
recommendations of IS 2395 (Parts 1 and 2). The need 
for this additional preparatory work may not become 
evident until after the application of the first coat of 
decoration. 


Where the primer is required to act as a vapour check 
a second coat should be applied but care should be 
taken not to damage the first application. 


NOTE — Gloss, silk or sheen paint finishes will highlight any 
slight irregularity of the surface. Butt joints shall be more 
noticeable than tapered edge joints. In common with other 
finishes the final effect is very dependent upon the type of 
lighting in the finishing building. If subjected to rigorous 
inspection under strong artificial lighting, or when close visual 


IS 16135 : 2014 


inspection is made in natural lighting, minor defects, scratches, 
undulations, texture, and grain may be apparent. Matt finishes 
are likely to produce a better appearance. 


10.7.3 Application of Decorative Textured Finishes 


Joints between boards up to 3 mm wide should be filled 
with the textured finish and allowed to harden. Joints 
should be treated by applying sufficient applications 
of the coating to all joints to embed and cover the 
textured coating manufacturer's tape. The coating 
should be levelled and feathered out and all nail heads 
filled. All surfaces with variable or high porosity should 
be sealed with diluted manufacturer's sealer. Where 
texturing may be delayed, boards should be sealed as 
soon as possible after fixing. A liberal application of 
the coating should be applied by brush or roller to a 
smaller area up to 1 m? at one time and the surface 
should then be textured. A brush margin of minimum 
13 mm should be applied to all perimeter edges. 


Over-painting with good quality emulsion paint is 
desirable and is essential in kitchens and bathrooms, 
if the material is not of a washable type. 


NOTE — Spray applied materials are available. These should 
be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 


Table 11 Dimensions of Battens and Fastenings 
(Clause 10.6.2) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


51 Partition Maximum Fastenings Perimeter Batten 
No. Thickness Height 4—4 
Timber Concrete Gypsum 
Background Background Based 
Adhesive 
(D (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
1) 50 2 600 30 mm x 2.65 mm and 38 mm panel pins 38 x 25 25 x25 Multi- 
ii) 55 2 600 30 mm x 2.65 mm and 38 mm panel pins 38 x 25 25 х 25 purpose or 
ш) 65 3 200 50 mm x 2.65 mm and 38 mm panel pins 38 x 25 25 x25 bonding 
(see Note) compound 
NOTE — Maximum length 7 300 mm without intermediate supports. 
ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
190 : 1991 Coniferous sawn timber (Baulks and 1642 : 2013 Code of practice for fire safety of 
scantlings) — Specification (fourth buildings (General): Details of 
revision) construction (second revision) 
1326 : 1992 Non-coniferous sawn timber (Baulks 1950 : 1962 Code of practice for sound insulation 
and scantlings) — Specification of non-industrial buildings 


(second revision) 


IS 16135 : 2014 
IS No. Title 

2095 Specification for gypsum plaster 
boards: 

(Part 1) : 2011 Plain gypsum plaster boards (third 
revision) 

(Part 2): 2001  Coated/laminated gypsum plaster 
boards (second revision) 

(Part 3): 1996 Reinforced gypsum plaster boards 
(second revision) 

2395 Code of practice for painting of 
concrete, masonry and plaster 
surfaces: 

(Part 1) : 1994 Operations and workmanship (first 
revision) 


(Part 2) : 1994 Schedules (first revision) 


2469 : 1976 Glossary of terms relating to gypsum 
(first revision) 
2547 Specification for gypsum building 


plaster: 

Excluding premixed lightweight 
plaster (first revision) 

Premixed lightweight plaster (first 
revision) 


(Part 1) : 1976 


(Part 2) : 1976 


IS No. Title 

3809 : 1979 Fire resistance test for structures (first 
revision) 

3954 : 1991 Hot-rolled steel channel sections for 
general engineering purposes — 
Dimensions (first revision) 

4082 : 1996 Recommendations on stacking and 
storage of construction materials and 
components at site (second revision) 

4101 Code of practice for external cladding: 


(Part 3) : 1985 Part 3 Wall tiling and mosaics (first 


revision) 


4835 : 1979 Specification for polyvinyl acetate 
dispersion based adhesives for wood 
(first revision) 

4891 : 1988 Specification for preferred cut sizes 
of structural timber 

12777 : 1989 Method for classification of flame 
spread of products 

15622 : 2006 Pressed ceramic tiles — Specification 

15883 Guidelines for Construction Project 
Management: 

(Part 1) : 2009 General 


3629 : 1986 Specification for structural timber in (Part 2) : 2013 Time Management 
building (first revision) IS/ISO 16163: Continuously hot-dipped coated steel 
3696 Safety code of scaffolds and ladders: 2005 sheet products — Dimensional and 
(Part 1): 1987  Scaffolds shape tolerances 
3792 : 1978 Guide for heat insulation of non SP 7 : 2005 National Building Code of India, 
industrial buildings (first revision) 2005 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 9.5) 
LIGHTING FOR DRY LINING 


B-1 Certain operations in building, such as plastering, 
painting, dry lining and terrazzo laying are visually 
more exacting than others because the work is 
concerned with surface finishes. A higher general level 
of illumination is required for these operations and this 
can be readily obtained from additional local light 
sources supplementary to those providing general 
working light. Usually, each such supplementary lamp 
should be of not less than 100 W rating for a filament 
lamp. 


However, the problem of lighting of the critical 
finishing operations in building interiors cannot always 
be solved merely by providing a higher level of 
illumination. The nature of some of these operations 
is such that the direction of the light incident upon the 
work surface is of considerable importance. A 


38 


particular direction of the light (for example, a 
‘glancing’ angle of incidence) may make the quality 
of the work in hand much more apparent than a higher 
illumination obtained by a more normal incidence of 
light. This factor is of particular importance when it is 
intended that the permanent installation shall 
incorporate side-lighting techniques, such as semi- 
recessed trough lighting in ceilings, cornice lighting 
or wall lighting from close-wall fittings. 


Trials of lighting at glancing incidence may be made 
for the plastering works, using an experimental 
additional lighting unit embodying a | 200 mm 40 W 
fluorescent lamp housed in a suitable reflector and 
mounted on a telescopic tripod. The unit shall be made 
so that the reflector could be easily adjusted to 
illuminate either horizontal or vertical surfaces during 


plastering, with the fitting close to and parallel with 
the surface being worked. Ideally, the work should be 
carried out under the same lighting conditions that shall 
ultimately be obtained from the permanent installation. 
By using these units, the effect of the permanent side- 
light can be simulated to a considerable degree. 
Furthermore, the relatively large area and length of the 
tubular lamps eliminate much of the troublesome 
shadows that can occur with more compact filament 
of tungsten lamps. 


39 


IS 16135 : 2014 


Another advantage of tubular fluorescent lamps is that 
they are resistant to breakage from water splashes; a saving 
which serves to offset the higher initial cost of the unit. 
Tubular lamps often outlive their expected life and 
although they are relatively expensive they have introduced 
a new concept of temporary lighting. It should be noted 
that this particular form of lighting does not generally cause 
such severe glare because the lamps are of comparatively 
low brightness even though their luminous efficiency is 
about three times that of filament lamps. 


IS 16135 : 2014 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Lime and Gypsum Products Sectional Committee, CED 4 


Organization 


In personal capacity (B-702, Saket Dham, Sector-61, Noida 201301) 


AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Boral Gypsum India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute (CSIR), New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Directorate of Mines and Geology, Udaipur 


Dyerstone Lime Co (P) Ltd, Delhi 
ESHAN Industries, Jalgaon 


Fly Ash Unit, Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi 
Geological Survey of India (WR), Jaipur 


Grasim Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian National Trust for Art and Culture Heritage (INTACH), 
New Delhi 


Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 


Institute for Solid Waste Research and Ecological Balance 
(INSWAREB), Vishakhapatnam 


Khadi and Village Industries Commission, New Delhi 


Lime Manufacturers Association of India, New Delhi 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army 
Headquarters, New Delhi 

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Institute of Technology, Warangal 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Rajasthan State Mines and Mineral Ltd Bikaner 


40 


Representative(s) 
Dr С. L. VERMA (Chairman) 


Dn V. M. SHARMA 
Ms Хонг SanrHALIA (Alternate) 


Suri R. S. JAMWAL 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri С. N. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri T. T. PAUL 
Suri RAJAT TANWAR (Alternate) 


Dr MRIDUL GARG 
Dr NEERAJ JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 
Suri S. P. CHoupuary (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri J. B. SENGUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI Murari RATNAM 
Suri RAJEEV Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri J. M. Josu! 
Suri SATYA PRAKASH (Alternate) 


Suri S. С. BOHRA 
Suri N. M. Pititya (Alternate) 


Suri N. MACEDO 


Suri R. К. VISHAMBHARNATH AGRAWAL 
Suri VuAY BARHATE (Alternate) 


DR VIMAL KUMAR 
DiRECTOR 


Suri А. K. JAIN 
Suri RAJIV GoEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR MITRA 
SHRI RAJESH SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri Divay Gupta 
Ms A. Vuava (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


Dr N. BHANUMATHIDAS 
Suri N. Kaupas (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


Suri VipyA P. AGARWAL 
SHRI PRANJAL JAUHAR (Alternate) 


Bric B. D. PANDEY 
Suri Ravi SINHA (Alternate) 


Dr M. M. Au 
Dn C. B. KAMESHWARA RAO 


Suri D. V. S. PRASAD 


Suri S. THIRUMALAI KoLuNpu (Alternate) 


Suri BRU BHUSHAN BHATIA 


Suri Navin Kumar Gara (Alternate) 


Suri C. L. JAIN 
Suri D. K. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


IS 16135 : 2014 


Organization Representative(s) 


Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd, Mumbai Suni V. K. AGRAWAL 
Suri S. B. SAHANE (Alternate) 


Research Design Standardization Organization, Lucknow SHRI PRABHAT KUMAR 
Suri Азнотозн Kumar (Alternate) 


Saint-Gobain Gyproc India Limited, Jind Suri R. S. BALAIN 
Suri R. S. Tvaai (Alternate) 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi Dr P. K. KAICKER 
Dn (SuniMari) Laxmi Rawar (Alternate) 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai SHRI JATINDER SAIGAL 
Suri Лт KUMAR Gupta (Alternate) 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata Suri S. C. Basu Roy 
Suri H. L. CHAWLA (Alternate) 
In personal capacity (6201, New Adarsh Nagar, Roorkee 247667) DR Mar SINGH 
BIS Directorate General Suri D. K. AGRAWAL, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (Civil Engg) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri S. ARUN KuMAR 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


41 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 04 (7782). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


