IS 15467:2004 *WT

?-1-=mft -- iwm-t-l
Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS -- COSMETICS

Ics 71.100.70

0 BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF IN DIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC NEW DELHI 110002 Price Group 3

August 2004

Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cosmetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. A need has been felt to publish a standard on Glossary of terms used in cosmetic industry with a view to eliminate the ambiguity arising from different interpretation of terms used in cosmetic industry and to establish a generally recognized usage. This standard primarily deals with terms and definitions used in cosmetic industry. It is intended chiefly to cover technical definitions of most of the terms and it may not necessarily include all the legal meanings of the terms. Should any inconsistency exist between the terms as defined in this standard and those defined in standards for individual materials, the latter shall prevail. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A.

Is 15467:2004'

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS -- COSMETICS
1 SCOPE This standard defines terms used in the cosmetic industry. The terms are listed alphabetically. 2 TERMINOLOGY Abrasive -- A material, which abrades, smoothes polishes. Abrasives are used in cosmetics to remove unwanted tissue or foreign materials from various body surfaces. The removed materials may include dead skin surface cells, callus or dental plaque. Absorbent Powder -- A powdery material which takes up liquids with sponge-like action. Acidulent -- Substance, which acidifies, lowers pH and neutralizes alkali. Aerosol -- The fine droplets of liquid or powder propelled from the container by means of pressurised gas. A.H.A. -- Alpha hydroxy acid or its derivative used as moisturizer and exfoliating agent. Allergy -- It is the condition resulting from the exposure of the hypersensitive person to the antigen. Alopecia -- Loss of hair. Amphoteric -- Type of surfactant, which has a positive as well as negative charge and is capable of reacting either as an acid or a base. Amphoterics are compatible with anionic and cationic surfactants. Anabolism -- The building up of the body cells; the constructive metabolism. Anesthetic -- Reduces sensory perception such as pain or temperature. Anagen Phase -- The phwe during hair is growing, lasts for 2-6 years. Antiaging -- Acts to reduce signs of aging such as wrinkles. Anticelhdoid -- Helps to reduce appearance of orange peel skin. the symptomsl Anti-caking -- Ingredients used to prevent the agglomeration of particulate solid into lumps or cohesive cakes. Anti-dandruff -- Preparation eliminates dandruff. which retards or

Antifoam -- Substance which suppresses formation of foam. Anti-inflammatory-- inflammation. Anti-irritant irritation. Reduces, suppresses, prevents suppresses, prevents

-- Reduces,

Antimicrobial -- Destroys, inhibits or suppresses the growth of micro-organisms. Antioxidant -- Inhibits oxidation and rancidity. Anitpuritic -- Reduces or prevent itching. Antiseptic -- Inhibits the growth of microorganisms on the skin or on living tissue. Antistat -- Reduces static by neutralizing electrical charge on a surface. In cosmetics antistatic agents play a role in the formulation of hair products that prevent the condition commonly known asjly-away hair. Antitartar Agent -- Helps remove / prevent tartar formation on teeth. Astringent -- Substance or preparation contracts organic tissues after application. which

Bindi -- Sticker Kumkum used traditionally by ladies in the centre of their forehead. Also available in sticker form. Binder -- Promotes cohesion of pow&rs. Bleaching Agent -- Lightens hair colour, oxidizing agent. Botanical -- Derived from plant materials. Buffering Agents -- Chemicals, which have the property of maintaining thepH of an aqueous medium in a narrow range even if small amount of acids or bases, am added. Bulking Agents -- Chemically inert solid inorganic materials used as dlluents for other solids. They are also used to increase the volume (bulk) of an applied cosmetic. Carrier -- A vehicle or base used for a preparation.

Antigen -- Substance which stimulates formation of antibody. Anti-perspirant -- A cosmetic used to restrict or inhibit the flow of perspiration from the sweat glands. Antibacterial -- Destroys/inhibits reproduction of bacteria. the growth or

1

IS 15467:2004 Chelating Agents -- Also called as sequestrants, ingredients that have ability to complex with an active metallic ion in order to prevent their adverse effects on the stability or appearance of cosmetic products. Catagen--The phase during which hair growth slows as the follicles shrink and the hair bulb thickens and slightly lifts from papilla. Cellulose -- It is an effective thickner in water based systems. Celluloid ethers are widely used as thickners. Circulatory Stimulant -- Stimulates blood flow in the skin. Co-emulsifier-- Used along with a primary emulsifier for attributes such as better foaming, mildness, etc. Collagen -- This is a major fibrous constituent of dermis of skin. Comedone -- A constricted mass or plug of sebum with a darkened top. Conditioning -- An application to help maintain good condition of the skin or hair and protect them from damage caused by strong chemicals, exposure to sun and other factors. Consistency -- Degree of firmness or viscosity of cosmetic preparation. Cooling Agent -- Imparts cooling sensation to skin and mucous membrane. Colourant -- Adds colour; may be a soluble dye or an insoluble pigment. Controlled Release -- Encapsulated / sequestered ingredient(s) become(s) available from a product over time or under selected conditions. Cortex -- The most important part of the hair shaft located between the cuticle and medulla. Cosmetics -- Any substance or preparation intended to be placed in contact with the various external parts of the human body (epidermis, hair system, nails, lips and external genital organs) or with the teeth and the mucous membranes of the oral cavity with a view exclusively m mainly to cleaning them, perfuming them, changing their appearance and/or correcting body odours and/or protecting them or keeping them in good condition. Co-solvent -- Used to assist in keeping difficult material in solution state. Cosmetic Dermatitis -- Allergic reaction caused due the application of cosmetic. Coupling Agent -- Aids in solubilisation emulsification of incompatible components. or Cuticle -- The outer layer/ covering of a hair, also the tough fold of skin that forms the base and sides of the nail plate. Dandruff -- Flaking of the skin usually in the region of scalp. Decolourant -- Removes colour by adsorption, bleaching or oxidation. Deodrant -- Masks, reduces or eliminates unpleasant odour and protect against the formation of malodor on body surface. Denaturant -- Ingredient added to ethyl alcohol to make it unsuitable for ingestion. Dentifrice -- Preparation for cleansing the teeth. Depilation -- Temporary method of hair removal chemically. Depilatory Agent -- Removes hair chemically. Dermis -- The inner layer of the skin of a vertebrate. Detangier -- A conditioner that acidifies or coats the hair cuticle to prevent or remove snarls. Detergent -- A surface-active agent (surfactant) that cleans by emulsifying oils and suspending particulate soiL D~infectant -- Destroys pathogenic micro-organisms Dispersant -- Promotes the formation stabilisation of a dispersion or suspension. Dye -- Water soluble colouring matter. Eaema -- An inflammatory condition of the skin characterised by redness, itching and scaly lesions. Edema -- A swelling. Emollient -- An ingredient that makes skin soft and supple. Emulsifier-- A surface-active agent (surfactant) that promotes the formation of emulsions. Emulsion -- A dispersion of one or more immiscible liquid phases in another;'the distribution being in the form of tiny droplets. Normally classified either as oil-in-water (OAV)or water-in-oil (W/O). Emulsion Stabiliser -- Helps preserve the integrity of emulsion characteristics. Enzyme-- Complex protein produced by living cells that catalyzes biochemical reactions, often at or near human body temperature. Epidermis -- The outermost layer of skin of a vertebrate. Epilation -- Temporary method of hair removal mechanically (waxing tweezing). . L and

Cream -- Emulsion having very high viscosity with smooth/soft texture and good consistency which cannot be poured out.

IS 15467: 2Q04 Epilating Agents -- Functional products designed to remove mechanically. constituents of unwanted hair Hair Follicle -- A tiny tube likes pit in the skin from which the hair grows. Hair Colourant/Dye -- Used on hair to impart anew permanent or semi-pemnanentitemporary colour. Hair Conditioning Agents -- Ingredients used to create special effects on hair. This group includes materials, which enhance the appearance and feel of hair, increase hair body or suppleness, facilitate styling, improve gloss or sheen and improve the texture of hair that has been darnaged by chemical or physical action. Hair Waving/Perming-- effect to the hair. Products used to give curly

Essential Oil -- Natural, usually plant derived oil used for its flavour, fragrance and/or active properties. Exfoliant -- Helps loosen surface skin cells to expose a fresher-looking skin surface. Eyebrow Pencil -- These are used either to accentuate the line of eyebrow or to modify their outline after plucking. Eyeliner -- These are used on eyelid, particularly upper eyelid close to eyelashes to help to accentuate the expressiveness of eyes. Eyeshadow -- These are applied to eyelid to produce an attractive moist looking background for eyes. Facial -- For or of the face, also a procedure designed to relax, tone and condition the facial skin. Fibre -- Strand of natural or synthetic plymers for example wool, cotton, silk, nylon or polyester. Foundation -- A cream, liquid, cake or stick product that imparts a smooth finistdeven colour to the skin and usually used as base for other make-up. Fragrance -- Pleasant smell. Usually this smell comes from essential oils. Freckles -- Reddish brown or yellow spot on the skin usually caused by locally excessive pigment. Film Former -- Materials which upon drying, produces a continuous film on skin, hair or nails. Fixative -- Fixes or sets perfumes; retards evaporation; promotes longer-lasting aroma. Flavour -- Imparts a characteristic taste (and smell) to edible foods and tilnks; sometimes used in lip products. Foam Booster/Stabiliser -- Enhances quality and quantity of lather in products. Foaming Agent -- A surface-active agent (surfactant) that produces foam, an emulsion of air-in-water Fungicide -- Inhibits or destroys growth of fungi. Gel -- This is the form of cosmetic product having very high viscosity. Gellant -- A gelling agent, forms gels, includes a wide variety of materials such as polymers, clays and soaps. Glosser -- Furnishes usually on lips or hair. surface luster/brightness,

Hair-set Polymer/Resin -- Polymer ancVor resins used to maintain desired hair shape. Humectant -- Ingredient used in cosmetic products, which absorbs, holds and retains moisture. Hydrotrope -- Enhances water volubility. Inflammation -- A response of the body tissues to irritation or infection with accompanying reddening, pain, heat or swelling. Interme&ate -- Basic chemicals, which chemically modified to obtain desired function. are

Irritants -- Substances that induce inflammations. Kajal -- Traditionally decorative cosmetic for the eye used to improve the expressiveness of the eyes. It may also provide soothing effect to the eyes. Keratin -- A hard chemical substance that is the principal constituent of hair and nails. Keratinase -- Enzyme isolated from Streptomyces fradiae capable of digesting keratin. Kumkum -- Traditionally used by ladies on their forehead and is available in different forms, for example, powder, liquid, adhesive based. Lanolin Substitute -- Emollient used to replace lanolin, usually botanical> Lathering stabilizer. Agent -- See foamer, foam booster /

Lentigo -- A pigmentation defect characterised by dark spots similar to freckles. Leucoderma -- White patches on the skin caused by lack of pigment. IJpstick -- Essentially dispersion of colouring matter in a mixture of oils, fats and waxes used to colour lips. Lotion -- Emulsion of sufficiently low viscosity which is pourable. Lubricant -- Reduces friction, smoothens, adds slip. 3

Hair Bulb -- A hair structure that lies just above the papilla and fits over it tightly; the bulb nourished by the papilla gradually narrows as it approaches the surface of the skin.

IS 15467:2004 Manicure -- The care of hands and nails. Mascara -- A cosmetic preparation for application to eyelashes hair for beautifying. Medulla -- The innermost part of the hair shaft. Melanin -- A brownish pigment that determines skin colour. Melanocytes -- Cells throughout produce pigments. the body that Pomade -- A cosmetic preparation used for hair and scalp. Polymer -- A very high molecular weight compound consisting of repeating structural units. Polymer Film Former -- A polymer that can function as a film former. Powder -- A solid in form of fine particles. Preservative -- Ingredent which prevents or retards microbial growth and thus protects cosmetic products from spoilage. Propellant -- Chemicals used for expelling products from pressurized containers (aerosols). Protein -- Naturally occurring combinations of amino acids. complex

Moisture Barrier -- Retards passage of moisture or water. Moisturizer-Aids in increasing the moisture content of the skin through humectant or bafier action. Mouth Wash -- These promote general oral hygiene and breath. Neutralizer -- An oxidizing agent used in hair waving that stops the action of reducing agent and re-establishes the disulphide linkage in hair. Ointment Base -- An oleaginous components medicaments. anhydrous mixture of used as a vehicle for

Reducing Agent -- Reduces a chemical compound usually by donating electrons; neutralizes oxidizing agents. Refatting Agent -- Adds oily material to the surface of substrates for example skin and hair. Resin -- Non-volatile solid or semi-solid organic substances obtained from plants as exudes to prepared by polymerization of simple molecules. Rouge -- Preparations used to apply colour to cheeks. They are also known as blushers. Sebostatic-- Suppresses production of sebum on skin. Seborrhea -- Condition of excessive secretion from sebaceous glands making scalp and hair greasy. Sebum -- The fatty matter secreted by sebaceous glands. Seaquestrant -- Form coordination complexes with multivalent positive ions. Shampoo -- Suitable product for washing and conditioning hair, packed in a form convenient for use. Wicone -- Polymeric organo-silicon compounds that are water-resistant. Sindoor -- Product applied on the parting of hair by ladies--an indication of marital status. Skin Bleaching Agent --An agent designed to bleach limited areas of hyper-pigmented skin and inhibit the cell proliferation of melanocytes. Skin Conditioning Agent -- Cosmetic ingredient which helps to maintain the SO* smooth and pliable appearance of skin. Skin Protestant -- Protects skin fmm environmental attack. SPF Boosters -- Increases the effectiveness sunscreen ingredients. 4 of

Odour Masking Agent -- Absorbs or otherwise neutralizes unpleasant odours. Opacifying Agent -- Ingredients deliberately added to cosmetic products to reduce their clear or transparent appearance. Oxidizing Agents -- Oxidizing agents are chemicals, which gain electrons during their reaction with a reducing agent. In cosmetics these are used to destroy the natural pigment, melanin (that is effect bleaching), restore the normal oxidized state of hair or skin after exposure to a reducing agent. Pearlant/Pearling texture or luster. Agent -- Imparts a pearlescent

Pedicure Preparations -- These are the preparations used for application on feet. Pefiume Solvent -- Solubilizes perfume, usually in aqueous vehicle. Perspiration -- The excretion of water and minerals through the sweat glands. pH Adjuster -- Chemicals (acids, bases or buffering agents) which are used to control the pH of finished cosmetic products. Pigment -- A finely powdered insoluble substance used to impart colour, luster or opacity. Plasticizer -- Plasticizers are materials, which soften synthetic polymers. They are frequently required to avoid brittleness and cracking offilmformers.

IS 15467:2004 Solubilizer -- Sohrbilizes, usually into aqueous vehicles, normally insoluble materials such as fragrances, flavours, oils etc. Solvent -- Usually liquids, capable of dissolving other substances. Stimulant -- Produces a temporary increase in the functional activity of an organism or any of its parts. Stratum Corneum -- Outermost layer of epidermis, which is keratinised and continuously shed. Sunless-tanning Agent -- Imparts suntan colour to skin without ultra violet exposure. Sunscreen -- Used to protect skin and /or cosmetic preparations from degradation by ultra violet radiation. As per US FDA, a sunscreen active is defined as an ingredient which absorbs reflects or blocks at least 85 percent of the radiation in the ultra violet range at wavelengths from 290-320 nm but may or may not transmit radiation at wavelengths longer than 320 nm. UVA is ultra violet light in the wavelength range of 320-400 nanometers (rim). UVB is ultra violet light in the wavelength range of 290-320 nanometers (rim). Surfactant -- Also called as surface-active agents, form a large group of cosmetic ingredients, which exhibit the ability to lower the surface tension of water or to reduce the interracial tension between two immiscible substances. They are classified based on their ionic characteristics as anionic, cationic, non-ionic and amphoteric. Surfactants are used in cosmetics to perform a variety of functions like, cleansing, emulsifying, foam boosting, solubilizing, suspending, conditioning, etc. Suspending Agent -- Keeps finely divided solid particles in suspension. Sweat Glands -- These secrete sweat on the body surface and are concerned with control of body temperature and excretion. Sweetener -- Sweetens to provide a more pleasant taste. Tanning Accelerator -- Accelerates the tanning of skin. Telogen -- The period during which hair rests and does not grow. Thickener -- Thickens consistency or increases viscosity/

Thixotrope -- The property of certain gels and emulsions of becoming more fluid or less viscous when shaken or stirred. Tonic -- A stimulant or dressing for hair or scalp. Topical Delivery System -- Product that enhances the delivery of actives on the skin. Traditional Cosmetics -- These are the cosmetics used traditionally in India, such as Kajal, Kumkum, Sindoor etc. T-zone -- An area of the face that cuts across the forehead and down the nose. Vasodialator-- These stimulate circulation of blood. Vegetable Od -- Any plant-derived oil. Viscosity Stabilizer -- Helps to preserve the flow characteristics of a fluid. Vitiligo -- Patchy de-pigmentation of skin. Wax -- Any of numerous substances of plant, animal or synthetic origin that contain principally esters of higher fatty acids and higher fatty alcohols; free fatty alcohols, fatty acids and hydrocarbons may also be present; waxes derived form petroleum products are mainly high-molecular weight hydrocarbons. Wetting Agent -- A surface-active agent (surfactant) that lowers the surface and interracial tension in facilitating the wetting of surfaces. Whitening Agent- Skin -- Lightens/evens colour, often by inhibiting melanin formation andor transfer. Whitening Agent-Teeth-- Lightens colour, usually oxidizing agent; may also include enzymatic stain removal.

5

IS 15467:2004

ANNEX

A

( Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION PCD 19
Representative(s)
SHRIASHWINIKUMAR (Chairman)

Cosmetics Sectional Committee,
Orgunimtion Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi All India Small Scale Cosmetic Manufacturer's Association. Mumbai

SHRIM. B. DESAI SHRIB. M. CHOPRA(Alternate 1) SHRIS. CHATJ'ERJEE (Alternate 11)

Bengal Chemicals

& Pharmaceuticals

Ltd, Kolkata

DR SAJAL K. ROY CHOWDHURY DR A. K. MANDAL (Alternate) DR M. K. MAZUMDER DR A. C. DAS GUPTA (Alternate) DR SANTOSH. K. TALWAR DR SUKOMALDAS (Afrernafe) DRC. J.

Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata Central India Pharmacopoeia Laboratory, Ghaziabad

Consumer Education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad Consumer Guidance Society, Mumbai Colgate-Palmolive (India) Ltd, Mumbai

!Mtwoo

SHRIY. S. YELLORE(Alternate) SHRIN. G. WAGLS DR S. G. BHAT (Alternate) DR RAJ KOHLI SHRI SuritL AGGARWAL (Alternate I) DR NEENASHARMA(Alternate 11)

Commissioner, Food & Drugs Administration, Mumbai Dabur Research Foundation, Sahibabad Food & Drugs Control Administration Gujarat State, Gandhinagar Godrej Soaps Ltd, Mumbai Hindustan Lever Research Centre, Mumbai

DR PILANKAR

DR. D.B.A. NARAYANA
DR P. J. TJiOMAS SHRIJ. J. SHUKLA(Alternate) SHRIA. RANGARAJAN DR (St-rtumm) ROHINITHAKKAR (Ahernate) DR PUSHKER SONA SHRIN. S. BOLANI(Alternate 1) SHRICYRUS DALAL (Alternate 11)

Hygienic Research institute, Mumbai Indian Soaps and Toiletries Members Association. Johnson & Johnson Ltd, Mumbai Lady Amritbai Doga College, Nagpur Maharishi Ayurved Products, Noida, U.P. Nahira Cosmetic Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Mumbai National Test House, Kolkata Pnxter & Gamble, Mumbai Shingar Ltd. Mumbai BIS Directorate General Mumbai

SHRIM. B. DESAI SHRIMANISH K. CHHABRA(Alternate) SHRIR. HARIHARAN DR PRASHANT ABHYANKAR DR V. R. BAMBULKAR(Alternate) DR (SHRtMATI)S. B. KULKARNI DR S. C. SAXENA

Stsru V. K. SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) SHRIMADHUKARY. BORDAWEKAR
SHRIG. J. LAD (Alternate) SHRI K. C. NASKAR DR S, K. SAHA (Alternate) DR ARUN VJSWANATH Ms SHWETAPURANDARE (Alternate) SHRI V. K. SINGH SHRtMATt VARSHA BJSEN(Alternate) SHRI ANJAN KAR, Director&

Head (pCD) [Representing Director Gene'ral (Ex-oflicio)]

Member Secretary
DR (SHRIMATI)VUAY MALIK

Director (pCD), BIS

6

Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright
BIS has the
without the copyright prior of all its publications. in writing of No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form

permission

BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of

implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'.
This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 19 (1932).

Amendments

Issued Since Public@en Date of Issue Text Affected

Amend No.

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002
Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 /

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all oflices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843
{ 609285

Regional Offices : Central

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) hfUMBAI 400093

?

Eastern

Northern

Southern

Western

22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD.

GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at I%abhatQtRet Press, New DeUsi-2

