NAT HA IS 1304 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


TAH SATA Wat 
samt — OIR ATA vrecractt 
(ARTIE) 


Fertilizer Trade and 
Industry — Glossary of Terms 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 65.080 


O BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2021 Price Group 5 


Soil Quality and Fertilizers Sectional Committee, FAD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Soil Quality and Fertilizers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1958 and subsequently revised in 1963 and 1980. This revision has being 
undertaken chiefly to cover the technical definitions of most of terms, however, it may not necessarily include 
all the legal meanings of the terms. In this revision number of new definitions added, such as Additives, Bio 
fertilizers, Coated Fertilizers, Controller, Dealer, Humus, Peat, Organic Fertilizers, Prill, Reduced sample, 
retailer/retail dealer, Wholesale dealer, Semi-organic fertilizer and solubility of fertilizers. 


Should any inconsistency exist between the terms as defined in this standard and those defined in standards for 
individual materials, the latter shall prevail. 
Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1957, Standards 
of Weights and Measures Act, 1977 and the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 of Government of India. However, 
this standard is subject to restrictions imposed under these, wherever applicable. 


IS 1304 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


FERTILIZER TRADE AND 
INDUSTRY — GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


(Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines the terms widely used in the 
fertilizer trade and industry in this country. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


460 Test Sieves — Specification 

(Part 1): 2020 Wire Cloth Test Sieves 
(fourth revision) 

(Part 2): 2020 Perforated Plate Test Sieves 


(fourth revision) 


Methods of 
Apertures of 
(fourth revision) 


(Part 3) : 2020 Examination of 


Test Sieves 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following terms 
shall apply. 


3.1 Acid Forming Fertilizer — A fertilizer capable of 
increasing the residual acidity or reducing the residual 
alkalinity of the soil. 


3.2 Activated Sludge — A material made from 
sewage, freed from grit and coarse solids, and aerated 
intensively. The resulting flocculated organic matter 
is withdrawn from the tanks, filtered with or without 
the aid of coagulants, dried, ground and screened 
(see also 3.132). 


3.3 Additive — A Substance intended to improve the 
properties of a fertilizer or soil conditioner. 


3.4 Agricultural Liming Material — A Material 
containing oxides and/or carbonates and/or hydroxide 
of calcium and/or magnesium, used for neutralizing the 
acidity of the soil. 


3.5 Air-Slaked Lime — A product composed of 
various proportions of the oxide, hydroxide and 
carbonate of calcium or of calcium and magnesium, 
and derived from exposure of quick lime. 


3.6 Alkaline (or Basic) Fertilizer — A fertilizer 
capable of increasing the residual alkalinity or reducing 
the residual acidity of the soil. 


3.7 Ammonia (Liquid, Anhydrous) (NH,) — A 
material mostly produced by the synthetic process and 
obtained in the liquid form. It is used in the fertilizer 
industry extensively for the manufacture of urea, for 
ammoniation of superphosphate, in making base 
mixtures, in making mixed fertilizers, or for conversion 
into salts like sulphate, phosphate, chloride, nitrate, 
etc. It is also applied directly into the soil by suitable 
mechanical means. Fertilizer grade anhydrous ammonia 
contains about 82 percent of nitrogen by mass. 


3.8 Ammonia, Liquor (Aqua Ammonia) (NH,OH) — 
A solution obtained by absorbing ammonia in water. 
The solution is strongly alkaline and is made in 
various strengths for ammoniation purposes generally 
containing not less than 20 percent of ammonia by 
mass. 


3.9 Ammoniated Superphosphate — A product 
obtained from super-phosphate when it is treated with 
ammonia or solutions containing free ammonia. 


3.10 Ammoniating Solution (Nitrogen Solution) — 
A solution used for ammoniating superphosphate or a 
mixture of superphosphate with other fertilizers. This 
solution may be liquor ammonia itself or a solution of 
ammonium nitrate or urea in liquor ammonia. 


3.11 Ammonium Chloride (Sal Ammoniac or 
Muriate of Ammonia) (NH,Cl) — Ammonium salt of 
hydrochloric acid containing not less than 25 percent of 
nitrogen in ammoniacal form. 


3.12 Ammonium Nitrate (Nitrate of Ammonia) 
(NH,NO,) — A product obtained by neutralizing nitric 
acid with gaseous ammonia. It is usually in a granular 
or prilled form and coated with a suitable material to 
prevent absorption of moisture and caking in storage. 
Pure ammonium nitrate has a total nitrogen content 
of about 35 percent, of which one-half is present as 


IS 1304 : 2021 


ammoniacal nitrogen and the other half as nitrate 
nitrogen. Due to the addition of conditioning agents 
applied in commercial practice, the nitrogen content is 
reduced. 


3.13 Ammonium Phosphate — Two important 
ammonium phosphates are: 


a) Mono-Ammonium Phosphate (NH,H,PO,) — 
It contains 12.17 percent of nitrogen and 
61.7 percent of phosphoric acid (as P,O., 
when pure. The commercial or the fertilizer 
grade contains about 11 percent of nitrogen and 
52 percent of phosphoric acid (as P,O.). 


b) Diammonium Phosphate [(NH,),HPO,] — Pure 
diammonium phosphate contains 21.21 percent 
of nitrogen and 53.76 percent of phosphoric acid 
(as P,O,). The commercial or fertilizer grade 
contains about 18 percent of nitrogen and about 
46 percent of phosphoric acid (as P,O,). 


3.14 Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate — A material 
produced by neutralizing a mixture of phosphoric acid 
and sulphuric acid with ammonia. 


3.15 Ammonium Sulphate (Sulphate of Ammonia) 
[(NH,),SO,] — Ammonium salt of sulphuric acid 
containing not less than 20.6 percent of nitrogen in 
ammoniacal form. 


3.16 Ammonium Sulphate Nitrate — A double salt of 
ammonium sulphate and ammonium nitrate containing 
not less than 26 percent nitrogen of which about 
one-fourth is in the nitrate form and three-fourths in the 
ammoniacal form. 


3.17 Analysis — As applied to fertilizers, it shall 
designate the percentage composition of the product 
expressed in terms which the existing trade practice 
and laws require and permit. 


3.18 Anhydrous Ammonia — See 3.7. 
3.19 Aqua Ammonia — See 3.8. 


3.20 Available Phosphoric Acid — The sum of the 
water-soluble and the citrate-soluble phosphoric acid 
(as P,O,) in a fertilizer, except for bone meal and 
basic slag in which the amount of phosphoric acid 
(as P,O,) soluble in a two percent citric acid solution is 
considered available. 


3.21 Basic Fertilizer — See 3.8. 


3.22 Basic Slag — A by-product in the manufacture 
of steel from phosphatic iron ores. The product is 
finely ground to prescribed size and shall contain no 
admixture of materials other than what result in the 
original process of manufacture. 


3.23 Biofertilizers — It means the product containing 
carrier based (solid or liquid) living microorganism 
which are agriculturally useful in terms of nitrogen 
fixation, phosphorus solubilisation or nutrient 
mobilization, to increase the productivity of the soil 
and/or crop. 


3.24 Bone Ash — A product obtained by burning off 
bones to ash. The material contains 30 to 40 percent 
phosphoric acid (as P,O,). 


3.25 Bone Black (Bone Char) — A product obtained 
by heating bones in closed retorts. This is used for 
clarifying sugarcane juice and the spent material is 
used as phosphatic fertilizer. It may contain one to two 
percent of nitrogen and 30 to 35 percent of phosphoric 
acid (as P,O.). 


3.26 Bone Meal, Raw — A by-product of the bone 
crushing industry and consists of ground bones. 
It contains at least 3 percent nitrogen, and at least 
20 percent total phosphoric acid (as P,O,) of which 
not less than 8 percent is available phosphoric acid 
(as P,O.). 


3.27 Bone Meal, Steamed — A product obtained by 
subjecting bones to the action of steam under pressure. 
A major portion of glue and gelatinous material is 
extracted and the bones are then easily ground to a fine 
meal. It contains at least 22 percent of total phosphoric 
acid (as P,O,) of which not less than 16 percent is 
available phosphoric acid (as P,O,). 


3.28 Bone Superphosphate — See 3.53. 


3.29 Bone Tankage — A product obtained by 
processing bones along with a smaller proportion of 
meat of carcasses, with steam under pressure. It may 
contain 3 to 10 percent of nitrogen and 7 to 20 percent 
of phosphoric acid (as P,O.). 


3.30 Bulk Fertilizer — A Commercial fertilizer 
supplied in solid or liquid form, in a non-packaged 
form (to which a label cannot be attached). 


3.31 Burnt Lime — See 3.125. 


3.32 Calcium Ammonium Nitrate — A mixture of 
ammonium nitrate and finely pulverized limestone 
or dolomite. It contains not less than 25 percent of 
nitrogen, half-of which is in the form of ammoniacal 
nitrogen and the other half in the form of nitrate 
nitrogen. 


3.33 Calcium Carbonate (CaCO,) — A common 
naturally occurring substance in the form of limestone, 
marble, shells, etc. Precipitated calcium carbonate 
is also obtained as a by-product of certain industries, 
when finely ground, it is valuable for application 


to the soil to neutralize soil acidity. It is also used 
as an ingredient in mixed fertilizers to render 
them non-acid-forming. 


3.34 Calcium Cyanamide (Cyanamide) (CaCN,) — 
A commercial product consisting principally of 
calcium cyanamide and carbon. It contains not less 
than 20 percent of nitrogen. The nitrogen in this 
product is in the form of synthetic, non-protein nitrogen. 


3.35 Calcium Metaphosphate [Ca(PO),] — A 
product obtained by tearing phosphate rock with 
gaseous phosphorus pentoxide (as P,O.) at high 
temperature. 


3.36 Ca, Mg, S-Fertilizers — Fertilizers not included 
in groups nitrogenous, phosphatic, potassic, NP, NK, 
PK, NPK, but contain one or more of the elements 
Ca, Mg, S and of which the principal function is the 
supply of plant food. 


3.37 Calcium Nitrate [(Ca(NO,),] — The calcium salt 
of nitric acid. It is a source of nitrate form of nitrogen 
and of water-soluble calcium. The commercial product 
contains about 15 percent nitrogen and 28 percent total 
lime (CaO). 


3.38 Caustic Lime — See 3.125. 


3.39 Chilean Nitrate of Soda (Chile Saltpetre) — A 
product obtained by refining the crude nitrate deposits 
found in Chile and containing about 99 percent sodium 
nitrate (see also 3.98). 


3.40 Citrate Soluble Phosphoric Acid — It is 
that part of the total phosphoric acid (as P,O,) in a 
fertilizer that is insoluble in water but soluble in neutral 
1 N ammonium citrate solution at 65 *C. 


3.41 Citric Acid Soluble Phosphoric Acid — It is that 
part of the total phosphoric acid (as P,O,) particularly 
in basic slag and bone meal that is insoluble in water 
but soluble in 2 percent citric acid solution. 


3.42 Coated Fertilizer — A fertilizer, the granules 
of which are covered with a thin layer of a different 
material in order to improve the behaviour and/or layer 
of a different material in order to improve the behaviour 
and/or modify the characteristics of the fertilizer. 


3.43 Complete Fertilizer — A product obtained by 
mixing different fertilizer stock materials, containing 
three major plant nutrients, namely, nitrogen, 
phosphoric acid and potash (see also 3.65). 


3.44 Complex, Fertilizer — A granulated fertilizer 
containing more than one major plant nutrient in a 
pre-determined ratio in the manufacture of which 
chemical reactions are involved. The individual 
elements may be present in more than one form. 


IS 1304 : 2021 


3.45 Compost — A product obtained by the controlled 
decomposition of organic wastes. 


3.46 Compound Fertilizer — A chemical compound 
which contains more than one major plant nutrient 
elements. 


3.47 Controller — A person appointed as Controller of 
Fertilizer by the Central Government and other person 
empowered by the Central Government to exercise or 
perform all or any ofthe powers, or as the case may be, 
functions of the Controller under this order. 


3.48 Curing of Fertilizers — In the case of certain 
fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures, if the materials 
are mixed and immediately bagged, the fertilizers 
would become caked or set hard as a result of various 
chemical reactions taking place. It requires weeks and 
frequently months for these reactions to be completed 
and during this time most of the water combines with 
materials like gypsum and crystallized compounds are 
formed. However, the manufacturer usually prepares 
the mixtures well in advance and allows these chemical 
reactions to take place in the storage heap in the factory. 
This is known as ‘curing’, when the fertilizer is finally 
powdered and bagged, it should retain the good physical 
condition suitable for distribution. 


3.49 Cyanamide — See 3.34. 
3.50 Diammonium Phosphate — See 3.13. 


3.51 Dealer — A person carrying the business of selling 
fertilizers whether wholesale or retail or industrial 
use and includes a manufacturer, importer and a pool 
handling agency carrying on such business and the 
agents of such person, manufacturer, importer or pool 
handling agency. 


3.52 Dicalcium Phosphate (CaHPO,) — A product 
containing not less than 34 percent of available 
phosphoric acid in citrate soluble form, which is 
considered available to plants. 


3.53 Dissolved Bone — A ground bone or bone meal 
that has been treated with sulphuric acid. It is commonly 
known as “Bone Superphosphate’ and contains one to 
two percent nitrogen and 16 percent total phosphoric 
acid (as P,O,) of which about 8 percent is water-soluble. 


3.54 Dolomite — A mineral composed chiefly of 
carbonates of calcium and magnesium in substantially 
equimolar proportions. 


3.55 Double Sulphate of Potash and Magaesia 
— A commercial product containing not less than 
21 percent of potassium oxide, not less than 53 percent 
of sulphate of magnesia and not more than 2.5 percent of 
chlorine. 


IS 1304 : 2021 


3.56 Dried Blood — The collected blood of 
slaughtered animals, dried and ground, and containing 
9 to 14 percent nitrogen in organic form. 


3.57 Equivalent Acidity — The number of parts by 
mass of calcium carbonate (as CaCO,) required to 
neutralize the acidity resulting from the use of 100 parts 
by mass of the fertilizer. 


3.58 Equivalent Basicity — The number of parts by 
mass of calcium carbonate (as CaCO,) that corresponds 
in acid-neutralizing capacity to 100 parts by mass of the 
fertilizer. 


3.59 Fertilizer — A material, organic or inorganic, 
natural or synthetic which supplies one or more of the 
chemical elements required for the plant growth. 


3.60 Fertilizers (Inorganic) — A fertilizer in which 
the declared nutrients are as mineral or inorganic 
chemicals obtained by extraction and/or by physical 
and/or chemical industrial processes. 


3.61 Fertilizers (Organic) — These are carbonaceous 
products generally of biological origin added to the soil 
specifically for the nutrition of plant. 


3.62 Fertilizer Conditioners — The materials which 
are added to fertilizers to control free moisture and 
keep the fertilizer free-flowing by helping to prevent 
caking. 


3.63 Fertilizer Formula — It expresses the quantity and 
grade of the stock materials used in making a fertilizer 
mixture, for example, 400 kg of superphosphate 
containing 16 percent water-soluble phosphoric add 
(as P,O,), 400 kg of ammonium sulphate containing 
20.6 percent nitrogen and 200 kg of muriate of potash 
containing 60 percent potash (as K,O). 


3.64 Fertilizer Grade — It represents the minimum 
guarantee of its plant food expressed in terms of 
percentage of nitrogen (as N), phosphoric acid 
(as P,O,) and potash (as K,O). 


3.65 Fertilizer Mixture — A product obtained 
by mixing different fertilizer stock materials and 
containing more than one of the three plant nutrients, 
namely, nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash 
(see also 3.43). 


3.66 Filler — Any material mixed with fertilizers for 
any purpose other than the addition of available plant 
food, such as to facilitate granulation, for imparting 
anti-caking properties, to impart physical strength to 
granules and to adjust the nutrient percentage to the 
guaranteed levels. 


3.67 Finely Ground — It refers to actual size of 
particles as determined by the use of standard sieves. 


Seventy percent or more of the material should pass 
through 150 micron IS Sieve [see IS 460 (Part 1) to 
(Part 3)] and 90 percent or more should pass through 
300 micron IS Sieve. 


3.68 Fish Manure — A product consisting of largely 
non-edible fish that have been used for other commercial 
purposes, either ground or unground. It may contain 
4 to 8 percent nitrogen and 4 to 8 percent phosphoric 
acid (as P,O,). 


3.69 Fused Calcium and Magnesium Phosphate — 
A product derived from the fusion of rock phosphate 
with approximately 30 percent of magnesium oxide as 
such or as a mineral silicate. Its fineness and available 
phosphoric acid content shall be up to the accepted 
standards. 


3.70 Fused Tricalcium Phosphate — A product 
composed chiefly of the alpha form of the compound 
represented by the formula Ca,(PO,),. It is obtained 
when rock phosphate containing 5 to 10 percent silica 
is fused and the melt quenched. Its fineness and content 
of available phosphoric acid shall be up to the accepted 
standards. 


3.71 Garbage Tankage — A product obtained by 
treating waste household food materials with steam 
under pressure, drying and grinding. 


3.72 Granulated Fertilizer — A fertilizer which has 
been made into particles of approximately uniform 
size, ranging in diameter from 1 to 4 mm. 


3.73 Granulated Mixture — A mixture of fertilizers 
made by intimately mixing two or more fertilizers 
with or without inert material, and granulating them 
together, without involving any chemical reaction. 


3.74 Ground Limestone — It is the product obtained 
by grinding either calcareous or dolomitic limestone to 
a fineness so that all the ground product passes through 
1.70 mm IS Sieve. 


3.75 Ground Phosphate Rock — Material obtained 
by grinding naturally occurring phosphate rock to 
a fineness so that 90 percent of it passes through 
150 micron IS Sieve. 


3.76 Guano — It includes many materials which vary 
in source, composition and readiness for use. It may 
mean, 


a) bat guano found in caves; 


b) Peruvian guano — the accumulated excrement of 
sea birds found in Peruvian coast; 


c) fish guano, whale guano, sheep guano, goat guano; 
and 


d) phosphatic guano of various kinds. 


The nitrogen content varies from 0.4 to 9.0 percent and 
total phosphoric acid (as P,O,) from 12 to 26 percent. 


3.77 Gypsum — A hydrated calcium sulphate 
(CaSO,.2H,O). The commercial material contains 
varying amounts of impurities and is used as a soil 
amendment. 


3.78 High Analysis Fertilizer — A fertilizer containing 
not less than 25 percent of the major plant nutrients, 
namely, nitrogen, phosphoric acid (as P,O,) and potash 
(as K,O). 


3.79 Hoof or Horn Meal — A product resulting from 
processing, drying and grinding of hoofs and horns and 
containing 13 to 15 percent nitrogen. 


3.80 Humus — A term used for defining stable fractions 
of the soil evolved from organic materials therein. 


3.81 Inorganic Fertilizer — See 3.60. 


3.82 Kainite — A natural impure mixture of potassium 
and sodium chlorides; sometimes containing sulphate 
of magnesia, with not less than 12 percent of potash 
(as K,O). 


3.83 Kotka Phosphate — A product obtained by 
partial acidulation of ground rock phosphate with 
sulphuric acid and containing not less than 16 percent 
of available phosphoric acid (as P,O,) of which at least 
8 percent is water-soluble. 


3.84 Liquid Ammonia — See 3.7. 


3.85 Liquid Fertilizer — This term includes anhydrous 
ammonia, ammoniating solutions and liquid mixed 
fertilizers. The principal materials used in making 
liquid fertilizers are ammonia, urea, phosphoric acid, 
nitric acid and potassium chloride. 


3.86 Liquid Manure — A liquid arising from animal 
urine and litter juices or from a dung heap. 


3.87 Liming Material — A product containing one or 
both of the elements calcium and magnesium, generally 
in the form of an oxide, hydroxide or carbonate, 
principally intended to maintain or raise the pH of soil. 


3.88 Magnesia (Magnesium) (MgO) — A product 
consisting chiefly of the oxide of magnesium. 


3.89 Major Fertilizer Elements (Primary Plant 
Nutrients) — These elements are nitrogen, phosphorus 
and potassium. 


3.90 Manure — It is substance that is added to the soil 
to increase its fertility and for enhancing plant growth. 


3.91 Meat meal — A product obtained by processing 
meat waste from carcasses. It contains 9 to 11 percent 
nitrogen in organic form. 


IS 1304 : 2021 


3.92 Micro-Nutrients — See 3.147. 


3.93 Mixed Fertilizer — A product which contains 
two or more fertilizer materials, mechanically or 
otherwise physically well mixed such that they contain 
and supply two or more major plant nutrient elements 
(see also 3.65). 


3.94 Mono-ammonium Phosphate — See 3.13. 
3.95 Muriate of Ammonia — See 3.11. 


3.96 Muriate of Potash (KCI) — The potassium salt 
of hydrochloric acid. 


3.97 Nitrate of Ammonia — See 3.12. 


3.98 Nitrate of Soda (Sodium Nitrate) (NaNO,) — 
The sodium salt of nitric acid containing about 
16 percent nitrogen (see also 3.39). 


3.99 Nitrate of Soda and Potash — It is chiefly 
sodium and potassium salt nitric acid and contains not 
less than 15 percent of nitrate nitrogen and 10 percent 
of potash (as K,O). 


3.100 Nitrogen Activity — It indicates how readily 
the nitrogen in a fertilizer or manure would become 
available to plants after application to soil. It, therefore, 
offers a qualitative distinction between slow and quick 
acting nitrogenous fertilizers and manures. 


3.101 Nitrogen Fertilizer (Inorganic) — It contains 
nitrogen and may contain other elements but not 
declared amounts of P,O, and/or K,O. 


3.102 Nitrogen Fertilizer (Organic) — It contains 
nitrogen associated with carbon. 


3.103 Nitrogen Solution — See 3.10. 


3.104 Nitrophosphates — The products obtained by 
treatment of phosphate rock with nitric acid alone or in 
admixture with sulphuric or phosphoric acid, with or 
without subsequent treatment with ammonia. 


3.105 NK-Fertilizers — Those fertilizers which 
contain nitrogen and potassium and may contain other 
elements but not declared amount of P,O.. 


3.106 Non-Acid-Forming Fertilizer — A fertilizer not 
capable of increasing the residual acidity or reducing 
the residual alkalinity of the soil. 


3.107 NP-Fertilizers — Those Fertilizers contain 
nitrogen and phosphorus and may contain other 
elements but not declared amount of K,O. 


3.108 NPK-Fertilizers — Those Fertilizers contain 
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium and may contain 
other elements. 


IS 1304 : 2021 


3.109 Oil Cake — The residue left after extraction 
of fatty oil from different oil seeds employed for 
industrial purposes. They are chiefly valued for their 
nitrogen content in fertilizer use and also contain 
phosphoric acid, potash and other elements in small 
proportions. The more commonly used oil cakes are 
Groundnut cake, Castor cake, Rape cake, Cotton seed 
cake, Mustard cake, Neem cake and Mahua cake. The 
nitrogen content in these varies from 2 to 8 percent. 


3.110 Order of Terms of Plant Nutrients in 
Fertilizers — The order of terms of plant nutrients in 
fertilizers shall be nitrogen (N) first, phosphoric acid 
(as P,O,) second and potash (as K,O) third. 


3.111 Organic Fertilizer — Those substances made up 
of one or more unprocessed material(s) of a biological 
nature (plant/animal) and may include unprocessed 
mineral materials that have been altered through 
microbiological decomposition process. 


3.112 Organic Nitrogenous Fertilizer — A fertilizer 
containing nitrogen associated with carbon. 


3.113 Peat — A residual matter from plants grown and 
decayed in almost permanently waterlogged conditions 
and which may contain a limited quantity of naturally 
occurring mineral material. 


3.114 Pelphos — It is a mixed product made from the 
basic slag and ground rock phosphate containing citrate 
and water soluble phosphate. 


3.115 Phosphatic Fertilizer (Inorganic) — It contains 
phosphorus and may contain other elements but not 
declared amounts of N and K,O. 


3.116 Phosphate Rock — A natural rock containing 
one or more calcium phosphate minerals of sufficient 
purity and quantity as to permit its use directly or 
after concentration in the manufacture of commercial 
phosphatic fertilizers. 


3.117 PK-Fertilizers — Those fertilizers contain 
phosphorus and potassium and may contain other 
elements but not declared amounts of N. 


3.118 Potassic Fertilizers — Those fertilizers contain 
potassium and may contain other elements but not 
declared amounts of N and P,O.. 


3.119 Potassium Metaphosphate (KPO) — A 
product composed chiefly of the crystalline compound 
represented by the formula KPO,. Its fineness and 
content of phosphoric acid and potash shall be up to 
accepted standards. 


3.120 Potassium Schoenite — It is hydrated double 
sulphate of potassium and magnesium manufactured 
from salt bitterns. 


3.121 Powder — A solid substance in the form of 
very fine particle. 


3.122 Precipitated Bone Phosphate — A 
by-product from the manufacture of glue from bones 
and is obtained by neutralizing the phosphoric acid 
of processed bone with lime. The phosphoric acid is 
chiefly present as dicalcium phosphate. 


3.123 Prill — Granule obtained by solidification 
of droplets of fertilizers or by crystallization under 
special conditions. 


3.124 Processed Tankage — A product made under 
steam pressure from crude inert organic nitrogenous 
materials, with or without the use of acid for the 
purpose of increasing the activity of the nitrogen. 


3.125 Quick Lime (Burnt Lime, Caustic Lime, 
Shell Lime and Unslaked Lime) — A liming material 
produced by heating calcium carbonate until most of 
the carbon dioxide has been eliminated. 


3.126 Reverted Phosphoric Acid — The part of the 
water-soluble phosphoric acid in a fertilizer which, 
as a result of some reaction, has become insoluble in 
water. 


3.127 Reduced Sample — A representative part of the 
composite sample obtained by a process of reduction 
in such a manner that the mass approximates to that of 
the final (laboratory) samples. 


3.128 Retailer/Retail Dealer — A dealer who sells 
fertilizers to farmers or plantations for agricultural 
use such as for fertilization of soil and increasing 
productivity of crops. 


3.129 Sal Ammoniac — See 3.11. 
3.130 Saltpetre, Chile — See 3.130. 


3.131 Secondary Fertilizer Element (Secondary 
Plant Nutrients) — Calcium, magnesium and sulphur 
are called secondary fertilizer elements. 


3.132 Sediment Sewage Sludge — Made from 
sewage, freed from grit, coarse solids and any floating 
materials and sedimented, either gravitationally or 
with the aid of chemical coagulants, and dried in the 
form of lumps, or after drying, ground and screened 
(see also 3.2). 


3.133 Semi-Organic Fertilizer — A product in 
which declared nutrients are of both organic and 
inorganic origin obtained by mixing and/or chemical 
combination of organic and inorganic fertilizers. 


3.134 Shell Lime — See 3.125. 
3.135 Single Superphosphate — See 3.145. 


3.136 Slow Release Fertilizer — Fertilizer whose 
nutrients are present as a chemical compound or in a 
physical state such that their availability to plants is 
spread overtime. 


3.137 Sodium Nitrate — See 3.98. 


3.138 Soil Amendment — Any substance that is added 
to the soil for the purpose of improving its physical 
or chemical character or enhancing soil productivity 
or promoting the growth of crops but exclusive of 
commercial fertilizers and farm yard manures. 


3.139 Soil Conditioner (Ca, Mg, S) — A product 
containing one or more of the elements, Ca, Mg, S, the 
principal function of which is the improvement of the 
soil and which otherwise cannot be classed as fertilizers 
(see also 3.138). 


3.140 Solubility of a Fertilizer — The mass, in 
kilograms, of a fertilizer that will dissolve in 100 litre 
of water at a given temperature. 


3.141 Solubility of a Fertilizer Nutrient — The 
quantity of a given nutrient which will be extracted in a 
specific medium under specified conditions, expressed 
as a percentage by mass of the fertilizer. 


3.142 Straight Fertilizer — A product which contains 
and supplies to plants only one of the three major plant 
nutrient elements namely, nitrogen or phosphorus or 
potassium. 


3.143 Sulphate of Ammonia — See 3.15. 


3.144 Sulphate of Potash (K,SO,) — The potassium 
salt of sulphuric acid. 


3.145 Superphosphate (Single Superphosphate) — 
A commercial product obtained by treating phosphate 
rock with sulphuric acid and contains not less than 
16 percent of water soluble phosphoric acid (as P,O.) 
along with calcium sulphate and other products of 
reaction. The grade of superphosphate is stipulated 
in terms of percent of water soluble phosphoric acid 
(as P,O.). 


IS 1304 : 2021 


3.146 Suspension Fertilizer — A two-phase fertilizer 
in which solid particles are maintained in suspension in 
the aqueous phase. 


3.147 Trace Elements (Micro-Nutrients) — The 
products which contain nutrient elements essential for 
living plants in relatively small quantities such as B, 
Mn, Fe, Zn, Cu, Mo, Co. Fertilizers containing one or 
more trace elements have a declared content of each of 
these trace elements but may not have declared content 
of N, P, K, etc. 


3.148 Triple Superphosphate — A commercial 
product obtained by treating phosphate rock with 
phosphoric acid and contains not less than 40 percent 
of water soluble phosphoric (as P,O.). 


3.149 Unit — A unit of plant food is 10 kg or one 
percent of 1 000 kg. 


3.150 Unslaked Lime — See 3.125. 


3.151 Urea [CO (NH,),] — A synthetic, non-protein 
organic compound, crystalline or made into granules 
for fertilizer use and containing not less than 46 percent 
of water-soluble nitrogen. 


3.152 Urea Formaldehyde — Slow release nitrogenous 
fertilizer produced by the reaction between urea and 
formaldehyde. These products are mainly methylene 
ureas in the form NH,-CO-(NHCH,NHCH) -NH,, with 
low molar mass (1<n<8). 


3.153 Waste Lime (By-Product Lime) — An industrial 
waste or by-product containing calcium or calcium and 
magnesium in forms that will neutralize acids. It may 
be designated by prefixing the name of the industry or 
process by which is produced, for example, gas house 
lime, tanner’s lime. lime kiln ashes, etc. 


3.154 Wholesale Dealer — A dealer who sells fertilizers 
otherwise than in retail for agricultural use such as for 
fertilization of soil and increasing productivity of crops. 


IS 1304 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Soil Quality and Fertilizers Sectional committee, FAD 07 


Organization 


Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya 


Bidhan Chandra Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, West 
Bengal 


CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 


Central Fertilizers Quality Control & Training 
Institute, Faridabad 


Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd, New Delhi 
Cental Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Gujrat State Fertilizer & Chemicals Ltd, Vadodara 
(Gujrat) 


G B Pant Univ of Agri and Technology, Pantnagar 


Indian Micro Fertilizers Manufacturers Association, 
Pune 

Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 

Indian Farmer Fertilizer Co-operative Limited 
(IFFCO), New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal 

International Panacea Ltd, New Delhi 

IRC Agrochemical, Kolkata 

National Centre of Organic Farming, Ghaziabad 


National Fertilizer Ltd, Noida 


NEERI, Nagpur 


Nirmal Seed Private Ltd, Jalgaon 


Potash Research Institute of India, Gururam 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


Representative(s) 


DR A. K. SINGH (Chairman) 


ProF B. MANDAL 
Pror G. C. HAzRA (Alternate) 


HEAD (SOIL SCIENCE) 
HEAD (MICROBIOLOGY) (Alternate) 


SHRI SHYAM BABU, DIRECTOR 


DR NARESH PRASAD 
DR A. K. BARANWAL (Alternate) 


DRA. K. Ral 
Dr AsHIM DATTA 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr R. K. TEWATIA 


MR V. N. GoOTHI, DY MANAGER (AS) 
MR K. G. KORANT, SR MANAGER (AS) (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL K. SHARMA, PROFESSOR 


SHRI MAHESH G. SHETTRY 


HEAD (SOIL SCIENCE) 
HEAD (MICROBIOLOGY) (Alternate) 


Dr RADHA KRISHNAN NAYAK 


Dr ASHOK K. PATRA 
Dr M. C. Manna (Alternate) 


DR RANVIR SINGH 
MRs VIMALA PRAKASH (Alternate) 


Dr B. B. SINGH 
MR BIDHAN SINHA (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. BANSAL 
SHRI RAVINDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR JYOTI GOEL 
SHRI PREMLAL (Alternate) 


DR HEMANT J. PUROHIT 
Dr B. K. SARANGI (Alternate) 


DR J. C. RAJPUR 
MR M. S. PAPRIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. BANSAL 


HEAD (SOIL SCIENCE) 
HEAD (SOIL SCIENCE) (Alternate) 


Dr R. SANTHI 


IS 1304 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi Dr ALOK ADHOLEYA 
DR REENA SINGH (Alternate) 

University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangaluru Dr K. SUDHIR 
Dr V. R. RAMAKRISHNA PARAMA (Alternate) 

National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Dr ANIL KUMAR SAXENA 

Microorganism(NBAIM)-Mau Nath Bhanjan (UP) Dr ALOK KUMAR SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 
Yara Fertilizer India Pvt Ltd, Jalgaon Dr VIPIN MISHRA 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI RAJPAL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (FAD) BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 07 (16489). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


