IS 14231( Part 3 ) : 1995
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard CABLED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS FOR TELEVISION AND SOUND SIGNALS SPECIFICATION
PART 3 ACTIVE
COAXIAL WIDEBAND DISTRIBUTION COMPONENTS

UDC

621-397-743 : 621~375.12

@ BIS 1995

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW

STANDARDS
SHAH

ZAFAR

MARCJ

110002 Price Group 8

July 1995

Radio Communications

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The series of standards on cabled distribution the following parts: Part Part Part Part Part system for television and sound signals comprise of

1 Safety requirements 2 Electromagnetic compatibi!ity for system and components 3 Active coaxial wideband distribution components 4 Passive coaxial wideband distribution components 5 Headend

( under preparation )

This standard ( Part 3 ) states the minimum guaranteed performance requirements .of certain parameters for active coaxial wideband distribution components and identifies the guaranteed performances specifications that shall be published by the manufacturers. It also lays down the basic methods of measurement of the operational characteristics of the active components in order to assess the performance of these components. This standard is largely based on IEC document 12G ( Sectt ) 129 `Cabled distribution system for television and sound signals : Part 3 Active coaxial wideband distribution components'. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off number of significant places retained in the rounded off value specified value in this standard. for this standard is complied with, a test or analysis, shall be rounded numerical values ( revised )`. The should be the same as that of the

IS 14231( Part3):

1995

Indian Standard

CABLEDDISTRIBUTIONSYSTEMSFOR TELEVISIONANDSOUNDSIGNALSSPECIFICATION _
PART 3
ACTIVE COAXIAL WIDEBAND DISTRIBUTION COMPONENTS

1 SCOPE
This standard applies to all broadband amplifiers used in cabled distribution systems. covers the frequeney range 5 MHz to 1 750 MHz. applies to one-way and two-way equipment. lays down the basic methods of measurement of the operational characteristics of the active components in order to assess the performane of these components. identifies the guaranteed performance specifications that shall be pnblished by the manufacturers. states the minimum guaranteed performance requirements of certain parameters. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Sl.andards listed in Annex D are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS For the purpcse of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 shall apply. 4 METHODS OF MEASUREMENT This clause defines basic methods of measureAny equivalent method that ensures the ment. same accuracy may be used for assessing performance. Unless stated otherwise, all measurements shall be carried out with 0 dB plug-in attenuators and equalizers. The position of variable controls used during the measurements shall be published. The test set-up shall be well matched specified frequency band. 4.1Linear Distortion 4.1.1 Return Loss Ratio The method described is applicable over the

surement of return loss ratio of equipment operating in the frequency range 5 MHz to 1 750 MHz. All input and output ports of the unit shall meet the specification under all conditions of automatic and manual gain controls and with any combination of plug-in equalizers and attenuators fitted. 4.1.1.1 Equipment required

a) A signal generator

or sweep generator, adjustable over the frequency range of the equipment being tested.

Care shall be taken to ensure that the signal generator or sweep generator output does not have a high harmonic content as this can cause serious inaccuracy.

b) A VSWR bridge with built-in or separate
RF detector. The accuracy of measurement is dependent on the quality of the VSWR bridge. In particular on the directivity and on the return loss of the test port of the bridge. For example, Fig. 2 shows the maximum accuracy achieved by a bridge with 46 dB directivity and 26 dB return loss.

Cl An oscilloscope. 4 Calibrated mismatches.
4.1.1.2 Connection of equipment
The equipment
NOTES

shall be connected

as in Fig. 1.

4.1.1.3 Measurement procedure 1 All coaxial input and output ports, other than those under test shall be terminated in 7.5 ohms. 2 Ensure that there is no supply voltage on the port being measured as this could damage the bridge.
If it is necessary to use a voltage blocking device, use one with a good return loss ratio ( 10 dB better than requirement ). 3 Only good quality, calibrated connectors. adaptors and cables shall be used.

to the mea1

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995

._
- VSWR-BRIDGE

SWEEP GENERATOR

DEVICE UNDER

. TEST

osClLLOSCOPE

FIG.

1

MEASUREMENT OFRETURN Loss RATIO

A.

0

10

20
dB

30

LO

FIG. 2M

AXIMUM ACCURACY, A, FOR MEASUREMENT OF RETURN Loss RATIOUSINGVSWR BRIDGE WITH DIRECTIVITY OF 46 dB ANDTESTPARTRETURN Loss OF26 dB.

The measurement following steps:

procedure

comprises

the

a) Connect the equipment as shown in Fig. 1. b) Set the signal generator output level such that the DUT is not overloaded. c) Use the calibrated mismatches to calibrate the display on the oscilloscope. d) Connect the DUT as shown in Fig. 1 and check the return loss over the specified frequency range. 4.1.2 Flatness Methods of measurements a.re well known and `a description of the procedure is not necessary. 4.1.3 ChrominancejLuminance
Delay Inequality

terms, each generated from one or more of the ( assumed sinusoidal ) terms in the input, and particularly by the interaction of two or more terms. The transfer function of the device can be expressed as:
V out = a, + a,Vin + asVd + a, Vi2 + . . . . ..etc + a, Vd + ...... ...

If the input signal Vi, has m sinusoidal then this can be expressed as:
Vilin= V,sin(w,t+(61)+V,sin(w,t+~,)3. . , . . . . . . Vmsin(wmr+ 4,)

terms,

The output signal is then a series of terms each of which can be expressed in the general form: CVia, sin ( wit + 4i ) where WI is the sum or difference of integral positive multiples of one or more of the input frequenties, for example:
4% 2 wl-w894w, + wg, 22, + WI + ws

Method of measurement as given in IS 13420 ( Part 1 ) : 1994 shall be applicable.
,' 4.2 Non-Linear Distortion

4.2.1 General In a non-linear device, the expression for the output signal will, in general, have an infinity of
2

This may be written in a general form as WI = plol f pJwa f p3w3 f . . . . . . . . . fpmwm

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995 where pl, p,, . . . . . . . . . . . ., pm are ( including 0 > +i is the relative a, is a coelhcient phase of the positive integers signal; function; However, considering the standard level variation of t,etms of different order, the relative contribution of higher-order terms increases with the level of the input signals. Conversely, if signal levels are low enough, only a few of the lowest order terms will produce significant contributions at the output. If all input signals are limited to a frequency band of less than one octave, the frequencies of all second-order terms will fall outside of the band limits. Signals frequencies can also be allocated in two or more non-contiguous bands in a manner that will place all secondorder products, outside the bands. Third-order distortion products, in particular the products that occur at frequencies represented by p,a, p3h, PX, ha7 P3f9 PA Pe, Paj cannot be kept out of the band that contains the input signals. The accumulation of thirdorder distortion products may therefore be a limiting factor in the performance of a wideband multi-channel distribution system. Measurement related mena are described: intermodulation single frequency to the following two or phenothree

of the output transfer

Vi is a term dependent on the product of powers of the amplitudes of the input signals ( V,, V,, etc ) where the sum of the powers equals n; and C is a numerical multiplier.

It should be noted that terms at the same frequency may arise from several different terms in the transfer function, that is, for several difierent values of n. Each component of the output signal represented by such an expression with n > 1 is a non-linear distortion product. Where wr is an integral mul:iple of a single term in the innut signal, for example 4 COG, the product is regarded If it is formed as a harmonic distortion product. from two or more terms, for example 2wl-wQ, it is known as an intermodulation distortion product. Sil*ce the values of a,, a,, as, etc, usually decrease relatively rapidly with increasing values of n, it is found that the predominant non-!ineac output signals arise from the terms in transfer function in such a way that the sum P,+pz+ ,>... pm=n. and n is defined as the order of the nonlinear distortion product, for exampie 3~,-2~, is a fifth order product arising from th:: term represented in the QjVi"L. The in input signals expression are not necessarily distinct signals. Anv periodic signal may be represented by a series of sinusoidal terms as in the expression for Vi,. For the predominant non-linear output signals it is found that: ViII=VIP1 V,P2 V8P3... . . . . . . . . . . . . Vmpm so that if the amplitudes of all the input signals the are multiplied by a common factor K, amplitude of the n-th order distortion products will be multiplied by I0 (since ~~+p~+p~.~.... pm-n). When the levels of all input signals are raised by 1 dB, the level of ,any signal n-th order distortion product will increase n dB, and the resultant signal/distortion ratio will decrease by ( n- 1 ) dB. This relationship will be referred to as the standard level variation of a distortion product. If a distortion product is due to components of diGrent order, and/or different order products occur within the bandwidth of the device used to measure the level of distortion products, then the measured level will not follow a standard level variation. In principle, an infinite number of terms is necessary for a completc description of a non-linear characteristic.

between signals.

composite beats produced of single frequency sig.lals. composite crossmodulation nun-&r of single frequency

by a number between signals. a

No attcmnt is made to discuss the merits of the different methods in relation to the specification of equipment for cabled distribution nor is there any attempt to indicate systems, any equivalence between methods, in the sense that the results of one method may be derived from measurements made by another. In fact, the discussion should not be taken even to imply that the ranking of devices by measured non-linear distortion is independent of the method of measurement. A proper following specification details: particular shall include at least the

a>the
cl 4

effect that signals at

is measured; produce the effect ratio. this is

b) a list of input
effect; the frequency measured; and the required

that which

signal

to distortion

"he result of the measurement shall be given as the worst case maximum signal level at the component output that allows the required

3

IS 14231( Part 3 ) : 1995

signal to the distortion ratio to be met. If the output level is sloped with frequency, this must be defined. The effect shall be defined as being of a particular order (for example rthird-order intermodulation' ). 4.2.2 Intermodulation
4.2.2.1 Iniroduction

than one octave, and shall be measured two signals ( see A-l ).

using

Third-order products are encountered in wideband and narrow-band equipment and systems and shall be measured using three signals ( see A-2 ). 4.2.2.2 Equipment required

a) A selective

The two carrier method described is applicable to the measurement of the ratio of the carrier to a single intermodulation product at a specified point within a cabled distribution system. The method can also be used to determine the intermodulation performance of individual items of equipment.
NOTEIt should be especially noted that the simultaneous use of many channels spaced by the same frequency interval results in a large number of intermodulation products ( particularly those of the third-order ) falling near the vision carrier of a wanted television channel. In these cases, the resultant interference is of an extremely complex nature and an alternative measurement procedure will be needed. This is covered by 4.2.4.

voltmeter covering the frequency range of the equipment or system to be tested. This may be spectrum analyser. number of signal generators covering the frequencies at which the tests are to be carried out. greater ratio in the

b) The appropriate

A variable attenuator with a range c> than the signal to intermodulation expected, voltmeter if not incorporated described in 4.2.2.2(a).

4 A combiner will be required

for tests on equipment and systems with a single input ( Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 ).

NOTE-Additional items may be necessary, for example, to ensure the measurements are not affected by spurious signals generated in the test equipment itself ( Annex B ).

Examples of second-order and third-order intermodulation products are given in Annex A. Second order products are encountered only in wideband equipment and systems covering more
SIGNAL GENERATORS FILTERS

4.2.2.3 Connection of equipment The equipment Fig. 3. shall be connected as shown in

VANABLE ATTENUATOR EM OR EQUIP. UNOER TEST FILTER

SELECTIVE VOLTMETER

( IF REQUIRED SIGNAL GENERATOR61

FOR

ALC)

NOTES 1 The requirements for the items of test eqUipment indicated by dotted lines depends OII the results of checks given in Annex B. The filters at the signal generator outputs may be needed to suppress The selective voltmeter input signals. spurious be required to prevent iutermodulation in filter may

the meter. If a filter is used, then possible mismatch should be avoided by not reducing the attenuator value below 10 dB. 2 To avoid intermodulation between the signal generators, it may be necessary for the combiner to be in the form of one or more directional couplers ( see Annex B )*

FIG. 3

BASIC ARRANGEMENT OF

TEST EQUIPMENT FOR EVALUATIONOF THE RATLOOF SIGNAL TO INTERMODULATION PRODUCT

4

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995

12 10

-5.

4,

I

20

I

D
LO 60 60 100

r\.
200 LOO 600 1000

.
1750

FREQUENCY

(MHz)

FIG. 4 GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATIONOF RETURN Loss CATEGORIES
4.2.2.4 Measurement procedure c) Measurement

The measurement following steps: a) General,

procedure

comprises

the

Unless otherwise required, the reference levels used in the measurements shall be the normal operating levels specified for the equipment or system. If the specified levels are not constant over the frequency range then the levels of all the test signals shall be quoted in the results. Measurements of both second-order and thirdorder products shall be carried out with the test signals widely and closely spaced over each band of interest at frequencies capable of producing significant products within the overall frequency range. An exception to this is dealt with in A-1.2. Where the system to be measured includes automatic gain control ( AGC ), tests shall be carried out at the nominal operating signal input levels. b) Calibration and checks A check shall be made to determine if harmonics and other spurious signals at the outputs of the signal generators are likely to affect materially the results of the measurements ( see Annex B ). The selective voltmeter shall be calibrated and checked for satisfactory operation ( see Annex B ). A check shall be made for possible intermodulation between the signal generators at the output levels to be used for the tests ( see Annex B ).
5

generators to the frequencies of the test signals [ see 4.2.2.4(a) and Annex A 1, and adjust their outputs and that of the different points ot the systems as far as the point of measurement to obtain the specified system operating levels throughout. Connect the variable attenuator and selective voltmeter and other items if required (see Annex B ) to the point of measurement. Tune the meter to each test signal and note the attenuator value al required to obtain a convenient meter reading R for the reference signal. The attenuator value al should be slightly greater than the signal to intermodulation ratio expected at the point of measurement.
Tune

Set the signal

the meter to the intermodulation product to be measured and reduce the setting of the variable attenuator to the value a2 required to obtain the same meter reading R.
NOTE - When measuring levels of intermodulation products, it may be necessary to insert a filter at the input to the meter (see Annex B. ). In such instances the insertion loss ( in dB) of the filter at the frequency of the products shall bo added to the attenuator value. The signal

to intermodulation product ratio in dB is given by: S]I, = al -a2 where al - attenuator value for the test signal used as a reference in dB, and a2 = attenuator value for the intermodulation product in dB.

IS 14231 (Part 3 ) : 1995 4.2.3 Composite Triple Beai
4.2.3.1 Introduction

The method of measurement of composite triple beat using carrier wave (cw) signals is applicable to the measmemcnt of the ratio of the carrier to composite triple beat at a specified point in a cabled distribution system. The method can also be used to determine the composite triple beat intermodulation performance of individual items of equipment. When the input signals are at regularly spaced intervals ( as is common in most allocations fcr TV channels ), the various distortion products tend to cluster in groups, close to the vision carriers and at other regular positions within the TV channels. The number of different products in each cluster increases rapidly with the number of channels, and they combine in differrent ways, depending on the degree of coherence between generating signals, and the relative phases of the different distortion products. The method described in this clause measures the non-linear distortion of a device or system by the composite effect of all the beats clustered within f 15 kHz of the vision carrier of that channel has to be turned off, so that the composite triple beat measured is that generated by all carriers except that of the measured channel.
NOTE-On

Because of the large variety of frequency plans in use and the need to compare readily performance specifications of different manufacturers equipment, the measurement for components shall be made with the carriers listed in Annex C ( the carriers are all in an 8 MHz raster, except for the special case of 48.25 MHz ). The vision cart-ter frequencies are arranged in groups and only complete groups shall be used. If an amplifier is specified up to 450 MHz, group A shall be used. If specified to 550 MHz, groups A and B shall be used. If specified to 860 MHz, all groups A, B, C, D and E shall be used. For amplifiers specified for intermediate upper limit frequencies the performance shall be quoted for the maximum possible number of complete groups. The manufacturer may, in addition, provide a performance figure for a large number of carriers. 4.2.3.2 Equipment required A spectrum analyser with 30 kHz IF bandwidth and 10 Hz video bandwidth capability. NOTE - When using a spectrum analyser with

a>

minimum video filtering capabilities greater than 10 Hz, the composite third-order distortion may be noisy and should be read at the middle of the trace.

b) A variable

75 ohms attenuator, in 1 dB steps.

adjustable

systems carrying more than 10 channels, removal of the wanted carrier does not significantly affect the result.

4 A bandpass

The

method is used to support of the following general format:

a specification

`The composite triple beat ratio for groups of carriers in channel (A) at (B) dB (pV) is (C) dB' where (a) designates the channel in which the test is made. If omitted, the specification is understood to be a minimum specification for measurements at all the channels specified by the list of carriers.

filter for each channel to be tested or a tunable bandpass filter. This filter should attenuate the other channels present on the system to be tested sufficiently to ensure that the products generated by non-linearity in the spectrum analyser itself do not contribute significantly to the composite beat products to be measured. The passband of this filter shall at least be flat with 1 dB

over the frequency range of interest, and shall be well matched over the cdmplete frequency band. If necessary, a fixed attenuator shall be connected at the input to the filter.

(b) is the reference level at which all carriers should be set during the measurement unless otherwise specified. If all carriers are not at the same level, the specification should clearly indicate the level of each carrier relative to the reference level. (c) is the composite triple beat ratio, usually given as a minimum specilication.

4

CW generators, operating at the frequencies of the vision carriers used in the system to be tested. The tuning accuracy and stability shall be better than f 5 kHz. The number of generators needed is governed by the number of groups of frequencies used for the tests ( see 4.2.3.1 ). Group A also can be used in part, dependent on the specified bandwidth of the equipment under test. The frequencies delet,ed shall be stated.

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995

e) A combiner
generators.

for

the

signals

from the

f ) Matching devices, attenuators

and filters, etc, to obtain the correct signal levels, matching condiiions and reduction of spurious signals at the input of the system.
Connection of equipment

4.2.3.3

The equipment

shall be connected
procedure

as in Fig. 5.

4.2.3.4 Measurement The measurement following stepsi Connect a>

procedure

comprises

the

point A directly to point B and disconnect the bandpass filter (see Fig. 5 ). Adjust the level of each generator for an output level at point A equal to that which will be present when the system or device under test is connected.

b) Adjust

the spectrum analyser as follows: IF bandwidth 30 kHz Vide bandwidth 10 Hz Scan width 50 kHz/div Vertical scale 10 dB/div Scan time O-2 s/div

m>

c) Tune the spectrum

analyser so that the vision carrier of the channel in which the measurement is to be made is centred on the display screen. of the spectrum analyser together with its internal and external input attenuator in such a way that the response to the picture carrier corresponds to a full scale reference. At the same time the noise level shall be at least 10 dB lower than the distortion ratio required.

4 Adjust the sensitivity

to the channel to be measured and adjust the input attenuator to correct for the attenuation of the filter. f> Disconnect the generator for the channel to be measured and terminate the combiner with its nominal impedance. products g) Verify that the intermodulation generated in the spectrum analyser over the entire channel are at least 20 dB below the distortion ratio required. If this is not the case, disconnect the handpass filter and repeat the steps (d) to (g) of this procedure with decreased sensitivity of the spectrum analyser. h) Note the setting of the sensitivity control. Connect the signal generator again and j) repeat steps (c) to (h) of tb.is procedure for all channels. k) Connect the system to be tested between points A and B and reset the signal generators to obtain the required output levels at point B. Adjust the centre frequency of the spectrum analyser as in step (c) and insert the appropriate bandpass filter. Adjust the input attenuator ( internal or n) external ) to return the response of the spectrum analyser to the picture carrier to full scale with the appropriate setting of its sensitivity control [see step (h) 1. P) Disconnect the generator for the channel terminate the and to be measured combiner with its nominal impedance. 4) The composite triple heats are clustered within -+ 15 kHz of the vision carrier, so the signal/composite triple beat ratio can be read directly oif the screen of the spectrum analyzer.
i3AND-PASS FILTER

e) Insert the bandpass filter corresponding

I N -

CnANNELI

FIG.

5

CONNECTION OF TEST EQUIPMENT FOR THE MEASUREMENT

OF NON-LINEAR DISTORTIONBY

COMPOSITE BEAT 7

1s 14231( Part 3 ) : 1995
r) Adjust the attenuator Al of Fig. 5 to obtain the required signal/composite triple beat ratio and compensate for the change in output level using attenuator A2. s) Measure the signal the DUT. t) Repeat cedure tert. the steps level at the output of The method described is applicable to the measurement of crossmodulation by the transfer of modulation from multiple interfering modulated signals on to an unmodulated wanted signal. Measurements are made using the same carrier frequencies as for composite second order that is as shown in Annex C. The method uses multiple interferring signals modulated symmetrically about a level such that the voltage at the peak of the modulation envelope is equal to the reference level L, which is also the level of the unmodulated wanted signal. A correction factor the use of modulation cent ( see Table 3 ). is included to allow for depths less than 100 per-

for every

(m) to (s) of this prochannel used in this

u) The worst case maximum output level giving the required signal to composite triple beat ratio shall be noted for publication. 4.2.4 Composite Second Order Beat

The test equipment required, connection of equipment and moasurement procedure are as for the comoosite trinle bzat measurement but with the following d ikerences.
I

4.2.4.1

Equipment required equipment in 4.2.3.2. required is the same as

Composite amplitude crossmodulation is defined as the transfer of amplitude modulation from a number of modulated signals to the wanted carrier, and can be expressed as follows: of wanted amplitude modulatiorl -~ ___20 log p-p voltage of transferred amplitude modulation Composite total crossmodulation is defined as the transfer of total modulation, that is the vector sum of amplitude and phase modulation, from a number of modulated signals to the wanted carrier and can be expressed as follows: 20 log p-p voltage p-p voltage of wated sideband ..__ of transfEd%deband 100 percent at the peaks equal to the p-p voltage

The test described 4.2.4.2

Measurement procedure

The procedure is as for composite triple beat except that the second order beats are not exact carrier clustered ( f 10 kHz ) about frequencies but may be at f 0.75 MHz or f 0.25 MHz from them. The carrier/cornposite second order ratio can be read directly off the screen of the spectrum analyser. For composite second order it is also necessary to measure the beats close to channel at 48.25 MHz or at the lowest possible channel. Although it is not essential to have the caulier present at this frequency, it may be useful for reference purposes. In this case, the second order beats are clustered around 48.00 MHz &lo kHz and so again may be read directly from the screen of the spectrum analyser. The worst case maximum output level giving the required signal to composite second order ratio shall be noted for publication. 4.2.5 4.2.5.1 Composite Crossmodulation Introduction

All signals are symmetrically modulated and have rms voltages of their modulation envelopes reference level L.

The measurement results obtained at the chosen depth of modulation are corrected to those which would be obtain with 100 percent d.c. coupled modulation ( see Table 3 ). The device under test is measured at the maximum output signal level that will allow a particular wanted modulation/composite crossmod!llation ratio to be achieved ( usually 60 dB ). 4.2.5.2 Conditions of measurement

The multi-signal method of measurement is The system or equipment output signal used levels, that produce the required composite amplitude crossmodulation ratio and the com( both crossmodulation ratio posite total normally 60 dB ), are measured. 8

a) The measurements shall be carried out with all the input signals present. These shall be appropriate to the frequency range of the particular device under test and in accordance with the table in Annex C.

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995

b) Where the equipment

cl

to be measured includes automatic gain control ( AGC ), tests shall be made at the input signals nominal operating levels. All levels shall be expressed in rms values.

having a calibrated input level range exceeding the expected crossmodulation ratio.

d) A combiner,

4.2.5.3 Equipment required 4 An RF selective voltmeter covering the frequency range of the system or equipment to be tested having linear demodulated output facilities at the depths of modulation to be used and a bandwidth adequate to pass the desired AF sidebands without attenuation. If the selectivity and linearity of the voltmeter are not adequate to prevent the generation of spurious signals, it is essential that the bandpass filter shown in Fig. 6, is inserted. The RF selective voltmeter shall indicate the rms value of its input signal at the peaks of the modulation envolpe. b) Signal generators covering the appropriate vision carrier frequencies as listed in Annex C, all having the required modulation facilities, linear at the depth of modulation to be used.
NOTE -It is recommended that the modulation frequency approximates the line scan frequency of tbc TV signals in order to include effects which may be caused by low frequency circuits ( for example decoupling ) in the equipment to be tested. The modulation frequency should not be a multiple of the power supply frequency.

matching devices, attenuators, filters, etc, to obtain the correct signal levels, matching and reduction of spurious signals. analyser with 3 kHz IF band10 Hz video bandwidth

A spectrum e>

width and capability.

f) A bandpass

filter for each channel to be tested or a tunable bandpass filter. This filter shall attenuate the other channels present on the system to be tested sufficiently to ensure that the products generated by non-linearity in the spectrum analyser itself do not contribute significantly to the crossmodulation products to be measured. The passband of this filter shall be flat at least to within 1 dB over the frequency range of interest, and shall be well matched over the complete frequency band. If necessary, a fixed attenuator shall be connected to the input of the filter.

4.2.5.4 Connection of equipment Connect equipment as shown in Fig. 6.

4.2.5.5 Measurement procedure The measurement following steps: Composite amplitude procedure comprises the

Any symmetrical modulation waveform ( excluding pulse modulation ) may be used providing the same signal generator used for both calibration and measurement, and the modulation depth and waveform remain the same. c) An AF selective voltmeter covering the modulation frequency to be used and

crossmodulation of the system or to the RF selective

Connect the output a> equipment under test voltmeter.

b) Select
the

each signal generator in turn, set modulation depth and adjust the

SGt

AU010

I
BANOPASS

-Ek
SGn FIG.

6

MEASUREMENT OF COMPOSITE CROSS MODULATION 9

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995 output to give the desired r.f. peak level L at the output of the system or equipment to be tested using the RF selective voltmeter.

n) Insert the bandpass

filter corresponding to the channel to be measured and adjust the input attenuator to correct for the attenuation of the fiIter.

cl Tune the

selective voltmeter to the frequency of the carrier selected as the wanted signal. Switch off all the unwanted signals. Adjust the AP selective voltmeter for a convenient reading of the demodulated signal. Note this reading.

4 Switch off the modulation

on the selected Adjust its unmodulated wanted signal. output to give the desired RF level L at the output of the system or equipment to be tested, using the RF selective voltmeter. signals and, with the RF selective voltmeter tuned to the wanted carrier frequency, note the level of the demodulated amplitude crossmodulation signal on the AF selective voltmeter.

P) Adjust the sensitivity of the spectrum analyser together with its internal and/or an external input attenuator in such a way that the response to the first sidebands, approximately 15 kHz on the either side of the picture carrier, corespond to a full scale reference. At the same time the noise level shall be at least IO dB lower than the distortion ratio required. q) Switch off the modulation of the wanted carrier and switch on all the other modulated carriers. Measure the amplitude of the sidebands on either side of the wanted carrier caused by the total composite crossmodulation transfer. The difference in dB between the full scale reference and the largest of the two sidebands, corrected as in Table 3, is the total crossmodulation ratio referred to 100 percent d.c. coupled modulation. Adjust attenuator Al of Fig. 6 and compensate for the change in output level using attenuator A2 in order to obtain the required total composite crossmodulation. Repeat steps (a) to (p) of this procedure each time selecting a different wanted signal, until all channels used in this test have been selected. The worst case maximum output level giving the required signal to composite total crossmodulation ratio shall be noted for publication. 4.2.6 Hum Modulation
The

e) Switch on all the modulated

f) The difference

in decibels between the levels obtained in steps (c) and (e), corrected as in Table 3, is the amplitude crossmodulation ratio referred to 100 per cent d.c. coupled modulation Adjust attenuator Al of Fig. 6 and compensate for the change in output level using A2 in order to obtain the required composite amplitude crossmodulation ratio, normally 60 dB. output level giving the required signal to composite amplitude crossmodulation ratio shall be noted for publication.

9) The worst case maximum

Composite total crossmodulation h) Connect the output of the system or equipment under test to the spectrum analyser. j) Adjust the spectrum analyser as follows: 3 kHz IF bandwidth 10 Hz Video bandwidth 5 kHz/div Scan width 10 dB/div Vertical scale 0.5 S/div Scan time k) Tune the spectrum analyser to the channel on which the measurement is to be made so as to display the vision carrier and a frequency range of 25 kHz either side of the carrier. m) Switch off all other channels and switch on the modulation of the channel to be measured.
10

method of measurement IS 13420 ( Part I ) : 1994.

is

given

in

4.3 Unwanted Components of the Signal 4.3.1 Automatic
Response Gain and Slope Control Step

In cabled television systems using broadband amplifiers having automatic gain and slope controls, it is important to have carefully chosen control time constants to prevent instability when amplifiers are cascaded. Moreover correctly chosen time constants are an a&an: tage during measurements with CATV systems analysers.

IS 14231( Part 3 ): 1995 The control time constant, Tc, is the time in which the effect on the output of a level step at the input of an amplifier is reduced to 50 percent of the instantaneous change.
that the control curve NOTE - It is assumed follows an exponential function. Contrary to the normal definition of a time constant, the 50 Percent value has been chosen as more easily read on the display of a spectrum analyser ( see Fig. 8 ).

cl Switch the DUT to automatic gain control.

The two pilot frequencies on the spectrum analyser should have the normal level.

4

Tune to the upper pilot frequency using the spectrum analyser on the following settings: frequency span resolution bandwidth time/division dB/division 0 MHz 3 MHz 0.5 s 1 dB

The following using pilots.

procedure

is used on equipment

4.3.1.1 Equipment required a) Two pilot frequency generators ( or one if only one pilot frequency is used ). b) A combiner generators. for the two pilot frequency

Turn the rotary e> ( negative step

switch RS2 to position A ) shortly after the start of the spectrum analyser scan. See Fig. 8. Measure the control time constant Tc.

f) Repeat the procedure

c) One switched attenuator. d) Two rotary switches. e) Two cables with attenuation of 2 dB at the highest frequency of the amplifier frequency range. f) A spectrum analyser with storage display. 4.3.1.2 Connection of equipment The equipment is connected as in Fig. 7. comprises the 4.3.1.3 Measurement The measurement following steps:
procedure

with the rotary switches in the same start positions (RS 1 at A, RS2 at B ) and turn RSI to position B ( no cable ) ( positive step ).

8) repeat the procedure for the lower pilot
frequency.

h) A control

time constant and 4 seconds is typical.

Tc between 2

4.3.2 Noise Figure The noise figure is a figure of merit describing the internally generated noise of an active device.
Normally the noise figure is measured using either a calibrated noise generator suitable for the required frequency range or, more conveniently, with an automatic noise figure meter

procedure

8) With the rotary switches RSI and RS2 in
position B ( no cables ), ensure that the pilot signals at the point P have the same value and that the input levels are in the normal operating range of the device under test.

using an excess noise source. The following clauses describe the `twice power' method of measurement usiog a calibrated noise generator. 4.3.2.1 Definition The noise figure is the ratio of the signal to noise ratio at the input to the signal to noiso ratio at the output of an active device. Sl/Nl -F = S2/N2
CABLE 2

b) Turn the rotary switch RSl to position A
( cable 1 ) and connect the DUT. With a 2 dB plug-in equalizer (or an additional 2 dB cable equalizer in front of the DUT), the pilot signals will have the same level at the first stage of the amplifier.
CABLE 1

laPILOT GENERATORS SWITCHABLE ATTENUATORS

RSl
ROTARY

-

R&-J
SWITCHES

TEST

ANALYZER (WITH STOHAGE CRT 1

SPECTRUM

FIG. 7

MEASUREMENT OFAGC STEP RESPONSE 11

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995

where Sl S2 Nf N2 = = = = signal signal noise noise power power power power at at at at the the the the input output input output

In other words, the noise figure is the ratio of noise power at the output of an active device to the noise power at the same point if the device had been ideal and added no noise: N2 actual F a N2 ideal The noise figure is dimensionless expressed in dB: F ( dB ) = 10 log F and is often

the 3 dB attenuator and without additional noise at the input port of the LjUT ( noise * generator turned off ). The measured noise level should be at least 10 dB higher than the indication of the power meter if its input is terminated in 75 ohms. b) Jnsert the 3 dB attenuator and increase the noise generator output until the power meter returns to the original reference level. c! Read the noise figure from the noise generator.
5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 5.1 General requirements

Where the standard calls for performance figures to be published, these shall be stated, if appropriate, for each input and output port. Published performance figures shall apply when the methods of measurement given in 4, or equivalent methods, are used. Service and installation available. 5.2 Safety as laid down The relevant safety requirements in IS 14231 ( Part 1 ) : 1995 shall be met. instructions must be

FIG. 8
4.3.2.2

TIME CONSTANTTc

Equipment required

a) A noise generator excess noise source suitable for the frequency range in use with dB-or KTo-calibration. b) A 3 dB attenuator. c) A frequency selective power meter ( voltmeter ). 4.3.2.3 Connection of equipment is connected as in Fig. 9. The connection between the noise generator and the DUT should br short. The impedance of all equipment should be 75 ohms.
The equipment

5.3 E.M.C. The relevant E.M.C. requirements as laid down in IS 14231 ( Part 2 ) ( under preparation ) shall be met. 5.4 Frequency Range The frequency range or ranges, over which the equipment is specified, shall be published. 5.5 Impedance and Return Loss Ratio
The nominal

impedance

shall be 75 ohms.

Amplifier return loss requirements are dependent on its position and purpose in the system. Table 1 below shows the required return loss category for the two quality grades of amplifiers.
Table 1 Amplifier Classification Loss Requirement
1

GENERATOR

tcUNDER TEST

and Return

3dB PA0

POWER METER

Amplifier Quality Grade 2

Return Loss Catepor)

B
C

F+G. 9

MEASUREMENT OF NOISE FIGURE
procedure

4.3.2.4 Measurement

The measurement procedure comprises the following steps: a) Set a convenient reference on the power meter at the wanted frequency without 12

Quality grade 1 contains typically amplifiers intended to be cascaded, quality grade 2 amplifiers are used typically within an apartment block, or within a single residence, to feed a few outlets. The performance requirements for each loss category is given in Table 2. return

IS 14231( Table 2 Return Loss Requirements ( Chse
Category A Frequency S-40 MHz , 40 MHz

Part 3 ) : 1995

for All Components

5.5 )
Return Loss Requirements 2 22dB 2 22dB1.5 dB/Octave 2 14 dB at 1750 MHz

above 40 MHz

B

5.40 MHz > 40 MHz

2 18 dB 2 18dB1.5 dB/Octave 2 16 dB at 1750 MHz

above 40 MHz

C

S-40 MHz > 40 MHz but 5.1750 MHz

2 14dB > 14 dB - 1.5 dB/Octave 2 10 dB up to 1750 MHz

above 40 MHz

D

> 10dB

Manufacturers shall state category of each amplifier. 5.6 Gain The minimum full gain of at the highest specified published. 5.6.1

the

return

losa

Maximum specified, published minimum

deviation, at the highest frequency relative to the average value, shall be or taken into account in the published full gain.

the amplifier, in dB, frequency shall be

5.8 Test Points Test point shall be 75 ohms or adapted 75 ohms The return loss shall be through a test probe. as for category B of Table 3. The attenuation and flatness shall be published. Table 3 Correction 4.2.5.5 Factor

Gain Control
in dB of any gain control . shall be

The range published. 5.6.2

Slope and Slope Control

( Clauses 4.2.5.1,
Modulation ( ac coupled ) percent 100 90 ;: 60

and 5.8 )

The characteristic of fixed slope, if fitted, shall This shall be in the form of a be published. formula showing the relationship between attenuation, in dB, and frequency, or, the particular test cable used for factory test shall be stated. The range, in dB, of any variable slope control, relative to the mean value, shall be published. 5.7 Flatness Flatness shall be published as a maximum deviation, in &- dB, from the average value of The average value is the amplitude response. mean value of the amplitude response curve, in dB, plbtted against linear frequency over the published frequency range. Slope is assumed to be eliminated either by calculation or by cable. The flatness specification shall be achieved in all conditions of automatic and manual gain control and also with any combination of plugin equalizers and attenuators provided.

Correction to be Added to Measured Ratio dB 0 0.4 0.9 1.4

::"5
3.1 3.7

Z
30

Correction factors where the modulation
used is other than 100 percent

5.9 Group Delay 5.9.1

ChrominancelLuminance

Delay Inequality

The worst case delay inequality, in nanoseconds, between the luminance and chrominance ( 4.43 MHz ) with a single television channel, shall be published. The worst case channels shall be identified by frequency. 59.2 Other Television Standards and Modulation Systems These 13 shall be measured over the nominal

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995 channel bandwidth shall be published. 5.10 Noise Figure The maximum fied frequency 5. I1 Non-linear If the amplifier measurements output. noise figure, in dB, over the specirange s!lall be published. Distortion is designed for sloped operation, shall be carried cut with sloped and the worst case figure Two figures are required to be published. These correspond to the transfer of amplitude modulation only, as measured by amplitude demodulation, and to totzl mcclulation transfer as measured on a spectrum analyser.
NOTE - For some amplifiers (for example, feed forward) it may not be possible to measure 60 dB distortion, in these cases. the output level for a

greater signal to distoition 5.12 Automatic

ratio may be stated.

Gain and Slope Control

Measurements of composite distortions in amplifiers carrying multiple FM television signals are under consideration. 5.11.1 Second Orde/ Distortion carrier method is used for amplifiers above 860 MHz, for return path operaling b-low 70 MHz and for used for carrying FM sig!:als.

The two opera.;ing ampiifiers amplifiers

The pilot frequencies and the dynamic range shall be published. Dynamic range is defined as the minimum and maximum input level variations, in dB, which can be compensated by the amplifier at the highest frequency. Maximum variation in the output level, corresponding to the input level variations for the specified dynamic range and ever the specified temperature range, shall be published. 5.13 Hum Modulation The feed through reference modulation shall be published. current producing to hum modulation 60 dB ratio

The worst case value shall be published as the output level in dB ( ,uV ), that gives 60 dB signal or 40 dB for amplifiers to distortion ratio, carrying only FiM signals in the passband. 5.11.2 `Third Order Distortion The three operating ampiifiers amplifiers carrier method is used for amplifiers above 860 MHz, for return path operting below 70 MHz and for used for carrying FM signals.

Jf a switching mode power supply is incorporated, reference carrier to spurious modulation ratio, in dB, shall also be published. 5.14 Power The following Supply shall be published: and frequency complete module. range. amplifier and

The worst case value shall be published as the ouipu~ ]evel in dB ( PV), that gives 60 tlB signal or 40 dB for amplifiers to distortion ratio, carrying only FM signals in the passband. 5.11.3 Composite Triple Beat ( CTB )

Input ac rms voltage

Power consumption to assemb!y or to each active For the modular voltage required

The worst case value over all channels shall be published as the output level in dB ( PV ), that gives 60 dB signal to distortion ratio.
example, feed NOTE - For some amlifiers (for forward ) it may cot be possible to measure 60 dl3 in th-se cues, the output level for a distortio.1, greater signal to distortion ratio may be stated.

amplifier, the for each active

dc current module.

The worst case peak to peak ripple voltage, if the sUPPlY voltage is available for external use. 5.15 Environmental sha]] pubIish environmental on thzjr products to enable uSerS to judge their suitability with regard to four main requirements; storage, transportation, installa_ tion and operation.
infOrnlatiOn

5.11.4

Composite Second Order ( CSO )

Manufacturers

The worst case value over all channels sha]] be published as the output level in dB ( pV ), that gives 60 dB signal to distortion ratio.
NOTE - For some amplifiers ( for example, feed forward ) it may not be possible to measure 60 dJj distortion, i,; these cases, the output level for a greater signal to distortion ratio may be stated.

5.11.5

Composite Crossmodulation

The presentation form with the pubiicatlons: 5.15.1 Storage

of the information shall conrequirements of the following

The worst case value over all channels shall be published as the output level in dB ( pV ) that gives 63 dB signal to dis:ortion ratio. 14

( simulated effects of)

IS 9001 ( Part

14 ) : 1979

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995 5.15.2 Transportaiion Air freight ( combined ISly,; cold and low pressure ) Road Transport ( bump test ) Transport Road ( shock test ) ( Part 31 ) : 5.16 Markings 5.16.1 Each component shall be legibly indelibly marked with the following: a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, b) Serial number, and c) Country of manufacture. 5.16.1.1 It is recommended that appropriate symbols shall be used, when marking ports. 5.16.2 BIS Certification Marking The Components may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 5.16.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers and producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 5.17 M.T.B.F. The M.T.B.F. value for each complete amplifier, or for each module in modular amplifiers, shall be published. It shall be stated whether the value is based on calculation or on statistical evidence. If calculated, the method shall be defined. and

IS 890709 ( Part 7/Set 2 ) : IS ~~CK$ ( Part 7/Set 1) :

5.153 .?nstaIIation or Maintenance Drop and Topple test Free fall test 5.15.4 Operation IP Class, Protection provided by enclosures Climatic category of component or equipment for storage and operation as defined in following publications: General Cold Dry heat Damp heat Vibration ( sinusoidal ) IS 9000 ( Part IS 9000 ( Part IS 9000 ( Part IS 9000 (Part IS 9000 ( Part 1 ) : 1988 2/Set 1-4 ) : 1977 3/Set l-5 ) : 1977 S/Set 1-2 ) : 1981 8 ) : 1981 ISz910907~( Part 7/Set 3 ) IS:9lO& ( Part 7/Set 4 )

15

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995

ANNEX ( Clauses 4.2.2.1,

A

and 4.2.2.4 )
PRODUCTS A-l.2 Signal Levels The two test carriers shall be set to the reference level* A-2 THE SIGNAL TESTS FOR THIRD ORDER PRODUCTS A-2.1 Intermodulation Products with Test Signals at Frequencies
fa,fb and fc

TEST CARRIERS, LEVELS AND INTERMODULATION A-l TWO SIGNAL TESTS FOR SECOND AND THIRD ORDER PRODUCTS A-l.1 Intermoduiation Products with Test Signals at Frequencies fb and fs Second order ( see note ) : $a Third order =
b = fb fa +

fs
fb

P% =
`p? 1

2fa-fb
tf -2./j

where
where

2fa

>

fb

2fa c

fb

Third order :

P31 =
%I p3j = =

k'=fS+fC-fb
fb + fc f, + fb f

f.

+

fb

-

fc

P3: = P3d =

2f:

+ f;

fa fc

2fb + fa

NOTE - Not applicable to narrow-band equipment unlessthe frequency range covered by the equipment is SUCIIthat 2fmln < frn.x. \
A I,

NOTE - Second and third order products due to any two of the tzst carriers will also be present if they fall within the frequency range of the equipment or system to be tested.
REFERENCE IEVEC -

A.

f FUNDAMENTAL SECOND ORDER THIRD ORDER P20 P3a P3b to tb

f

f

1

P2b Pk P3d

NOTE - The sequence of the intermodulation
FIG.

products will depend on the fundamental

frequencies chosen.

10 AN EXAMPLESHOWING PRODUCTS FORMEDWHEN 2fa>fb.

-A--

REFERENCE

LEVEL

A
A

A

FUNDAMENTAL SECOND THIRD ORDER ORDER P3a P20

fb P2b P3b P3c P3d

NOTE _ The sequence of the intermodulation
FIG.

products will depend

on

the fundamental

frequencies chosen.

11 AN EXAMPLE OP PRODUCTS FORMEDWHEN 2fa<fb.

16

IS 14231(

Part 3 ) : 1995

:

A

n

A

REFERENCE

LEVEL-

S'

A

A

T FUNDAMENTAL THIRD ORDER P3f ' fo P39 fb fc P3h P3j

FIG. 12

PRODUCTS OF THE FORM fa

f fb f fc

ANNEX

B
)

(Clauses 4.2.2.2 and 4.2.2.4
CHECKS ON TEST EQUIPMENT B-l HARMONICS ( AND OTHER SPURIOUS SIGNALS ) IN GENERATOR OUTPUTS Connect the selective voltmeter to one of the signal generators and determine the level of any spurious signals when the fundamental output If the is set to the level required for the test. ratio of fundamental to spurious signals is less than 30 ?1B, a filter should be inserted to reject the unwanted signals such that this ratio is achieved. All test signal generators shall be checked. B-2 INTERMODULATION IN THE SELECTIVE VOLTMETER Check the accuracy of the amplitude scale of the selective voltmeter using one of the signal generators and the variable attenuator. Connect the equipment as for measurement of intermodulation and tune the voltmeter to an appropriate product, adjusting the attenuator as

necessary to obtain a convenient reading. Check that a small change, say 3 dB, in the attenuator setting produces an equivalent change in the meter reading. If the changes do not correspond, a filter should be inserted at the input to the meter to reduce the level of one or more of the test signals. B-3 INTERMODULATION BETWEEN SIGNAL GENERATORS Care should be taken to ensure that the intermodulation measurements are not affected by intermodulation between the signal generators. Check by inserting a 6 dB attenuator between the combiner output and the equipment or system under test and adjusting each generator output by the same amount to restore the original input test levels. If this gives rise to a change in the levels of the measured intermodulation products, then the isolation between the generator outputs should be increased.

17

IS l&31(

Part 3 ) : 1995

( Chuseles 4.2.3.1, 4.2.5.1, 4.2.5.2 and 4.2.5.3 )
CHANNEL Frequency 48.25 119.25 175.25 191.25 207.25 223.25 231.25 247.25 263.25 287.25, 311.25 327.25 343..25
359.25

ALLQCATION

( MHz )

a.

FOR CTB, CSO AND kMOD MEASUREMENT Frequency ( MHz ) 447.25 463.25 479.25 GROUP B 495.25 * 511.25 527.25 543.25 567.25 583.25 599.25 GROUP C ( last channel in band IV )

GROUP A

633.25 679.25 695.25 711.25 727.25 743.25
759.25

GROUP

D

375.25 391.25 407.25 423.25
439.25

775.25 791.25 807.25 823.25
839.25

GROUP

E

855.25

ANNEX
LIST OF REFERRED
IS No. 9000 Title

D

( Clause 2 )
INDIAN STANDARDS
IS No. Title

Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: (Part 1 ) : 1988 General Cold test, ( Part 2/ Set l-4 ) : 1977 Section 1 General Section 2 Cold test for nonheat dissipating items with sudden change of temperature

( Part 3/ Set l-5 ) : 1977

Section 3 Cold test for nonheat dissipating items with gradual change of temperature Section 4 Cold test for heat dissipating items with gradual change of temperature Dry heat test, Section
I General

18

IS 14231 ( Part 3 ) : 1995

IS No:

Title

IS No, .;

Tiile

Section 2 Dry heat teSt ,fo'or r_ non;heat dissipating items sudden change of with temnerature " " Section 3 Dry-heat test for non-heat dissipating items with gradual change : of temperature
( Part 31) : 1978

Section 3 Drop and topple test Section 4 Free fall test ( sinusoidal ) test cold/low air

( Part 8 ) i--1981 , Vibration

Combined pressure test

9001 (Part.14) : I Guidance for environmental testing: Part 14 Storage test . Section 4 Dry heat test for L 1979. heat, dissrpating items ,with 13420 Cabled distribution systems: sudden change of temperature ( Part 1 ) : 1994 Part 1 Sys terns primarily intended for sound and Section 5 Dry heat test for, television signals operating he+ ,dissipating items with between 30 MHz and 1 KHz gradual change tof tempera( jirst revision ) ture ( cyclic ) test, 13696 : 1993 14231 Interconnection TV receivers of radio and

( Part 5/ Set 1-2):

Dampheat 1981" Section

1 16 + 8 h cycle

Section 2 12 + 12 h cycle ( Part 7/ Impact test, Set 1-4 ) : 1979` ' Section 1 Shock test Section 2 Bump test ( Part 1 ) : 1995 ( Part 2 ) : 1995

Cabled distribution for television and signals: Safety requirements

system sound

Electromagnetic compatibility for components and systems ( under preparation )

19

Barero of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Zndh~ promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Standurdr marking Ad, and 1986 to quality

Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. This does not preclude the free use, in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright he addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the up for revision. latest amendments or editon by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and sStandards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LTD 20 ( 1744 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, Telephones 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar 331 13 75

OF INDIAN Marg,

STANDARDS 110002 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstba to a11 O&es Telephone )

New Delhi

: 331 01 31,

Regional Central

Offices : Manak

: Bhavan, 9 Bahadur 110002 VIII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 160 3843, 34-A, CHANDIGARH MADRAS Andheri 160022 600113 Shah Zafar Marg

{ 331 01 31 331 13 73 37 85 61 37 86 62

NEW DELHI Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme CALCUTTA 700054 Sector

Northern Southern Western

: SC0

335-336,

160 20 25, 1235 02 16, I 235 15 19, 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross Road, Marol,

E9 MIDC, 400093

( East )

f632 92 95, 1632 78 91,

Branch

: AHMADhBAD. FARIDABAD. LUCKNOW.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR PATNA. THIRUVANAN-THPURAM.

Printed at Printwell Printers,

Aliaarh,

India

