UDC

681'267'7

: 620'1
Indian Standard

IS : 11547

( Part

S/Set

2) - 1985

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRONIC WEIGHING-IN-MOTION
PART 3 METHODS OF TESTS

SYSTEMS

Section 1. Scope 1.1 This standard ( Part 3/Set an electronic weighing-in-motion
2. Submission 2 ) describes system. the

2

Site Tests

site tests

carried

out to determine

the performance

of

Requirements

2.1 Sample

simulated Instrument for Site Tests - On the successful completion of the laboratory tests, the submittor manufacturer shall arrange for the installation of the weighing instrument on a site with suitable test facilities to enable a static test and dynamic test to be conducted. More than one instrument with different capacities the range of conditions specified in the submission. and site conditions may need to be tested to

cover

The submittor manufacturer shall be r.esponsible specifications and details of test facilities available. 3. Site

for notifying

all

installations

together

with

their

Tests

3.1 General - As the testing of weighing-in-motion weighing instruments used for weighing large trains presents several difficulties not experienced' in testing other weighing instruments, a special test procedure has been devised in order to reduce testing time and costs but still maintain the In general the procedures are as follows. required accuracy in the calibration of such devices. 3.1 .I Static tests - Verified test masses equal to the capacity of the instrument shall be placed or As the size of the test masses is usually larger than the area oi the load receptor for the static tests. the load receptor, the use of a known mass test trolley with a large platform simplifies the application It also allows the initial calibration to be carried out more quickly and the of the test masses. calibration of each pair of load cells to be checked as the load can be quickly moved on and off the load receptor and to various positions on the load receptor. 3.1.2 Dynamic tests - The dynamic errors are found by weighing a typical train on the weighing instrument at the required speeds and comparing the known statically weighed masses of the vehicles As it is usually difficult, if not impossible, tc with the dynamic mass measured on the instrument. determine the true mass of each vehicle in a train, a sample number of test wagons of known mass The errors of the unknown wagons are used to measure the error at various positrons in the train. The errors between the test wagons are assumed to be proportional to the errors of the test wagons. will vary considerably throughout the train and it is important to sample the errors over the whole train. The composition of the test train shall be as close as possible to the composition The important features of the test train are: to be weighed on that installation. a) capacity b) number c) type of wagons, of wagons, and 8 wheel bogie, etc 1. ( 4 wheel, of a typical

train

of wagons

The performance of the weighing instrument is also determined by the track layout before and Therefore, the track after the load receptor on which the test train will be located during weighing. layout during testing shall be in the same form in which it will be used when in service.

3.1.2.1 Total train mass - As the true total train mass is not known, the individual total trair masses obtained during tests cannot be used to determine if the instrument is calibrated correctly The true total mass Of the test wagons is known but as the number of test wagons is much smaller than the total wagons in the train, the individual total masses of the test wagons could vary more thar the individual total masses of the whole train. However, it can be assumed that the percentage error of' the known mean total dynamic mass of the test wagons is the same as the percentage error of the unknown mean total dynamic mass of the whole train provided sufficient tests are carried out tc reduce the uncertainties.
Adopted 24 December 1985

Q April 1987, I
BUREAU
MANAK

BIS I STANDARDS
2AFAR MARG

Gr 5

OF
BHAVAN.

INDIAN

9 EAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:11547(Part3/Sec2)-1985
The maximum permissible percentage error for the mean total dynamic mass of the test wagons of all the test runs is taken as half the maximum permissible percentage error for the total dynamic train mass, that is, f 0'1 percent. If
train error

the mean error is within these reduced limits, then the individual total masses of the whole should lie within the maximum permissible dynamic errors, provided the dynamic repeatability does not exceed the errors specified in IS : 11547 (Part 2)-1985 `Specification for electronic systems : Part 2 Requirements'.

weighing-in-motion

The range of the repeatability error is half the range of the maximum permissible errors and must be determined on the total dynamic mass of the whole train as it is dependent on the number of As the repeatability error is the difference between the two extreme individual total wagons weighed. masses obtained for a given set of conditions, the true mass does not need to be known, The application of the errors is shown in Fig. 1.

rx ex ?I* /

x1.,.x5

*** Yl...Y3 -

Ml I
-0.1'1.

ERROR -5t
-

.

A
t 0.1`/.

E&OR l5t +i%%

8!2 %

T Total mass measured statically of: a) sample test wagons ( known ), b) train ( unknown ). Ml and M2 Mean total masses measured dynamically a) sample test wagons ( known ), b) train (assumed ). at the two extreme speeds of speed range of:

el and e2 Dynamic errors of the mean total masses at the two speeds of; a) sample test wagons ( known ), b) train ( assumed ). Maximum permissible errors for el and e2 are + 0'1 percent.
Xl . ..x!i and Yl...Y3 Total train masses measured I dynamically for individual test runs and at the two speeds ( known

)

rx and ry Dvnamic repeatability errors of total train masses at each speed. Maximum permissible errors for IX and ry is 0'2 percent.
IX

If el, e2. IX and ry comply with above maximum and ey Assumed dynamic train mass errors. assumed that ex and ey are within the maximum permissible errors of rt 0`2 percent. FIG. 1 APPLICATION OF ERRORS

permissible

errors,

it

is

X1.2.2 Wagon mass - Although the true mass of each wagon is not known, the magnitude the dynamic errors on individual wagons throughout the train can be found from the errors obtained This is best illustrated in Fig. 2. the test wagons, the true masses of which are known.

of for

3.2

Test Facilities be carried out.

-

The following

test facilities

are required

to enable

static

and

dynamic

testing

to

3.2.1 Test masses - Verified test masses are to be capable of being instrument and of sufficient quantity to load the instrument to full capacity. 2

placed

on the weighing

IS:11547(

Part3/SecZ)-1985

3.22 Test trolley - A test trolley may be used for the static tests. If it is used as the first test mass its mass shall be verified to i 0'02 percent. If the weighing instrument is a `bogie weigher', the trolley shall have two axles spaced at approximately the same spacing as the bogie axles of the wagons.
lt OR ,.o%
1 ____-------------__---------_--^-

+T +k&--Jl
X
r M
Q

-z e

0

8 -E w ltOR___________________________________
1.0%
POSITION OF TEST WAGONS IN THE TRAIN

m M
Xand e r Y Mean measured Maximum Maximum

LOCOMOTIVE

m

TEST

WAiXN

097HLR

V:AGONS

aT;UAROS

VAN

dynamic

mass of each wagon measured dynamic

at one speed. at one speed. permissible Maximum error If: 1'0 percent. permissible error 1'0 Maximum at one

and minimum dynamic

masses of each wagon speed.

error of each wagon repeatability

at one speed.

Maximum dynamic percent.

error of each wagon

FIG. 2

WAGON

MASS

the axle spacing shall If the weighing instrument is an `axle weigher', The test trolley shall be fitted with a platform to maintain adequate stability. test masses equal to the capacity of the instrument.

be as small as possible capable of supporting

3.2.3 Test wagons - The test wagons are used for the dynamic tests. At least 5 test wagons are required, having the same number of axles, and approximately the same bogie and axle centres as the The test wagons shall also be fitted with the same type wagons to be weighed on the weighbridge. of coupler and shall be loaded with some stable material (such as steel). For trains in which the wagons are of equal capacity the mass shall be as close as practicable the minimum loaded mass of the wagons being weighed provided it is not less than 75 percent. For trains in Which the wagon capacity varies three test wagons shall be heavily loaded as and the two wagons shall be lightly loaded to no more than 25 percent of the lightest wagons weighed. 3.2.4 Verified weighbridge - The gross mass of each uncoupled and in a single weighing, on a verified weighbridge test wagon shall be to an accuracy of f to

above being

weighed statically, 0'05 percent,

test shall consist of the locomotives and 3.2.5 Test train - The test train used for the dynamic The wagons shall be loaded as they would be in a typical wagons which make up a typical train. that is, the train is being loaded or If the capacity of the wagons changes, train being weighed. unloaded before or after weighing, the wagons shall be in the condition that the majority of them will be behind the test wagon when being weighed. The mass of the wagons does not need to be known. The number of wagons in the test train shall be as close as practicable to the number in the most The following examples include cases where there is more than one commonly weighed typical train. typical train:

Number 10 only

of Typical Trains

Number

in Test Train
10 20 40 60

10, 20 and 30 only 20, 40 and 80 only 60, 100 and 150 only Variable from 20 to 80 with the most common 60

60

3

IS:11547(
The positions: known

Part3/SecZ)
mass two test wagons

-1985
are inserted in the train after the locomotive at the following

a) after b) after c) after d) e) after

the first

wagons, of the wagons,

25 percent 50 percent 75 percent

of the wagons, of the wagons, and

at the end of the train. mass is variable the heavy and light test wagons shall be placed as follows:

If the wagon
a) heavy, b) light,

c) heavy, d) light, and

e) heavy. The other wagons and light wagons. To correctly or dissimilar in the test train shall also be arranged to ensure a thorough mixing of heavy

tive

sample the errors in the train, the test wagons vehicle by at least two wagons. is to be used for weighing to both conditions. gross as well

shall

be separated

from

any

locomo-

If a weighbridge test trains equivalent 3.3 Test Procedure Static tests

as tare masses,

it

shall

be

tested

with

3.3.1

3.3.1 .l General - The errors applicable to static tests are contained in IS : 9281 ( Part 3 )-I981 The particular requirements for `Specification for electronic weighing systems : Part 3 Requirements'. the end test are contained in IS : 11547 ( Part 2 )-I 985. 3.3.1.2 Zero test - Check that with no mass on the weighbridge the indicator indicates zero within the maximum permissible errors. If the instrument is fitted with an automatic zero correction device, the zero test is carried out with a load equivalent to, say, IO scale intervals on the load receptor. 3.3.1.3 load test and end test receptor, place test masses evenly on

a) With the test trolley located in the centre of the load the trolley noting the indication for each test load. b) For a bogie weigher, the end test With the test trolley evenly loaded indication. With the test trolley to the capacity of the instrument, test masses noting the indications

is carried out when the test load reaches bogie capacity. move it to each end of the load receptor and record the relocated in the centre of the load receptor, continue loading Remove the recording the results for each additional load. Check the zero error. progressively with decreasing load.

c) For an axle weigher, load the test trolley up to the instrument capacity with the trolley Then, with the trolley located at each end of the located in the centre of the load receptor. receptor, relocate the test masses so that the load over the outside axle at each end is approximately the axle load. The remainder of the test mass is located in-board to provide a Relocate the trolley counter-balance force for stability of the trolley. Note the indications. to the centre of the load receptor and with the test masses evenly distributed on the trolley. Remove the test masses, noting the indications progressively with decreasing load. Check the zero error. d) At least 5 readings should indications shall be within be taken maximum with increasing load and permissible errors specified 4 5 with decreasing load. All in IS : 9281 ( Part 3 )-I 981.

IS : 11547
e) A schematic Fig. 3. diagram showing the various methods of applying

( Part 3/Set
the test loads

2 ) - 1985
is shown in

END

TEST

LOAD

TEST

BOGIE

WEIGHER

END

TEST

c

zI3
END TEST

I
AXLE WEIGHER FIG. 3

I
LOAD TEST

I

xl
END TEST

c

APPLICATION

OF TEST LOADS

3.3.1.4 Calibration - If the weighing instrument has not been previously calibrated, adjustments could be made when the end test is being carried out. The trolley with test masses is moved on and off the load receptor and positioned at each end as well as the centre to check the indications at zero and Once adjustment is made, the indications with with a load, and to make any adjustments necessary. decreasing load can be checked directly for compliance with the maximum permissible errors. The indications for the increasing load test obtained before calibration would have to be corrected proportionally to the adjustment made during the test to determine compliance with the maximum permissible errors. 3.3.2 Dynamic tests

3.3.2.1 General - Using the method described in 3.1.2, the test train ( with test wagons assembled as described in 3.2 ), is run over the weighing instrument at various speeds to determine the appropriate errors depending on whether the total train mass or individual wagon masses are required, Test report sheets are given in Appendices A and B. 3.3.2.2 Total train mass at the wagons. normal

a) Carry out at least 5 test runs of the complete train over the weighing instrument operating speed recording the mass of each test wagon and of all the unknown

b) Calculate the percentage error of the mean total mass of all the test wagons from mass for the 5 test runs. The error shall be within half the maximum permissible percentage error for the total train mass. c) From the 5 total masses of the whole maximum variation between the total bility error for the total train mass.

their true dynamic

train calculate the absolute and percentage errors of the The error shall be within the dynamic repeatamasses.

d) Repeat (a) to (c) at a speed at the other end of the speed range from the normal operating The results shall also be within the same maximum permissible speed for at least 3 test runs. errors. e) Repeat (a) to (d) for other directions of travel weighing instrument, if these are applicable. Wagon mass instrument at the normal and for other entry or exit tracks to or from the

3.3.2.3

a) Carry out at least 5 test runs of the complete train over the weighing operating speed, recording the mass of each test wagon. b) Calculate the absolute and percentage errors known true mass. All errors shall be within wagons. 5

for each test wagon for each test the maximum permissible errors

run from the for individual

IS:11547(

Part3/Sec2)-1985
maximum variation between the 5 test the dynamic repeatability error for the

4

Calculate the absolute and percentage errors of the results for each wagon. The errors shall be within wagon mass. speed for at least 3 test runs. errors.

d Repeat ( a ) to (c ) at a speed of the other end of the speed range from the normal operating
The results shall also be within the same maximum permissible

Repeat ( a ) to (d ) for other directions of travel and for other entry or exit the weighing instrument, if these are applicable. 3.3.2.4 Other tests

tracks

to

or from

a)

Overspeed test - Run the train over the weighing maximum speed ( approximately 10 percent ) to check operates correctly.

instrument at a speed just above the that the overspeed protective system then total mass

b) c) d)

Roll-back safeguard - Run, say 75 percent of the train over the weighing instrument, stop the train; reverse, say, 25 percent of the train, then complete the weighing of the train in the forward direction. Check that no wagon is weighed more than once. Unweighed vehicles - During the tests described in 3.3.2.2 and 3.3.2.3, check that the is not recorded for vehicles not intended to be weighed, for example, locomotives. If facilities are provided for calculating tests that the calculations are correct. net mass from gross and tare masses, check during

the

3.3.2.5 Calibration and re-testing - If the instrument has not been previously calibrated, initial adjustments can be made using a short test train consisting of the locomotive, two unknown-mass However, for initial verification of a site, the test wagons and the five known-mass test wagons. complete typical test train shall be used. The short test train will shorten the time taken for initial calibration but although the errors are similar, they will not necessarily be the same as for the total train. During the initial verification tests a comparison of the errors can be made The results of this comparison can be used In future test train and the total train. the short test train only. between the short reverification using

If the weighing instrument or track work has been altered in any way, after the initial the total test train shall be used to reverify the instrument.

verification

6

IS : 11547 APPENDIX ( Clause 3.3.2.1 )
DYNAMIC TEST REPORT - TOTAL WEIGHING-IN-MOTION WEIGHING

( Part 3/Set

2 ) - 1985

A

TRAIN MASS INSTRUMENT

Weighing-in-Motion No. Maximum Minimum e= T= Maximum

Instrument No. 1 2 3 4

Test Wagons Wagon No. and Type Mass

General

.

Owner : Location Material : Weighed : :

Temperature Date :

axle or bogie load :

5

Train speed range : No. of wagons in train : , Total Mass

Wagon type and No. of axles :

Description

Run 1

Run 2

Run 3

Run 4

Run 5

1. Speed

2. Mass 1st wagon 3. Mass 2nd wagon 4. Mass 3rd wagon 5. Mass 4th wagon 6. Mass 5th wagon 7. Total mass of 5 wagons

a. True total mass of 5 wagons 9. % Error total mass
10. Total train mass

7-a
s`

xl00

Average

% error of total

test wagon

mass

Nosuns=

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I. .,... % at... ,...,,,.....

... .. .. . . . . .

km/h ( MPE ;t 0'1 % 1 Maximum repeatability error (Max IO-hIMin IO) or MaxlO--Minl0xl00 Av IO 1 J"' . . . . .,......... t or .,.... %

at ..,,...........

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . km/h ( MPE 5t or 0'2% )

C

Signed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *Date . . ..I............I....11I.,... Checked . . . . . . . ,..... ,... .,. . . . . . . . .Date.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,.....,.,,.. 7

IS : 11547

( Part 3/Set

2 ) - 1985 APPENDIX
( Clause 3.3.2.1 )

B

DYNAMIC TEST REPORTWAGON MASS WEIGHING-IN-MOTION WEIGHING INSTRUMENT Weighing-in-Motion No. Maximum Minimum e= T = Maximum axle or bogie load : = = Instrument No. 1 2 3 4 5 Test Wagons Wagon No. and Type Mass Owner : Location : Material weighed Temperature Date : : : General

Train speed range : No. of wagons in train : Total Mass

Wagon type and No. of axles : Description Run 1 Run 2 Run 3 Run 4 Run 5

Speed 1st Wagon 2nd Wagon 3rd Wagon 4th wagon 14 15 16 5th wagon Mass True mass Error ( 2-3 Mass True mass Error (5-6 Mass True Mass Error ( 8-9 Mass True mass Error ( 1 1 --12 ) or Mass True mass Error (14-15) or 14-15 TX 100 11-12 12 xl00 ) or t q$ 100 I % ) or 5$X 100 ) or 2$X 100 I %

1

%

1 1

%

%

t or.. ................... Maximum wagon errors i- ..................... % at ........................ km/h (MPE f 1 tor h 1'0%) Repeatability y0 for wagon error (Worst wagon, Max error--/l/lin ..a t ........................... No. ...................

%and -

.....................

t or ..................

t or ........................ error) =. ....................... km/h ( MPE 1 t or 1'0% ) . . . . . . . . . .., . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..Date.. . . . . . . ,.. ., . . . . . . . . .,. . . .

Signed...

Checked... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..Date... ..,...,. .., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

a

IS : 11547 EXPLANATORY
The examination of a pattern of a weighing-in-motion authority consists of the following three separate tests:

( Part 3/Set

2 ) - 1985

NOTE
weighing instrument by a certifying

a) Simulation tests carried out in the pattern approval laboratory to determine the performance The tests are carried out using static test loads. of the various components of the instrument. b) Static tests carried out on an instrument installed on site using verified test masses. test vehicles

c) Dynamic tests carried out on the same instrument of known mass. While preparing for weighing-in-motion Australia.

using a sample test train with

this standard, assistance has been derived from Manual systems for trade use', issued by the National

No. 8 `Design manual Standards Commission,

_
Printed at Printrade, New Delhi. India

