( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS 2248 : 1992

(

~FRT q&m)

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO CLAY PRODUCTS FOR BUILDINGS
( Second Revision )

UDC

691.4 : 001.4

@ BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

January 1992

Price Group 2

Clay Products

for Buildings Sectional

Committee,

CED 30

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Clay Products for Buildings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Clay products, such as bricks, blocks and tiles, etc, are used abundantly in building work. To a clear understanding of the meaning of various know the properties of such clay products, This glossary has been prepared to fulfil this objective. This standard was terms is necessary. first published in 1969 and subsequently revised in 1981. In this revision the definition of bricks and blocks have been modified. In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in India.

IS 2248 : 1992

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO CLAY PRODUCTS FOR BUILDINGS ( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the definition common terms applicable to clay products building. 2 DEFINITIONS 2.1 `Raw Materials 2.1.1 Clay - An earthy or stony mineral aggregate consisting essentially of hydr-ous silicates of alumina; plastic when sufficiently pulverised and wetted: rigid when dry; and vitreous when fired to a sufficiently high temperature. 2.1.2 Shale - A thinly stratified, consolidated sedimentary clay with well-marked cleavage parallel to the bedding. 2.1.3 Surface Clay An unconsolidated, unstratified clay, occurring on the surface. 2.2 Manufacture 2.2.1 Flashing - The operation of heating the clay products with and without air alternately, where irregularly colourd bricks or tiles are required. 2.2.2 Hand Moulding
Ground moulding - When the clay products are moulded by hand on ground and the moulder shifts his position as moulding progresses. 2.2.2.1

of for

or power-driven machmes, such as a hand-screw press, a soft-mud moulding machine, an extruder or a semi-dry/dry press. 2.2.4 Maturing Temperature - The temperature of firing at which the clay body used in the manufacture of the building material acquires the optimum mechanical strength and the necessary physical properties to satisfy the requirements set down in the standard specifications for the relevant building material. 2.2.5 Pugging - This is the process by which the lean and plastic clay is tempered before moulding. 2.2.6 Sanding - The operation of imparting to the clay product a rough face by blowing sand on to it, that is, by sand blasting prior to drying. 2.2.7 Soaking - The process of imparting heat to the clay product by maintaining the temperature constant for a specified period near about the maturing temperature. 2.2.8 Tempering - This is the process of mixing cIay, water and other ingredients, if any, by which a homogeneous paste is produced. 2.2.9 Weathering - This is the process of exposing excavated clay mass in the open air, so that it comes in contact with natural agencies, such as sun, rain and frost due to which there is change in some of the physical and chemical properties that are helpful in subsequent treatment and also impart better working properties. 2.210 Lime Blowing - If the soil contains lime noduIes or calcarious `kankars' the bricks get cracked due to the formation of Calcium Oxide within the brick mass during firing. The oxides so formed expand after taking moisture from the air and cause blowing of the bricks. in 2.2.11 Docking - Docking is the process which freshly fired bricks are dipped in water to prevent lime blowing. 1

2.2.2.2 Sand moulding - The process of moulding of bricks by hand in which fine sand is used to dust the mould before throwing in the clot. 2.2.2.3 Slop moulding - The process of moulding bricks by hand in which the mould is dipped in water, before clay is thrown into it. 2.2.2.4 Table moulding - Where bricks are moulded by hand on tabIe and then transported using pallet boardsIt the drying ground. 2.2.3 Machine Moulding - The process in which the clay products are shaped in hand-operated

IS 2248 : 1992 2.2.12 Lamination - Lamination is a defect normalIy found in the extruded bricks caused by the differential movement of the clay mass when it is pushed by the auger or wing knife of the extrusion machine towards the die of If the spacer is too short, there the machine. may be hollow core in the centre when the clay mass enters the die. In the die this core is flattened and owing to the rotation of the clav it shows in the extruded brick as an `S' crack. Features

2.44 Heavy Duty Bricks -' Bricks required for masonry in heavy engineering work, such as, bridge structure, industrial foundations and multi-storeyed buildings having high durability and compressive strength and low water absorption. 2.4.5 Paving Bricks - Bricks which are used as a paving material for roads, heavy duty industrial floors, particularly suited to resist heavy wear and tear from steel tyred traffic.
2.4.6 Perforated Bricks - Bricks in which holes passing through the bricks exceed 25 percent of the volume and the holes are sma!l. For the purpose of this definition, a small hole is a hole less than 20 mm wide and less than 500 mm2 in area. The hole may be circular, square, rectangular or any other regular shape.

2.3 Surface

2.3.1 Combed Finish - Units whose face surfaces are altered by more or less parallel scratches in manufacture. 2.3.2 Exposed Finish - Units whose surfaces are intended to be left exposed or painted.
2.3.3

Units having unglazed or uncoated surface burned to the natural colour of the material used in forming the body.

Natural Finish -

2.4.7 Sewer Bricks - Bricks intended for use in the lining of walls, roofs and floors of sewers used for the ordinary sanitary ( domestic) sewage. 2.4.8 Soling Bricks - Bricks used for soiing purpose. They are different from common building solid bricks. 2.4.9 Wire Cut Bricks - Bricks manufactured by cutting an extruding column through a die of weathered and processed clay with the help of wires fixed to a cutting frame. 2.5 Tiles - Burnt clay units which are appreciably smaller in thickness than the bricks and are used for flooring, roofing, ceiling and wall covering.
Ceiling Tiles ( Plain ) - Clay roofing tiles which are capable of being used on sloping roofs below the interlocking plain Mangalore tiles. 2.5.1

2.3.4 .Roughened Finish - Units whose plane die surfaces are entirely broken by mechanical means. 2.3.5 Salt Glaze - Units whose surface faces have a lustrous glazed finish from the thermochemical reaction of the silicates of the clay body with vapours of common salt and/or other suitable chemicals. 2.3.6 Sand Finish covered with sand.
2.3.7 Smooth Finish -

Units

whose

surfaces

are

not altered

Units whose surface are or marked in manufacture.

2.4 Bricks - A masonary unit not exceeding 300 mm in length, 150 mm in width nor 100 mm in height. 2.4.1 Acid Resistant Bricks - Bricks used for masonry construction, such as flooring, subject to acid attack, lining of chambers and towers in chemical units, lining of sewers carrying industrial effluents, etc, to prevent deterioration of the surface by acids. 2.4.2 Common Building Solid Bricks - The burnt clay building bricks which are commonly used in building and civil engineering construction work in which frogs do not exceed 20 percent of this volume. 2.4.3 Facing Bricks - Bricks made specially for facing purpose, that is, which are being exposed in use. 2

2.5.2 Flooring Tiles - Clay tiles made by pressing or extrusion and repressing, which are capable of being laid level on a prepared base. clay units in 2.5.3 Hollow Clay Tiles -Burnt which holes passing through the tiles exceed 25 percent of the volume and the holes are not are parallel to their small. The perforations length. These tiles can be used both as filler material and structural units. 2.5.4 Ridge Tile - A clay roofing tile which is capable of being used on the ridge of a sloping roof in conjunction with interlocking plain Mangalore pattern tiles. 2.5.5 Roo$ngTile, Mangalore Pattern - A type of clay roofing tile, capable of being laid down

IS 2248 : 1992 on sloping roof by means of nibs which catch on the reepers or battens interlock with and overlap similar tiles at the lower end on the sides. 2.5.6 Terracing Tile --- A flat tile, which is capable of being laid level on a prepared base in one or more courses to provide satisfactory floor oriroof finish. 2.6 Blocks - Masonary unit exceeding a brick in any dimension. size of 2.7.3 Fired Shrinkage - The percentage reduction in length or volume of dry claygtiles or bricks when subjected to heating to a maturing temperature of the clay body. 2.7.4 Flexural Strength - A property of solid material that indicates its ability to withstand a flexural or transverse load. 2.7.5 Warpage - Distortion or deformation of original shape of the clay body during the manufacturing"process. 2.7.6 Water Absorption - The increase in weight of a test specimen after immersion in water, at a constant temperature and for a specified period, expressed as a percentage of the dry weight. 2.8 General 2.8.1 Cells -- Hollow spaces the perimeter of the exterior clay blocks. enclosed within shells of hollow

2.6.1 Hollow Block - A block in which holes passing through the block exceed 25 percent of its volume and the holes are not small. The hollows may belat right angle or parallel to the bearing surface. 2.6.2 Solid Block percent solid. 2.7 Tests 2.7.1 Drying Shrinkage - The percentage reduction in the length or volume of bricks or tiles on drying, due to the removal of the film of water which surrounds the individual grains in the plastic form is given below: Drying shrinkage, where
L = Ld =

A block

which

is hundred

2.8.2 Frog - The depression made in one or both of larger sides of bricks in order to form a key for the mortar at the joints. 2.8.3 Perforations - A hollow space of uniform section, within a brick, extending from one face to the opposite parallel face with its axis parallel to the two faces. 2.8.4 Shells blocks. The outer walls of tiles or

percent

=

L -L Ld

X 100

( wet basis ) wet length in metres, and dry length in metres.

2.7.2 EfJIOrescence - A white, yellow or green powdry substance occurring on the surface of the clay product and caused by the migration of soluble salts, followed by precipitation.

2.8.5 Webs - The partition tiles into cells.

dividing

blocks or

Standard

Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed

by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. CED 30 ( 4980 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Ofices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI

110002

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: Manakalaya,

311 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 16

160036

:C. I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

6 32 92 95 E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

