ANAT HTA IS 16555 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


yatar Aaea sit NGUNI. — 
TANNA watarut Hm era 
(eua n Vata wafer ) 


Environmental Labels and 
Declarations — Self-declared 
Environmental Claims 
(Type Il Environmental Labelling) 


ICS 13.020.50 


© BIS 2017 


TAA AM oR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM MAA, 9 TEGEN SHC Art, ae feeeit-110002 
i MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 8 


Environmental Management Sectional Committee, CHD 34 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Environmental 
Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council 


The proliferation of environmental claims has created a need for environmental labelling standards which require 
that consideration be given to all relevant aspects of the life cycle of the product when such claims are developed. 


Self-declared environmental claims may be made by manufacturers, importers, distributors, retailers or anyone else 
likely to benefit from such claims. Environmental claims made in regard to products may take the form of statements, 
symbols or graphics on product or package labels, or in product literature, technical bulletins, advertising, publicity, 
telemarketing, as well as digital or electronic media, such as the Internet. 


In self-declared environmental claims, the assurance of reliability is essential. It is important that verification is 
properly conducted to avoid negative market effects such as trade barriers or unfair competition, which can arise 
from unreliable and deceptive environmental claims. The evaluation methodology used by those who make 
environmental claims should be clear, transparent, scientifically sound and documented so that those who purchase 
or may potentially purchase products can be assured of the validity of the claims. 


This standard was originally published as IS/ISO 14021:1999 ‘Environmental labels and declarations — Self- 
declared environmental claims (Type II environmental labelling)’. 


Subsequently, Corrigendum No.1 was issued to ISO 14021:1999 vide which ‘Claims relating to Greenhouse Gas 
emissions’ have been incorporated in the standard. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard while considering adoption of Corrigendum No. 1 
to ISO 14021, observed that complete adoption of the Corrigendum is not possible in the Indian context and certain 
modifications were proposed in Corrigendum No.1 to ISO 14021:1999. 


Accordingly, in this standard, modifications have been made in Clause 2 References and Clause 3 Terms and 
Definitions. Specific requirements for selected claims namely Renewable Material, Renewable Energy and 
Sustainable Claims have been incorporated. 


IS 16555 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


ENVIRONMENTAL LABELS AND DECLARATIONS — 
SELF-DECLARED ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS 
(TYPE I ENVIRONMENTAL LABELLING) 


1SCOPE 


This standard specifies requirements for self-declared 
environmental claims, including statements, symbols 
and graphics, regarding products. It further describes 
selected terms commonly used in environmental claims 
and gives qualifications for their use. This standard 
also describes a general evaluation and verification 
methodology for self-declared environmental claims 
and specific evaluation and verification methods for 
the selected claims in this standard. 


This standard does not preclude, override, or in any 
way change, legally required environmental 
information, claims or labelling, or any other applicable 
legal requirements. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS/ISO No. Title 
14020: 2000 Environmental labels and 
declarations — General principles 
14025 : 2006 Environmental labels and 
declarations — Type III 
environmental declarations — 
Principles and procedures 
14040 : 2006 Environmental management — 
Life cycle assessment — 
Principles and framework 
14044 : 2006 Environmental management — 
Life cycle assessment — Require- 
ments and guidelines 
NOTE — For reference to publications other than Indian 


Standards, see Biblography. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions apply. 


3.1 General Terms 


3.1.1 Biomass — Material of biological origin, excluding 
material embedded in geological formations or 
transformed to fossilized material. 
NOTE — This includes organic material (both living and 
dead) from above and below ground, for example trees, 


crops, grasses, tree litter, algae, animals and waste of 
biological origin, for example manure. 


3.1.2 Co-product — Any two or more products from 
the same unit process. 


3.1.3 Environmental Aspect — Element of an 
organization’s activities or products that can interact 
with the environment. 


3.1.4 Environmental Claim — Statement, symbol or 
graphic that indicates an environmental aspect of a 
product, a component or packaging. 
NOTE — An environmental claim may be made on product 
or packaging labels, through product literature, technical 


bulletins, advertising, publicity, telemarketing, as well as 
through digital or electronic media such as the Internet. 


3.1.5 Environmental Claim Verification — 
Confirmation of the validity of an environmental claim 
using specific predetermined criteria and procedures 
with assurance of data reliability. 


3.1.6 Environmental Impact — Any change to the 
environment, whether adverse or beneficial, wholly or 
partially resulting from an organization’s activities or 
products. 


3.1.7 Explanatory Statement — Any explanation which 
is needed or given so that an environmental claim can 
be properly understood by a purchaser, potential 
purchaser or user of the product. 


3.1.8 Functional Unit — Quantified performance of a 
product system for use as a reference unit in a life cycle 
assessment study. 


3.1.9 Greenhouse Gas (GHG) — Gaseous constituent 
of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, 
that absorbs and emits radiation at specific wavelength 
within the spectrum of infrared radiation emitted by 
the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere and clouds. 


NOTE — GHGs include, among others, carbon dioxide (CO,), 
methane (CH,), nitrous oxide (N,O), hydro fluorocarbons 


IS 16555 : 2017 


(HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride 
(SF,). A list of recognized GHGs is provided by IPCC, 
Climate Change 2007; The Physical Science Basis, Chapter 
2, Table 2. 14. 


3.1.10 Life Cycle — Consecutive and interlinked stages 
of a product system, from raw material acquisition or 
generation of natural resources to final disposal. 


3.1.11 Material Identification — Words, numbers or 
symbols used to designate composition of components 
of a product or packaging. 


NOTE — A material identification symbol is not considered 
to be an environmental claim. 


3.1.12 Offsetting — Mechanism for compensating for 
the greenhouse gas emissions through the prevention 
of the release of, reduction in, or removal of, an 
equivalent amount of GHG emissions in a process 
internal and outside the boundary of the product 
system. 


Example: External investment in renewable energy 
technologies, energy efficiency measures, 
afforestation/reforestation. 


3.1.13 Packaging — Material that is used to protect or 
contain a product during transportation, storage, 
marketing or use. 


NOTE — For the purposes of this Indian Standard, the term 
“packaging” also includes any item that is physically 
attached to, or included with, a product or its container for 
the purpose of marketing the product or communicating 
information about the product. 


3.1.14 Product — Any goods or service. 


3.1.15 Qualified Environmental Claim —Environ- 
mental claim which is accompanied by an explanatory 
statement that describes the limits of the claim. 


3.1.16 Self-declared Environmental Claim — 
Environmental claim that is made, without independent 
third-party certification, by manufacturers, importers, 
distributors, retailers or anyone else likely to benefit 
from such a claim. 


3.1.17 Sustainable Development —Development that 
meets the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs. 


3.1.18 Upgradability —Characteristic of a product that 
allows its modules or parts to be separately upgraded 
or replaced without having to replace the entire product. 


3.1.19 Waste —Anything for which the generator or 
holder has no further use and which is discarded or is 
released to the environment. 


3.2 Selected Terms Commonly Used in Self-declared 
Environmental Claims 


Requirements for the usage of the terms listed below, in 


the context of making an environmental claim, are given 
in 7. 


@ Compostable 7.2.1 

@ Degradable 7.3.1 

@ Designed for disassembly 7.4.1 

@ Extended life product 7.5.1 

@ Recovered energy 7.6.1 

@ Recyclable 7.7.1 

6 Recycled content 7.8.1.1 (a) 

6 Pre-consumer material 7.8.1.1 (a) (1) 
@ Post-consumer material 7.8.1.1.(a) (2) 
@ Recycled material 7.8.1.1 (b) 
© Recovered [reclaimed] material 7.8.1.1 (c) 

@ Reduced energy consumption 7.9.1 

@ Reduced resource use 7.10.1 

6 Reduced water consumption 7.11.1 

@ Reusable 7.12.1.1 

@ Refillable 7.12.1.2 

© Waste reduction 7.13.1 

@ Renewable material 7.14.1 

@ Renewable energy 7.15.1 

@ Sustainable 7.16.1 


4 OBJECTIVE OF SELF-DECLARED 
ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS 


The overall goal of environmental labels and 
declarations is, through communication of verifiable, 
accurate information, that is not misleading, on 
environmental aspects of products, to encourage 
demand for and supply of those products that cause 
less stress on the environment, thereby stimulating the 
potential for market-driven continual environmental 
improvement. 


The objective of this s tandard is to harmonize the use 
of self-declared environmental claims. It is anticipated 
that benefits will be: 


a) accurate and verifiable environmental claims 
that are not misleading; 


b) increased potential for market forces to 
stimulate environmental improvements in 
production, processes and products; 


c) prevention or minimization of unwarranted 
claims; 


d) reduction in marketplace confusion; 
e) facilitation of Indian trade; and 


f) increased opportunity for purchasers, 
potential purchasers and users of the product 
to make more informed choices. 


5 REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO ALL SELF- 
DECLARED ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS 


5.1 General 


The requirements set out in 5 shall apply to any self- 
declared environmental claim made by a claimant, 
whether it is one of the selected claims referred to 7 or 
any other environmental claim. 


5.2 Relationship to IS/ISO 14020 


In addition to the requirements of this standard, the 
principles set out in IS/ISO 14020 shall apply. Where this 
standard provides more specific requirements than IS/ 
ISO 14020, such specific requirements shall be followed. 


5.3 Vague or Non-specific Claims 


An environmental claim that is vague or non-specific 
or which broadly implies that a product is 
environmentally beneficial or environmentally benign 
shall not be used. Therefore, environmental claims such 
as “environmentally safe”, “environmentally friendly”, 
“earth friendly”, “non-polluting”, “green”, “nature’s 


friend” and “ozone friendly” shall not be used. 


NOTE — This list is illustrative and not exhaustive. 


5.4 Claims of “... free” 


An environmental claim of“... free” shall only be made 
when the level of the specified substance is no more 
than that which would be found as an acknowledged 
trace contaminant or background level. 


NOTE — Attention is drawn to the requirements of 5.7 
(m) and 5.7(s). 


5.5 Claims of Sustainability 


The concepts involved in sustainability are highly 
complex and still under study. At this time there are no 
definitive methods for measuring sustainability or 
confirming its accomplishment. Therefore, no claim of 
achieving sustainability shall be made. 


5.6 Use of Explanatory Statements 


Self-declared environmental claims shall be 
accompanied by an explanatory statement if the claim 
alone is likely to result in misunderstanding. An 
environmental claim shall only be made without an 
explanatory statement if it is valid in all foreseeable 
circumstances with no qualifications. 


IS 16555 : 2017 


5.7 Specific Requirements 


Self-declared environmental claims and any explanatory 
statements are subject to all requirements given in 5.7. 
Such claims, including any explanatory statement: 


a) shall be accurate and not misleading; 
b) shall be substantiated and verified; 


c) shall be relevant to that particular product, 
and used only in an appropriate context or 
setting; 


d) shall be presented in a manner that clearly 
indicates whether the claim applies to the 
complete. product, or only to a product 
component or packaging, or to an element of 
a service; 


e) shall be specific also the environmental aspect 
or environmental improvement which is 
claimed; 


f) shall not be restated using different 
terminology to imply multiple benefits for a 
single environmental change; 


g) shall be unlikely to result in misinterpretation; 


h) shall be true not only in relation to the final 
product but also shall take into consideration 
all relevant aspects of the product life cycle in 
order to identify the potential for one impact 
to be increased in the process of decreasing 
another. 


NOTE — This does not necessarily mean that a life 
cycle assessment should be undertaken. 


j) shall be presented in a manner which does 
not imply that the product is endorsed or 
certified by an independent third-party 
organization when it is not; 


k) shall not, either directly or by implication, 
suggest an environmental improvement which 
does not exist, nor shall it exaggerate the 
environmental aspect of the product to which 
the claim relates; 


m) shall not be made if, despite the claim being 
literally true, it is likely to be misinterpreted 
by purchasers or is misleading through the 
omission of relevant facts; 


n) shall only relate to an environmental aspect 
that either exists or is likely to be realized, 
during the life of the product; 


p) shall be presented in a manner that clearly 
indicates that the environmental claim and 
explanatory statement should be read 
together. The explanatory statement shall be 


IS 16555 : 2017 


of reasonable size and in reasonable proximity 
to the environmental claim it accompanies; 


q) shall, if a comparative assertion of 
environmental superiority or improvement is 
made, be specific and make clear the basis for 
the comparison. In particular, the 
environmental claim shall be relevant in terms 
of how recently any improvement was made; 


r) shall, ifbased on a pre-existing but previously 
undisclosed aspect, be presented in a manner 
that does not lead purchasers, potential 
purchasers and users of the product to believe 
that the claim is based on a recent product or 
process modification; 


s) shall not be made where they are based on 
the absence of ingredients or features which 
have never been associated with the product 
category; 


t) shall be reassessed and updated as necessary 
to reflect changes in technology, competitive 
products or other circumstances that could 
alter the accuracy of the claim; and 


u) shall be relevant to the area where the 
corresponding environmental impact occurs. 
NOTE — A process-related claim can be made 
anywhere, so long as the environmental impact 
occurs in the area where the production process is 


located. The size of the area will be determined by 
the nature of the impact. 


5.8 Use of Symbols to Make Environmental Claims 


5.8.1 When a self-declared environmental claim is made, 
the use of a symbol is optional. 


5.8.2 Symbols used to make an environmental claim 
should be simple, easily reproducible and capable of 
being positioned and sized to suit the product to which 
the symbol is likely to be applied. 


5.8.3 Symbols used for one type of environmental claim 
should be easily distinguishable from other symbols 
including symbols for other environmental claims. 


5.8.4 A symbol used to express implementation of an 
environmental management system shall not be used 
in such a way that it could be misunderstood as an 
environmental symbol indicating the environmental 
aspects of a product. 


5.8.5 Natural objects shall be used only if there is a 
direct and verifiable link between the object and the 
benefit claimed. 

NOTE — There are many advantages to be gained by the 


use of the same symbol to denote the same environmental 
aspect on competing products. As new symbols are 


developed, claimants are encouraged to consistent approach 
and not to discourage the use of the same symbol to denote 
the same environmental aspect by others. In selection of a 
new symbol, due consideration should be given so as not to 
violate the intellectual property rights (for example 
registered designs) of third parties. 


5.9 Other Information or Claims 


5.9.1 Words, numbers or symbols may be used in 
addition to environmental symbols to communicate 
information such as material identification, disposal 
instructions or hazard warnings. 


5.9.2 Words, numbers or symbols used for non- 
environmental claim purposes shall not be used in a 
manner that is likely to be misunderstood as making an 
environmental claim. 


5.9.3 An environmental symbol as described in 5.10 
shall not be modified to relate the symbol to a specific 
brand, company or corporate position. 


5.10 Specific Symbols 
5.10.1 General 


The selection of specific symbols for this standard is 
based on their existing wide use or recognition. This 
should not be taken to imply that environmental claims 
represented by these symbols are superior to other 
environmental claims. Only the Mobius loop is included 
at present. Other specific symbols which are not 
provided for in this standard will be introduced at an 
appropriate time. 


5.10.2 The Mobius Loop 


5.10.2.1 The Mobius loop is a symbol in the shape of 
three twisted chasing arrows forming a triangle. 
Whenever it is used to make an environmental claim, 
the design shall meet the graphical requirements (see 
ISO 7000, Symbol No. 1135). There should, however, 
be enough contrast so that the symbol is clear and 
distinguishable. Some examples of the form of the 
Mobius loop are provided in Fig. 1. Clause 7 provides 
detailed requirements concerning the use and 
applicability of the Mobius loop. 


5.10.2.2 The Mobius loop may apply to the product or 
the packaging. If there is any potential for confusion 
about whether it applies to the product or the 
packaging, the symbol shall be accompanied by an 
explanatory statement. 


5.10.2.3 If a symbol is used for claims of recyclable or 
recycled content, then that symbol shall be the Mobius 
loop subject to the requirements of 7.7 and 7.8. 


5.10.2.4 The Mobius loop shall only be used for claims 
of recycled content and recyclable, as described in 7.7 
and 7.8. 


DL MB 


a 


Fic. 1 EXAMPLES OF THE Mosius Loop 


6 EVALUATION AND CLAIM VERIFICATION 
REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Responsibilities of the Claimant 


The claimant shall be responsible for evaluation and 
provision of data necessary for the verification of self- 
declared environmental claims. 


6.2 Reliability of Evaluation Methodology 


6.2.1 Prior to making the claim, evaluation measures 
shall be implemented to achieve liable and reproducible 
results necessary to verify the claim. 


6.2.2 The evaluation shall be documented and the 
documentation retained by the claimant for the purpose 
of the information is closure referred to 6.5.2. This shall 
be for the period that the product is on the market, and 
for an able period thereafter, taking into account the 
life of the product. 


NOTE — For guidance on reproducibility and reliability, 
see references [8] through [11] in the Bibliography. 


6.3 Evaluation of Comparative Claims 


6.3.1 Comparative claims shall be evaluated against 
one or more of the following: 


a) an organization’s own prior process; 
b) an organization’s own prior product; 
c) another organization’s process; or 
d) another organization’s product. 

The comparison shall only be made: 


— using a published standard or recognized test 
method (as setout in 6.4); and 


— against comparable products serving similar 
functions, supplied by the same or another 
producer, currently or recently in the same 
marketplace. 


6.3.2 Comparative claims involving the environmental 
aspects of the product’s life cycle shall be: 


IS 16555 : 2017 


a) quantified and calculated using the same units 
of measurement; 


b) based on the same functional unit; and 


c) calculated over an appropriate time interval, 
typically twelve months. 


6.3.3 Comparative claims may be based on: 


a) percentages, in which case they should be 
expressed as absolute differences; or 


NOTE — The following example is provided to 
clarify how relative measurements could be handled: 
For a change from 10 percent to 15 percent recycled 
content, the absolute difference is 15 percent — 10 
percent = 5 percent, in which case, a claim of an 
additional 5 percent recycled content could be made; 
however, a claim of 50 percent increase, while 
accurate, could be misleading. 


b) absolute (measured) values, in which case they 
should be expressed as relative improvements. 


NOTE — The following example is provided to 
clarify how absolute measurements could be handled: 


For an improvement that results in a product lasting 
1-5 months instead of the previous 10 months, the 
relative difference is 


(15 months — 10 months) 
10 months 


x100 = 50 percent 


in which case, a claim of 50 percent longer life could be 
made. If one of the values is nil, the absolute difference 
should be used. 


6.3.4 As there is a high risk of confusing an absolute 
claim with a relative claim, the claim should be worded 
to be clear that it is a claim of absolute difference and 
nota claim of relative difference. 


6.3.5 Improvements related to a product and its 
packaging shall be stated separately and shall not be 
aggregated. 


6.4 Selection of Methods 


Methods for evaluation and claim verification shall 


IS 16555 : 2017 


follow, in order of preference, Indian Standards, 
recognized standards that have Indian acceptability 
(these may include regional or national standards) or 
industry or trade methods which have been subjected 
to peer review. If there are no methods already in 
existence, a claimant may develop a method, provided 
it meets the other requirements of 6 and is available for 
peer review. 


NOTE — Some typical Indian and national standards, as 
well as some specific industry methods relevant to some 
selected claims are listed in the Bibliography (references 
[12] through [65]). 


6.5 Access to Information 


6.5.1 A self-declared environmental claim shall only be 
considered verifiable if such verification can be made 
without access to confidential business information. 
Claims shall not be made if they can only be verified by 
confidential business information. 


6.5.2 The claimant may voluntarily release to the public 
the information necessary for on of an environmental 
claim. If not, the information necessary to verify the 
claim shall be disclosed, upon request, at a reasonable 
cost (to cover administration), time and place, to any 
person seeking to verify the claim. 


6.5.3 The minimum information required to be 
documented and retained in accordance with 6.2 shall 
include the following: 


a) identification of the standard or method used; 


b) identification of the standard or method used; 
document evidence, if verification of the claim 
cannot be made by testing the finished 
product; 


c) test results, where these are necessary for 
claim verification; 


d) if testing is carried out by an independent 
party, the name and address of the 
independent party; 


e) evidence that the claim conforms with the 
requirements of 5.7 h) and 5.7 u); 


f) if the self-declared environmental claim 
involves a comparison with other products, 
then a description of the method used, the 
results of any tests of those products, and- 
any assumptions made shall be clearly stated; 
and 


NOTE — Further requirements for comparative 
claims are set out in 5.7. 


g) evidence that the claimant’s evaluation gives 
assurance of the continuing accuracy of the 
self-declared environmental claim during the 
period over which the product is on the market, 


and for a reasonable period thereafter, taking 
into account the life of the product. 


7 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR SELECTED 
CLAIMS 


7.1 General 


7.1.1 Clause 7 provides interpretation and usage 
qualifications for selected terms commonly used in self- 
declared environmental claims. The onus ona claimant 
to follow the principles set out in this clause shall not 
be diminished by substituting like terms. Clause 7 
supplements, but does not replace, the requirements in 
other clauses of this Indian Standard. 


7.1.2 It is not intended to imply that the claims in 7 are 
superior to other environmental claims. The principal 
reason for their selection has been their current or 
potential wide use, not their environmental importance. 
These claims can be applied, when relevant, to the 
stages of manufacturing and distribution, product 
usage and product recovery and disposal. 


NOTE — The terms dealt with in 7 have been arranged in 
alphabetical order (in English), as set out below: 


7.2 Compostable 
7.3 Degradable 
7.4 Designed for disassembly 
7.5 Extended life product 
7.6 Recovered energy 
7.7 Recyclable 
7.8 Recycled content 
7.9 Reduced energy consumption 
7.10 Reduced resource use 
7.11 Reduced water consumption 
7.12 Reusable and refillable 
7.13 Waste reduction 
7.14 Renewable material 
7.15 Renewable energy 
7.16 Sustainable 
7.2 Compostable 
7.2.1 Usage of Term 


A characteristic of a product, packaging or associated 
component that -allows it to degrade, generating a 
relatively homogeneous and stable humus-like 
substance. 


7.2.2 Qualifications 


7.2.2.1 A compostability claim shall not be made for a 
product or packaging or a component of a product or 
packaging that: 


a) negatively affects the overall value of the 
compost as a soil amendment; 


b) releases substances in concentrations harmful 
to the environment at any point during 
decomposition or subsequent use; or 


c) significantly reduces the rate of comporting 
in those systems in which the product or 
component is likely to be composted. 


7.2.2.2 All compostability claims shall be clearly 
qualified as follows: 


a) The claim shall specify whether the type of 
comporting facility or process in which the 
identified component is compostable is a 
home-comporting facility or an on-site or 
central comporting facility, unless the product 
is compostable in all types of comporting 
facilities, in which case no qualification is 
necessary. 


b) If the entire product is not compostable, the 
claim shall identify specifically which 
components are compostable. If the user of 
the product is required to separate those 
components, clear direction on how to do so 
shall be provided. 


c) If problems or risks are associated with 
introducing the product into either a home- 
comporting facility or on-site or central 
comporting facilities, then the claim shall 
identify which of these types of facility are 
capable of comporting the product. 


7.2.2.3 If a compostability claim refers to home 
comporting, the following additional requirements shall 


apply. 


a) If significant preparation or product 
modification is necessary to ensure 
satisfactory compostability, or if significant 
additional treatment of the finished compost 
is required as a direct result of the comporting 
of the product or component, the 
compostability claim shall not be made. 


b) If home comporting of the product or 
component would require materials, 
equipment (other than a comporting unit) or 
specialized skills that are unlikely to be 
available in most households, the claim of 
home compostability shall not be made. 


7.2.2.4 If a compostability claim is dependent on 
processes or facilities other than home composers, then 
the following shall apply. 


a) Such facilities for the purpose of comporting 


IS 16555 : 2017 


the product or packaging shall conveniently 
available to areas on able proportion of 
purchasers, potential purchasers and users 
where the packaging or product is sold. 


b) Ifsuch facilities are not conveniently available 
to a reasonable proportion of purchasers, 
potential purchasers and users of the product, 
explanatory statements shall be used which 
are adequate to convey the limited availability 
of these facilities. 


c) General qualifications, such as “Compostable 
where facilities exist”, which do not convey 
the limited availability of facilities are not 
adequate. 


7.2.3 Evaluation Methodology 

Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
7.3 Degradable 

7.3.1 Usage of Term 


A characteristic of a product or packaging that, with 
respect to specific conditions, allows it to break down 
to a specific extent within a given time. 
NOTE — Degradability is a function of susceptibility to 
changes in chemical structure. Consequent changes in 


physical and mechanical properties lead to the 
disintegration of the product or material. 


7.3.2 Qualifications 


7.3.2.1 The following qualifications refer to all types of 
degradation, including for instance biodegradation and 
photo degradation. 


a) Claims of degradability shall only be made in 
relation to a specific test method that includes 
maximum level of degradation and test 
duration, and shall be relevant to the 
circumstances in which the product or 
packaging is likely to be disposed. 


b) A degradable claim shall not be made for a 
product or packaging, or component of a 
product or packaging, that releases substances 
in concentrations harmful to the environment. 


7.3.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 


7.4 Designed for Disassembly 
7.4.1 Usage of Term 


A characteristic of a product’s design that enables the 
product to be taken apart at the end of its useful life in 
such away that allows components and parts to be 
reused, recycled, recovered for energy or, in some other 
way, diverted from the waste stream. 


IS 16555 : 2017 


7.4.2 Qualifications 


7.4.2.1 A claim of designed for disassembly shall be 
accompanied by an explanatory statement that specifies 
the components or parts to be reused, recycled, 
recovered for energy or, in some other way, diverted 
from the waste stream. 


7.4.2.2 If a claim of designed for disassembly 
accompanies another claim, such as a claim of 
recyclable, the relevant requirements applying to the 
other claim shall also be followed. 


7.4.2.3 All claims that a product is designed for 
disassembly shall specify whether the disassembly is 
to be done by the purchaser or user, or whether it is to 
be returned for disassembly by specialists. 


7.4.2.4 If a special process is required to disassemble 
the product, then the following shall apply. 


a) Collection or drop-off facilities shall be 
available to a reasonable proportion of 
purchasers, potential purchasers and users 
of the product where the product is sold. 


b) Ifsuch facilities are not conveniently available 
to a reasonable proportion of purchasers, 
potential purchasers and users of the product, 
explanatory statements shall be used which 
are adequate to convey the limited availability 
of these facilities. 


c) General qualifications, such as “Can be 
disassembled where facilities exist”, which do 
not convey the limited availability of facilities 
are not adequate. 


7.4.2.5 Products designed for disassembly by the 
purchaser, potential purchaser or user of the product 
shall have accompanying information on disassembly 
tools and methods used. 


7.4.2.6 A claim that a product is designed to be 
disassembled by the purchaser, potential purchaser or 
user of the product shall only be made if: 


a) specialized tools or expertise are not required; 
and 


b) clear information on the method of 
disassembly and reuse, recycling, recovery 
or disposal of the parts is provided. 


NOTE — Further guidance on provision of consumer 
information is given in ISO/IEC Guide 14. 


7.4.2.7 Products designed for disassembly by specialists 
shall have accompanying information on equipment and 
facilities needed to carry out the disassembly. 


7.4.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 


7.5 Extended Life Product 
7.5.1 Usage of Term 


A product designed to provide prolonged use, based 
on either improved durability or an upgradability 
feature, that results in reduced resource use or reduced 
waste. 


7.5.2 Qualifications 


7.5.2.1 All claims regarding extended life shall be 
qualified. As extended life claims are comparative claims, 
the requirements of 6.3 shall be met. 


7.5.2.2 Where a claim of extended life is based upon an 
upgradability feature, specific information on how to 
achieve the required upgrade shall be provided. An 
infrastructure to enable upgrading shall be available. 


7.5.2.3 Extended life claims that are based on the 
improved durability of the product shall state the 
extended life period or the percentage improvement and 
the measured value (for example repetitive number of 
operations before breakage) or reasoning that supports 
the claim. 


7.5.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
In addition, the average extended life period shall be 
measured in accordance with appropriate standards and 
statistical methods, as outlined in 6.4. 


7.6 Recovered Energy 
7.6.1 Usage of Term 


A characteristic of a product that has been made using 
energy recovered from material or energy that would 
have been disposed of as waste but instead has been 
collected through managed processes. 


NOTE — In this context, the product can be the recovered 
energy itself. 


7.6.2 Qualifications 


In order for a claim to be made that a product has been 
manufactured using recovered energy, the energy used 
shall meet the following qualifications and shall be 
evaluated in accordance with 7.6.3. 


a) Energy recovery from waste materials refers 
to the collection and conversion of waste 
material into useful energy. This includes any 
collection and conversion of waste materials 
from industry, home, business or public 
service facilities. 


b) Before a claim of recovered energy can be 
made, the claimant shall ensure that adverse 
effects on the environment resulting from this 
activity are managed and controlled. 


c) The type and quantity of waste that has been 
used for recovery shall be stated. 


7.6.3 Evaluation-Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
In addition, evaluation of recovered energy shall be 
calculated using the following method: 


a) The claim shall only be made if R- E >0. 


b) A claim of net recovered energy shall be 
expressed as follows: 


R-E 
Net recovered energy (%) = KEL ii 
(R-E)+P 
where 
P = the amount of energy from primary sources 


used in the manufacturing process to 
produce the product, 


R = the amount of energy resulting from the 
energy recovery process, and 


E = the amount of energy the recovered energy 
from primary sources used in the energy 
recovery process to recover or extract the 
recovered energy. 


7.7 Recyclable 
7.7.1 Usage of Term 


A characteristic of a product, packaging or associated 
component that can be diverted from the waste stream 
through available processes and programmed and can 
be collected, processed and returned to use in the form 
of raw materials or products. 
NOTE — Material recycling is only one of a number of 
waste-prevention strategies. The choice of a particular 


strategy will depend on circumstances and account should 
be taken of differing regional impacts in making this choice. 


7.7.2 Qualifications 


If collection or drop-off facilities for the purpose of 
recycling the product or packaging are not 
conveniently available to a reasonable proportion of 
purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the 
product in the area where the product is sold, then the 
following shall apply. 


a) Aqualified claim of recyclability shall be used. 

b) The qualified claim shall adequately convey 
the limited availability of collection facilities. 

c) Generalized qualifications, such as 
“Recyclable where facilities exist”, which do 
not convey the limited availability of collection 
facilities are not adequate. 


7.7.3 Use of a Symbol 


7.7.3.1 When a recyclable claim is made, the use of a 
symbol is optional 


IS 16555 : 2017 


7.7.3.2 Ifa symbol is used for a recyclable claim, it shall 
be the Mobius loop, as described in 5.10.2. 


7.7.3.3 The Mobius loop, as described in 5.10.2, 
without a percentage value shall be taken to be a 
recyclable claim. 


7.7.3.4 The use of an explanatory statement is optional, 
subject to 5.6. 


7.7.3.5 An explanatory statement may include material 
identification. 


7.7.4 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
The information referred to in 6.5 shall include evidence 
of the following : 


a) The collection, sorting and delivery systems 
to transfer the materials from the source to 
the recycling facility are conveniently 
available to a reasonable proportion of the 
purchasers, potential purchasers and users 
of the product. 

b) The recycling facilities are available to 
accommodate the collected materials. 

c) The product for which the claim is made is 
being collected and recycled. 


7.8 Recycled Content 
7.8.1 Usage of Terms 


7.8.1.1 Recycled content and its associated terms shall 
be interpreted as follows: 


a) Recycled content 


Proportion, by mass, of recycled material in a product 
or packaging. Only pre-consumer and post-consumer 
materials shall be consider d as recycled content, 
consistent with the wing usage of terms. 


1) Pre-consumer material — Material diverted 
from the waste stream during a manufacturing 
process. Excluded is reutilization of materials 
such as rework, regrind or scrap generated in 
a process and capable of being reclaimed 
within the same process that generated it 

2) Post-consumer material — Material generated 
by households or by commercial, industrial 
and institutional facilities in their role as end- 
users of the product which can no longer be 
used for its intended purpose. This includes 
returns of material from the distribution chain 


b) Recycled material 


Material that has been reprocessed from recovered 
[reclaimed] material by means of a manufacturing 


IS 16555 : 2017 


process and made into a final product or into a 
component for incorporation into a product. 


c) Recovered [reclaimed] material 


Material that would have otherwise been disposed of 
as waste or used for energy recover, but has instead 
been collected and recovered [reclaimed] as a material 
input, in lieu of new primary material, for a recycling or 
a manufacturing process. 


NOTES 

1 A diagrammatic representation of a material recycling 
system is given in annex A. 

2 For the purposes of this Indian Standard, the expressions 
“recovered material” and “reclaimed material” are treated 
as synonyms; however, it is recognized that, in some 
countries, one or other of these expressions may be preferred 
for this application. 


7.8.1.2 Material recycling is only one of a number of 
waste-prevention strategies. The choice of a particular 
strategy will depend on circumstances and account 
should be taken of differing regional impacts in making 
this choice. Consideration shall be given to the fact 
that a higher percentage of recycled content does not 
necessarily imply a lower environmental impact. 
Because of this, the recycled content claim, in particular, 
should be used discretion. 


NOTE — Attention is drawn to the requirements of 5.7 (h). 
7.8.2 Qualifications 


7.8.2.1 Where a claim of recycled content is made, the 
percentage of recycled material shall be stated. 


7.8.2.2 The percentage recycled content for products 
and packaging shall be separately stated and shall not 
be aggregated. 


7.8.3 Use of a Symbol 


7.8.3.1 When a claim of recycled content is made, the 
use of a symbol is optional. 


7.8.3.2 If a symbol is used for a recycled content claim, 


= 


65% 


ay 
Ta Yo 


it shall be the Mobius loop accompanied by a 
percentage value stated as “X %.”, where X is the 
recycled content expressed as a whole number 
calculated in accordance with 7.8.4. The percentage 
value shall be located either inside the Mobius loop or 
outside and immediately adjacent to the Mobius loop. 
Examples of acceptable locations of the percentage 
value are shown in Fig. 2. The Mobius loop with a 
percentage value, stated as “X Yo”, shall be taken to be 
arecycled content claim. 


7.8.3.3 If the percentage recycled content is variable, it 
may be expressed with statements such as “at least X%”, 
or “greater than X Yo”. 


7.8.3.4 The use of an explanatory statement is optional, 
subject to 5.6. 


7.8.3.5 Where a symbol is used it may be accompanied 
by material identification. 


7.8.4 Evaluation Methodology 


7.8.4.1 Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance 
with 6. In addition, recycled content shall be expressed 
quantitatively as a percentage, calculated as shown 
below. As there are no methods available for directly 
measuring recycled content in a product or packaging, 
the mass of material obtained from the recycling 
process, after accounting for losses and other 
diversions, shall be used. 


X(%)= < x 100 


where 
X = the recycled content, expressed as a 
percentage; 
A = the mass of recycled material; and 
P = the mass of product. 
NOTE — For further clarification on the calculation of 


recycled material, reference may be made to Annex A. 


65% 


Fic. 2 EXAMPLES OF ACCEPTABLE LOCATIONS OF PERCENTAGE VALUE WHEN USING THE Mosius Loop TO MAKE 
CLAIMS ABOUT RECYCLED CONTENT 


10 


7.8.4.2 Verification of the source and quantity of the 
recycled materials may be carried out through the use 
of purchasing documentation and other available 
records. 


7.9 Reduced Energy Consumption 
7.9.1 Usage of Term 


Reduction in the amount of energy associated with the 
use of a product performing the function for which it 
was conceived when compared with the energy used 
by other products performing an equivalent function. 


NOTE — Claims of reduced energy consumption are 
commonly expressed as energy-efficient, energy-conserving 
or energy saving. 


7.9.2 Qualifications 


7.9.2.1 All claims regarding reduced energy 
consumption shall be qualified. As reduced energy 
consumption is a comparative claim, the requirements 
of 6.3 shall be met. 


7.9.2.2 Claims for reduced energy consumption shall 
be based on the reduction in energy consumption in 
the use of products and delivery of services. It shall 
not include reduction of energy in the processes used 
to manufacture the product. 


7.9.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
In addition, reduced energy consumption shall be 
measured in accordance with established standards and 
methods for each product, and the average value 
should be calculated by statistical processing. The 
selection of methods shall be in accordance with 6.4. 


7.10 Reduced Resource Use 
7.10.1 Usage of Term 


A reduction in the amount of material, energy or water 
used to produce or distribute a product or packaging 
or specified associated component. 


NOTE — Claims of reduced resource use relating to energy 
and water usage in the product usage phase of the life cycle 
are dealt with in 7.9 and 7.11. 


7.10.2 Qualifications 


7.10.2.1 Resources include energy and water resources 
in addition to raw materials. 


7.10.2.2 All claims regarding reduced resource use shall 
be qualified. 


7.10.2.3 Reductions in resource use for products and 
packaging shall be separately stated and shall not be 
aggregated. 


7.10.2.4 Reduced resource use claims shall be 


11 


IS 16555 : 2017 


expressed in terms of reduction percentage (%). As 
reduced resource use is a comparative claim, the 
requirements of 6.3 shall be met. 


7.10.2.5 If reduced resource use claims are made, the 
type of resource shall be stated in an explanatory 
statement. 


7.10.2.6 If an increase in consumption of other 
resources occurs as a result of the claimed reduction 
of resource use, the increased resource and percentage 
shall be stated in an explanatory statement. 


7.10.2.7 When a resource reduction has been achieved, 
for an initial twelve-month period, a claim may be based 
on an estimated calculation of reduced resource based 
on the design or distribution of products or production 
process. 


7.10.2.8 A change in resource use shall be expressed 
separately for each resource. 


7.10.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
In addition, except as allowed for in 7.10.2.7, the 
consumed resource per production unit shall be 
obtained by dividing the gross input of resources 
during a twelve month period by the gross production 
in the same twelve-month period. Reduced resource 
use rate percentage (U%) shall be obtained by the 
following formula: 


I-N 
U(%)= x100 
where 
U = the reduced resource use per production 
unit, expressed as a percentage; 
I = the initial resource use, expressed as 
consumed resource per production unit; and 
N = the new resource use, expressed as 


consumed resource per production unit. 


7.11 Reduced Water Consumption 
7.11.1 Usage of Term 


Reduction in the consumption of water associated with 
the use of a product performing the function for which 
it was conceived when compared with the amount of 
water used by other products performing an equivalent 
function. 


NOTE — Claims of reduced water usage are commonly 
expressed as water-efficient, water-conserving or water- 
saving, 


7.11.2 Qualifications 


7.11.2.1 All claims regarding water efficiency or 
reduction shall be qualified. As reduced water 


IS 16555 : 2017 


consumption is a comparative claim, the requirements 
of 6.3 shall be met. 


7.11.2.2 Claims for reduced water consumption shall 
be based on the reduction in water consumption in the 
use of the product. It shall not include reduction of 
water in manufacturing processes of the product. 


7.11.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
In addition, water consumption shall be measured in 
accordance with established standards and methods 
for each product, and the average value should be 
calculated by statistical processing. The selection of 
methods shall be in accordance with 6.4. 


7.12 Reusable and Refillable 
7.12.1 Usage of Terms 
7.12.1.1 Reusable 


A characteristic of a product or packaging that has 
been conceived and designed to accomplish within its 
life cycle a certain number of trips, rotations or uses for 
the same purpose for which it was conceived. 


7.12.1.2 Refillable 


A characteristic of a product or packaging that can be 
filled with the same or similar product more than once, 
in its original form and without additional processing 
except for specified requirements such as cleaning or 
washing. 


7.12.2 Qualification 


7.12.2.1 No product or packaging shall be claimed to 
be reusable or refillable unless the product or packaging 
can be reused or refilled for its original purpose. 


7.12.2.2 Aclaim that a product or packaging is reusable 
or refillable shall be made only where: 


a) a programme exists for collecting the used 
product or packaging and reusing or refilling 
it; or 

b) facilities or products exist that allow the 


purchaser to reuse or refill the product or 
package. 


7.12.2.3 If programmed for collecting the used product 
or packaging, or facilities for the purpose of reusing or 
refilling it, are not conveniently available to a reasonable 
proportion of purchasers, potential purchasers and 
users of the product in the area where the product or 
packaging is sold, then the following shall apply. 


a) A qualified claim of reusability or refillability 


shall be used. 
The qualified claim shall adequately convey 
the limited availability of collection 


b) 


12 


programmed or facilities. 
c) Generalized qualifications, such as “Reusable/ 
refillable where facilities exist”, which do not 
convey the limited availability of collection 


programmed or facilities are not adequate. 
7.12.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
In addition, the information referred to in 6.5 shall 
include evidence of the following: 


a) The product for which the claim is being made 
is being refilled or reused. 

b) That reuse or refilling facilities are available 
to accommodate the product for which the 
claim is being made. 

c) The facilities required to reuse or refill the 
product are conveniently available to a 
reasonable proportion of the purchasers, 


potential purchasers and users of the product. 


7.13 Waste Reduction 
7.13.1 Usage of Term 


Reduction in the quantity (mass) of material entering 
the waste stream as a result of a change in the product, 
process or packaging. 


NOTE — Waste may include discharges to air and water as 
well as solid waste from manufacturing or treatment 
processes. 


7.13.2 Qualifications 


7.13.2.1 All claims regarding waste reduction shall be 
qualified. As waste reduction is a comparative claim, 
the requirements of 6.3 shall be met. 


7.13.2.2 Waste reduction of products and packaging 
may include reduction in waste generated in the 
production, distribution, use and disposal stages. 


7.13.2.3 Reduced waste claims may include not only 
the reduction in water content of solid waste but also 
the reduction in mass through waste treatment 
processes. 


7.13.2.4 Calculations of process waste reduction shall 
not include in-process re-utilization of materials. such 
as rework, regrind or scrap materials generated within 
the process and capable of being reused within the 
same process that generated it. 


7.13.2.5 Waste generators who transfer wastes to 
other users that intend to utilize the waste for a 
constructive purpose, other than to put it into the waste 
stream, may make a claim of waste reduction. 


7.13.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 


In addition, reduced waste amount may be calculated 
from material balance sheets, as well as from the-actual 
measurement of waste. 


7.14 Renewable Material 
7.14.1 Usage of Term 


Material that is composed of biomass from a living 
source and that can be continually replenished. 


7.14.2 Qualifications 


When claims of renewability are made for virgin 
materials, those materials shall come from sources that 
are replenished at a rate equal to or greater than the 
rate of depletion. 


An unqualified claim of renewability shall only be made 
when the product consists of 100 percent renewable 
material, allowing for de minimum amounts of non- 
renewable materials being contained in that material. 
Otherwise, renewability claims shall be qualified as 
follows: 


a) where a claim of renewable material content is 
made, the percentage by mass of renewable 
material to the total mass shall be stated; 

b) the percentage of renewable material content 


(mass fraction) for products and packaging 
shall be separately stated and shall not be 
aggregated. 


All renewable claims shall be compliant with all other 
requirements of this standard. In particular, the onus 
on a claimant to follow the principles set out in this 
clause shall not be diminished by substituting like terms 
(see 7.1). 


7.14.3 Evaluation Methodology 

Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 
7.15 Renewable Energy 

7.15.1 Usage of Term 


Energy derived from sources that are non-exhaustible 
or capable of continuous replenishment. Renewable 
energy sources include, but are not limited to, sunlight 


13 


IS 16555 : 2017 


and wind energy. They also include biomass and 
geothermal sources that conform to 7.14. 


Claims of renewability for energy sources associated 
with movements of water shall only be made if they are 
from sources that are managed in accordance with the 
principles of sustainable development (see 3.1.17). 


7.15.2 Qualifications 


An unqualified claim for renewable energy shall only 
be made when 100 percent of the energy supply is 
renewable Otherwise, renewable energy claims shall 
be qualified. 


Where a proportion of the energy supply is from 
renewable sources, the percentage shall be clearly 
stated. 


All renewable energy claims shall be compliant with all 
other requirements of this standard. In particular, the 
onus on a claimant to follow the principles set out in 
this clause shall not be diminished by substituting like 
terms (see 7.1). 
NOTE — Particular care is needed when making a claim 
for a product or process relating to use of electrical energy 


from the grid, when that electrical energy is claimed to 
contain a percentage of renewable energy. 


7.15.3 Evaluation Methodology 


Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with 6. 


7.16 Sustainable 
7.16.1 Usage of Term 


As stated in 5.5, self-declared claims of achieving 
sustainability shall not be made. It is re-emphasized in 
this sub-clause that unqualified claims of “sustainable” 
and “sustainability” shall not be used. 


When using a qualified claim of “sustainable”, 
“sustainability” or “sustainable development” 
(see 3.1.17), any portion of that claim that relates to an 
environmental aspect shall conform to this standard. 


NOTE — The term “sustainable” can be used in third- 
party verified schemes, such as those related to forestry 
and fisheries, but such schemes are outside the scope of this 
standard. 


IS 16555 : 2017 


ANNEKA 
(Informative) 


SIMPLIFIED DIAGRAMMATIC REPRESENTATION OFA RECYCLINGSYSTEM 
Other use Other use 
or sale or sale 


Coproducts 

Coproducts 
Recyled 
material ( A 


Primary 
material 
(B) 


Energy 
generation 


Reclaiming 
process 
(collect /sort) 


Recycling 
process 


Manufacturing 


Recovered 
(Reclaimed) 
material 


process 


Recyled 
Waste material (A) 


Waste 


Final 
disposal 


Recycle content of product (X%) = (4/P) x 100 


Fic. 3 SIMPLIFIED DIAGRAMMATIC REPRESENTATION OF A RECYCLING SYSTEM 


Some recovered (reclaimed) materials may go directly | determining the mass of recycled material to be used in 
to a manufacturing process, which includes the the formula for calculating recycled content. 


recycling process, without having a separate operation NOTE —This diagram represents a simplified example of 
called the “Recycling process”, in the system. When a recycling system and is intended to provide information 
this is done, coproducts and waste are still likely to be 191 clary ot recycle Content caleutasons: Vor mate 

A : complete examples refer to 1SO/TR 14049, Environmental/ 
generated in that manufacturing process. These Management — Life cycle assessment — Examples for the 
coproducts and waste shall be accounted for when application of ISO 14041. 


14 


IS 16555 : 2017 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[1] ISO 7001, Graphical symbols — Public information symbols 
[2] ISO/IEC Guide 14 : 2003, Purchase information on goods and services intended for consumers 
Examples of Standards for Material Identification Symbols 


References [3] through [6] give examples of standards and industry publications which deal with material 
identification. These are only examples and this is not intended to be an exhaustive list. 


[3] ISO 11469:1993, Plastics — Generic identification and marking of plastics products. 


[4] IEC 61429:1995, Marking of secondary cells and batteries with the international recycling symbol ISO 
7000-1135. 


[5] Technical Bulletin No. PBI-24-1988 Revision 2, October 1, 1990 Voluntary Guidelines — Plastic Bottle 
Material Code System: Mold Modification Drawings, The Society of the Plastics Industry, Inc. (SPI). 


[6] Technical Bulletin No. RPCD-13-1989 Revision 1, October 1. 1990 Voluntary Guidelines — Rigid Plastic 
Container Material Code System: Mold Modification Drawings, The Society of the Plastics Industry, Inc 


(SPI). 
Quality Assurance of Testing and Claim Verification Data 


References [7] through [10 ] give examples of standards which can provide useful information and guidance 
regarding the collection of reliable data that can then be used for claim verification. These are only examples and 
this is not intended to be an exhaustive list. 


[7] ISO 9004-1:1994, Quality management and quality systems elements — Part 1: Guidelines. 
[8] ISO/IEC Guide 25:1990, Genera/ requirements for the competence of calibration and testing laboratories. 


[9] ANSVASQC E4-1 994, Specifications and guidelines for quality systems for environmental data collection 
and environmental technology programs. 


[10] EN 4-5001:1989, General criteria for the operation of testing laboratories. 
Examples of Standards for Testing and Claim Verification 


References [11] through [65] list standards and industry methods which could be considered for use when 
collecting various data necessary for claim verification. The list is not exhaustive and is only intended to provide 
an illustration of the types of standards that could be considered when selecting methods for testing and verification 
of self declared environmental claims. 


The methods in this list should only be used where the method chosen meets the relevant requirements set out in 
clause 6 of ISO 14021, as they apply to the particular claim being made. 


a) Recycled content 
[11] ASTM D5663-95, Standard Guide for Validating Recycled Content in Packaging Paper and Paperboard. 
[12] BS 7500:1995, Specification for marking of recycled paperboard. 
[13] AS 4082-1992, Recycled paper — Glossary of terms. 


[14] PBI 27-1993, Technical Bulletin — Protocol to Quantify plant Usage of Recycled Plastics in Plastic bottle 
Production, The Plastic Bottle Institute. 


b) Reduced resource use 
[15] ASTM D5833-95, Standard Guide for Source Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and Disposal of Steel Cans. 


[16] ASTM D5834-95, Standard Guide for Source Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and Disposal of Solid and 
Corrugated Fiberboard (Cardboard). 


c) Degradability 


[17] ISO 7827:1994, Water quality — Evacuation in an aqueous medium of the “ultimate” aerobic 


15 


IS 16555 : 2017 


biodegradability of organic compounds — Method by analysis of dissolved organic carbon (DOC). 


[18] ISO 9408:1999, Water quality — Evaluation of ultimate aerobic biodegradability of organic compounds in 
aqueous medium by determination of oxygen demand in a closed respirometer. 


[19] ISO 9439:1999, Water quality — Evacuation of ultimate aerobic biodegradability of organic compounds 
in aqueous medium — Carbon dioxide evolution test. 


[20] ISO 10707:1994, Water quality — Evaluation in an aqueous medium of the “ultimate” aerobic 
biodegradability of organic compounds — Method by analysis of biochemical oxygen demand [closed- 
bottle test]. 


[21] ISO 14851, Determination of the ultimate aerobic biodegradability of plastic materials in an aqueous 
medium — Method by measuring the oxygen demand in a closed respirometer. 


[22] ISO 14852, Determination of the ultimate aerobic biodegradability of plastic materials in an aqueous 
medium — Method by analysis of evolved carbon dioxide. 


[23] ISO 14853, Determination of the ultimate anaerobic biodegradability of plastic materials in in aqueous 
medium — Method by measurement of biogas production. 


[24] ISO 14855, Determination of the ultimate aerobic biodegradability and disintegration of plastic materials 
under controlled comporting conditions — Method by analysis of evolved carbon dioxide. 


[25] OECD 301, Guideline for testing of chemicals. 


[26] ASTM D3826-91, Determining degradation end point in degradable polyethylene and polypropylene 
using a tensile test. 


[27] ASTM D5071 -91, Standard practice for operating xenon arc type exposure apparatus with water for 
exposure of photodegradable plastics. 


[28] ASTM D5208-91, Operating fluorescent ultraviolet (UV) and condensation apparatus for exposure of 
photodegradable plastics. 


[29] ASTM D5209-92, Test method for determining the aerobic biodegradation of plastic materials in the 
presence of municipal sewage sludge. 


[30] ASTM D521 O-92, Test method for determining the anaerobic biodegradation of plastic materials in the 
presence of municipal sewage sludge. 


[31] ASTM D5247-92, Test method for determining the aerobic biodegradability of degradable plastics by 
specific microorganisms. 


[32] ASTM D5271-93, Test method for determining the aerobic biodegradation of plastic materials in an 
activated sludge -waste water treatment system. 


[33] ASTM D5272-92, Outdoor exposure testing of photodegradable plastics. 


[34] ASTM D5338-93, Test method for determining aerobic biodegradation of plastic materials under controlled 
composting conditions. 


[35] ASTM D5437-93, Weathering of plastics under marine floating exposure. 
[36] ASTM D5509-96, Standard practice for exposing plastics to a simulated compost environment. 
[37] ASTM D5510-94, Standard practice for heat aging of oxidatively degradable plastics. 


[38] ASTM D5511-94, Standard test method for determining anaerobic biodegradation of plastic materials 
under high-solids anaerobic digestion conditions. 


[39] ASTM D551 2-96, Standard practice for exposing plastics to a simulated compost environment using an 
externally heated reactor. 


[40] ASTM D5525-94, Standard practice for exposing plastics to a simulated active landfill environment. 


[41] ASTM D5526-94, Standard test method for determining anaerobic biodegradation of plastic materials 
under accelerated landfill conditions. 


16 


IS 16555 : 2017 

[42] ASTM D5988-96, Standard test method for determining aerobic biodegradation with oil of ‘plastic materials 
or residual plastic materials after comporting. 

[43] ASTM D6002-96, Standard guide for assessing the compostability of environmentally degradable plastics 


[44] ASTM D6003-96, Standard test method for determining weight loss from plastic materials exposed to 
simulated municipal solid waste (MSW) aerobic compost environment. 


[45] DIN V 54900-2, Testing of the compostability of plastics — Part 2: Testing of the complete biodegradability 
of plastics in laboratory tests. 


[46] DIN V 54900-3, Testing of the compostability of plastics — Part 3: Testing under practice-relevant 
conditions and testing of quality of the composts. 


[47] DIN V 54900-4, Testing of the compostability of polymeric materials — Part 4: Testing of the ecotoxicity 
of the composts. 


d) Energy and water consumption 
[48] IEC 60436, Methods for measuring the performance of electric dishwashers. 


[49] IEC 60350, Electric cooking ranges, bobs, ovens and grills for household use — Methods for measuring 
performance. 


[50] IEC 60379, A4efhods for measuring the performance of electric storage water-heaters for household 
purposes. 


[51] IEC 60531, Household electric thermal storage room heaters — Methods for measuring performance. 
[52] IEC 60675, Household electric direct-acting room heaters — Methods for measuring performance. 
[53] IEC 60456, Clothes washing machines for household use — Methods for measuring the performance. 
[54] IEC 61121, Electric tumble dryers for household use — Methods for measuring the performance. 


[55] IEC 60530, Methods for measuring the performance of electric kettles and jugs for household and similar 
use. 


[56] IEC 60661, Methods for measuring the performance of electric household coffee makers. 
[57] IEC 60705, Household microwave ovens — Methods for measuring performance. 


[58] ISO 7371, Household refrigerating appliances — Refrigerators with or without low-temperature 
compartment — Characteristics and test methods. 


[59] ISO 8187, Household refrigerating appliances — Refrigerator-freezers — Characteristics and test methods. 


[60] ISO 8561, Household frost-free refrigerating appliances — Refrigerators, refrigerator-freezers, frozen 
food storage cabinets and food freezers cooled by interns/ forced air circulation — Characteristics and 
test methods. 


[61] ISO 5151, Non-ducted air conditioners and heat pumps — Testing and rating for performance. 
[62] ISO 13253, Ducted air-conditioners and air-to-air heat pumps — Testing and rating for performance. 
[63] ISO 13256 (all parts), Water-source heat pumps — Testing and rating for performance. 


[64] ISO 15042 (all parts), Multiple split-system air-conditioners and air-to-air heat pumps — Testing and 
rating for performance. 


[65] ISO 5801, Industrial fans — Performance testing using standardized airways. 


17 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 34 (2174). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


