ISIISOIPAS

17002:2004

Indian standard CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT -- CONFIDENTIALITY PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS --

I(Y3 03.120.20

@ BIS 2007

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STAN!3ARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI 110002
August

2007

Price Group 2

National Mirror Committee

of CASCO, IRD 1

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with lSO/PAS 17002:2004 `Conformity assessment -- Confidentiality -- Principles and requirements' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the NationahMirror Committee of CASCO and approval of the Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards under Rule 8(3)C of BE Ru/es, 1987. The text of lSO/PAS Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in' Indian Standards, use a point (.) as the decimal marker.

the current practice is to

lS/lSO/PAS 17002:2004

Introduction
In 2001 the ISO Council asked its policy committee on conformity assessment (lSO/CASCO) to study and prepare a group of common elements for application in future ISO documents on conformity assessment. Subsequent to this request, lSO/CASCO approved the formation of Working Group 23, Common elements in /SO//EC Standards for conformity assessment activities, to undertake this task. The working group has identified several common elements, including among others -- -- -- -- impartiality, confidentiality, complaints and appeals, management systems,

This Publicly Available Specification (PAS) addresses the "confidentiality" element that occurs in many of the lSO/lEC Guides and International Standards on conformity assessment.
The PAS covers the agreed principles that give substance to the element of confidentiality, and also provides

requirements clauses intended to be included in future lSO/lEC International assessment.

Standards on conformity

This PAS is intended to apply to the drafling of documents on conformity assessment by lSO/CASCO. Clause 4 (Principles) contains statements that are intended to orientate lSO/CASCO working groups in their task of creating requirements to address confidentiality in their documents. The requirements to be inserted into future lSO/CASCO documents that cover the common element of "confidentiality are detailed in Clause 5. lSO/CASCO has adopted a common structure for the presentation of requirements. Requirements should be grouped under one or more of the following headings: a) b) c) d) e) General requirements; Structural requirements; Resource requirements; Process requirements; Management system requirements.

As such, each of the common elements will have requirements related to it grouped under one or more of the headings shown above. This PAS is not intended to become a future International Standard, At the end of three years after the date of publication, it is expected this PAS will be withdrawn and its contents incorporated as appropriate in relevant lSO/CASCO normative and guidance documents.

lS/lSO/PAS 17002:2004

Indian Standard CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT -- CONFIDENTIALITY PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS --

1

Scope for the element of

This Publicly Available Specification (PAS) contains principles and requirements confidentiality as it relates to conformity assessment.

It is an internal tool for use in the ISO standards development process by lSO/CASCO working groups when addressing the element of confidentiality in the preparation of their documents.
This Publicly Available Specification is not a stand-alone normative document

to be used directly in conformity

assessment activities,

2

Normative

references

The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. lSO/lEC 17000, Conformity assessment -- Vocabulary and general principles

3

Terms

and definitions

For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in lSO/lEC 17000 apply.
The use of the term "body" in this PAS means either an accreditation body or a conformity assessment body NOTE as defined in lSO/lEC 17000.

4

Principles

of confidentiality

4.1 To gain access to the information needed to conduct effective conformity assessment activities, the body needs to provide confidence that confidential information will not be disclosed. 4.2 All organizations and individuals have the right to have protected any proprietary information that they provide. 4.3 Managing the balance between confidentiality and public disclosure related requirements affects stakeholders' trust and their perception of value in the conformity assessment activities being performed.
NOTE It is intended that there will be a separate PAS coveringthe commonelement of public disclosure.

lS/lSO/PAS

17002:2004

5 5,1

Requirements General

for confidentiality

In developing this PAS it was recognised that there are varying degrees of specificity that lSO/CASCO working groups should consider. As a result the requirements in this clause are categorized into three levels of specificity as follows. a) Obligatory: these are specific drafted requirements that shall be used by lSO/CASCO working groups where the element has to be addressed, without modification, except for substitution of more specific terms. For example, the phrase "Conformity assessment activities shall be undertaken impartially", may be substituted more specifically with "Management system certification activities shall be undertaken impartially". Justification is required from LSO/CASCO working groups that do not use these requirements when dealing with the relevant common element. Recommended: these are drafted requirements that working groups should use if they wish to have a greater degree of specification. Modification is permissible. Suggested: these are considerations that could be taken into account in the drafting of requirements by the. ISOIGASGO working group.

b)

c)

By providing for these different levels of specificity, the PAS achieves the lSO/CASCO intent to have an agreed statement on elements that are common to all conformity assessment activities, and at the same time maintains some flexibility for specific wording by individual lSO/CASCO working groups. 5.2 General requirements 9

The following requirements are obligatory. a) The body shall be responsible, through legally enforceable commitments, for the management of all information obtained or created during the performance of conformity assessment activities, The body shall inform the client, in advance, of the information it intends to place in the public domain. Except for information that the client makes publicly available, or when agreed between the body and the client (e.g. for the purpose of responding to complaints), all other information is considered proprietary information and shall be regarded as confidential. When the body is required by law or authorized by contractual arrangements to release confidential information, the client or in~vidual concerned shall, unless prohibited by law, be notified of the information provided. Information about the client obtained from sources other than the client (e.g. complainant, regulators) shall be treated as confidential. Resource Obligatory requirements requirements

b)

c)

5.3 5.3.1

Personnel, including any committee members, contractors, personnel of external bodies, or individuals acting on the body's behalf, shall keep confidential all information obtained or created during the performance of the body's conformity assessment activities, except as required by law. 5.3.2 Recommended requirements

The body shall have available and use facilities for the secure handling (e.g. postage, e-mailing, record destruction) of confidential information (e.g. documents, records) and objects of conformity assessment (e.g. product samples),

2

lS/lSO/PAS

17002:2004

Bibliography

[1]

CANICSA-Q830-03, Model Code for the Protection of Pmonal

Information

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of /rrdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of the these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard alongwith amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed Amendments Amend No. from Dot: Issued No. IRD 1 (005). Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131, 23233375, 23239402 Website : www. bis.org.in Regional Central Offices : : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Shah Zafar Marg Telephones 2323'7617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Eastern

Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi

Northern

Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

160022

Southern

:

C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

:

Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri MUMBAI 400093

(East)
A

Branches

:

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GtJWAHAT1. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Shri Gane.$h Associates, DeI~

