GEGEE II IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


mier & feu lae sad A da AA 
afge 
MT 2 gem Saag 
(een gastaron ) 
Code of Recommended Practice for 
Amusement Rides Safety 


Part 2 Safety Requirements 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.200.40 


© BIS 2022 


FRAN Ae St 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Na HITS HA, 9 dele Mls AH AMT, Ae feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 6 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


Amusement parks in India are becoming quite common and people visit these parks quite often. In order to ensure 
their safety in amusement parks or while enjoying the rides, an attempt has been made to stipulate safety in the 
form of a National Code. It is hoped that organizers of amusement parks, manufacturers of rides would make use 
of these codes to ensure the overall safety of human beings and equipment at such places. 


This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international 
practices. This revision incorporates the following major changes : 


a) More safety provisions were added with the inclusion of new clauses 5,6,7. 


The code of recommended practice for amusement rides safety is in six parts. This standard covers the safety 
requirements relating to amusement rides safety. Other parts in this series under the general title are as follows : 


Part 1 General information 

Part3 Design, manufacture, and erection 

Part4 Selection, training, and supervision of operators 

Part5 Operation and maintenance procedures 

Part6 Performance tests 

The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 


‘Rules for rounding off numerical values’ (second revision). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES 
SAFETY 


PART 2 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) covers general safety 
requirements related to amusement ride or device to 
be taken care of during its construction, installation, 
utilization, and maintenance to ensure its uses to the 
optimum advantage, and to prevent, as far as 
possible, any accidents or mishaps that could arise 
from misuse. 


These safety requirements shall be in addition to the 
requirements/information given in IS 15475 (Part 1). 


This standard is not intended to contravene any 
provision of any of the existing Government 
regulations. It is the responsibility of the user of this 
code to establish appropriate safety and health 
practices and comply with regulatory and statutory 
requirements prior to the use of the ride or device for 
carrying a passenger for amusement. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 15475 Code of recommended practice for 
(Part 1) : amusement rides safety — Part 1 
2022 general information 
IS 15475 Code of recommended practice for 
(Part 3) : amusement rides safety — Part 3 
2022 Design, manufacture, and erection 
IS/IEC Low-Voltage switchgear and 
60947 controlgear — Part | general rules 
(Part 1) : (first revision) 
2007 


3 APPLICATION 


These safety requirements apply in specified 
conditions as agreed by the user and manufacturer of 
an amusement ride or device keeping in view the 
safety of the operator, attendant, rider, and visitors. 


3.1 Normal working conditions shall be specified 
and defined for standard equipment in the 
manufacturer's catalog in agreement with the user or 
the purchaser. 


3.2 The safety requirements apply to ride or device 
excluding the structures (building framework, 
plants, etc) except when such structures have been 
designed so as to share any loads from the ride or 
have any direct physical connection with the ride or 
device. 


3.3 Skilled personnel, such as fitters, welders, 
maintenance, and repair personnel who only work 
from time to time at the request of the user shall 
observe special requirements. 


3.4 Persons whose duties do not demand their 
presence on the ride or in the vicinity of the 
equipment and devices, shall observe forbidding 
access to certain areas. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


The construction erection and operation of all 
equipment appliances used in amusement ride 
system shall meet the statutory, specific, and other 
requirements relating to safety in general and the 
following general requirements. 


4.1 In the Construction Stage (Design and 
Manufacture) 


4.1.1 Design and Construction of Platform, 
Walkways, Stairways and Ladders 


The design of platforms, walkways, stairways, and 
ladders shall be such that adequate clearance is 
provided for normal operation, servicing, and 
maintenance giving sufficient room for freedom of 
movement and access for carrying out such duties. 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


4.1.2 The stability and strength of the ride or device 
(static and mobile) shall be ensured under all 
working conditions, including climatic conditions, 
as agreed by the interested parties. 


4.1.3 The whole ride path and especially the entry, 
exit, and transfer points shall be designed so as to 
avoid falling, slipping of rider/passengers. 


4.1.4 The support element of the passengers and load 
(belt, chairs, swing cabin, etc) shall have sufficient 
size suitable and comfortable to the passenger/rider. 


4.1.5 In order to prevent overrunning or running 
backward of the ride, all inclined or vertical 
appliances shall include a safety device that operates 
whenever the motive power is cut-off or fails and 
where the passengers conveyed possess kinetic or 
potential energy. 


4.1.6 Certain fixed or mobile appliances may 
include an articulated or mobile part in a vertical 
plane, actuated by a motor or manually in each case, 
there shall be a compulsory safety device for 
immobilizing such an articulated part in the event of 
a voluntary or accidental stoppage of the motive 
power even if the latter is manual. 


4.1.6.1 The lowering and raising system shall be 
fitted with a safety device to prevent accidental 
lowering and lifting of the ride or device and to 
prevent kickback of any manually operated crank. 


4.1.6.2 The device for lowering and raising the 
movable part shall be so located that there is no 
necessity for the operator to be under the ride for 
operating the device. 


4.1.6.3 The movement shall be limited at the 
extreme positions, by stops capable of supporting 
the stress due to the load. 


4.1.7 The in-running nips and pinch points of the 
conveying device (belts, chains belt pulleys, etc) and 
the movable parts (chains sprockets, spur gears 
couplings, etc) shall be protected. 


4.1.8 When shearing and squeezing points or zone 
exist on the path of the conveying elements due to 
change in direction, or close approach of fixed 
joints, guards shall be provided. 


4.1.9 All movable parts giving access through 
mechanical handling equipment shall be designed so 
that they cannot be opened whilst the riding 
apparatus is working and so that apparatus cannot be 
started while they are open. 


4.1.10 The entry and exit gates of the cabin and 
housings shall be made in such a way that they 


prevent access to the moving components, otherwise 
suitable protection shall be provided. 


4.1.11 Opening in enclosed appliances, which give 
access to moving parts, shall be guarded by covers 
that require a hand tool for removal or are locked or 
are interlocked with the drive to the equipment. 


4.1.12 Access to inspection holes shall be easy. 


4.1.13 All lubrication points used frequently shall be 
accessible without it being necessary to remove the 
guards. 


4.1.14 The equipment and devices shall be so 
designed that cleaning is facilitated. 


4.1.15 Wheels and rollers of traveling rides and of 
additional traveling equipment shall be guarded at 
points accessible to personnel under normal working 
conditions. 


4.1.16 Whenever an operator remains on the 
traveling equipment a platform shall be provided 
and be so designed as to prevent any accidental 
contact with mobile components or any part of the 
fixed installation. 


4.1.17 When mobile appliances or equipment travel 
alongside an unprotected gangway, warning devices 
shall be provided. 


4.1.18 Sharp edges and comers shall be removed. 


4.1.19 Projecting parts of the moving equipment 
shall be as small as possible. 


4.1.20 Rail crossings, walkways, galleries, 
workplaces under the overhead ride shall be 
protected by means of suitable covering to prevent 
falling of the material/objects over such 
areas/personnel. 


4.2 During Installation Stage (Layout, Erection, 
and Entry into Service) 


4.2.1 All powered appliances, equipment, and 
devices shall carry the following indications 
permanently and legibly marked in a clearly visible 
place: 


a) Name of the manufacturer or supplier, and 
b) Year of manufacture and serial number. 


4.2.2 Access for Operation, Servicing, and 
Maintenance a permanent or stable platform shall be 
provided for the purpose of operation, regular 
servicing repair, and maintenance. A clear access 
platform or floor space of at least 0.5 m width shall 
be provided for the maintenance of every driving 
mechanism. All service platforms of appliancesor 


cabins on which operating personnel may require to 
be stationed should remain horizontal. 


4.2.3 Access between movable parts of the static 
appliances or passengers and fixed obstacles shall be 
prevented by guards when the free space is less than 
0.5 m. 


4.2.4 There shall be fixed access to the platform, 
floor, or similar construction located more than 1.50 
m above ground level. 


4.2.4.1 Platform at different levels shall be 
adequately and conveniently connected by stairways 
or where stairways are not practicable, by fixed 
ladders. It is recommended that ladders be avoided 
as a means of access and access shall be preferably 
either by sloping ramp with slates or by a staircase. 
The angle of staircases with the horizontal shall not 
exceed 60°. 


4.2.4.2 In case a ladder has to be used, the width 
between the uprights shall be 0.35 m minimum. 
Portable ladders shall not be used at places where 
operation and regular servicing are being carried out. 


4.2.5 All flooring of platforms and treads of 
staircases shall be selected to suit the individual 
installation and working conditions and shall have a 
non-slip surface. 


4.2.6 Sharp edges and corners shall be avoided in the 
area normally accessible to personnel between the 
floor and height of 2m. 


4.2.7 All authorized passageways shall be indicated 
in a clear manner. 


4.2.8 Ride Control 


Except where the conveying system is under the 
control of an operator, an electrical or mechanical 
device shall be provided to automatically stop the 
ride or device. 


4.2.8.1 Sequence interlocks shall be provided so that 
no device can supply to another device that is not in 
operation or under maintenance. 


4.2.9 All starting and stopping devices shall be 
clearly indicated and easily accessible and shall be 
in accordance with the requirements of IS/IEC 
60947 (Part 1). 


4.2.9.1 Instantaneously operating manual stop-lock 
devices shall be provided either continuously or at 
selected points along with the installation. Resetting 
of these devices shall be carried out by authorized 
personnel and only after the fault has been rectified. 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


4.2.10 When a ride or device extends out of sight of 
the control station operator, audible and/or visual 
signals shall be provided to instruct the operating 
staff. 


4.2.11 It is recommended that all lubrication points 
be painted to a specified pattern. 


4.2.12 Staircases, ladders, fencing, guards, etc shall 
be erected before the ride is put into service. 


4.2.13 Principles of guarding fencing, guards shall 
be designed to prevent injury to persons and shall be 
provided at all dangerous parts of a ride. 


4.2.13.1 Fencing, guards shall be planned in to 
design of the ride and ride system and shall neither 
be added as an afterthought nor do they provide a 
hazard. The guards shall not have to be removed for 
normal cleaning, lubrication, or belt and chain 
tension adjustments. 


4.2.13.2 At points along the ride where riders may 
fall, suitable guards shall be provided. 


4.3 During the Utilization Stage (Operation and 
Maintenance) 


4.3.1 No amusement ride or device shall be used for 
duties other than those for which it is designed nor 
under conditions other than those stated in the 
contract between the concerned parties and booklets 
relating to installation operation and maintenance. 


4.3.2 It shall be strictly forbidden to use the ride or 
device for conveying materials. 


4.3.3 Equipment particularly its conveying element 
shall be kept in proper working condition as 
recommended by the manufacturer and shall be well 
maintained at all times. 


4.3.3.1 All apparatus, devices, working stations, 
and passageways shall be kept clear and clean. 


4.3.4 The inspection, adjustment, maintenance, and 
cleaning of moving parts (belts, pulleys, idlers, 
chains, sprockets, etc) shall be carried out regularly 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 


4.3.5 No inspection hole shall be opened while the 
appliance is in operation.The inspection cover may 
be electrically interlocked to, either remain locked 
during operation or to give a warning hooter if 
opened during operation, where ever required 


4.3.6 No one, except those so authorized shall 
operate or interfere with the normal working of the 
ride. All starting operations shall only be carried out 
by qualified and competent personnel only. 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


4.3.7 Normal and emergency stopping devices shall 
be made known to all personnel and be accessible. 


4.3.8 All restarting operations on an 
equipment/appliance which has been inoperative 
because of an emergency or accidental stoppage 
shall be preceded by an inspection aiming at: 


a) Determining the cause of the emergency or 
accidental stoppage, and 
b) Rectification of fault. 


4.3.9 It shall be strictly forbidden to crossover or 
under an appliance except at the points especially 
provided for the purpose. 


4.3.10 All adjustments, whether mechanical or 
electrical shall be carried out by competent and 
authorized persons, particularly in the case of safety 
devices. 


4.3.11 Repairs and removal of protective covers, 
enclosures, or panels shall only be carried out after 
stopping the equipment, and after all the starting 
devices of the ride control panel have been made 
inoperative, by a competent person. 


4.3.11.1 Re-commissioning shall be carried only 
after the protective devices have been replaced and 
order received from the authorized responsible 
person. 


4.3.12 It shall be forbidden to carry out any 
lubrication while an appliance is in operation, except 
in cases when the parts to be lubricated are so 
located or there are special devices that will permit 
their lubrication without danger. 


4.3.13 A logbook shall be maintained for each 
appliance and/or for each installation. Logbooks 
may be maintained in the form of electronic data if 
backup systems have been provided for safety. 


4.3.14 In order to follow the instructions as 
recommended by the manufacturer or supplier 
regarding operation and maintenance of amusement 
ride system, suitable training shall be given to 
personnel operator/technician both operating and 
carrying out maintenance, as, in the long run, this 
may serve as the best way of accident prevention. 


4.3.15 The users shall not make any alterations that 
affect the design, construction, installation, 
operating requirements of the ride or device without 
the consent of the manufacturer/constructor, as some 
of the alterations may give rise to detrimental 
consequences. 


4.3.16 In case of emergency, when work has to be 
carried out on unfenced machinery in motion, 
another person(s) well acquainted with the actions to 


be taken shall be deputed to keep watch on the 
person at work and hold himself close to and ready 
to operate a stop device. 


4.3.17 The manufacturer/designer shall identify the 
controls which require additional safety device when 
first safety device fails. Second/alternate safety shall 
be provided as fail-safe devices and shall be clearly 
indicated. 


5 GENERAL SAFETY PROVISIONS 


The controller shall identify all emergency situations 
(including those identified by the 
designer/manufacturer) which may arise during the 
operation and plan procedures to cover these 
situations. Such situations may include but are not 
limited to the following: 


a) Ride breakdown; 

b) Severe weather conditions; 
c) Explosion; 

d) Fire; 

e) Power failure etc. 


The controller shall cover the potential risks 
associated with the device in emergency situations. 
Some of them are given as under : 


5.1 Evacuation and Escape 


Exits and exit routes shall be clearly indicated by 
notices and directional signs, which are self- 
illuminating if required. In enclosed structures, the 
emergency lighting shall adequately illuminate exit 
routes, staircases, changes in level, and signs. Where 
necessary in the event of power failure, effective 
emergency lighting shall form part of the 
arrangements for the safe evacuation of persons 
from passenger-carrying devices. 


While any person is within the structure, the doors 
of the structure and of any room within the structure 
which afford a means of exit shall not be locked or 
fastened in such a manner that they cannot be easily 
and immediately opened from the inside. All doors 
on an exit route shall open outwards so that people 
can escape in an emergency without impediment. 
Where exit doors have to be secured against outside 
intruders, there shall be a security guard placed 
always or wherever necessary. 


Public address system may be introduced for Dark 
ride, Ropeway, and any other ride with a long track. 


6 OTHER SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


a) Safety instructions should be clearly posted 
at the entrance to the ride and the 
amusement ride operators/attendants 
should strictly enforce all of them; 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


2) 


h) 


Separate brakes shall be provided in the 
drive of individual rides. Normal and 
emergency stopping devices shall be made 
known to all personnel and be accessible. 
The brakes must come into operation 
automatically when: 

1) Normal Stop/Emergency Stop push 

button is pressed; 

2) The ride speed exceeds 5% of the set 

speed; 

3) The tripping of Drive motor due to 

actuation control security devices; 

4) Incase of power failure, as required. 
Standby prime mover is required to run 
ride at slow speed, to rescue passengers 
from the system in case of failure of main 
motor or power failure or DG set failure; 
Emergency pushbuttons must be provided 
at all comfortable locationsnear the ride 
operator for gradual stopping of the 
system; 
Strictly maintaining maximum carrying 
capacity in terms of Adult & Child 
passengers (child age can be between 5-12 
years); 
Maintaining minimum height of the 
passengers (can be considered between 3 
feet to 4 feet). This may vary from ride to 
ride or as per ride operational manual; 
Introduce engineering control measures to 
prevent the following situations from 
occurring to a slim rider, who is at or 
marginally above the minimum height 
allowed to go on the ride. Consider if the 
rider is able to: 

1) Maneuver into a position (e.g. both 
legs onto the seat) where they could be 
ejected from the ride; 

2) Slip under the restraint system and into 
the footwell of the car where they 
could be ejected from the ride. 

In order to prevent overrunning or running 
backward of the ride, all inclined or vertical 
appliances shall include a safety device that 
operates whenever the motive power is cut- 
off or fails and where the passengers 
conveyed possess kinetic or potential 
energy; 
Add a primary and a secondary lock on the 
restraint system if not already present. The 
secondary lock should be independent of 
the primary lock and the restraint system 
must stay in the intended closed position in 
the event that either the 
primary or secondary lock fails. Riders 
should not be able to disengage either the 
primary lock or the secondary lock while 
the ride is in operation. 

Have the restraint system designed to 

sound engineering principles (e.g. fasteners 


k) 


m) 


n) 


p) 


q) 


r) 


s) 


t) 
u) 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


used to secure the restraint bars and locking 
devices must be prevented from unintended 
loosening when the restraint system is 
being engaged or disengaged); 
Every amusement ride operator/attendant is 
responsible for on-the-job safety. They are 
responsible for their own safety as well as 
the safety of other employees and that of 
the general public. Here are some basic 
rules for a safe work place that amusement 
ride operators/attendants should follow: 
1) Knowing and obeying all safety rules 
and procedures; 
2) Keep surroundings neat, clean, and 
free of hazards; 
3) Reporting hazardous situations that 
might result in an accident; 
4) Verifying the inspection checklists 
prior to operating the ride; 
5) Development of safe work habits and 
participate in safety training; 
6) Anything that can cause someone: 
i) To trip; 
ii) To bump their head; 
iii) Get asplinter; 
iv) To fall; 
v) Acute. 
It is especially important to reach out to the 
parents of young children and to enlist their 
help and support in promoting safe riding 
practices enforcing all safety instructions; 
Beware of all unsafe conditions that could 
cause trips or falls on the ride platform or 
steps and cause injury; 
Ensuring that seat belts or safety restraints 
are fastened and locked in place before the 
ride starts; 
Always careful not to close the door or 
restraint on any part of the rider’s body 
while the riders are getting on or off of the 
ride; 
Any suspicion that a rider is under the 
influence of alcohol or drugs, should not be 
allowed them; 
Be sure to alert pregnant women and 
people with heart conditions to possible 
risks involved in using the ride; 
Remind riders to keep hands, arms, legs, 
and feet inside the ride at all times; 
Remind riders to remain seated until the 
ride comes to a complete stop. 


7 SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS 


a) 


b) 


The use of amusement rides is 
recommended only for those who are 
feeling well. 

The amount of time that passengers are 
held in an upside-down position should be 
limited. 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Accelerations acting on passengers when 
using rides should be limited to a tolerable 
level. For guidance, IS 15475 (Part 3) may 
be seen. 

If there are any problems with a rider or 
parent because of ride restrictions or 
behavior, amusement ride 
operators/attendants should not operate the 
ride. They should stop the ride if in motion 
and only resume operation after the 
problem has been settled. 

Amusement ride operators/attendants 
should always report all safety-related 
matters to their immediate supervisor, the 
insurance company, and local safety 
authorities. They should also update the 
ride manufacturer and consult with them. 


2) 


h) 


Amusement ride operators/attendants 
should never leave the ride while it is 
operating. 

Amusement ride operators/attendants 


should watch the ride and riders at all times 
while it is operating. 

Remembering and following these rules 
while operating amusement rides will 
significantly increase the chances of a safe 
and enjoyable time for everyone, riders and 
operators/attendants alike while lessening 
the prospect of stricter insurance terms and 
licensing requirements for the amusement 
ride hirers/operators. 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


Organization(s) 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


CSIR — Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Conveyor and Ropeway Services Private 
Limited, Kolkata 


Desein Private Limited, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanba 


Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur 


Elecon Engineering Company Limited, Gujarat 
Indian Association of Amusement Parks and 
Industries, Mumbai 


Lepton Projects Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Mcnally Bharat Engineering Company Limited, 
Kolkata 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, 
New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Mineral Development Corporation, 
Hyderabad 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHRA (Chairman) 


SHRI DEBASHISH BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHKRAVARTY 
SHRI KAMAL KUMAR BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRI H. K. GUPTA 
SHRI ARVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. P. NIJALINGAPPA 
SHRI H M BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI D. B. NAYAK 
SHRI VIJAY YADAORAO BARAPATRE (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI C S SHAH 
SHRI K. S. KODIA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SHRI ANIL PADWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI PIYUSH RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY BHATTACHAR 
SHRI AMIT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY MAITI 
SHRI SANDIPAN DAW (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI O.P. KALIA 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI S. SURENDER (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE KUM. GHOSH (Alternate) 


IS 15475 (Part 2) : 2022 


Organization(s) 
Polo Amusement Park Lmited, Gurugram 
Project and Development India Limited, Noida 
RITES Limited, Gurugram 
Ropeway and Resorts Private Limited, Kolkata 


TRF Limited (A Tata Enterprise), Jamshedpur 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi 
Mumbai 


Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad 


Usha Martin Limited, Ranchi 


In personal capacity (145/44, South Sinthi 
Road, Kolkata — 700050) 


In personal capacity (BH/VI/SF,VIP Floors 
Sector 81, DPS Faridabad, Haryana - 121007) 


In personal capacity (F-7B DDA MIG Flats, 
Hari Nagar, New Delhi - 110006) 


In personal capacity (20 D, Dhakuria Station 
Road, Kolkata - 700031) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 


SHRI A. K. KINRA 


SHRIN. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJOY MAITI 
SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 
SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 
SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI C. K. KARMAKAR 


SHRI. ASHUTOSH BHADRA 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD 
(MED) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (18110). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


