INGA WT IS 16547 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Alsat Far we viet ate cat Ata at 
wit mrt tq — fanfaras 


Investigations for Foundation of 
Existing Earth and Rock Fill Dams — 
Guidelines 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF Fa, 9 FIRM WAL AMT, ae feeeit-110002 
sale =m MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 2 


Foundations and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee, WRD 8 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Foundations 
and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Geological and geotechnical conditions are one of the most important aspects of the adequacy of a dam foundation 
and its safety. Evaluation of the safety of an existing dam, among other things, requires that its foundation has 
been adequately examined, explored, and investigated so that it is as fully understood as possible. 


Foundation explorations should be directed towards obtaining only such information as may be considered important 
to an evaluation of the dam. The exploration programme should identify the factors that critically affect the safe 
performance of the dam, and not develop extraneous information. 


The following are the commonly employed methods in foundation investigations, and are intended to suggest 
scope of investigations which, when properly implemented, will facilitate diagnostic investigation methods. It is 
emphasized that, because of the almost largely varying geological conditions, it would be unreasonable and 
impractical to attempt to set guidelines for specific investigation programmes. 


It is fully recognized that the specific investigation programs and studies for individual projects vary widely 
according to site conditions, type of dam, hazard classification, and design phase considerations. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised).’ The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16547 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


INVESTIGATIONS FOR FOUNDATION OF EXISTING 
EARTH AND ROCK FILL DAMS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down guidelines for determining the 
appropriateness and extent of geotechnical 
investigations and studies for dams, water retaining and 
other appurtenant structures. It also outlines the 
desirable quantity and quality of the investigations 
required to support design and arrive at conclusions. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on these 
standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1888 : 1982 Method of load test on soils (second 
revision) 
1892 : 1979 Code of Practice for subsurface 


investigations for foundations (first 
revision) 

Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 General 
provisions and buildings (first 
revision) 

Method for standard penetration test 
for soils (first revision) 

Method of test for determination of 
dynamic properties of soil (second 
revision) 

Code of practice for in-situ 
permeability test 

Tests in overburden (second revision) 
Tests in bedrock (second revision) 
Code of Practice for subsurface 
exploration for earth and rockfill 
dams (first revision) 

Code of Practice for uniaxial jacking 
test for deformation modulus of rock 
(first revision) 

Determination of rock stress — Code 
of Practice 

Using hydraulic fracturing technique 
Using flat jack technique 


1893 (Part 1): 
2002 
2131: 1981 


5249 : 1992 


5529 
(Part 1) : 2013 


(Part 2) : 2006 
6955 : 2008 


7317 : 1993 


13946 


(Part 1) : 1994 
(Part 4) : 1994 


IS No. Title 
15681 : 2006 Geological exploration by 
geophysical method (seismic 
refraction) — Code of practice 


15736 : 2007 Geological exploration by 
geophysical method (electrical 


resistivity) — Code of practice 


3 NEED FOR SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 


The preferred approach for assessing the adequacy of 
dam foundations should be to minimize the use of 
general assumptions related to foundation conditions 
and strength parameters. The objective of reviewing 
existing data is self-evident. Site-specific information 
and data-based analysis should be the prevalent basis 
for judgments on dam safety. If potentially hazardous 
foundation conditions are believed or determined to 
exist, and the existing data are insufficient to resolve 
the problem, supplementary investigations should be 
conducted and analysed, or additional information 
should be developed to complete the evaluation. 


Typical conditions that would require additional 
foundation information and explorations for existing 
dams are given below: 


a) Significant cracking, settlement or sloughing 
of dams or related nearby structures; 


b) Increase in settlement rates or indications of 
movement towards downstream; 


c) Uncontrolled seepage conditions under, 
through, and around foundations or abutments, 
and at the toe area of any water retaining 
structures; 


d) Steady or sudden increase in observed 
seepage; 

e) Credible foundation data is insufficient to 
support stability analysis of dam and 
foundation system; 

f) Rapid or unexplained high rise in piezometric 
pressures either in the foundation or abutment 
material; 

g) Highly fractured, jointed rock; 

h) Rock formations that are known to be 
susceptible to seepage problems, solution 
activity or erodible material; 


IS 16547 : 2017 


j) Rock formations that possess or have weak 
seams or planes with low strength 
characteristics and adverse orientation such 
as dip towards downstream, etc; 

k) Change in seismotectonic activity in and 
around the dam vicinity; and 

m) Modification in the existing structure, if any. 


4 REVIEW OF GEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS 


Geological Investigations already conducted or 
required to be taken up for review of existing structures 
to determine the following: 


a) General geologic setting of the area at and near 
the project. 


b) Characteristics of the foundation. 
c) Seismicity of the area. 


The extent of the investigations depends on the design 
of dam and appurtenances and the complexity of the 
local geology. The methods used for the investigations 
are dependent on the data that shall be obtained to fully 
understand the foundation. The investigative methods 
also depend on the types and size of the structures 
involved, and on the extent and quality of the 
information needed. 


5 SCOPE OF INVESTIGATIONS 


Existing dams without adequate available data should 
be evaluated as carefully as possible. The extent of 
required investigations should be dictated by hazard 
classification, nature of structure, and data already 
available. The investigations, when needed, should be 
planned to provide the engineer with information and 
data to answer questions on specific dam foundation 
safety problems and to perform dam safety analysis 


For geotechnical investigations of existing dams, the 
extent of data needed may be relatively limited, 
depending on the adequacy of existing data and 
construction documentation and the same may only be 
obtained by drilling, sampling and testing that is 
concentrated in specific site areas or problems. 


5.1 Investigations 


The foundation soil/rock investigations for existing 
dams would primarily comprise of detailed drilling, 
sampling, and testing focused on specific features at 
the project site; and should be specifically planned to 
provide the engineer with information that is necessary 
to review design and develop cost estimate in case of 
any need for strengthening methods. Dynamic elastic, 
shear modulus and Poisson’s ratio are also required to 
be determined. 


For rock foundations with joints/seams, proper 
geotechnical investigations are to be carried out to 


determine the strength parameters of joints and to assess 
the strengthening measures like grouting/rock bolting. 


In case of dams being situated in seismic areas, it is 
important to assess from drill logs, the existence of any 
liquefiable strata. Standard Penetration Test (SPT) 
values, Cone Tip Resistance (q,) from Cone Penetration 
Test (CPT) or Shear Wave Velocity (V,) obtained by 
different in-situ/geophysical tests can be made use of 
to assess the liquefaction potential of the soil deposit 
(see IS 1888, IS 1892 and IS 2131). Specialist literature 
may be referred for determining liquefaction potential 
of a site as suggested in IS 1893 (Part 1). In case 
liquefaction potential is envisaged, suitable measures 
should be undertaken to improve the liquefiable 
foundation strata by suitable methods to mitigate/ 
eliminate the possibility of liquefaction of soil during 
earthquakes. 


6 METHODS OF INVESTIGATIONS 


The adequacy of design of a structure will normally be 
primarily dependent on the extent of the information 
known about foundation conditions of the site and the 
physical properties of the foundation materials. To 
evaluate these properties, choice and the type and 
application of sampling methods is important. There is 
no single sampling method or sampling device that will 
guarantee the recovery of satisfactory sampling in all 
material, but the less disturbance caused to the sample, 
the more accurate the results will be from testing that 
sample. Different devices and techniques have been 
developed for drilling and sampling a wide variety of 
types of material. Proper sampling is a combination of 
science and art. Although many procedures have been 
standardized, requisite alteration and adaptation of 
investigation techniques are often dictated by specific 
requirements of design. 


6.1 Types of Exploration 


The general types of explorations used to investigate 
foundation soils fall into following four categories (see 
IS 6955): 


a) Geological reconnaissance and mapping; 

b) Borings, with sampling and conducting SPT, 
in-situ permeability of foundation strata; 

c) Special excavations to provide access to sub- 
strata; and 

d) Geophysical explorations. 


6.2 Geological Reconnaissance and Mapping 


Geological reconnaissance and mapping is crucial for 
understanding critical items influencing siting, design, 
and construction. It gives the overall picture of 
foundation geological condition and is very useful in 
evaluating any instability, settlement or seepage 


problems that may occur during the operation of the 
structure under investigation. 


6.3 Borings 


Out of different types of explorations, borings comprise 
the most practical and accurate method of obtaining 
sub-surface information. The most important aspect of 
the drilling procedures is the recovery of the in-situ 
foundation material penetrated. A boring with low 
recovery is of limited value. Besides, standard 
penetration tests may be conducted alternately with 
sampling at appropriate intervals. These help to assess 
the important soil/rock parameters required for 
evaluating the foundations. 


6.4 Special Excavations 


Special excavations are defined as those openings made 
manually or with machinery other than drill rigs for 
the purpose of obtaining soil or rock samples, or 
conducting in-situ testing. They consist of test pits, test 
trenches, large diameter borings, tunnels, shafts, drifts 
or adits. 


6.5 Geophysical Explorations 


Geophysical explorations are an indirect method of 
obtaining generalized sub-surface geological 
information by using special instruments to make 
certain physical measurements (see IS 15681 and 
IS 15736). Geophysical observations in themselves are 
not geological facts, but are statistical and orderly 
measurements. Geophysical explorations complement 
core drilling, test pits data, or other direct methods of 
sub-surface exploration and can provide a rapid insight 
into the geological conditions and help evaluate some 
design parameters. However, their reliability is only as 
good as their confirmation by conventional means of 
explorations. 


6.6 Location of Explorations 


Adequate information about foundation properties and 
characteristics is critical to a full understanding of the 
adequacy of any design or in the evaluation of an 
existing foundation/structure. Therefore explorations 
should be adequately distributed over the entire 
foundation and influenced adjoining area and in 
specially required cases at appurtenant structures, 
including penstocks, tunnels, spillways, intakes and 
outlet, at the powerhouse foundations site (whether 
surface or sub-surface) 


6.7 Laboratory Tests 


Laboratory testing of foundation material may include 
the performance of routine tests such as direct shear, 
unconfined compression, triaxial shear, sliding friction, 
modulus of elasticity, tensile strength, natural and dry 


IS 16547 : 2017 


density, moisture content, consolidation, Atterberg’s 
limits, grain-size analysis, and permeability. Tests for 
foundation rebound, slaking, collapsibility, dispersive 
characteristics, and determination of the mineral and 
chemical composition of the rock and ground water 
may be required where unusual geological conditions 
exist. In addition, where liquefaction potential may need 
to be evaluated, dynamic laboratory tests such as cyclic 
direct shear and/or cyclic triaxial compression tests 
should be conducted (see IS 5249). 


Laboratory tests may be needed to provide information 
regarding the behaviour of foundation soil/rock under 
the various construction conditions to which it will be 
subjected to, such as, rebound due to removal of load, 
application of load, scour, exposure to weather, wet- 
dry, and freeze-thaw cycles. The interpretation, 
evaluation and application of the test results to the 
evaluation of foundation adequacy is a highly important 
aspect and depends to a great degree upon experience 
and judgment in correlating and weighing the data 
accumulated in the test program. 


6.8 Field Tests 


One of the most important field tests performed is 
permeability. Permeability tests can be done either by 
pumping out or by applying hydraulic pressure [see 
IS 5529 (Part 1) and IS 5529 (Part 2)]. The pumping- 
out test consists of bailing or pumping water from wells 
or boreholes and observing the effect of this operation 
on the water level in these and nearby holes. 


For evaluating the physical characteristics of the rock 
mass as a whole , Additional field tests such as test 
blasting, rock bolt pull-out tests, flat jacking tests, 
Goodman jacking tests, chamber tests, and direct shear 
test [see IS 7317, IS 13946 (Part 1), IS 13946 (Part 4)] 
may be carried out. 


In special cases where foundation strata is susceptible 
to liquefaction potential, dynamic field tests such as 
cyclic plate load test and block vibration tests may be 
conducted (see IS 5249). 


7 EXPLORATION 


The term exploration as used in this phase of the 
geotechnical investigation refers to the sub-surface 
work performed at the dam foundation site; it includes 
such items as soil and rock borings and field testing 
and evaluations. Explorations are normally confined 
to foundation materials through the body of the dam 
unless there are explicit reasons for exploration in 
separated areas such as on upstream or downstream 
through the bed in to the foundation. Conditions which 
may call for additional investigation may include such 
features as cavernous limestone foundations. 


IS 16547 : 2017 


The exploration serves several functions which should 
include the specific items noted below: 


a) Identification of the soil horizons in 
foundation, that is, soils with differing 
properties for engineering purposes. 

b) Obtaining soil samples for subsequent 
laboratory testing. 

c) Performance of field tests which can later be 
used to corroborate laboratory test results. 


The number and location of borings which form the 
bulk of the exploration will vary, depending on the 
height and length of the dam, geological conditions in 
the area and the complexity of the dam. 


8 MINIMUM BORING LAYOUT 


The following is a suggested minimum boring program 
that can establish a reasonable basis for getting required 
information for any desired subsequent analyzer. 


a) One (1) crest boring extending through the 
embankment and foundation materials to 
bedrock for each 100 m of crest length, 
arranged such that one boring is located at or 
reasonably near the maximum section. 

b) One (1) crest boring extending through the 
embankment and foundation materials to 
bedrock near each abutment; these borings 


should be located such that the phreatic line 
should be intercepted. 


c) Ifaccess is reasonably attainable (side slopes 
not steeper than 3H : 1V or berms are present), 
one boring extending through the embankment 
and foundation materials to bedrock near each 
abutment near the mid height of the dam on 
the downstream slope of the dam; additional 
borings on the downstream slope should, if 
attainable, be taken at intervals not to exceed 
10 m. 


d) One (1) boring opposite each boring advanced 
from the crest extending through the 
foundation material to bedrock along the toe 
of the dam. 


NOTES 


1 All borings should extend into the foundation material a 
minimum depth of half the heights of the embankment or to 
bedrock. Borings may be terminated in foundation soils when 
they penetrate a ‘firm, impervious’ stratum which will not settle, 
fail in shear or permit excessive seepage. This determination 
requires considerable judgment in certain cases and experience 
is very important. 


2 Generally, to better establish the rock line, soil horizons and 
phreatic surface, borings on the crest, slope and at the toe should 
be located on or reasonably near cross-sections through the dam. 


3 All proposed borings should be accurately located on a boring 
plan and the elevation information noted on the boring log. 
The boring plan and logs should be plotted on scale drawings 
for ease of use. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 08 (0636). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


