( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS 88716 1978
l

hub

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PACKAGING OF HOUSEHOLD ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES
Packaging of Engineering Goods Sectional
Chinnon SHR~A. C. SEKHAR Srikalpam, Lawsons Bay, Pedawaltair P. O., Visakhapatnam Members SHRI R. P..AGARWAL The Association Bombay

Committee,

MCPD

19

530017

I?& csenting of Small Tool Manufacturers,

SHRI R. J. AGARWAL ( Alternate ) Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta SHRI D. P. BWATTACHERJEE SHRI B. KUMAR ( Altsmatu ) Praxa Tools Ltd, Secunderabad DR I. V. S. RAMANUJACHARY SHRI S. SAMUEL( Ahmate ) Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay SHRI P. G. DESHMUKH SHRI P. L. NAGARSEICAR (Alternate) J. K. Steel & Industries Ltd, Rishra SHRI D. GUPTA Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DIRECTOR, T R A P P I c Tor~r COMMERCIAL( RATES) I Ministry of Defcnce ( DGI ) MAT S. K. MIERA 2S~~~ M. K. DUTT ( Alternate ) Cooper Engineering Ltd, Satara ( Maharashtra ) SHRI D. MUKHERJEE SHRI W. N. KHATAUKAR ( Alternate ) The Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd, Sonepat SHRI L. N. NASEEY Tube Investments~cycles of India, Madras Srrar A. PRADHAN SHR~R. DEVANATHAN( dbernatc) Engineering Export Promotion Council, Calcutta SHRI v. P. PUNJ Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore SHRI M. RANCASHAI SHRI S. C. BHUTANI(Alternate ) The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. SAHA SHRI S. V. RAMAN (Alternate) The Jay Engineering Works Ltd, New Delhi SHRI N. P. S. SHIMI SHRI I. C. AQARWAL ( Alternate ) Indian Machine Tool Manufacturers' Association, SHRI N. SRIHARI Bombay The Mysore Kirloskar Ltd, Harihar SHRI N. C. SUKHARAMWALA SHRI S. G. GODBOLB (Alternate)

L

( Continued on pogc 2 ) @ INDIAN Copyiighht 1978 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

Thii publication is protected under the Indian Cofiyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission oftbe publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS r_II716-1978
( Continucdfrom page 1 )

Members
CAPT N.

R.$wescnting

A. TAMHANS SHRIA. N. VERMA SHRK P. S. DAS, Director ( MCPD )

The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Calcutta

BharatPumps SC CompressorsLtd, Allahabad Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficioMember )
Sccrstay &-IlU s. GAF'OOR

Deputy Director ( MCPD ), IS1 Panel for Packaging of Refrigerator, Ah-conditioner and Enamelled Household Appliances, MCPD 19 : P9
SHRIJ. V. FERNANDES Da P. A. TOSHI --------v---SHRI G. C. NARANG SHRI B. R. PUNJ SHRI S. G. SATEWAR SHRI P. A. RAO ( Alternate ) Voltas Limited, Thana Godrei & Boyce Manufacturing Co Pvt~Ltd, Bombay Kelvinator of'India Limited, fielhi Fcdd;e;ih_Joyd Corporation Private Limited, New American Universal Electric (India) Ltd, Faridabad

Racold Appliances Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI K. P. SETHI SHRI S. K. VINAYAK( Alternate ) The Hyderabad Allwyn Metal Works SHRI E. V. VENUGOPAL Hydcrabad
SHRIT. S. REDDY ( Alfernrte )

Limited,

2

IS : 8716- 1978

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PACKAGING OF HOUSEHOLD ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1978, after the draft finalized by the Packaging of Engineering Goods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 There is a considerable increase in the production and use of household electrical appliances in our country. The appliances have been designed and marketed for heating, cooling, cleanin,,e entertainment and as kitchen accessories. 0.3 Irrespective of the area of their use, these appliances are sensitive items, which require protection of their functional characteristics. 0.4 The package has to fulfil other objectives in addition to minimizing the damage to the contents and aesthetic consideration. It must communicate information like instructions for use, safety instructions and statutory inforIt may have to fulfil another functional requirement of protecting mation. the appliances after sale, when not in use. 0.5 Another eminent factor is the cost of the package. It is not desirable to pass unnecessary burden of cost to the ultimate consumer and therefore the materials which are available locally and commensurate with the functions expected to be performed have to be utilized. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the practice for packaging of electrical appliances for household purposes, intended both for domestic distribution and for export. 1.1.1 a) b) c) d) This standard does not cover the following : Appliances designed for industrial purposes, Appliances made for medical treatment, Separate motors, and Portable tools.

IS : 8716 - 1978 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply.

2.1 Household Appliances -An energy consuming device or equipment, other than a lamp, fixed or portable, in which electric energy is converted into light, heat, motion, or any other form of energy, or substantially changed in its electrical character and primarily used in households. 3. DETERMINATION OF PACKAGE package the following

3.0 In the process of determining the appropriate factors should be taken into consideration.

3.1 Product Characteristics - To start with, it is essential to know the details about the product to be packed. The physical characteristics of the product, such as size, mass, shape, materials of construction and strength, have to be known. 3.1.1 The prototype of a new product provides the basis for packaging considerations. 3.2 Conditions
of Transport and Storage

modes of transport normally employed, the 3.2.1 Trarrsfiort -The hazards the product is likely to be subjected to during transportation and the distance to the ultimate destination affect the selection of a package. 3.2.2 Apart from the normal inherent hazards in transportation, handling is also responsible for transmitting damages to the packages. In export, the package is subjected to a much greater variety of handling methods and climatic conditions. 3.2.2.1 For all packs having a mass of contents more than 100 kg, provision has to be made to permit handling by power equipment. This may be by means of external skids, strips on the bottom of transport packages or by strips bolted to the bottom of the appliance and secured to inside face of the bottom of the package positioned in such a manner as to ensure adequate protection to the package and contents when handled with power equipment. If the strips or skids are secured to the inside face of the bottom of the transport packages it should be marked to indicate two opposite sides intended for fork lift truck handling. storage conditions likely to be encountered at 3.2.3 Storage -The various points, before it is delivered to the ultimate consumer, have to be considered. 3.2.3.1 In some cases the package may be called upon to extend protection even after reaching the ultimate destination and when the appliance is not in use. 4

IS : 8716 - 1978 3.2.4 Stackability - Storage which may extend from short to long periods particularly when the storage space is small and not provided with modern amenities such as the stacking, offers hazards, which can lead to crushing of the lower packages. The other hazards are the dust and dirt which The design of the may spoil the communicative aspect of the package. storage bins and handling arrangements within the stores will depend upon the physical characteristics of the package and also the provision of handling equipment. 3.2.5 The package should be such that no deterioration of surface and The mechanism occurs due to conditions prevailing in the surroundings. package may be transported as : a) loose package; b) unitized ( palletized ) load; and c) containerized container. load, that is, the loose packages inside a freight

3.2.5.1 In order to achieve the simulation of actual distribution system in the design of package, tests conditions according to stipulations in Appendix A may be taken as a guideline. 3.3 Packaging Materials 3.3.1 Primary Protection - The most important function of packaging is This protection may be to the extent of the protection of the contents. wrapping in an acid-free tissue. Fine metal finishes shall be protected In such cases the product from scratches and sometimes from corrosion. is wrapped in tissue paper to prevent contact with the inner wall of the The vitreous enamel is another surpackage, which might be abrasive. face which, though, resistant to scratching is liable to damage if struck and needs protection against any such shock. 3.3.2 Outer Pack - Depending upon the product characteristics the outer pack may be offibreboard or wood conforming to IS : 2771 (Part I )1977*, IS : 2771 ( Part II)-19751_, IS : 3971-1965$, or IS : 1503-1967$, as the case may be. To select the type of the fibreboard box to be employed, IS : 648~1-1971 /should be used for guidance. purpose of cushioning material is to 3.3.3 Cushioning Material -The reduce the intensity of shocks experienced by the outer container before Two types of cushioning material are normally they reach the contents. . used, namely : ( a ) processed, and ( b ) unprocessed.
*Specification for fibreboard boxes: Part I Corrugated fibreboard boxes (jkt revision). fspecification for fibreboard boxes: Part II Solid fibreboard boxes (Jirst revision). SSpecification for wooden crates. $Specification for wooden packing cases (Jirst revision). /IGuide for principal user and styles of fibreboard containers.

5

IS : 8716 - 1978 3.3.3.1 Processed material - Materials in this category may be rubberbased, plastic foams, paper-based or pneumatic. These materials ensure uniformity in characteristics; hence lend themselves to accurate assessment of dynamic characteristics.

3.3.3.2 Unprocessed material - In this category materials like wood wool, corrugated board, corrugated paper roIls,~polystyrene strips, shredded paper may be included. 3.3.4 Recommended materials for the packaging ances are given in Appendix B. of some of the appli-

- The manufacturer may disassemble the product for 3.4 Disassembly the purpose of packaging and shipment. The extent of disassembly may be decided by the following factors:

a) Need for protection b) Reduction

of fragile or projecting parts, and should be adequately identified and included in the package, preferably

in cubage.

3.4.1 The parts disassembled instructions for proper assembly pictorial.

3.5 Economy - The selection of materials have to be matched by the economic considerations, the types of markets the product is expected to cater to, availability, their absolute cost and cost with respect to the packaged contents, and the functional utility of the package at the ultimate destination. 4. IDENTIFICATION
4.1 One of the essential functions of the package is to communicate.

communication

may be of any, or all, of the following : of the contents, for proper use, and

The

~a) Identification b) Instructions

c) Statutory information. 4.1.1 Contents - The communication may be pictorial or explanatory. It should be complete and convey an exact nature of the contents. Its conformity to accepted standards should be ensured. 4.1.2 Instructionsfor Use - For an efficient and safe use and maintenance of appliance, the manufacturer should incorporate instructions for use. These may be in one or more languages for easy compliance. 4.1.3 Statutory Information - Any information required regulations shall be given on the package prominently. 6 by the statutory

IS : 8716 - 1978

APPEND-IX A ( Clause 3.2.5.1 )
PACKAGE A-l. DOMESTIC Test (2) Drop test TESTS AND CONDITIONS OF CARGO Test Conditions (5) THEREOF DISTRIBUTION Ref to IS : (3) 7028 ( P;g7;y))-

St?&-a. (1) i)

Hazards to be Simulated (4) Drop by mishandling

.

The drop height is decided depending on the bulk and the mass of the filled package (Drop height: 30 to 80 cm; number of drops: 7 or 8 times ) 30 minutes each in horizontal and vertical positions

ii)

Vibration test

7028 ( P;;;,`r )-

Vibration transit

in

iii)

Revolving hexagonal drum test ( 2 m and4m)

-

Falls from loose cargo

N

=

125 +1*25

2.2 M .

where N = number of falls, M= mass of the filled package in kg, L = maximum length of the filled package, and 1 = minimum length of the filled package

*Performance tests for completefilled transportpackrw: Part II Vibration test. Part IV Vertical impact alrop tests.

7

IS I 8716- 1978 SI No. Test Ref to IS: (3) 7028 ( Part VI)1973' 7028 ( Part III )1973* 7028 ( Part VIII 1974* )Hazards to be Simulated Test Conditions

(1)
iv)

(2)
Compression test

(4)
Pressure strength in transit and in warehouse Collision cargoes Rain of

(5)

v)

Incline impact test Spray test

Run-way distance: 100 to 150 cm Volume of water sprayed: 8 11s CARGOES

vi)

A-2. TESTS A-2.1 tests.

AND CONDITIONS

OF EXPORT

Export cargo tests are conducted in the same way as domestic cargo The only difference shall lie in the condition of drop test. OF DROP TEST FOR EXPORT CARGO

A-Z.2 CONDITION Sl Jvo. (1) 9 Loose

Kind of Cargo (2) p a c k a g e

Test Conditions (3) Height of fall: a) Where mechanical handling exists : 60 to 120 cm b) Where mechanical handling does not exist : 80 to 140 cm

ii)

Unitized ( palletized ) package Containerized package

Base drop : 30 cm Corner drop : 20 cm Number of falls : 3 Same tests and domestic cargo conditions as

iii)

*Performance tests for complete filled transport packages: Part III Horizontal impact test, inclined plane test and pendulum test. Part VI Compression test. Part VIII Water spray test. 8

IS :8716 - 1978

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.3.4 )
PACKAGING
Sl No. (1)
i)

B
ELECTRICAL PRODUCTS
Ref to IS :

METHODS
Product (3)

FOR

Product Categop (2)

Packaging

Method

(4)

(5) I)-

Small appliantes

recorder, Tape transistor radio, electric stove, juicer, blender, and toaster, other products

Box: Corrugated 2771 (Part fibreboard c&ton 1975s Cushioning materials : Polystyrene foam and corrugated fibreboard Primary protection: Polythene bag Box: Corrugated fibreboard carton Cushioning materials: Polystyrene foam and corrugated fibreboard Primary protection: Polythene bag 271i7kart

ii)

Mediumsize appliantes

Elect r~i c fan, airstereo, conditioner

I )-

iii)

Major appliantes

Refrigerator, washing machine, television, stereo, phonogram

Box: Corrugatid 2771 (Part I)fibreboard carton 1975* or (Joints areused to fix 3071-1965t outer inner and boxes) or wooden crates Cushioning materials: Polystyrene foam and corrugated fibreboard Primary protectioz Polythene bags

$+ecification

*Specificationfor fibreboard boxes: Part I Corrugated fibreboard boxes (firEt rmirion ).
for wooden crates.

9

IS : 8716- 1978 S1 No. (1) iv) Product Category (2) Heavy products Product (3) Electric boiler, furnace for heating Packaging Method (4) Box: Wooden frame box or corrugated car ton fibreboard with wooden bottom sheet Cushioning materials: Felt Primary protection: Polythene bags Ref to IS: (5) 1503- 1967* or 2771

*Specificationfor woodenpackingcase8 (firrt k&n ) . tOpccificationfor fibreboardboxes:Part I Corrugatedfibreboard-boxes (Jsrstrcuirion ). 10

