IS:4395

-1987

( Amalgamating IS : 4724 ) ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) ( Reatfirmed 1992 )

Indian Standard
RELATING GLOSSARY OF TERMS TO INKS AND ALLIED INDUSTRY

( First Revision )
First Reprint SEPTEMBER 1997

UDC

001.4

: 667.4/5

0 Copyright 1988

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gt- 7

ApriI

19SS

IS:4395-1987
( Amalgamating IS

: 4724 )

Indian Standurd
RELATING GLOSSARY OF TERMS TO JNKS AND ALLIED INDUSTRY (

First Revision )
Sectional Committee,
Representing Sulekha Works Limited, Calcutta

Inks and Allied Products Chairman
SHEI N. G. MAITRA Mem hers

CDC

13

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) Sass J. A. ASTAPUTRE SHRI K. P. MAJUMDAR ( Alfrrnafc ) Chemical Testing & Analytical Research LaboraSHRI C. N. BALAERISHNAN tory ( Department of Industries & Commerce, Government of Tamil Nadu ), Madras SH~I P. N. SUNDARA RAO ( Alternate ) SHRI N. S. BIRDIE Shri Ram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi SHIH C. P. SHARDA ( Al~.mole ) Associated Duplicator Company Private Limited, SHBI S. CUANNIAII Bangalore SHRI S. D. DANDEKAR Camlin Private Limited, Bombay SHRI R. M. DANDIWAI~ ( Alfernate ) Sam P. N. GANDHI Kores ( India ) Limited, Bombay DR T. R. BQAIYZBL~ANI ( Allernate ) Department of Industries, Government of klahaJOINT DIRECTOR OF INDUSTRIEY rashtra, Bombay DEPUTY DIRECTOR OR INDUSTRIES ( Alfernatc) Directorate General of Technical Development, SERI R. D. KAWATRA New Delhi SEW K. P. DOHARE ( Altcrnotc ) All India Federation of Master Printers, New SHRI M. R. KUMAR Delhi SEIRI V. N. CHHABRA ( Allernafc ) SHRI G. P. MADAX Survey of India, Dehra Dun SERI S. K. SEN GUPTA ( Alfernafc ) [ Continued on page 2 ) @ Co&vighf 1988 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS I 4395 - 1987
( Continued from page Members SHRI S. C. MALIK

I )
Represenring

Bharat Carbon & Ribbon Manufacturing Company Limited, New Delhi SHRI RAJNESH KWMAI~RAYPAN ( Altesnntc ) Snn~ C. P. MEHRA National Archives of India, New Delhi S~ttr RAJENDRA PRASAD ( Alternate ) SHILI A. M. MIWEANDANI Chelpark Company Ltd, Bangalore SERI VASANTH ( Altrrnats ) SERI H. MITI~A Controller of Stationery, Government of India, Calcutta Development Commissioner ( Small Scale Indur SHRS R. MUEHOPADHYAY tries ), New Delhi Carbon & Allied Products SHRI K. L. NARAYANSA Khoday Ribbon, Indusrries, Bangalore SHRI C. S. BHATTACHARJEE ( Altmate ) Sam P. K. PAIN National Test House, Calcutta DR J. RAJARAM Essen & Company, Bangalore SHRI R VISWANATHAN ( Alternate ) SHRI N. P. SARNA~E India Security Press, Nasik Road SRRI GANQA PRAKASH ( Alternate ) SHRI V. N. SEEI~AL Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi SHRI M. K. JAIYX ( Alfematc ) SHRI S. K. SRIVASTAVA Coates of India Limited, Calcutta DR C. S. CHADEA ( Altmmt8 ) Sanr S. VENKATARAW~N Indian Duplicator Company Limited, Calcutta SHR~ A. K. SENCUJPTA( Alternate ) SRRI SATISH C~ANDER, Director General, BIS ( Ex-o$cio Member ) Director ( Chem ) SHRI M. BAKS~I GUPTA Deputy Director ( Chem ), BIS

2

IS : 4395 - 1987

Indian Standard
RELATING GLOSSARY OF TERMS TO INKS AND ALLIED INDUSTRY

(First Revision/
0. FOREWORD
Indian by the by the

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Standards Institution on 16 February 1987, after the draft finalized Inks and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved Chemical Division Council.

0.2 The glossary of terms relating to inks have been covered by IS : 43951967* and IS : 4724-1968t. This revision has been brought up as an amalgamated revision of these standards. Opportunity has been taken to review the various terms and make them up-to-date with their usages, etc. Several newer terms have also been added in this revision.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers ink and allied industries. 2. TERMS Abrasive surfaces. the terms and definitions that are prevalent in

AND DEFINITIONS Quality The quality of substance to rub or grind to down

Abrasiveness - This is the capacity of a substance an exposed surface by wearing it away mechanically. Absorption surface. Process by which a liquid is sucked due to

disintegrate a porous

into the

Absorption Drying - The process of drying of the medium in the absorbant substrate.

absorption

*Glossary of terms relating to ink and allied industries. tGloaary of terms relating to printing inks and allied industries. 3

IS : 4395 - 1987 Acetyl Value Number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide required to neutralize the free acid present in one gram of the material under the prescribed condition. Acid Dyes - A group of dyes, salts of organic ing wool and natural silk. Acid Free Paper - Paper which does not paper having a PH value of not less than 6. acids, used chiefly for dyecontain any free acid or a required to

Acid Value -- Number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide neutralize free acidity in one gram of the substance.

Acidity of Paper or Board - A water extract of the paper or board with a pH below 5.0. Such paper and beard is prone to cause ink drying problems. Additive - A chemical compound the performance of an ink. added in small proportions to improve

Additive Process - The process of forming any colour by a mixture of red, green and blue colours. The colours add together to form a new colour; the colour obtained depending on the properties of each additive primary colour. Equal proportions give white light. Adhesion - The degree of attachment between material which may be another ink or a substrate losic and synthetic films, foil, metal, etc. Adsorption - Adherence of atoms, to the surface of another substance. Aeration Agitation an ink and underlying like paper, board, celluof a gas or liquid

ions or molecules air. an applied

of ink by blowing present in

After Tack ing period.

The tackiness

ink after normal

dry-

Ageing - The change on storage in physical tance, namely, ink, paper, board, media, etc. Agglomerates when the pigment
Aggregate

characteristics particles which

of a subsare formed face to to break

A cluster of undispersed has dried up.

Primary pigment particles, when firmly attached face with each other, become aggregates. Aggregates are difficult but can be broken up by suitable dispersion technique.

Alkali Resistance - The resistance of a pigment or a print to bleedinto a solution of alkali of a specified concentration and at room temperature.
4

IS : 4395 - 1987 Alkalinity of Glass Bottles - A measure of the alkali extracted from the glass powder expressed as millilitres of 0.01 N hydrochloric acid required to titrate the alkali extracted from 5 g of glass powder under specified conditions. Alkyd Resins - Polymers having a large molecular structure and are produced by reaction of polybasic acids with polyhydric alcohols/or chemically interacted with natural or synthetic resins, fatty acids, oils, reactive chemicals, monomers, etc. Alkylated Urea Formaldehyde Resin and Alkylated Melamine Formaldehyde Resins - They are widely used in lacquers where chemical inertness of the finished tilm is essential. Alkylated MF resins have slightly better chemical, heat and water resistance. Aluminium Pigment - Aluminium powders or pastes which have high hiding power, leafings/non-leafings alone or with colours to produce a silvery metallic colour effect. Aniline Inks - Solutions of a coal-tar dyestuff such as alcohols, esters, ketones and ethers. in an organic solvent,

Aniline Point or Aniline Number - The lowest temperature at which equal parts of aniline and the liquid under test are just completely miscible. It is an arbitrary figure used with petroleum products as a measure of degree of the aromatics present. Antifungal Agent Substance that prevents when present the growth of fungi. in small quantities, retard

Anti-Oxidants oxidation.

Substances,

Ash ContentThe amount of the incombustible residue left over after the complete combustion of any substance. It consists of non-volatile, inorganic constituents of the substance. Attritor - A pigment dispersion equipment, in which the dispersing medium is moved by means of agitation, operated by a central vertical spindle provided with perpendicular horizontal shafts in a vertical, stationary cyclindrical chamber provided with a water jacket. LOW viscosity inks are normally made. Backing Away - The tendency tain contact with the duct roller. Ball Mill balls, stones vehicle. of an ink not to flow freely nor to maincylindrical mill which uses steel or disperse the pigment in the

A horizontally revolving or other media to grind

5

Is I

4395

-

1987 Banbury mixers are twin blade Z-arm ink premixers. usually only or dissolved

Banbuxy Mixers

Base - In ink manufacture, one colouring matter, pigment in a vehicle.

a base is an ink containing or dye, properly dispersed

Bead Mill - They are based on principle ofattritor. The smaller size of grinding media like steel, glass or porcelain beads, etc, used, lead to very efficient pigment dispersion due to the greater number of contact points. Binder - The material in printed surface after drying. an ink film that holds the pigment to the

Bleaching - Removing the colour from coloured changing the dyestuff into colourless substances.

materials

by chemically

Bleeding - A condition which exists when the colour of a dye, stain or pigment passes through the top coat producing a stain. It occurs when the pigment is somewhat soluble in the vehicle of the top coat. Bleeding on Press - Light or faint tint of colour run appears on unprinted areas of paper after press has been in operation for some time. Dampening rollers and fountain solution eventually become strongly coloured with the ink being run. Blinding - In lithography, this problem occurs in the image area of the plate. The image area becomes overlaid with water, giving a reduction or `sharpening' of the image size. This fault is also referred to as plate `blinding'. Blocking - In flexographic subsequent la! ers of printed a `-block" or solid cylinder. or gravure printing, roll stick together. In blocking occurs when extreme cases forming

Bloom - A thin whitish film which sometimes forms on a glossy printed surface, thereby diminishing its lustre or veiling its depth of colour. Blown Oils These are produced by blowing large volumes of air They are fast drying with higher through the vegetable oil at IOO-140�C. viscosity and have improved wetting, dispersion and flow qualities. Blue Wool Scale - A gradation of standard patterns of woollen cloth especially dyed to match a master set of standards, in colour and fading It is behaviour, with certain acid dyestuffs and solubilized vat dyestuffs. coded 1 meant for assessment of light fastness. Its scale is numerically ( very low light fastness ) to 8 ( very high light fastness ). of haloing and feathering. Blurred Prints - The process due to various reasons as poorly dispersed pigments in the being used at incorrect consistency, etc. 6 This may be ink, the ink

IS:4395 - 1987
Blushing - The process of the prints dimming and loosening ance due to moisture trapped in the lilm of ink. Bodied Oil - Heat polymerized vegetable oils having These are also generally known as stand oils. Body The viscosity, consistency, length higher their brilliviscosity.

or flow of an ink or varnish. straw and tub-sized.

Bond PaperIt is a strong, thin paper, made of rags, asparto, wood or various mixtures of these constituents and are always They are used for personal and commercial stationery. Breaking Length see `Tensile strength'.

Bronze PowderBrilliant gold coloured powders and lining manufactured from copper/zinc alloy ( minimum 80 percent copper ); powders are used for dusting on wet prints and linings are mixed with low acidicmedia for use as `Gold' printing inks. Bronzing Solvent - A strong reflection of a narrow band of wavelengths of light from the pigment surface as a vivid glare. It is entirely a surface phenomena. Brook Field Viscometer - A rotational viscometer used for measuring the absolute viscosity of both Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluid ( see Newtonian fluid ). Buffer Solution - A solution, the hydrogen ion concentration of which, and hence the acidity or alkalinity is practically unchanged by dilution. It also resists a change of PH on the addition of an acid or alkali. Bulk Densitygrams per litre. Buttery Ink The weight of unit volume of material expressed in

A printing

ink which is short but not tacky.

Caking on Press - Also termed `piling'. Ink piles up on rollers and plates and does not distribute or transfer properly from printing plate to paper. The pigment in the ink, appears to remain behind on the plate in patches. The print locks uneven, but ink fills in halftone screens or small open spaces in letters. Calender - A machine consisting essentially of a certain number superposed rollers ( bowls ) of which only one is power driven. of

Calendering - A process carried out by means of a calender on the partially dried paper or board fabric, destined to improve its surface finish or smoothness, thus controlling of calipre. 7

IS: 4395 -1987
It is a phenomenaobserved in liquids due to unbaCapillary Actionlanced inter-molecular attraction at the liquid boundary, for example, rise or depression of liquids in narrow tubes. Capillary Viscometer - These are used for measuring viscosity oftNewtonian fluids. Since the stress involved in this viscometer is due to the difference in fluid level between the two arms of the U, the density of fluid is taken into consideration, and the result is expressed as kinematic viscosity in Stokes. Carbon Paper - Paper coated ( generally on one side but sometimes on both sides ) with a pressure transferable, highly coloured coating, which is a blend of oils and waxes. It is usec. for making copies at the same time as an original manuscript or typescript is made. For typing, a relatively hard and tough coating is required; for pencil carbons, a softer coating is preferable and for pen carbons, a still softer coating is necessary. Carbon Paper Inks manufacture carbon processes. - There are various types of special inks used to papers required by the copying or duplicating

Cartridge PaperA hard sized and strong paper generally free from free from fluffing loading and usually with a rough surface, substantially characteristics. Catch UpIt manifests itself when the non-image areas of the plate starts to print. It first appears on the leading edge of the plate and also when the back edges of solid areas become uneven. It is caused rhainly by improper ink water balance. Cavitation Dispersers - High speed mixers consisting of a vertical shaft at the bottom of which is a dispersion rotor of saw toothed design. Used for premixing of low and medium viscosity materials. Cellulosic Films - Transparent films based on cellulosic materials widely used for packaging. These films are coated with various polymers like nitrocellulose, polyvinylidene chloride, etc, to impart moisture and water resistance, heat sealability and gas barrier properties. ChalkingA phenomenon manifested in ink film by the presence of loose removable powder, evolved from the film itself at or just beneath the surface. Chalking may be detected by rubbing the film with a finger tip or other means. Cissing - A film defect in which a wet ink or varnish film recedes from small areas of the substrate surface leaving them apparently uncovered.

8

IS : 4395 - J98f CleaningAn operation intended to eliminate foreign matter unwanted in pulp, paper or board by physical means from the stock or raw material in the form of a suspension in water, that is, cleaning by gravity, centrifugal cleaning, cleaning by passing through orifices size, etc. CleanlinessDegree of freedom from the tendency of the sheet carbon or ribbon to transfer or bleed on to hands and paper in use and storage. Clogging Interruption in free flow of ink while writing.

Cloud Point - The temperature at which a homogenous liquid becomes cloudy or turbid, owing to separation in two phases when cooled under specified conditions. Coagulation - `The combination or aggregation of semi-solid particles such as fats or proteins to form a clot or mass. This can often be brought about by addition of appropriate electrolytes like addition of acid to milk'. Cockling - The local deformation of a sheet of paper shrinkage giving it a slightly crumpled appearance. due to unequal

Coe5cient of ViscosityIt is defined as the force in dynes required per square centimetre, to maintain a difference in velocity of 1 cm/s, between two parallel layers of the fluid which are 1 cm apart. r) where `1 = a = v = coefficient of viscosity, area in square centimetres, velocity and per second. change in centimetres

-flua

ColloidA substance present in a solution whose particles are of large size and present in a dispersion medium, with properties distant from those of a true solution. Colloid Mill - It has a truncated cone, which rotates inside a stator with a narrow clearance. They have high output and low maintenance cost. They are used for milling emulsions and thin pastes, but not of a viscosity above 100 p. Collotype InkIt is almost similar to lithographic ink, but instead is very stiff and fairly short. The ink must be based on a very clean working vehicle of excellent water resistance. Collot ype Procurs - The essential feature of this craft printing process is that it apparently gives continuous tone print of much finer detail than any half tone process. It is a very slow speed and short run process; 9

IS 1.4395 - 1987 but accurate reproductions, for example, of art subjects can be made where delicate tone gradation of colour work is important. Colour Bleed Resistance -A measure of the freedom from inter-mixing of the inks on multi-coloured ribbons or print. Colour Strengthof PigmentThe colour or tinting strength of a pigment is a measure of its ability to impart certain intensity colour to a system. Colour strength is usually measured by reduction with a standard white pigment in a suitable medium. Colour ValuecompotibilityIt is the strength of the colour. Mutually miscible; get along well together.

Complementary Colonrs - Pairs of colours ( light ) that, when combined, give the effect of white colour. CondensationThe change of vapour into liquid, which takes place when the pressure of the vapour becomes equal to the maximum vapour pressure of the liquid at that temperature. ConicaI Bend Test Apparatus - This apparatus gives information on the flexibility of a printed or coated film on metal substrate by measuring the elongation potential of coated metal panels. Consistency - The term indicates theviscosity, length or flow of an ink. Contact Angle- This term is usually used for solid-liquid interface. It is the angle included between the tangent plane to the surface of a liquid and the tangent plane to the surface of a solid at any point along their line of contact. Corrosion - Surface chemical action, especially on metals, by the action of moisture, air and chemicals. Cosolvency- This phenomenon of cosolvency occurs when a mixture of two or more solvent/non-solvents ( for a particular polymer ) mixed in certain proportions forms a blend which dissolves the polymer. Coverage of ink- Total area of solid substrate that can be printed with a fixed quantity of ink. Cracking of Oil- The method of decomposing mineral boiling point by heating them into more volatile oils. crawling - The retraction the supporting surface. oils of high

of wet paint or varnish from large areas of

10

IS:

4395 - 1987

Crazing - The extension of fine cracks on, within or beneath the surface of an adhesive layer, formation of fissures, voids in a film due to shrinkage or solvent action.
Creeping

-Flowing

of ink beyond the limits of the design.

Cross Direction - The dimension of a paper or board at right angles to the machine direction ( se# Machine Direction ). CRIV! - To change the physical properties of a material by chemical action, which may be condensation, polymerization or addition usually accompanied by the action of either heat or catalyst or both. CurlingThe deformation of a.sheet of paper or board, all over its surface which, therefore, tends to roll up into the form of a cylinder.
Curl Resistance - A measure of the tendency of sheet carbon or paper to be flat on exposure to varying conditions of temperature and humidity.

DpmL?ening - Also known as `Fountain Solution' used in lithographic printing process to keep non-image hydrophilic areas free from the ink and to maintain steady ink water balance. Debout - Application of a ink film on a substrate with the help of a finger for shade comparison.
Deep Etch Lithographic Plates - Plates usually made of aluminium based alloy which are developed using photographic positives with the image etched into the plate. Such plates last longer during press run up to say 250 000.

inks by oxidation,

Development

of Ink-

Deepening of impressions

of writing or marking

Dehydrated Castor Oil ( DC0 ) - Castor oil from which hydroxyl groups of fatty acids have been removed as water thereby introducing unsaturation in the hydrocarbon chain.

Diene Value - The estimation of two double bonds ( diene ) in unsaturated hydrocarbons. Die Stamping - An intaglio printing process using engraved plates and a mole die replica of the engraving to achieve an embossed image. Dilatent A liquid whose viscosity increases with shearing rate.

Dilitho - The newspaper printing process, directly printing from a printing plate with image and non-image area, the latter kept damped vGith water or fountain solution.

IS :4395 - 1987
Dilnent - A non-solvent or poor solvent, the visocsity of the vehicle. for a vehicle that also reduces

Dimerized Rosin - Rosin is dimerized by heat polymerization in presence of a catalyst to get dimerized rosin. It has increased compatibility and improved hydrocarbon tolerance. Mainly used in gravure inks, gloss lacquers and for the manufacture of high melting resins. Dispersing Agent - Chemicals ment in pigment vehicle system. that help dispersion or grinding of pig-

Dispersion - Two-phase system in which one phase, called the disperse phase, is permanently distributed as small particles through the second phase ca!led the continuous phase. Doctor's Blade - A scraper blade for regulating the amount being deposited on a surface. It is also called `Doctor's bar'. Doping corporation Changing in the pressroom of the properties of various modifying agents. of coating

of an ink by inof or

Dot Doubling - It manifests itself as a ghost, either in front behind the original half tone dot. This is caused by press defects. .

Dot GainDuring multicolour wet on wet printing, a half tone dot printed on the first unit when exposed to the printing pressure of the blankets of the subsequent units, it is then possible for the dot to spread from its original fiqure. This causes the final colour print to lack depth, punch and ' snap. Dot gain is also influenced by lithographic balance. Draw Down - A method of comparing the relative mass tone and under tone of two inks by drawing the inks placed side by side on a paper by drawing down with the help of a knife. DriersA catalyst which, when incorporated in small proportions, motes drying by converting a wet ink film to a dry ink film. pro-

The solid state of a film derived from a vehicle or ink after oxiDry-dation and polymerization or after the removal of a solvent. Also used to signify the condition of paper, pigment, solvent, etc, after the removal of water by evaporation. Drying Oils - An oil, usually of animal or vegetable origin, having the property of hardening by oxidation to a tough film, when exposed in the form of a thin layer to air. Drying TimeThe time which elapses between the printing ink and the attainment of a specified dry state. 12 application of a

IS:4395-19&7 and/or Duplicating Stencil - A paper of a special structure impregnated coated with a special suitable preparation for the re-production, by means of suitable equipment, of textual matters or patterns which have been impressed on it in such a manner as to permit the passage of an appropriate ink. The impressions are generally obtained by means of a typewriter or by hand with a special stylus or by a photo-chemical process. Durability impressions or ribbon. of Carbon Paper/Ribbon - A measure of the number of that can be obtained from the same spot on a carbon paper and can be

Dye Pigment - Dyes that by nature are insoluble in water used directly as pigments without any chemical transformation. Dyestaff - Coloured solvents/oils. organic substances which are soluble

in specific

Edge Runner - A machine which can mix and, at the same time, break-up the actual pigment particles and rub only the aggregates. It employs two steel discs which are moved round on a circular track and scrappers return the materials to the track. Edge Sealing - The method by which fraying of fibres at the edges can be prevented by application of a suitable coating. A special Electrophotograpbic Papers oxide resin for use in electrostatic printing. paper coated with zinc-

Electrolytic Tin Plate - The tinplate produced by the electrolysis of containing cold reduced steel acidified solution of stannous sulphate strip as cathode and strips of tin as anode. Embossing - The process of embossing ( to cover with raised work ) is a method of impressing a desired design on to a material by the use of a die. Emulsion - A suspension another immiscible liquid. of extremely fine droplets of one liquid in

Emulsification of Litho Inks - In lithographic printing ink, water comes into intimate contact and litho inks take up limited amount of water which remain in finely dispersed state. The ink should not tend to form an oil-in-water emulsion which will affect the ink performance resulting in inferior quality prints. Emulsifying Agent - A surface-active substance which helps to produce a stable emulsion. Emulsifying agents generally consist of lipophilic groups combined in the same molecule with hydrophilic groups and they orientate 13

IS : 4395 ; 1987

themselves at the interfaces between the dispersed and continuous phase and thereby helping to form a stable dispersion.
Emulsion Ink - A composition comprising pigments, modifying and an emulsion of two immiscible liquids.

agents,

Epoxide Ester

- The reaction product of epoxy resin and long-chain fatty acids, such as linseed, soya or dehydrated castor oil. Epoxy Resin -T A condensation product of bisphenol with epichlorohydrin which is produced in a wide range of molecular weight, melting points and viscosities. Equalizer Rod - A metal rod wound with a fine wire around its axis so that ink can be drawn down evenly and at a given thickness across a piece of paper. It is also called meyer rod or bar.

Eradicator Eraser

-

An ink removing compound.

- Any article used to remove ink impressions by mechanical means, such as pen knife or rubber. - Ease with which the image may be removed without imp airing the surface of the paper. Ester GumEvaporation

Erasibility

A resin produced by esterification of rosin with glycerol. into vapour, without necess-

- The conversion ofa liquid arily reaching the boiling point.

Extenders - Transparent colourless pigments, transparent colourless ink, vehicle or solvent that change very little the appearance of an ink but do lower the colour strength of same. Frequently used to lower cost or improve the body and printing qualities of an ink. Fading - The destruction of colouring matter in an ink film surface as a result of ageing, weathering or exposure to sunlight. Fanals - A group of pigments formed by the reaction of basic dyestuffs with complexes of phosphoric and tungstic acids, phosphoric and molybdic acids or all three acids. Fat Resistance - Inks resistant to fats are used for the printing of wrappers for butter, cooking fat, usages and similar materials.

Feathering - The irregular spread of ink around printed area or on either side of the line drawn with a writing ink.

14

IS : 4395 - 1987 Filling InA printing defect where small recesses in type and half-tone illustrations become filled up with semi-solid matter and printing is impossible without cleaning the printing machine. Fineness of Grind - The fineness of grinding or dispersion of pigment in a vehicle. This can be measured with special gauges like Hegman Gauge. Flaking - Breaking away of thecomplete coating including primer, undercoat and finish from small or large areas of the surface to which the system has been applied. Flash Point - The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid will give off sufficient vapours that will burn momentarily. This is an arbitrary figure depending on method of test. Flat Bed Machine - A letter press machine used for book work and many types of commercial printing and is normally sheet fed. The type form is carried on the "bed" of the machine which has a reciprocating motion, and pressure is provided by a cylinder. Flexography - It is a branch of rotary the printing is done from flexible relief which dry rapidly by evaporation. - The development Floccalation a pigment-vehicle dispersion. =ng types. Paper typographic printing in which plates with fluid, volatile inks aggregates in

of loosely coherent solid

or board used for making the mould

for casting stereo-

Flow Cap - Usually used to compare the consistencies of substances like paints, inks and lacquers. These cups have a conical bottom with wide orifices. Flaff - Loose particles removed from the surface and edges of dry sheets of paper by agitation or rubbing. Flaorescence - Capable of converting ultraviolet rays into visible light. invisible light rays such as

Flaorescent Pigment - These are most brilliant of modern colours and this brilliancy is due to their ability to absorb radiation and re-emit the energy at longer wavelengths. Flushing - A process where water from the pigment surface, present in the aqueous slurries of pigments, is directly displaced by the selective medium. The pigment particles are dispersed directly into the varnish and require no grinding. Flutes The corrugations in a corrugated 15 paper or board.

IS:4395
Fly -

- 1987
see `Misting'.

Flying - This term is applied to the effect produced when small droplets of inks are thrown out from nips of inking rollers of a printing machine and can spread via air in the whole press room colouring all objects. Folding EnduranceNumber of double folds, in opposite directions at the same place which the paper, under specified tension, can stand up to the point when it ruptures. Foots -

Raw linseed oil contains impurities, such as carbohydrates, waxes, phosphatides and suspended mucilage which are known as `foots'.
-

Foreign Matter Fountain

Any matter which is not an ingredient of the ink.

Solution - Plain water or treated water which are used in lithographic printing process for separating printing and non-printing areas of `a lithographic printing plate by getting absorbed in the nonprinting area is known as fountain solution. Fraying Fugitive -

The paper or cloth becoming ragged at the edges. Lasting a relatively short time.

Fogitive Ink - Ink that leaves no trace of itself on paper due to the action of light and moisture or chemical treatment. Fungicide Furnish - A substance capable of destroying harmful fungi, such as moulds and mildews. of Paper -Cellulosic

substances being used for the manufacture

of paper.
Fusion Gardner

The conversion of solids into liquid state by means of heat.

Viscometer - It is a rapid and fairly accurate method of measuring the viscosity and is known as Gardner `air bubble' test. The apparatus consists of a number of glass tubes of accurate bore and uniform length which are filled with stable oils of specified viscosities and sealed. A small air space is left at the top of each test tube, thereby forming an air bubble when the tube is inverted. The sample under viscosity test is. compared against the standard tubes of known viscosities and viscosity figure can be readily ascertained.

Gel Point of gel.

The stage at which a liquid begins to exhibits the properties

Gelling Agent - Chemical compounds which, when incorporated into the ink system, increases the consistency of the ink considerably. Excessive use of these compounds can lead to unusable product. 16

IS : 4395 - 1987 Gel Time - The time required gel under specified conditions. to convert a liquid composition into a

Ghost Image - The faint repetition of the designs areas. This can also be with white prints and cameo form a ghost image with a larger area. Ghosting The formation of cloudiness in the printed

on the printed lettering, which areas.

Gilsonite - A natural asphalt and found as mineral gilsonite with high Gilsonite is melting point and hardness. It is soluble in hydrocarbons. used as a vehicle for black inks mainly for cheap inks. and Ghssine Paper - Paper obtained from a highly hydrated-pulp It is transluscent and may be cosubsequently highly super-calendered. loured or rendered opaque in the stock. It is very smooth and shiny on both sides and subsequently grease-proof. Glazed Paper Paper which has undergone the process of glazing.

Glazing - The operation of imparting a lustre to the surface of paper by means of any appropriate drying or mechanical process. Gloss - The degree to which a printed surface reflecting light in a mirror like manner ( specular to which this property is developed depends on type of substrate on which the ink is printed, and to full gloss. possesses the property of reflection ). The extent the ink composition and it ranges from dead flat

Grain of Offset PlateA mechanical process intended to increase the area of metal exposed also greatly increase the rate of chemical reaction at the surface. The graining of metal greatly helps the plate to retain a film of water during offest printing. Gravure Process - A process of printing from engraved surfaces. The important branches of gravure printing are the copper and steel processes, the steel die stamping process and photogravure and rotary photogravure processes. Grease Proof - Applied to synthetic films, paper and ink films that are resistant to the action of fats and greases. Greasing-Undesirable lithographic plate. adhesion of ink to the non-printing areas of a

Greyness - The purity of a colour is judged by -its freedom from grey. Colour becomes grey when they reflect less light of predominant colour than the paper that the colour is printed on.

IS t 4395 - 1987 Grey Scale - An internationally accepted standard scale which is used in assessing the change in colour and staining. Grinding Gauge - An apparatus for measuring the fineness of pigment dispersion in the ink vehicle. Different types of gauges are available, for example, Hegman, Ault and Wiborg, Hipiri, etc, for testing the fineness and the rea.dings can be converted to the micron scale. These gauges essentially consist of a block of hardened steel into which a shallow groove is drawn varying in depth from zero at one end to either ,001 inch or *002 inch at the other. A sample of ink is placed at the `deep' end, and drawn towards the shallow end by a steel scrapper. Presence of any bittiness or scratches in the ink film is observed and the distance at which they occur is noted. Guznming - An operation consisting in applying a layer of adhesive to the whole or a part of one side of paper or board with a view to its subsequent use after moistening. Halftone Process8 - For successful reproduction of photographs or artwork, the appearance of graded tones can be obtained only by dividing the printed image into small elements of varying size In halftone process, a very light tone is represented by very small pin point dots, and a very dark tone by a almost solid area. Intermediate tones are represented by dots of different size between these two limits. Halo Effect - Piling up of link at the edges of printed letters and dots. Also coloured or sometimes uncoloured areas adjacent to them caused by spread of coloured or uncoloured vehicles. Hangisag Back in the Duct - The ink which does not flow from the ink duct to the roller properly under normal conditions without agitation is known as hanging back in the duct. HectographIt is a type of reproducing media, wherein the transferred impressions obtain its colour through chemical media. Heat set Ink - A special type of quick drying ink system where the mineral oil evaporate from the print by the application of heat and the resin/pigment mixture immediately sets by passing over chilled rollers. The heat is applied either by gas burners or by passing the printed paper over steam-heated drums. Hegman's Gauge SeeFineness of Grind.

Hold Oat of Inks - The quality of the ink to remain on the top of the paper stock without being absorbed to a considerable extent by the paper pores and thereby exhibiting a high degree of gloss on the dried ink film. 18

X$:4395-1981 Hot Carbonizing InksThis special type of wax based carbon copying ink is applied to paper by letterpress printing machine where ink reservoir and part of the machine is heated to melt the wax. The print of this ink will transfer under pressure to the paper below like carbon paper.

Hue - A visual property determined by the dominant . reflected or transmitted.
Hydrocarbon

light wavelengths

Resin - Polymerization product of olefins at elevated temperatures using catalysts. The monomers are prepared by cracking petroleum fractions. These are chemically inert having acid and saponification values less than 3. Hydrocarbon S&en ts - Long chain non-polar, aliphatic and aromatic organic compounds of carbon and hydrogen used as solvent. They include, toluol, xylene, white spirit and mineral oils. -

Hydrophilic Hydrophobic Hydroxyl

Having a strong affinity for binding or absorbing water. Antagonistic to water; incapable of dissolving in water.

Value -The number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide required to neutralize the acetic acid which can combine with 1 g of the oil on acetylation. Hygroscopic

atmosphere.
Ignition Indelible

-

The

process of absorbing or attracting water from the

PointInk -

The minimum temperature required to initiate ignition. Ink, the impressions of which are resistant to chemical

treatment.

Indian Ink - Black ink containing a suspension of carbon. This is also known as Chinese Ink'.
Induction Period - The initial period of drying an oil during which no perceptible physical changes take place in the oil. Infrared Heating - An accelerated drying system where the printed sheets are subjected to radiated heat rays of different wavelengths which increases the setting action of the ink, while final drying is completed much more rapidly in the stack. Inkometer - An instrument for measuring the tack values of different ink systems. The instrument is provided with a range of speeds and temperature control system. The value of the tack is mentioned by inkometer units.

19

IS : 4395 - 1987 International Blue Wool Scale - The scale uses assessment of light fastness. It is numeiically coded 1 (very low light fastness ) to 8 ( very high light fastness ). Intaglio Process - In this process, the ink is held in etched or engraved lines or cells in a metal plate so that it is below the surface from which it is applied. It is based on the principle that if lines are etched or engraved on a metal plate and a sheet of paper is forced under pressure into the lines of the engraving, prints can be obtained. It is of three types: a) Copper plate and steel plate engraving, and rotogravure, and b) Photogravure c) Die-stamping

Iodine Value - The number of grams of iodine absorbed per 100 grams of oil or resin, which is the percent iodine absorbed. The iodine value gives an indication of the degree of unsaturation of the constituent fatty glyceride or the resin. Jobbing Inks - These inks are generally used for printing small order jobs, either by letterpress or offset printing process, for example, hand bills, letterheads, programmes, advertising leaflets, etc. Keying of Ink or to the previously The property of an ink to adhere printed ink film. to the substrate

Kauributanol Value It is a method for *determining the aromatic content of hydrocarbon solvents. The method consists in adding the solvent slowly, from a burette, to a standard solutions of Kauri resin in n-butanol until the mixture just turns cloudy. Ketone Resins - These are the condensation products of cyclic ketones and formaldehyde in the presence of alkali catalysts. Ketonic resins have very low iodine, acid and saponification values and good solubility in most solvents used in printing inks except aliphatic hydrocarbons. They are used in flexographic and gravure inks where good gloss and chemical resistance are required. Lake - The pigment that results when a soluble dye is converted into a pigment in the presence of an inorganic white base such as aluminia hydrate or white gloss. LaminationThe process of combining dissimilar materials such as paper, foil and `films into more functional and high valued product to impart properties meeting end use requirements. The various lamination processes are: adhesive lamination, thermal lamination, hot-melt lamination, extrusion lamination and coating, and co-extrusion.

20

IS : 4395 - 1987 Laray Viscometer - The instrument is used to determine the viscosity of letterpress and offset inks in poise. In Laray viscometer a round metal bar is allowed to fall through an aperature filled with ink sample under its own and additional weights. The time of fall is used to draw a rheological diagram from values for viscosity and yield value are obtained. Length of Ink - It is the relative ability of the ink to flow. This property is governed by the formulation of the ink and its measurement is empirical. Letterpress ProcessThe method of printing from a raised surface Several types of letterpress printing or `ype line and halftone blocks. machines are available, namely, platen, flat-bed cylinder and rotary. Light Stability to atmosphere. Resistance to change in colour of the image exposure

Light'Fastness of Inks - The behaviour of the dried ink film when exposed to light and the degree of resistance given by the film to the attack of UV rays is known as light fastness of ink. Light fastness property depends on the nature of the pigment used and also on the atmospheric conditions. Inks for printing jobs which are exposed in outdoor conditions should have good light fastness property. Lintiag - The deposition of paper fluff, dust and coating blankets during printing is known as linting. on offset press in which an ink or

Lithography - Printing from a planographic or flat surface image and non-image areas are chemically different. Livening -A progressive thickening in the consistency varnish to a stage where it is unsuitable for application. of

Machine Direction - The dimension of a paper or board, corresponding to the direction of the flow of the stuff on the paper machine. Magnetic nature. Inks Inks that contain pigments which are magnetic in

Maleic Resins A wide range of point, acid value graphic, gravure

- The reaction product of maleic anhydride and rosin. resins of this type are available which vary in melting and solubility properties. They are mainly used in flexoand letterpress inks. the

Melamine Formaldehyde Resin - A generic term used to denote condensation resins made by the reaction of amines with aldehydes. 21

IS : 4395 - ml7
Manifolding - A measure of the intensity and sharpness of the image as a function of the number of carbon copier produced in one typing or writing. Mass Tone-

The colour, by reflected light, of a bulk of the ink. The change in the ink characteristics after certain

Maturing of Ink period of storage.
Melting

Point - The constant temperature at which the solid and liquid phase of a substance are in equilibrium at a given pressure. It is usually quoted at standard atmospheric conditions. MicronOne millionth of a metre; approximately one twenty five-thousandth ( O*OOO 001) of an inch.

Micronised Mileage -

-

Reduction of solids particles to the smallest size.

See Coverage.

Misting - Tiny ink droplets travelling away from the rotating press rollers and depositing themselves on areas adjacent to or on other parts of the press. Moisture Set Inks - The inks based on the principle of precipitations drying, that is, resin is thrown out of solution and forms a film with pigment in presence of moisture. This may come from one or more of these sources, the atmosphere, an applied steam or from the moisture present in most papers and boards. Moon Scotch

endurance to friction.

Value -

The property of a pigment that provides the

Mottling - Irregular and unwanted variation in colour and gloss caused mainly by uneven absorbency of the substrate.

News Inks ( Rotary LetterPress ) - Inks used for printing daily newspapers. News inks are relatively low viscosity and are generally totally
based on mineral oils. These are, therefore, nature and depends on penetration for drying. Newtonian Fluid to the applied force. Nig,rometer completely non-drying i'n

A fluid in which shearing rate is directly proportional

Index Value This serves as a value for the colour density of carbon black. Low values indicate high density and vice-versa.

22

IS: offset

4395-1987

LithographyA planographic printing process in which the image on the minting is transferred to an intermediate surface, a bla&et in offset printikg, before being printed on substrate. Offsetting of Inks See ` Set-Off `.

Oil Absorbtion - The number of millilitres or grams of oil used to bind together 100 g of pigment under specified conditions of test. The figure is not absolute, but depends on method of determination. Oil Halation The process of spreading of oil beyond its proper

dary.

boun-

Oleoresinous Varnishes - The reaction products of drying oils and resins. They are usually prepared at elevated temperatures and used for making letter press rnd offset inks.
opacity applying a black strip. the ink film The hiding power of the pigment and is generally assessed by film of ink of standard thickness on a sheet of paper with a The higher the opacity of the pigment the black strip under will be less visible, on

Overprint VarnishA transparent varnish applied as an overcoat a printed substrate to impart gloss, scuff and rub resistance.

Parchment Paper - Paper that has acquired by the action of sulphuric acid, a continuous texture, The texture gives it both high degree of resistance to penetration by grease and renders it resistant to disintegration by water even at boiling point. Pearling - A common trouble in gravure with crepe pattern. when there is distinct print

Pebble Mills - The design is same as ball mills but in pebble mills the grinding medium is pebbles or porcelain balls and the mill has a lining of porcelain. Penetration - The visible effect seen on the reverse side of the sheet due to diffusion of ink or its components into or through the paper. Penetration Drying - This is the drying of an ink film by absorption due to the capillary action of the narrow spaces between fibres of the paper. Permanent Ink - Ink which show no appreciable fading of impressions when exposed to day light, ultra-violet rays and when immersed in water and alcohol. Peroxide ValueThe number of millilitres of WOO2 normal sodium thiosulphate required to titrate the iodine liberated by 1 g of the oil.

23

Is : 4395 - 1987 #H -The
common logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion In water, $H is activity in grams per litre of an extract, usually in water. absolute neutral, less than 7 is acidic and more than 7 is alkaline. A phase is a separate part of a heterogenous body or system.

Phase -

The reaction products of phenols or substituted phenols and formaldehyde solution in presence of a catalyst. These resins are available in oil soluble and oil reactive forms and are used for making varnishes.

Phenolic Resin

-

Phosphorescent Inks - These are based on inorganic phosphorescent pigments and the ink film has a characteristic `glow' when light falls on the surface. Picking or board. Detachment of coating, film or fibres from the surface of paper insoluble in the media that

Pigment imparts

Finally ground colour to an ink.

solid material,

Piling --~ Defects in printing due to lack of proper flow, or poorly dispersed pigment particles in the ink. The ink does not distribute properly and tends to pile up. Pin Holes and drying. The formation of minute holes in ink film during ink when the marked at room temperature. cloth printing after 24 due to

Pinking PipilNgirregular properties.

Bleeding of marking hours is stacked between materials

The corrugated effect produced in paper inadvertently tension during reeling or the effect of humidity. A material added to increase the flexibility which

Plastidser -

or plastic flow

Plastic Viscosity -

A property of materials shear stress above a minimal value is applied,

flow only when a

Ply ( of Paper or Board ) ous composition which together

One of the separate layers of homogenemake up the multi-layer aggregate.

Poise -

A unit of dynamic viscosity in C.G.S. units. It is defined as the tangential force per unit area ( dynes per square centimetre) required to maintain unit difference in velocity between two parallel planes separated by one centimetre of fluid. One Centipoise = 10-s Newton second unit of viscosity ) 24 per square metre ( the SI

IS:4395-

1987

Polishing of Plates - It is a defect associated with offset lithographic printing when edges of images on plate show signs of wear and printing become dull and lacks depth. Polyamide Resin - The polycondensation reaction products acids with diamines, used in flexographic and gravure inks. of dibasic

Polyesters - The polvmers formed by the condensation of ethylene glycol and terephthali'c acid. Polyester films are extensively used in packaging industry because they are tough, has excellent impact resistance, very low moisture absorption and dimensionally stable under extremes of temperature and humidity. Polyester resins are needed for metal decoration and other printing inks applications. waxes prepared by polymerizing Polyethylene Waxes - Synthetic ethylene at controlled conditions. Polythene waxes are white, odourless, chemically very inert with variable hardness and softening point. Poster Paper - A variety suitable for printing posters, of paper which labels, etc. has been machine gla,zed,

Powdering - The defect, when an ink film, after completion of standard drying time, can be rubbed off by finger-pressure in the form of a powder. Preservative formaldehyde - Substances used to prevent and carbolic acid. fungus growth, for example,

Primary Colonrs - The colours chosen for the substractive colour mixing principle of printing inks are complimentaries of the additive colours, blue, red and green. The primary colours are: a bright primrose yellow, a greenish blue ( cyan ) and a blue shade red ( Magenta ). Printability - A term used in ink testing that yields smooth dense solid areas and at the same time sharp and clean screen areas using a high grade printing paper. Printed Circuit Boards - These boards are made by laminating a thin copper foil to a hard non-conducting base line bakelite. Circuits are then drawn on the copper foil with an acid resist ink by silkscreen printing process These boards are extensively used in electronic industry. Printing Strength - A relative value indicating how much ink required to give an equal depth of tint to a definite amount of white ink as compared with the same amount of a standard ink of the same consistency. 25

IS : 4395 - 1987
Process Inks - The principle of process ink printing use of three primary colours and a black to reproduce colours. Pseudo apparent Rancid Plastic System -The material fluidity and no yield value. which depends on the a wide range of a variable

is having

The process of an oil being acidic on standing.

Recoaperation - This term is used for typewriter ribbon which describes the flow back property of the ink in the portion of the ribbon from where the ink has been used up. Reducer - An additive compound ink to improve its workability. Reference Ink comparison. Standard inks used for reducing as laid down the consistency of for

in the specifications

Relief Printing - The ink transfer process from the raised surface to the substance. Letterpress and flexographic printing come under this process. Reticulation - The crepe-like on collotype plates. Rheology The branch appearance of the surface of the colloid

of science which

covers the flow properties.

Roller Coating - They are free flowing lower viscosity compositions suitable for roller coating application to sheet materials, and gives tack free hard finish after stoving at recommended temperature. Rub Test - Rub test is a method of assessing the abrasion resistance property of the ink film. PATRA rub-tester is a motor driven machine which is widely used in printing industry to check the rub resistance or abrasion resistance property of the ink film. Sand Mill - A dispersion mill based on the principle of Attritor using smaller size grinding media viz. sand, beads or shots, where the increased number of contact points leads to faster dispersion. Screen Process Printing - It is a process of forcing a short, soft and less tacky ink, through the open meshes of a screen or fabric on which the design desired to be reproduce is left open, while the parts not to be printed are blocked. Silk, nylon and stainless steel screens are used for printing jobs. Scotch Tape Test - This test is done for adhesion. Cellophane adhesive tape is fixed on to the print. The paper and the tape are firmly held with one hand and the tape is pulled back slowly for half the length and then 26

fS:4395-1987 snatched rapidly. The print is examined for any failure adhesion and the lack of the tape for ink transfer. scouring Washing of cloth to remove greasy matter. manifests itself, due to lack of ink

Scumming - In lithographic offset printing scumming when the non-image areas of the plate begin to print.

Security Printing - The printing of paper cnrency, cheques and other security documents either by using special printing methods or specially formulated inks to resist forgery is known as security, printing. Sediment - All undissolved matter that may be found at the bottom or on the walls of the container as well as suspended in the body or on the surface of the fluid ink. Sedimentation suspension'. Serigraphy `The settling printing down by gravity of the solid particles in

Screen

is also known by this name. sheet of the

Set Off - Appearance of impressions on the back of the printing when stacked after printing being picked up from the printed sheet. Setting - The partial vehicle by the paper. drying of an ink film by slight absorption

Shade - Described as a gradation of colour resulting from the addition of a small amount of black or a complimentary colour. In ink manufacture, used incorrectly as a synonym for hue. Sharpness Similarity of the geometry of the image of the type face. condition when conditions.

Shelf-Life - The time that an ink will keep in good stored in original sealed containers, under normal storage Show Through - Due to lack of paper opacity, paper sufficiently making it transparent and the reverse side of the paper as a shadow image. Sieve Residue This is the percentage

the oil soaks into the printing is seen on the in a pigment. fine wrinkle

of grit present

Silking - This term is applied to the appearance in the surface of the varnish film. Sizing of Paper - The sizing ) or to the surface to increase its resistance writing inks, and to the

of a.very

addition of materi,als either to the stock ( engine of the paper or board ( surface sizing ) in order to the penetratiou of aqueous liquids, particularly resistance of surface spreading of such liquids. 27

IS : 4395 - 1987
Skinning
container. Slip Resistance between multiple - Resistance of sheet sheets of copy paper. carbon to slippage when placed

-

The formation

of surface film due to oxidation

of inks in the

Slur - Smudging of the half tones occurs at the edge, usually furthest from the grippers. The dots enlarge and highlights are cloudy. It occurs due to slight movement between paper and forme. Slurry A thin suspension of a solid in a liquid. by handling of not fully dried writing or

Smudge - The disfigurement print impression.

Solvent Release - Refers to the ability of a binder to influence the rate of evaporation of a solvent when the ratio of the binder to solvent is large. Solvents - The organic liquid, with fixed boiling range and specific gravity, which are used to make solution of resins, oils and dyestuffs. Different types of solvents are available depending on their chemical composition and are extensively used in printing ink formulations. Specific Gravity - The ratio of the weight ink to the weight of an equal volume of water. Spreadieg See Feathering. of a given volume of an

Spirit Varnishing - Resin solution in spirit, when applied over a print to give a glossier top surface, the process is known as spirit varnishing. Spirit varnish is applied over the print by roller coating. Squash - In letterpress printing, a deposition of ink film on the edge of print is observed because here the printing form is pressed against the paper at a pressure. This deposition of the ink film at the edge is characteristic to L/P printing only and is known as ` Squash ' marks. Stability Resistance to deterioration of quality during storage.

Streaking - A printing ink problem, which can be due to cylinder, coarse particles in the ink, paper coating dust and nicks in the doctor blade. Strike Through through the sheet. The penetration of the vehicle of the printing ink

28

1s : 4395 - 191)7 Stripping - When steel rollers refuse to accept ink resulting in an uneven ink distribution and appearance of bare surfaces on steel rollers, the defect is known as rollers stripping. Substance of Paper - Weight per square metres under standard `Basic Weight'. of a given specimen of paper in gram atmospheric conditions. It is also called

Subtractive Process -The process of producing colours by mixing three different dyes or pigments together. The final colour is produced by the absorbtion of different wave-lengths of light. Surface Active Agent Sarfactants See Wetting See Wetting Agent. of very small solid partiAgent.

Suspension cles distributed

A two-phase system consisting in a liquid dispersion medium.

Sympathetic Ink - A writing fluid which yields impressions invisible until heated, treated with some suitable reagents to certain rays. Tack Stickiness; resistance of an ink film to being split. strength of a fabric Tendering Effect - Loss in breaking action of marking ink.

that remain or exposed

by chemical

Tensile Strength -- The limiting resistance of a test piece of paper or board submitted to a breaking force applied to each of its ends under the standard conditions of test. The tensile strength is generally expressed as breaking strength. Texture of Pigments - It indicates the relative hardness of pigment particles and also the relative ease with which may be dispersed in the vehicle. and softness the pigment

Thermographic Printing - The method of producing a raised effect on the printed surface by dusting a freshly printed ink surface with a fusible resin and heating, so that the resin fuses and adheres to the ink. This method gives a raised impression and is mainly used for letterheads and cards. Tint Colours that have the same hue but different saturation. printer to

colourless inks used by the Tinting Bases - Transparent reduce the strength of the inks or to make transparent shades. Tinting Medium - An almost transparent substance of printing ink but of negligible colour value.

of the consistency

29

IS:4395-

1987

Tintorial Strength - The degress to which a colour pigment or ink imparts colour to a white pigment or ink under defined conditions of test. Tinting in Lithography A printing defect associated with the lithographic printing process and is characterized by the presence of a faint background of colour in the printed sheet and this is particularly noticeable in the non-printed regions. This may happen when the pigment tends to wash out of the ink vehicle and forming a dispersion in water and which, in turn, forms `tinting'. Tissue Paper - A fine, thin strong paper, made from rag and hemp and cellulosic fibrous materials with a close and even formation, and of a substance usually below 25 gram per square metre. Toner particular A colouring pigment. agent which helps in boosting up the intensity of a

Top Tone Total Solids ink.

See Mass Tone. Residue left after evaporation by substances of the volatile which content of a

Toxicity - The effect produced human body.

are harmful

to the

Trapping - The ability of a printed ink film to accept ink and forming a desired uniform colour combination.

the overprinting

Trichromatic Process - Coloured prints which are produced by printing yellow, magenta and cyan inks and without the use of black ink is known as trichromatic or three colour process. Turbidity End Point tion when there is change The volume of solution delivered in the turbidity of a solution. during titrathe particular to the presence in presence of 276�C. Tung

Tung Oil - Tung oil or chinawood oil is extracted from seeds, pale straw coloured with a characteristic odour. Due of three conjugated double bonds, the oil dries very quickly air. The pure oil gels in about 12 minutes when heated at oil is used for making oleo-resinous varnishes.

Two Can Inks - The reactive ingredient of an ink is supplied in a separate container and mixed with the remaining quantity of the ink before printing. These inks are commonly known as two can or two pack inks. The mixed ink will have a limited pot life and should be used within the specified time. 30

IS : 4395 - 1987 Under Tone - This is the shade of an ink revealed when light is allowed to travel through the thin film of ink, reflected from the paper surface, and traversed the film again. Undertone of an ink gives a ,close idea about the actual shade that will be obtained during printing and it is more important than top tone ( mass tone ) at printing film thickness. Urea Formaldehyde Resin ( UF Resin ) - This resin is prepared by condensation of urea with formaldehyde in definite proportions and For use in printing inks alkylated UF maintaining an alkaline condition. UF resin finds resin is used which is easily soluble indifferent solvents. use in two pack acid catalyzed airdrying system and also in stoving or thermosetting inks in combination with other resins. U-Tube Viscometer - These viscometers are widely used to measure the viscosity of oils and varnishes. The viscosity figure obtained directly from this method of measurement is in ` Stokes ' units. A number of Ushape viscometers are available to cover a wide range of oils and varnishes with different viscosities. Varnish - A homogeneous clear fluid, consisting of solvent, drying oil, which forms major component of an ink vehicle. :Vat Dyes These dyes are characterized resin and or in water.

by their insolubility

Vehicle - A fluid composed of varnish, waxes, driers and other additives that carries the ink colourant ( pigment ), controls the flow of the ink or varnish on the press, and after drying, binds the pigment to the substrate. Wash Coating -- A coating of a dilute shellac applied on the aluminium foil to improve ink preserve the foil. Washable Ink - Ink, the impressions simple treatment of soap and water. Water Proof Ink of which solution in alcohol is adhesion as well as to are easily removed by

Ink, which is resistant of grinding or

to water. dispersing pigment to in liquid or to

Wet Grinding medium.

Process

Wetting Agent - A substance which has the ability stabilize dispersion under appropriate conditions.

disperse

Wet or Wet Printing - In multi-colour printing when superimposition of one colour over other is accomplished before the colours are dry. This process of printing of one colour over the wet film of the other colour is completed rapidly. 31

IS

I

4395.

1987 Inks which are clear, aqueous solutions, free of sediment, on the paper without striking through and does not cause to the pen nib which is to be used.

Writing Ink dry satisfactorily undue corro,ion

Xerography - A method of forming an image by electrostatic transfer method and xefography is like a photographic process in which the pigment fusion mixture acts as the developer. The process has been mechanized and is used in connection with computers and for preparing copies of printed books quickly. Yield Value This phenomena The minimum force required is an attribute of rheology. to start an ink flowing.

type mixer Z-Arm Mixers - A kneading are designed like `Z'. This mixer is generally materials.

where the mixing arms used to mix heavier-bodied

32

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax : 91 113234062, 91 11.3239399, 91 113239362 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Of&es) Central Laboratory: Plot No. 2019, Site IV, Sahibabad Regional Olfices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 `Eastern Northern Southern 323 76 17 337 66 62 603843 235 23 15 632 92 95 industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 Telephone 6770032

: 1114 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA706054
: SC0 335336. Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160022

fwestern MUMBAI

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya. E9 Behind Mar01 Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),
400093

Branch OlYices: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg. Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380061 5561348 639 49 55 55 46 21 40 38 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 19 96 4g 54 11 37 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 66 76 Naval Kishore Road, 23 89 23 26 23 05 8 21 17 440010 52 51 71 323635

SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada

- Tumkur Road,

Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001 641037 121001

Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI. Ganga Nagar. BHUBANESHWAR Kalaikathir Buikfings. 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Savitri Complex, C658C, Road, FARIDABAD 201001 116 G. T Road, GHAZIABAD

53/5 Ward No. 29. R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, L. N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Marg, C-Scheme, Nagar, KANPUR E-52, Chitaranjan JAIPUR 302001

GUWAHATI 781003

Station Road, HYDERABAD'506001 208005

1171418 8, Sarvodaya

Seth Bhawan. 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 P 0. Palayam, 895034 T C. No. 1411421. University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM lnstkution of Engineers

NIT Buikfing, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR

( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Approach, P 0. Princep Street,

`Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072 tSales

27 10 65 Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 309 65 26 222 39 71 Square,

Office is at Novelty Chambers,

$%les Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGALORE 566002

Prtnied at New lndta PrintingPress, Khuria. India

