IS : 1200 ( Part XII ) - 1976
( Reaffirmed ( Realkued 2002 1997 ) )

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND ClVIL ENGINEERING WORKS
PART XII PLASTERING AND POINTING

( Third Revision )
Fifth Reprint APRIL 1999

UDC

69'003'12

: 693'6+693'224

0 Copyright r976 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI NEW 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARC3

Gr

3

June 1976

IS t 1200(PartXII)-X976

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS
PART XII PLASTERING AND POINTING

( Third Revision )
Civil Works Measurement Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI b . R. VAISH Representing Central Public Works Department

BDC 44

Members The Commissioner for the Port of Calcutta, Calcutta SHRI N. P. AORARYYA Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI K. D. ARCOT SHBI T. V. SITARAM( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd, Calcutta SK~I B. G. BALJEKAR SHRI J. DURAI RAJ ( A&mute 1 `Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI 9. &. BHASIN Public Works Department, Government of Andhra CHIEF ENOINEER ( R&B ) Pradesh, Hyderabad SUPEBINTENDINO ENQINEER ( P&D ) ( Alfernate ) SHRI R. K. CHOUDRRY Bhakra Management Board, Nangal Township SaBI I. P. PURI ( Alternate ) SHRI w. J. DAGAMA Bombay Port Trust, Bombay SHRI V. B. DESAI Hindustan Construction Co Ltd. Bornbav DIRECTOR,4RI Irrigation Department, Government of UttarPradesh, Roorkee Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR( RATES & COSTS) DIEPUTY DIRECTOR ( RATES & Coma ) ( Alternate ) EXECUFWE ENQINEER ( PLANNINQ Ministry of Railways &DESIC?NS), NQRTHERN RAILWAY SHRI P. N. GADI Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI G. V. HINUORANI Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SERI G. K. C. IYENQAR Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SIIRI EM.L. JAIN The National Industrial Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. L. KATHURIA Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Roads Wing ) SHRI V. SIVAWRU ( Alternate ) ( Continuedon page 2 ) @ copvright 1976 ~OF INDIAN STANDARDS

BUREAU

This publication is protected under the Indiaa Copyrighr Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written ermission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright un z er the said Act. +

18r1299(P~rt

XII)-1976

( Continnedfrompage1 ) Members SRRIH.K.KHOSLA Refwscnting Irrigation Department, Government of Hat-yana, Chsndigarh National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHHIS.K.KO~E~TAR ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (SR) (Alternatc) SHRI V. D.LoNDHF. Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI N. C. DUGGAL ( Alternate ) Builders' Association of India, Bombay SHR1K.K. MADHOK Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay &RI DATTA S.MALIK PROF IM. K. GODBOLE ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Ministry of Defence SHRIR.S.MuKTHY SHRI V. G. PATWARDHAN (Alternate j M. N: Dastur & Co Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRIC.B.PATEL SHRI B. C. PAT~L ( Alternate ) Hindustan Housing Factory Ltd, New Delhi Smr K. G. SAIIVI SHRI G. B. SINCH ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of MahaSHRI P.\'. SATH3 rashtra, Bombay Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi Dn R. B. S~l;nn Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI S. SRINIV.~SAN SDPERIYTENDING SmwaYoR OF Central Public Works Department, New Deihi WORKS ( AXATION)
SURVEYOR OF ~~ORK(8 (I)

ATTACHED TO SSW ( AX-IATION) ( Alternatc) SUPERINTETDIXG SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi WORKS(~) SURVF.YOR OF WORKS (I) ATTACHED To SSW ( 1 ) ( Akernate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-o&o Mcmbtcr ) SRRI D. AJITHA SINHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

SHRI K.M. MATHUR Deputy Director ( Civ Engg), BIS

2

IS:1200 (Part XII)-1976

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS
PART XII PLASTERING AND POINTING

( Third Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part XII ) (Thir& Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 14 May 1976, after the draft finalized by the Civil Works Measureqent Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Measurement occupies a very important place in ~planning and execution of any civil engineering work from the time of first estimates to final completion and settlement of payments of the project. The methods followed for measurement are not uniTorm and considerable differences exist between practices followed by one construction agency and another and also between various Central and State Government departments. While it is recognized that each system of measurement has to be specifically related to the administrative and financial organizations within the department responsible for work, a unification of the various systems at technical level has been accepted as very desirable, specially as it permits a wider circle of operation for civil qgineering contractors and eliminates ambiguities and misunderstandings arising out of inadequate understanding of various systems followed. 0.3 Among the various civil engineering items, measurement of `building had been first to be taken up for standardization and this standard, having provisions relating to all building works, was first published is 1958 and revised in 1964. 0.4 In the course of usage of this standard ( IS : 1200-1964* ) by various construction agencies in the countiy, several clarifications and suggestion for modifications were received and as a result of study, the Sections, Committee decided that its scope, besides being applicable to buildinga shall be expanded so as to cover civil engineering ~works like industrial and river valley project works.
*iMethod of measurement of building works ( rcvisrd ).

IS t 1200 ( Part XII) - 1976 0.5 Since various trades are not related to one another, the Committee decided that each type of trade as given in IS: 1200-1964' be issued separately as a different part which will be helpful to specific users in various trade>. This part covering method of measurement of plastering and pointing appiicable to building as well as civil engineering works was, therefore, issued as a second revision in 1971. 0.6 In the course of use of this standard in the past five years based on the suggestions received, certain amendments were issued to this standard. This third revision also incorporates all those amendments. 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a measurement, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE of 1.1 This standard ( Part XII ) covers the method of measurement plastering and pointing for buildings and other civil engineering works. 2. GENERAL RULES

2.1 Clubbing of Items-IItems may be clubbed together provided detailed drawings or specifications or both are prepared for such items and method of measurement is agreed to be on the basis stated in the standard. 2.2 Booking of Dimensions-In booking of dimensions, the order shall be consistent and generally in the sequence of length, breadth or width and height or depth or thickness. 2.3 Description of Items--Description of each item shall, unless .otherwise stated, be held to include, wherever necessary, conveyance; delivery; handling; unloading; storing; necessary scaffolding; protective cover; cleaning stains from floors, walls, return of packings, etc; and other incidental changes. 2.4 Dimensions-All work shall decimal system, as given below: a) Dimensions b) Areas shall be worked be measured net as executed 0.01 m, and in the

shall be measured

to the nearest

out to the nearest 0'01 ma.

*Method of measurement of building works ( mired ). *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

4

IS: I200 (Parr XII ) - 1976 2.5 Bills of Qmntities - Items of work shall fully describe materials and workmanship and accurately represent the work to be executed. 2.6 Preparatory WorkPreparatory work, such as raking out joints, scarifying and cleaning, shall be included in the description of item unless otherwise specified. 3. PLASTERING 3.1 Plaster work shall be classified according to the material used and each classification shall be measured separately. The following particulars shall be given for each classification:

4 Mix of b) Number 4 Nature
4
Nature

mortar; of coats and thickness of surface treatment, of base; spherical work and eliptical work of each coat;

4 f>

Curved work, conical work, stating the radius; and Any special treatment of base.

shall include arrises, internal ' rounded angles, 3.1.1 Description external chamfers and/or rounded angles not exceeding 80 mm in girth.
NOTE For work exceeding 80 mm girth, scc 3.4.

3.1.2 In case of fibrous plaster, particulars of methods and of treatment of joints shall also be given. 3.1.3 Work in dubbing, if any. 3.2 Plastering repairs shall be so described stating

of application thickness separately. be measured of

on roofs, ceilings

and walls shall be measured or otherwise shall

3.3 Removing plaster by scraping separately in square metres.

3.4 Plastering in isolated widths or in widths not forming part of general plastering work ( as in bands, cornices, sunk, panels, etc) and in chamfers, rounded angles exceeding 80 mm in girth shall be measured a~ below: a) 30 cm or below in width/girth, b) iVidth./girth in running metres; and above 30 cm in square metres.

3.5 Plastering at a height greater than 10 m above ground/datum level shall be measured separately in stages of 5-m height except interior plastering in case of building which shall be measured separately for each storey. 5

W t 1269 ( Part XII ) - 4976 3.6 All plastering
described. 3.7 Cutting to edges shall De measured separately alternatively described and included in the item. 3.8 D&jnactions 3.8.1 For jambs, soffits, each in area, for ends of exceeding 65 ms each in not exceeding 3 ma rin each in the following manner: sills, etc; for openings not exceeding 0.5 m2 joists, beams, posts, girders, steps, etc, not area, and for openings exceeding 0'5 ma and area, deductions and additions shall be made in running metres or shall be measured in square metres unless otherwise

a) No deduction shall be made for ends of joists, beams, posts, etc, and openings not exceeding 0.5 ms each and no addition shall be made for reveals, jambs, soffits, sills, etc, of these openings nor for finish to plaster around ends of joists, beams, posts, etc. b) Deductions for openings exceeding 0.5 m2 but not~exceeding 3 ma each shall be made as follows and no addition shall be made for reveals: jambs, soffits, sills, etc, of these openings: 1) When both faces of wall are plastered with deduction shall be made for one face only. same plaster,

2) When two faces of wall are plastered with different types of plaster or if one face is plastered and the other pointed, deduction shall be made from the plaster or pointing on the side on which width of reveals is less than that on the other side but no deduction shall be made on the other side. Where widths of reveals on both faces of wall are equal, deduction of 50 percent of area of opening on each face shall be made from areas of plaster and/or pointing as the case may be. 3) -When only one face is plastered and the other face is not, full deduction shall be made from plaster if width of reveal on plastered side is less than that on unplastered side hut if widths of reveal on both sides are equal or width of reveal on plastered side is more, no deduction shall be made. 4) When width of door frame is equal to thickness of wall or is projecting beyond thickness of wall, full deduction for opening shall be made from each plastered face of the wall. 3.8.2 In case of openings of area above 3 m* each, deduction shall be made for opening on each face but jambs., soffirs and sills shall be measured.
calccdating areas of openings, the extra width of rebated NOTE -In any, shall be excluded. reveals, if

6

IS 81200 ( Part XXI ) - 19% 3.9 Ceilings
shall be measured between walls or Partitions and dimensions Width covered by cornices or coves, before plastering shall be taken. if any, shall be deducted. 3.10 Soffits of stairs shall be measured Flewing soffits shall be measured separately. 3.11 Ribs (see 3.4), 15 cm. as plastering on ceilings.

and mouldings on ceilings shall be measured as for cornices deduction being made from plastering if width/girth exceeds

3.12 Measurement of wall plastering shall be taken between walls or partitions (dimensions before plastering being taken) for length and Depth of cornices or from top of floor or skirting to ceiling for height. coves, if any, shall be deducted. 3.12.1 walls. Sides of pilasters, ~projections, etc, shall be added to plaster on

3.12.2 Mouldings, architraves, ceiling ribs, cornices and the like on pilasters and around openings, etc, shall be measured separately as in 3.4. 3.13 Length shall be measured in running metres at the centre Girth shall be measured along curve of moulding. .of girth. the the the

3.14 Moulded cornices and coves shall be measured in square metres, area being arrived at by multiplying length by girth. 3.15 Forming height. letters or figures in plaster shall be enumerated separately stating stating

3.16 Plastering on lathing shall be measured number of coats and thickness of each coat.

3.16.1 Lathing shall be fully described and measured net; wood and steel lathing shall be measured separately [see IS : 1200 ( Part XXI )-1973* and IS: 1200 (Part VIII )-1974t] respectively. 3.16.2 Laps, gauge and mesh of steel allowance being made for laps or cutting. lathing shall be stated, of timber no shall

3.16.3 Size of laths, their distance apart and the kind be stated in the case of wood lathing. 3.16.4 Connector lathing shall be measured separately.

*Method of Woodwork and tMethod of and iron work (

measurement of building and civil engiheering works: Part joinery ( second revision ). measurement of building and civil engineering works: Part VIII third revirion ).

XXI Steel

7

IS: 1200 ( Part XII) - 1976 3.17 Plastering
on honeycomb work shall be described and measured in square metres on the basis of overall superficial area without deducting openings. 4. POINTXNG 4.1 Proportions of materials shall be described. Varioustypes of pointing Pointing on different types of walls, shall be measured separately. floors, roofs, etc, shall be IrLeasured separately, Type and material of surface to be pointed shall be described. 4.2 Pointing in single detached in running metres. 4.3 Pointing be measured 4.4 Pointing 4.5 Removing square metres. 4.6 joints as for flashings shall be measured shades shall

brick and tile work with mortars separately. shall be measured pointing in square metres. or otherwise

of matching

by raking

shall

be measured

in

Deductions
mr no: and the

4.6.1 For jambs, soffits, sills, etc, for openings not exceeding 0.5 each in area; for ends of joists, beams, posts, girders, steps, etc, exceeding 0'5 ma each in area; and for openings exceeding 0.5 ma not exceeding 3 ma each, deductions and additions shall be made in following manner:

a) No deduction shall be made for ends of joists, beams, posts, etc. and openings not exceeding 0.5 ms each, and no addition shall be made for reveals, jambs, soffits, sills, etc, of these openings nor ~for finish around ends of joists, beams, posts, etc. b) Deductions for openings exceeding 0.5 m* but not exceeding 3 m2 each shall be made as follows and no addition shall be made for reveals, j,ambs, s&its, sills, etc, of these `openings: 1) When both faces of wall are pointed with the same pointing, deduction shall be made for one face only. type of

2) When two faces of wall are pointed with different types of pointing or if one face is. plastered and the other pointed, deduction shall be made in the plaster or pointing on the side on which the width of. reveals is less than that on the other side, but no deduction shall be made from plaster or pointing on the other side. Where widths of reveals on both faces of wall are equal, deduction of 50 percent of area of opening on each face shall be made from areas of plastering and/or pointing as the case may be. 8

IS:1200( Part XII)-

1976

3) When width of door frame is equal to thickness of'wall or is projecting beyond thickness of wall, full deduction for opening shall be made from each pointed face of the wall. 4) When only one face is pointed and the other face is not pointed, full deduction shall be made from pointing if width of reveal on the pointed side is less than that on unpointed side, but if widths of the reveals on both sides are equal or width of reveal on pointed side is more, no deduction shall be made nor any addition shall be made for reveals, jambs, soffits, sills, etc. In case of openings of area above 3 mz each, deduction shall for opening on each face but jambs, soffits and sills shall measured.

nade

4.6.2

be be

NOTE- In calculating shall be excluded. 4.7 Raking-out joints

are& of openings, extra width of rebated reveal, if any,

alternatively included in description of item.

shall

be

measured

in

square

metres

or

4.7.1 Raking-out single detached joint shall be measured separately fin-running metres. 4.8 Pointing on honey-comb work shall be described and measured in square metres on the basis of overall superficial area without deducting openings.

