**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 3937-1 (1974) : Recommendations for socketing of wire 
ropes^ Part 1: Socketing with zinc [MED 10: Wire Ropes and 
Wire Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC CTTTZI 



( First Reprint NOVEMBER 1981 ) 



IS: 3937 (Part I) -1874 




Indiati Standard (Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SOCKETING OF WIRE ROPES 
PART I SOCKETING WITH ZINC 

(First Revision) 



f. Scop0 — Covers the procedure fo be adopted for socketing of stranded wire ropes by moiten 
zinc so that the maximum safety is assured. 

2. Material — The material chosen for socketing shall be zinc conforming to 18:209-1966 
' Specification for zinc (second revision)'. The composition, melting point and pouring temperature 
of the metal are given in Table 1. 



TABLE 1 COMPOSITION, 


MELTING POINT AND POURING TEMPERATURE OF SOCKETING METAL 


6r 


Composition 

Min 
Zn 


Approximate Melting 
Point 


Pouring 
Temperature 


Zn 99*99 of 
18:209-1966 


99*99 percent 


420'»C 


450to480*'C 



3. ProcedurG 

3.1 Carefully seize the wire rope just below the point where It is to be cut with tinned or galvanized 
seizing wires of the sizes given in Table 2 and cut the wire rope. 



TABLE 2 DtMENSIONS OF SEIZING WIRE 


Nominal Diameter 
of Wire Rope 


Selclng Wire 
Diameter 


mm 


mm 


8 to 24 


1-9 


26 „ 36 


re 


38 ..56 


2-0 



3.2 Measure from the end of rope a distanoe indicated in Fig. 1 and 2. Provide a second seizing at 
this point. 

3.3 Thread the rope end through the socket. Remove the seizing at the cut end and unlay the wire 
rope. 

3.4 When the wire ropes have a fibre core, it shall be cut so as to remove the fibre core up to the 
throat of the socket when drawn into the position in socket. 

3.5 A metallic core, that is, an independent wire rope core or wire strand core shall not be cut but 
shall be unlaid to form a brush or bend inwards to form a hook with other strands. 

3.6 Splay each individual wire separately into a brush. The wire may also be folded in the form of 
hook facing inwards towards centre of the rope. The hook shall not be more than one-third the 
length of the basket. 

3.7 Clean the basket and brush to remove all grease and dirt; a degreasing agent or trichloroethy- 
lene may be used. Petrol or paraffin is not recommended. When using a degreasing agent, the 
fluid should be liberally used and worked well into the throat of the brush. Remove the fluid and 
lubricant emulsion by washing off with hot water. Shake off the surplus water and dry the brush, 
it is essential that It is held downwards In the vertical position to prevent degreasing fluid, water or 
solvent being trapped in the throat of the brush or percolating back into the main body of the rope 
forming a source of corrosion. Trichoroethylene or other organic solvent shall only be used fn 



Ade^ed 30 October 1974 



(g) February 1975, ISI 




Prioe ReS-M 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DEtHt 110002 



18:3937 (Part I)- 1974 

well ventilated conditions. When used indoors, purpose designed equipment shall be used. After 
cleaning, the wires should first be dried and protected from contamination and also kept clear and 
dry until the molten metal is poured. 

3.8 The cleaned brush end is drawn into position in the socket basket with the ends of the wires or 
hooked ends flush with the end of the basket. Seal the junction of the rope of the socket with 
asbestos yarn or asbestos fibre to prevent escape of molten zinc and clamp the socket complete 
with the rope in a vertical position with large end of the socket uppermost. Care should be taken 
that the axes of the wire rope and the socket are in line and the rope is sensibly vertical over a 
length of at least 24 times the wire rope diameter from the socket end. 



-Hd 



2 Tp 5- 




-c^6 



SEIZING 



BRUSH PATTERN 




2T0S 




2 T0 5- 



SEtZING 



HOOK PATTERN 




2 TO 5 



All dimensions In mittimetres. 
FIG. 1 ARRANGEMENT OF SEIZING, SEIZING OUTSIDE SOCKET 




2T05- 



SEIZING 





/■I «* ei — 5 to 10 mm 
BRUSH PATTERN 



^4 =* 1J ©t — 5 to 10 mm 
HOOK PATTERN 



All dimensions In millfmetres. 
FIG. 2 ARRANGEMENT OF SEIZING, SEIZING INSIDE SOCKET 



3.9 Gradually and evenly heat the socket around the outside circumference by a blow lamp or by 
any other suitable method so that the basket surface temperature is raised between 100 and 200X. 

3.10 The molten zinc at the proper pouring temperature specified in Table 1 is poured into the 
heated socket. Before pouring dross accumulated on the surface of bath should be skimmed off. 
Care should be taken that only the clean bright fluid metal at the right temperature free from dross 
is poured into the socket. The ladle should be of sufficient capacity to hold the molten zinc to fill the 
socket in one filling. Pouring should be continuous, uniform until the metal comoletely fills the 
socket. To ensure that the poured metal penetrates the interestice between the wires completelv 
tap the socket lightly, if necessary, while the molten zinc Is being poured. 

3.11 After pouring the metal, allow the socket to cool gradually and do not disturb the socket till 
the metal is fully set and the socket cools to air temperature. The rope adjoining the socket shall 
then be carefully cleaned and treated with preservative dressing. After cooling, it is recommended 
that the seizing at the throat be removed enough to show any broken wire that may appear adjacent 
to the throat during service. 



IS: 3937 (Part I)- 1974 

3.12 It Is not necessary to use any flux with zinc, however, as the molten zinc has a tendency to 
oxidize in contact with air, it is necessary to protect the surface of the molten zinc with bone 
charcoal to prevent oxidation. While molten zinc is being poured into soclcet, care has to be taken 
that none of the charcoal i&carried along with the molten zinc into the socket. 



EXPLANATOR Y NOTE 

This standard was originally issued in 1967. The present revision has been taken up to 
include the provision for socketing of wire ropes with molten zinc. Opportunity of this revision 
taken to bifurcate the standard into two parts; Part I of the standard lays down the requirements for 
socketing of wire ropes with zinc and Part II lays down the requirements for socketing of wire ropes 
with whife metal. 

Requirements pertaining to sockets have been excluded from the standard and it is proposed 
to include these requirements in a separate standard dealing with sockets for mining. 

Socketing by either zinc or white metal provides equal efficient and permanent terminal 
attachment for wire ropes. They are sim.pte, practical for all the wire rope diameters. On the other 
hand their execution requires that all care be adopted in the operation, as inspection of the socket 
once it is completed is almost frnpossible. 

In the preparation of the standard, assistance has been derived from the following: 

ISO/DIS 3189 Sockets for wire ropes — General requirements. International Organization for 
Stamdardization. 

Notice 353/C.6.P. 9-1963 Patte Coulee Poor Cable Rond En Acier (CasYend for round steel 
wire ropes). Association Des industrials DeBelgique. 

DIN 83315: 1963 Vergiessen von Verzinkten Drahtsellen fur den SchifTbau in Seilluisen mit 
Vergussmetallen; Rjchtllnien (Sweating of galvanized wire ropes for ships used in wire rope 
sockets with special metals, instructions ). Deutscher Normenausschuss. 



Kinted at^ori«v & Tomofrow'i Printer, h P..H-h*r« Ntw Delhi India 



