UR AT HITE IS 9569 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Sle SURI Wat — Recract 


( TE JRIH) 


Solid Waste Management — 
Glossary 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.030.10 


© BIS 2022 


UR AAG srl 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS HAF, 9 GERR Ve WHY AMI, Ag ZN - 110002 
Nami” ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 10 


Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the solid waste 
management Sectional committee, had been approved by the chemical division council. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1980 with a view to eliminating ambiguity and confusion arising 
from different interpretations of terms relating to solid wastes and establishing a generally recognized usage. 


During this first revision, the terminology have been updated as per the latest usage and practices. Considerable 
assistance has been taken from the literature of the global development research center, Japan in updating and 
including few of the terminology. Definitions given in solid waste rules 2016, Bio-medical waste rules, 2016, 
Construction and demolition Waste Management Rules , 2016, E-Waste (Management) rules, 2016, Hazardous 
and other wastes (Management and transboundary movement) Rules, 2016 and plastic Waste Management 
Rules 2016, also have been incorporated in the standard. 


There is no International Standard on this subject. 


The composition of technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — GLOSSARY 


(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides the list of terminology and 
their definitions commonly used in the field of 
solid waste management. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
A 


Abrasion — Wearing away of surface material by 
scouring action of moving solids, liquids or gases, 
for example abrasion of hammers in a hammer- 
mill. 


Actinomycetes/Actinobacteria — A large group 
of mold like micro-organisms (filamentous 
bacteria) having an odour similar to that of rich 
earth. These organisms play an important role in 
composting of solid wastes. 


Aeration — The process of exposing the material 
(solid or liquid) to air. 


Aerobic — Able to live and grow only in the 
presence of free oxygen. 


Afterburner — A device used to burn or oxidize 
the combustible constituents remaining in effluent 
gases. 


Aggregate — Crushed rock or gravel prepared for 
use in road surface, concrete or bituminous mixes. 


Air — The mixture of gases comprising the earth’s 
atmosphere. 


Air, Stoichiometric — See combustion air, 
Theoretical. 
Air, Underfire — Air that may be forced or 


induced in a controlled quantity and direction and 
is supplied below a grate and passes through a fuel 
bed. 


Air Deficiency — The shortage of air, as 
compared to theoretical combustion air in an air- 
fuel mixture. 


Air Heater — A heat exchanger in which the 
flowing air is heated by hot combustion gases. 


Air Jets — Streams of high velocity air issuing 
from a nozzle in an incinerator to provide 
turbulence, combustion air or a cooling effect. 


Air Pollutant — A substance which when present 
in adequate amount adversely affects the 
environment. 


Air Pollution — The presence in ambient 
atmosphere of substances, generally resulting from 
the anthropogenic activities, in sufficient 
concentration, present for a sufficient time and 
under circumstances to interfere significantly with 
comfort, health or welfare of persons or with full 
use or enjoyment of property. 


Air Quality — The composition of air with 
respect to quantities of pollutants therein. 


Air Quality Standards — The maximum 
acceptable pollutant concentration in the outside 
air that cannot be exceeded during a specified time 
in a specified area. 


Alkalinity — The quantitative capacity of aqueous 
media to react with hydrogen ions. 


Alley Collection — Removal of solid wastes from 
containers placed adjacent to an alley 


Ambient Air — The surrounding air. 


Anaerobic — Able to live and grow in the 
absence of free oxygen. 


Analysis, Proximate — Analysis of a solid fuel to 
determine its moisture, volatile matter, fixed 
carbon and ash content. Usually the fuel’s heat 
value is also determined. 


Analysis, Ultimate — The chemical analysis of a 
solid, liquid or gaseous fuel. In the case of solid 
fuel, the amount of carbon, hydrogen, sulphur, 
nitrogen, oxygen and ash are determined. 


Anatomical Waste — Human or animal body 
parts. 


Angle of Repose — The maximum acute angle 
that the inclined surface of a pile of loose material 
can make with horizontal. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Animal Anatomical Waste — Experimental 
animal carcasses, body parts, organs, tissues, 
including the waste generated from animals used 
in experiments or testing in veterinary hospitals or 
colleges or animal houses. 


Aquifer — An underground water bearing 
geological formation. 


Arch, Furnace — A structure that extends into a 
furnace to deflect 


Arch, Ignition — A refractory furnace arch or 
surface located over a fuel bed to radiate heat and 
accelerate ignition. 


Ash — The non-combustible solid by products of 
incineration or other burning process. 


Ash-Pit — A pit or hopper located below a 
furnace where residue accumulates before its 
removal. 


Ash-Sluice — A trench or channel through which 
ash is transported by water from ash-pit to 
collection or disposal point. 


Autoclaving — Sterilizing by a pressurized, high 
temperature steam process. 


Authorisation — The permission given by Central 
Pollution Control Board, State Pollution Control 
Board or Pollution Control Committee, as the case 
may be, to the operator of a facility or urban local 
authority, or any other agency responsible for 
processing and disposal of solid waste 


Auxiliary Fuel Firing Equipment — Equipment 
used in an incinerator to supply additional heat by 
burning an auxiliary fuel so that the resulting 
higher temperature: 


a) dries and ignites waste material, 

b) maintains ignition, and 

c) effects complete combustion of 
combustible solids, vapours and gases. 


B 
Bacillus — Rod shaped Bacteria 


Backfill — The material used to refill a ditch or 
other excavation or the process of doing so. 


Backhoe Tamping — A processing step in which 
a conventional backhoe is used to compact waste 
contained in an open-top transport vehicle. 


Bacteria — Primitive, prokaryotic micro- 
organisms, generally free of pigment, which 


reproduce by dividing in one, two or three planes. 
They occur as single cells, groups, chains, or 
filaments. They may be grown by special culturing 
out of their native habitats. 


Baffle — A structure used to change direction of 
fluid flow. 


Baffle Chamber — A chamber following the 
combustion chamber in which baffles change the 
direction of and/or reduce the velocity of 
combustion gases so as to promote settling of 
flyash or coarse particulate matter. 


Baffle, Water-cooled — A baffle composed 
mainly of closely spaced boiler tubes. 


Bagasse — Fibrous residue remaining after juice 
is extracted from sugarcane or sugar beets. 


Baler — A machine used to compress and bind 
solid waste or other material. 


Baling — Compacting of waste mainly refuse 
derived fuel, (RDF)/Solid recovered fuel, (SRF) 
for transportation that is to increase the density of 
the waste. 


Bangalore Process — An anaerobic composting 
process in which refuse and human excreta are put 
in alternate layers in a pit which is finally covered 
by a thick soil layer. 


NOTE — This method of composting was developed at 
Bangalore in India in 1939 (FAO, 1980). The method 
overcomes many of the disadvantages of the Indore 
method, such as the problem of heap protection from 
adverse weather, nutrient losses from high winds and 
strong sun, frequent turning requirements, and fly 
nuisance. However, the time required for the production 
of finished compost is much longer. The method is 
suitable for areas with scanty rainfall. 


Bearing Capacity — The maximum load that a 
given material can support before failing. 


Beccari Process — The process of treatment of 
solid waste in which anaerobic fermentation is 
followed by partial aerobic action in final stages. 


Biodegradable — A substance that can be broken 
down by microorganisms. 


Bio-degradable Waste — Any organic waste 
material that can be degraded by micro-organisms 
into simpler stable compounds. 


Bio-medical Waste — Any waste generated 
during the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of 
human beings or animals or in research activities 
pertaining hereto or in the production or testing of 
biological or in health camps including the 


categories mentioned in bio-medical Waste 
Management Rules. 


Bio-Medical Waste Treatment and Disposal 
Facility — Any facility wherein treatment, 
disposal of bio-medical waste or processes 
incidental to such treatment and disposal is carried 
out, and includes common bio-medical waste 
treatment facilities (CBWTF). 


Bio-methanation — The process which entails 
enzymatic decomposition of the organic matter by 
microbial action to produce methane rich biogas; 


Blast Gate — A sliding metal damper provided in 
a duct to regulate flow of forced air. 


Blower — A fan used to force air or gas under 
pressure. 


Boom — A heavy beam hinged at one end having 
a weight lifting device at the other. 


Booster Cycle — The period during which 
additional hydraulic pressure is exerted to push the 
last charge of solid waste into a transfer trailer or 
container attached to stationary compactor. 


Brand owner — A person or company who sells 
any commodity under a registered brand label. 


Breeching — The passage through which products 
of combustion pass to a stack or chimney. 


Breeching Bypass — An arrangement whereby 
breechings and dampers permit the intermittent use 
of two or more passages to direct or divert the flow 
of combustion products. 


Briquetter — A machine that compresses the 
material into small pellets. 


Bucket — An open container affixed to the 
movable arms of a wheeled or tracked vehicle to 
spread and/or excavate material. 


Buffer Zone — The zone of no development to be 
maintained around solid waste processing and 
disposal facility, exceeding 5 TPD of installed 
capacity. This will be maintained within total and 
area allotted for the solid waste processing and 
disposal facility. 


Bulk Waste Generator — Means and includes 
buildings occupied by the government departments 
or undertakings, local bodies, public sector 
undertakings or private companies, hospitals, 
nursing homes, schools, colleges, universities, 
other educational institutions, hostels, hotels, 
commercial establishments, markets, places of 


IS 9569 : 2022 


worship, stadia and sports complexes having an 
average waste generation rate exceeding 100kg per 
day. 


Bullclam — A tracked vehicle equipped with a 
blade having a hinged curved bowl on its front top. 


Bulldozer — A tracked vehicle equipped with an 
earth blade. 


Burner, Conical — A hollow cone shaped 
combustion chamber having an exhaust vent at its 
top and a charging door at the bottom. It is also 
called a teepee burner. 


Burner, Primary — A burner that dries and 
ignites material in the primary combustion 
chamber. 


Burner, Refuse — A device for central or onsite 
burning of refuse. It is very simple in construction 
and all the factors of combustion are not 
controlled. 


Burner, Residential — A device used to burn 
refuse generated in individual dwellings. 


Burner, Secondary — A burner installed in the 
secondary combustion chamber to maintain a 
specified minimum temperature and complete 
combustion of incompletely burnt gases. 


Burning Area — Horizontal projection of a grate, 
hearth or both. 


Burning Rate — The quantity of solid waste 
incinerated (expressed as calim”h) or the amount of 
heat released (expressed as Calim” h) during 
incineration. 


Bye-laws — Regulatory framework notified by 
local body, census town and notified area 
townships for facilitating the implementation of 
these rules effectively in their jurisdiction. 


C 


Calorific Value — Number of heat units obtained 
by complete combustion of unit mass of a fuel. 


Calorific Value (Lovver) — See Heat Value 
(Lovv) 


Calorific Value (Higher) — See Heat Value 
(High) 


Capacity (of Incinerator ) 


a) Design — Quantity (expressed as tonnes/24 h) 
that it will be able to process, if specified criteria 
are met. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


b) Firm — The processing capacity when its 


largest independent unit is not operating. 


c) Rated — Quantity (expressed as tonnes/24 h) 
that is possible to process, when specified criteria 
prevail. 


Capillary Water — Underground water that is 
held above ground water table by capillary action. 


Captive treatment, storage and disposal facility 
— A facility developed within the premises of an 
occupier for treatment, storage and disposal of 
wastes generated during manufacture, processing, 
treatment, package, storage, transportation, use, 
collection, destruction, conversion, offering for 
sale, transfer of wastes. 


Carbon Dioxide — A colourless, odourless, non 
poisonous gas produced during thermal 
degradation and microbial decomposition of solid 
wastes. 


Carbon Dioxide Recorder — An instrument that 
continuously monitors (in percent by volume) 
carbon dioxide in flue gases. 


Carbon Monoxide — A colourless poisonous gas 
having a faint metallic taste and odour. It is 
produced during thermal degradation and 
microbial decomposition of solid wastes when the 
oxygen supply is limited. 


Carbon-Nitrogen Ratio — The ratio of mass of 
carbon to that of nitrogen present in compost or 
material being composted. 


Carbonaceous Matter — Pure carbon or carbon 
compounds present in the fuel or residue after 
combustion. 


Catalytic Combustion System — A process in 
which a substance is introduced into an exhaust 
gas stream to burn or oxidize vaporized 
hydrocarbons or odorous contaminants and the 
substance itself remains intact. 


Cell — Compacted solid waste enclosed in natural 
soil or cover material in a sanitary landfill. 


Cell Height — The vertical distance between top 
and bottom of the cell. 


Cell Thickness — The perpendicular distance 
between the cover materials placed over last 
working faces of two successive cells in a sanitary 
landfill. 


Charge — Quantity of solid waste fed into an 
incinerator at a time. 

Charging Chute — An overhead passage through 
which waste material is fed into an incinerator. 


Charging Cut-off Gate — A modified charging 
gate provided in a continuous fed furnace which 
does not have high temperatures near the charging 
hopper. 


Charging Gate — A horizontal movable cover 
that closes the opening on a top charging furnace. 


Charging Hopper — An enlarged opening at the 
top of a charging chute. 


Checker Work — A pattern of multiple openings 
in a refractory wall through which products of 
combustion pass and accelerated turbulent mixing 
of gases occurs. 


Chemocar — A special vehicle for the collection 
of toxic and hazardous wastes from residences, 
shops, and institutions. 


Chimney — A vertical passage through which 
products of combustion are let into atmosphere. 


Chipper — A device having sharp blades attached 
to a rotating shaft which chips off pieces from 
objects. 


Clamshell Bucket — A vessel having two jaws 
that clamp together when it is lifted by attached 
cables. It is used to hoist and convey materials. 


Clinker — Hard, sintered or fused pieces of 
residue formed in a fire by agglomeration of ash, 
metals, glass and ceramics. 


Cogeneration — Production of both electricity 
and steam from one facility, from the same fuel 
source. 


Collection — Removal of solid wastes from 
different collection points of a primary source. 


Collection Frequency — The number of times 
collection is made in a given period of time. 


Collection Method : 


a) Daily Route — A method in which collection 
crew is assigned a weekly route that is divided into 
daily routes. 


b) Definite Working Day — A definite route is 
allotted to different crew. The crew starts work and 
proceeds along the route till the end of working 
day. Next day collection starts from the point 


where it stopped the previous day. This goes on till 
the whole route is covered. Then the process is 
repeated. 


c) Group Task — In this method, more than one 
crew is assigned to a few routes and they complete 
the job together. 


d) Large Route — In this method, each crew is 
assigned a large route which it completes in one 
week. 


e) Reservoir Route — A method in which several 
crews are used to pick up on a centrally located 
route after having collected on peripheral routes. 


f) Single Load — A variation of the daily route 
method in which areas or routes are laid out that 
normally provide a full load of solid waste. 


g) Swing Crew — In this method, one or more 
reserve work crews are provided which go 
wherever help is needed. 


h) Variable Size Crew — In this method, 
depending upon the amount and condition of work 
on particular routes, variable number of collectors 
are provided. 


Collection Stop — A stop made by a vehicle and 
crew to collect solid waste from one or more 
service sites. 


Collector (of Incinerator) 


a) Bag type — A filter having a fabric cylindrical 
bag as filtering medium. 


b) Cyclone — A collector in which inlet gas 
stream moves vertically when the centrifugal 
force drives the suspended particles to its wall. 


c) Dust — A device used to remove dust from 
exhaust gases. 


d) Flyash — A device used to remove flyash 
from combustion gases. 


e) Mechanical — A device in which inertial and 
gravitational forces separate dry dust from 
gas. 


f) Multicyclone — In this device a number of 
cyclone collectors are provided in parallel. 
The volume and velocity of combustion gas is 
regulated by dampers over a given load range. 

g) Baghouse — Combustion plant emission 
control device that consists of an array of 
fabric filters through which flue gases pass in 
an incinerator flue. Particles are trapped and 


IS 9569 : 2022 


thus prevented from passing into the 
atmosphere. 


h) Bottom Ash — Relatively coarse, non- 
combustible, generally toxic residue of incin- 
eration that accumulates on the grate of a 
furnace 


Combustion — Chemical combining of oxygen 
with a substance which results in the production of 
heat and usually light. 


combustible waste — Non-biodegradable, non- 
recyclable, non-reusable, non hazardous solid 
waste having minimum calorific value exceeding 
1500 kcal/kg and excluding chlorinated materials 
like plastic, wood pulp, etc; 


Combustion Air — Air used for burning a fuel. 


Combustion Air, Excess — Air that is supplied in 
excess of theoretical air. It is normally expressed 
as a percentage of theoretical air. 


Combustion Air, Primary — Air that is added to 
combustion system at the point where fuel is first 
oxidized. 


Combustion Air, Secondary — Air introduced 
above or beyond a fuel bed by natural, induced or 
forced draft. It is generally referred to as over fire 
air, if supplied above the fuel bed through the side 
walls or the bridge wall of primary chamber. 


Combustion Air, Theoretical — The amount of 
air required to completely burn the waste. The 
amount is calculated from the chemical 
composition of the waste and is also known as 
stoichiometric air. 


Combustion Chamber 


a) Primary — The chamber of an incinerator 
where the waste is ignited and burned. 


b) Secondary — The chamber of an incinerator 
where combustible solids, vapours and gases from 
the primary chamber are burnt and flyash removed. 


Combustion Efficiency — It is the measurement 
of how well the fuel being burnt is utilized in the 
combustion process. 


Combustion Gases — A mixture of gases and 
vapours produced by combustion. 


Commingled — Mixed recyclables that are 
collected together after having been separated from 
mixed Solid Waste. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Common Treatment, Storage and Disposal 
Facility — A common facility identified and 
established individually or jointly or severally by the 
State Government, occupier, operator of a facility or 
any association of occupiers that shall be used as 
common facility by multiple occupiers or actual 
users for treatment, storage and disposal of the 
hazardous and other vvastes. 


Community — Group of apartments or houses 
including their private spaces. 


Communal Collection — a system of collection in 
vyhich individuals dispose their vvaste directly to a 
central point at community level. 


Compaction Pit Transfer System — A transfer 
system in which solid waste is compacted in a 
storage pit by a crawler tractor before being 
pushed into an open top transfer trailer. 


Compactor 


a) Mobile — A vehicle with enclosed body wherein 
mechanical devices convey the materials inside the 
body and compress it. 


b) Sanitary Landfill — A vehicle equipped with a 
blade and rubber tyres sheathed in steel or hollow 
steel cores to provide compaction and crushing 
effect. 


c) Stationary — A machine that reduces volume of 
solid wastes by forcing it into a container. 


Compost — Relatively stable decomposed organic 
material. 


Composting — A controlled process involving 
microbial degradation of organic matter. 


Composting, Mechanical — The process of 
composting involving the use of a number of 
mechanical devices. 


Composting, Ventilated Cell — The method in 
which the composting material is mixed and 
aerated by being dropped through a number of 
vertical cells. 


Composting, Aerobic — A controlled process 
involving microbial decomposition of organic 
matter in the presence of oxygen. 


Composting, Anaerobic — A controlled process 
involving microbial decomposition of organic 
matter in absence of oxygen; Also known as 
anaerobic digestion. 


Composting, Windrow — The method in which 
compostable material is placed in windrows or 
piles which are occasionally turned. 


Composite Liner — A liner system for a land-fill 
consisting of an engineered soil layer and a 
synthetic sheet of material. 


Construction and Demolition Waste — The 
waste comprising of building materials, debris 

and rubble resulting from construction, re- 
modeling, repair and demolition of any civil 
structure. 


Container 


a) Carrying — A receptacle constructed of plastics 
or aluminium carried by a collector in backyard 
carryout service. 


b) Disposable — Paper or plastics sacks for 
storage of solid waste. 


c) Lift and Carry — A large container that can be 
lifted onto a service vehicle and transported to 
disposal site for emptying. 


d) Roll on/Roll off — A large container 
(15 m°-30 m°) that can be mechanically pulled 
onto a service vehicle and transported to disposal 
site for emptying. 


Container Train — A number of trailers 
connected in series and pulled by a motor vehicle. 
The system is utilized to collect and transport solid 
wastes. 


Contract — A written agreement in which rights 
and duties of contractual parties are clearly set 
forth for collection of solid wastes. 


Contractor — Means a person or firm that 
undertakes a contract to provide materials or labour 
to perform a service or do a job for service 
providing authority; 


Controlled Dump — A planned landfill that 
incorporates to some extent some of the features of 
a sanitary landfill: siting with respect to 
hydrogeological suitability, grading, compaction in 
some cases, leachate control, partial gas 
management, regular (not usually daily) cover, 
access control, basic record-keeping, and 
controlled waste picking. 


Conversion — Action of changing the condition 
of a secondary material. 


Conveyor 


a) Apron — It has one or more continuous chains 
that are supported and moved by a system of 
sprockets and rollers which carry overlapping or 
interlocking plates that move bulky materials on 
their upper surface. 


b) Drag — A conveyor that uses vertical steel 
plates fastened between two continuous chains to 
drag material across a smooth surface. 


Cooling Air — Ambient air that is added to hot 
combustion gases to cool them. 


Cooling Spray — Water spray directed into flue 
gas stream to cool it and remove flyash. 


Co-processing — The use of waste materials in 
manufacturing processes for the purpose of energy 
or resource recovery or both and resultant 
reduction in the use of conventional fuels or raw 
materials or both through substitution; 


Corrosion — The alteration of a material by 
chemical action. 


Cover Material — Material (normally soil) used 
to cover compacted solid waste in a sanitary 
landfill. 


Crane 


a) Bridge — A lifting unit that can manouvre 
horizontally in two directions. 


b) Monorai | — A lifting unit suspended from a 
single rail which can move in one horizontal 
direction. 


c) EOT Crane — A type of electric overhead crane 
also called bridge cranes, consist of parallel 
runways with a travelling bridge spanning the gap. 


Cullet — Clean colour sorted crushed glass used 
in glass-making to hasten melting of silica sand. 


Curing — Allowing partially composted materials 
to sit in a pile for a specified period of time as part 
of the maturing process in composting. 


Cut — Portion of a land surface or an area from 
which earth or rock has been or will be excavated. 


Cut and Cover — Trench method of landfilling. 


Cut-off Trench — A trench that is filled with 
material that is impermeable to the flow of gas and 
water to prevent movement or intercept and direct 
them to another location. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Curbside Collection — Collection of 
compostables, recyclables, or trash at the edge of a 
sidewalk in front of a residence or shop. 


Cytotoxic — Harmful or toxic to the living Cell. 
D 


Damper — A manually or mechanically 
controlled valve or plate fixed in a breeching, duct 
or stack that is used to regulate a draft or rate of 
flow of air or other gases. 


Damper, Barometric — A hinged or pivoted 
plate that automatically regulates the flow of air. 


Damper, Butterfly — A plate or blade installed in 
the duct or stack which rotates on an axis to 
regulate flow of gases. 


Damper, Guillotine — An adjustable plate 
installed vertically in a breeching to regulate the 
flow of gases. 


Damper, Sliding — A plate normally installed 
perpendicular to the direction of flow and arranged 
to slide across it to regulate the flow. 


Dano Bio-stabilizer System — An aerobic system 
in which the material is retained in a revolving 
drum for 1-5 days under controlled air and moisture 
supply. The product is windrowed. 


Dead Animals — Animals that have died from 
any cause except those slaughtered or killed for 
human use. 


Decomposition — It involves reduction of the net 
energy level and change in chemical composition 
of organic matter. 


Decentralised Processing — Establishment of 
dispersed facilities for maximizing the processing 
of biodegradable waste and recovery of recyclables 
closest to the source of generation so as to 
minimize transportation of waste for processing or 
disposal. 


De-construction — A _ planned selective 
demolition in which salvage, re-use and recycling 
of the demolished structure is maximized. 


Demolition — Breaking down or tearing down 
buildings and other structures either manually or 
using mechanical force (by various equipment) or 
by implosion using explosives. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Density 


a) Sanitary Landfill — Ratio of combined mass of 
refuse and soil cover to combined volume of refuse 
and soil cover. 


b) Solid Waste — Ratio of mass of solid waste to 
its volume. 


Destructive Distillation — Heating of organic 
matter in the absence of air which results in the 
evolution of volatile substances and produces a 
solid char consisting of fixed carbon and ash. 


Digester, Fairfield Hardy — A patented process 
for stabilization of garbage, sewage sludge, 
industrial and other organic wastes by a controlled 
continuous aerobic thermophilic process. 


Digestion, Wet — Anaerobic decomposition of 
solid organic waste in open digestion pond. 


Digestion, Anaerobic — See Composting, 
anaerobic 


Direct Dump Transfer System — In this, the 
material is unloaded from a collection vehicle 
directly in an open top transfer trailer or container. 


Discarded or Expired Medicine Pharmaceutical 
waste — Any medicinal waste like antibiotics, 
cytotoxic drugs including all items contaminated 
with cytotoxic drugs along with glass or plastic 
ampoules, vials etc. 


Dispersion — A uniform distribution in finely 
divided state of a substance in a dispersion 
medium. 


Disposal — Any operation which does not lead to 
reuse, recycling, recovery, utilisation including co- 
processing and includes physico-chemical 
treatment, biological treatment, incineration and 
disposal in secured landfill, 


b) Ocean — The disposition of a vvaste into an 
ocean or estuarine body of vvater. 


c) On-site — The use of methods or processes to 
eliminate or reduce the volume or 
mass of solid vvaste at the point of 
generation. 


d) Waste — An orderly process of discarding 
useless or unwanted material. 


Diversion Rate — The proportion of waste 
material diverted for recycling, composting, or 
reuse and away from landfilling or incineration. 


Domestic E-waste — A part of dry waste 
comprising of electrical and electronic equipment 

whole or in parts or rejects which are intended to 
be discarded by household after their intended use. 


Domestic Hazardous Waste — Discarded paint 
drums, pesticide cans, CFL bulbs, tube lights, 
expired medicines, broken mercury thermometers, 
used batteries, used needles and syringes and 
contaminated gauge, etc, generated at the 
household level. 


Door to Door Collection — Collection of solid 
waste from the door step of households, shops, 
commercial establishments, offices, institutional or 
any other non residential premises and includes 
collection of such waste from entry gate or a 
designated location on the ground floor in a 
housing society, multi-storied buildings or 
apartments, large residential, commercial or 
institutional complex or premises. 


Downpass — A chamber or gas passage placed 
between two combustion chambers to carry the 
combustion products downwards. 


Draft — Difference between the pressure in an 
incinerator or any component part and that of the 
atmosphere. 


Draft, Forced — Draft caused by positive 
pressure exerted by the action of a fan or blower. 


Draft, Induced — Negative pressure caused by 
the action of a fan, blower or ejector. 


Draft, Natural — The negative pressure created 
by the height of a stack or chimney and the 
difference in temperature between flue gases and 
atmosphere. 


Draft Controller — An automatic device which 
by regulating a damper maintains a uniform 
furnace draft. 


Dragline — A revolving shovel that carries a 
bucket by cables and digs by pulling the bucket 
towards it. 


Drag Plate — Plate below a travelling stoker used 
to support the returning grates. 


Drum Mill — A long inclined steel drum which 
rotates and grinds solid wastes in its rough interior. 
The drum has its end portion in the form of a sieve. 


Dry Waste — Waste other than bio-degradable 
waste and inert street sweepings and includes 
recyclable and non-recyclable waste, combustible 
waste and sanitary napkin and diapers etc. 


Dulongs Formula — A formula for calculating 
approximate heat value of solid fuel based on its 
ultimate analysis. 


Dump sites — A land utilised by local body for 
disposal of solid waste without following the 
principles of sanitary land filling; 


Dumping — An indiscriminate method of 
disposing of solid waste. 


Dump Plate — A hinged plate in an incinerator 
which supports residue. The plate can be rotated to 
discharge the residue. 


Dust — Solid particles predominantly larger than 
colloidal ones and capable of temporary 
suspension in air or other gases. They do not tend 
to flocculate except under electrostatic forces; they 
also do not diffuse but settle under the influence of 
gravity. Derivation from larger masses through the 
application of physical force is usually implied. 


Dust Loading — The amount of dust in a given 
amount of gas. Usually applied to the contents of 
collection ducts and the emissions from stacks. 


E 


Earth Blade — A heavy plate connected at the 
front of a tractor to push and/or spread soil or other 
material. 


Ecology — Science that deals with the 
interrelationship of organisms and their living and 
nonliving surroundings. 


Ecosystem — The interdependence of organisms 
and their surroundings. 


Effluent 
a) A liquid which flows out of a containing place. 


b) Sewage, water or other liquid, partially or 
completely treated, or in its natural state, as the 
case may be, flowing out of a reservoir, basin, or 
treatment plant or part thereof. 


Electrostatic Precipitator — A device for 
collecting particulates by placing an electric charge 
on them and then attracting them to a collecting 
electrode. 


Elutriation — Separation of solid waste into 
heavy and light fractions by washing. 


End-of-life of The Product — The time when the 
product is intended to be discarded by the user. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


End of life Vehicle Waste — An end-of-life of 
vehicle is any type of motor vehicle that is classed 
as waste. End-of life vehicles aims at making 
dismantling and recycling of ELVs more 
environmentally friendly. 


Emissions — The sum of total substances 
discharged into air from a stack, vent or any other 
discrete source. It is generally applicable to 
harmful and injurious substances. 


Emission Standard — A rule or measurement 
established to regulate or control the amount of a 
given pollutant which may be discharged into the 
atmosphere from the source. 


Energy Recovery — The process of extracting 
useful energy from waste, typically from the heat 
produced by incineration or via methane gas from 
landfills. 


Engine Side Screen — A rugged screen fitted on 
the engine housing of a vehicle used at sanitary 
landfill to keep paper and other objects from 
accumulating and damaging the engine. 


Engineered Landfill — A method of disposing of 
refuse on land without creating nuisance or hazard 
to public health or safety, by utilizing the 
principles of engineering to confine the refuse to 
the smallest practical area, to reduce it to the 
smallest practical volume and to cover it with a 
layer of earth at least at the conclusion of each 
days operation or at such more frequent interval as 
may be necessary. 


Environment — The conditions, circumstances 
and influences surrounding and affecting the 
development of an organism or group of 
organisms. 


Environmentally Sound Management of Waste 
— Taking all steps required to ensure that e-waste 
is managed in a manner which shall protect health 
and environment against any adverse effects, which 
may result from such waste. 


Environmental System — The interaction of an 
organism or group of organisms with its natural 
and man-made surrounding. 


Erosion 


a) Accelerated — Erosion occurring at a rate faster 
than the natural rate. 


b) Refractory — The wearing away of refractory 
surface by the action of moving liquids or gases. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Evase Stack — An expanding connection 
provided on the outlet of a fan or in an airflow 
passage which converts kinetic energy into static 
pressures. 


Expansion, Permanent — It is the ability of some 
refractories to increase in size permanently at 
temperature within their useful range. It is also 
known as secondary expansion. 


Expansion Joint, Refractory — An open joint 
which allows the refractories to expand thermally 
or permanently. 


Extended Producer Responsibility, (EPR) — 
The responsibility of any producer of packaging 
products such as plastic, tin, glass and corrugated 
boxes, etc., for environmentally sound 
management, till end-of-life of the packaging 
products; 


E-waste — Electrical and electronic equipment, 
whole or in part discarded as waste by the 
consumer or bulk consumer as well as rejects from 
manufacturing, refurbishment and repair processes; 


F 


Facultative — Able to live and grow with or 
without free oxygen. 


Facility — Any establishment wherein the solid 
waste management processes namely segregation, 
recovery, storage, collection, recycling, processing, 
treatment or safe disposal are carried out. 


Fan, Induced Draft — A fan for exhausting hot 
gases from heat absorbing equipment, dust 
collectors or scrubbers. 


Fan, Overfire Air — A fan used to provide air 
above a fuel bed. 


Field Capacity — The amount of water retained 
in solid waste, which after saturation is allowed to 
drain freely. It is also known as moisture holding 
capacity. 


Filter Bag — A device having one or more fabric 
bags for recovering particles from dust laden gas 
or air. 


Filter Fabric — A device to remove particles 
from a carrier gas by passing it through a porous 


(fabric) medium. 


Firebrick — Refractory brick made from fireclay. 


Fireclay — A sedimentary clay containing only 
small amounts of fluxing impurities which is 
capable of withstanding high temperature. 


Fixed Carbon — Ash-free carbonaceous material 
that remains after the volatile matter is driven off 
during proximate analysis of the solid waste 
sample. 


Flareback — A burst of flame from a furnace in a 
direction opposite to the normal gas flow. 


Flue — A passage designed to carry combustion 
gases and entrained particles. 


Flue Dust — Solid particles smaller than 100 
microns carried in the products of combustion. 


Flue Gas — Waste gas from a combustion 
process. 
Fluidized Bed Technique — A combustion 


process in which heat is transferred from finely 
divided particles such as sand to combustible 
materials when kept in a fluidized state in a 
combustion chamber. 


Fly Ash — The finely divided particles of ash 
entrained in flue gases arising from the combustion 
of fuel. The particles of ash may contain 
incompletely burned fuel. The term has been 
applied predominantly to gas-borne ash from 
boilers with spreader stoker, underfeed stoker, and 
pulverized fuel (coal) firing. The particles fall to 
the ground close to the point of release. 


Food Processing Waste — Wastes resulting from 
operations that alter the form or composition of 
agricultural products for marketing purposes. 


Food Waste — Animal and vegetable waste 
resulting from the handling, storage, sale, 
preparation, cooking and serving of foods; 


commonly called garbage. 


Front End Loader — A collection vehicle with 
arms that engage a detachable container, move it 
over the cab and empty it in a container and return 
it to the ground. 


Fuel Bed — Layer of solid fuel or waste on a 
furnace grate or hearth. 


Fume — Gas containing particles less than one 
micron in diameter in suspension. 


Fungi — Multicellular nonphotosynthetic plants. 


Furnace — Chambers of an incinerator where 
drying, ignition and combustion occur. 


Furnace Volume — The total internal volume of a 
combustion chamber. 


Fusion Point — Temperature at which a particular 
complex mixture of minerals can flow under the 
weight of its own mass. 


G 


Garbage — Waste food material originally 
intended for or associated with food for human 
consumption. 


Garbage Grinder, Central — A conveniently 
located facility that mechanically pulverizes food 
waste collected from various sources in a 
community. 


Garchey System — A patented system in which 
refuse is first stored in a water filled flushing 
device under a sink from where it is conveyed 
through tubes to a central holding tank. 


Gasification — The process of converting a solid 
or liquid fuel into a gaseous fuel. 


Generation — Act or process of producing solid 
wastes. 


Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) - 
Organisms whose genetic material has been 
changed or modified artificially for experimental 
or research purposes. 


Grader — A pneumatic wheeled vehicle having a 
centrally located blade which can be angled to cast 
to either side. 


Gradient — Degree of slope. 

Grapples — A clamshell type bucket having 3 or 
more jaws. It is also called a star or orange peel 
bucket. 

Grate — A device which supports solid fuel or 
solid waste during drying, ignition and combustion 


and the openings in it permit air to pass through it. 


Grate, Fixed — A grate without any moving 
parts. 


Grate, Movable — A grate with moving parts. 


Grinding — Mechanical pulverization of solid 
wastes. 


11 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Ground Water — Water in the ground beneath 
the surface. In a strict sense the term applies only 
to water below the water table but in the general 
sense it covers water derived from wells and 
springs. 


Ground Water, Free — Ground water in aquifers 
that are not bound or confined in impervious strata. 


Ground Water, Run-off — It is that portion of 
ground water which is discharged into a stream as 
spring or seepage water. 


Grouser — A cleat extending across the track of a 
crawler tractor to improve its traction. 


Grout — A cementing mixture containing cement, 
water, sand, sawdust and other fillers. 


H 


Hammer Mill — A category of high speed 
equipment which have pivoted or fixed hammers 
to crush or shred solid waste. 


Handling — All activities relating to sorting, 
segregation, material recovery, collection, 
secondary storage, shredding, baling, crushing, 
loading, unloading, transportation, processing and 
disposal of solid wastes. 


Haul Distance 


a) The distance between last collection point of a 
refuse vehicle and transfer station or processing or 
disposal facility. 


b) The distance between a transfer station or 
processing facility and disposal site. 


c) The distance through which cover material has 
to be transported from excavation or stockpile to 
the working face of a sanitary landfill. 


Haul Time — The time spent in transporting solid 
waste between two specific locations. 


Health Care Facility — A place where diagnosis, 
treatment or immunization of human beings is 
provided irrespective of type and size of health 
treatment system, and research activity pertaining 
thereto. In pretext to these guidelines these health 
care facilities includes District Hospitals, Sub 
Divisional Hospitals, Community Health Centres, 
Primary Health Centres and Sub centres. 


Hazardous Waste — Any waste which by reason 
of characteristics such as physical, chemical, 
biological, reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive or 
corrosive, causes danger or is likely to cause 


IS 9569 : 2022 


danger to health or environment, whether alone or 
in contact vvith other vvastes or substances. 


Hearth 


a) Burning — A solid surface, vvithout any air 
openings, to support the solid fuel or soil waste in 
a furnace during drying, ignition or combustion. 


b) Cold Drying — A surface upon which unheated 
waste material is placed for drying or burning. The 
process is aided by hot combustion gases passing 
over it. 


c) Drying — A solid surface in an incinerator 
where the wet waste material is kept before 
burning to dry or burn with the aid of hot 
combustion gases. 


d) Hot Drying — A surface upon which waste 
material is kept to dry or burn. The hot combustion 
gases first pass over and then under the hearth. 


Heat Available — The amount of useful heat 
produced per unit of fuel completely burnt minus 
the heat values of dry fuel gases and water vapour. 


Heat Balance — An account carried out on hourly 
basis of the heat input and output of an incinerator. 


Heat Exchanger — An equipment which transfers 
heat from one fluid to another without allowing 
them to mix. 


Heat of Combustion — The heat released when a 
unit quantity of waste or fuel is burned. 


Heat Release Rate — The amount of heat 
released during complete combustion. Generally it 
is expressed as k cal/m? (of internal volume of 
furnace) h. 


Heat Value, High — The amount of heat, 
expressed in kilocalories liberated when a 
kilogram of solid waste is completely burnt and the 
products of combustion are cooled to initial 
temperature of solid waste as in a calorimeter. 


Heat Value, Low — The high heat value minus 
the latent heat of vaporization of water formed by 
burning the hydrogen in fuel. 


Heavy Media Separation — Separation of solid 
wastes into heavy and light fractions with the aid 
of a fluid medium having density between the two. 


Heavy metals — Metals of high atomic weight 
and density, such as mercury, lead, and cadmium, 
that are toxic to living organisms. 


12 


Hog Feeding — Utilization of heat treated food 
waste as livestock feed. 


Hopper — For feeding the waste 


Household Bio-Medical Waste (Including 
Domestic Sanitary Waste) — A part of dry waste 
generated during the medication/treatment at home 
including sanitary napkins, diapers, etc. 


Human Anatomical Waste — Human tissues, 
organs, body parts and fetus below the viability 
period (as per the Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy Act 1971, amended from time to time). 


Humus — Stabilized organic matter. 


Hydraulic Scooper — A self-propelled crawler 
vehicle having hydraulically operated arms which 
lift, empty and replace containers carried on a 
transfer trailer bed. 


Hydraulic Tipper — A device which unloads a 
transfer trailer by raising its front end to a 70 
Degree angle. 


Hydrology — Science dealing with the 
occurrence, properties, distribution and flow of 
water in nature. 


I 


Ignition Temperature — Lowest temperature at 
which a fuel can be burnt by a self-sustaining 
combustion reaction. 


Impact Mill — A machine which grinds material 
by throwing it against heavy metal projections 
rigidly attached to a rapidly rotating shaft. 


Incineration — An engineered process involving 
burning or combustion of solid waste to thermally 
degrade waste materials at high temperatures. 


Incinerator — An engineered apparatus used to 
burn waste substances and in which all factors of 
combustion, such as, temperature, retention time, 
turbulence and combustion air can be controlled. 


Incinerator, Batch Fed — An incinerator in 
which one charge is fed and only after it is 
completely burnt, the next charge is added. 


Incinerator, Cell Type — An incinerator whose 
grate areas are divided into cells, each of which 
has its own ash pit and air supply. 


Incinerator, Central — A facility located at a 
convenient point which burns waste collected from 
different sources. 


Incinerator, Chute Fed — An incinerator that is 
charged through a chute which extends two or 
more floors above it. 


Incinerator, Continuous Fed — An incinerator 
into which solid waste is fed more or less 
continuously to maintain a steady rate of burning. 


Incinerator, Controlled Air — An incinerator 
having more than one combustion zone in each of 
which distribution of air is controlled. 


Incinerator, Direct Fed — An incinerator in 
which solid waste is fed directly in the combustion 
chamber. 


Incinerator, Flue Fed — An incinerator that is 
charged through a shaft which functions as a chute 
for charging waste and has a flue to carry the 
products of combustion. 


Incinerator, Industrial — An incinerator 
designed to burn industrial wastes. 
Incinerator, Multiple Chamber — An 


incinerator consisting of two or more chambers 
arranged as in line (known as in—line type) or 
retort types (known as retort type), interconnected 
by gas passage ports or ducts. 


Incinerator, Municipal — An incinerator 
primarily designed to burn municipal (residential 
and commercial) solid wastes. 


Incinerator, On-site — An incinerator which 
burns the waste on the same premises which 
generates it. 


Incinerator, Open Pit — A burning device that 
has an open top and a system of closely spaced 
nozzles that place a stream of high velocity air 
over the burning zone. 


Incinerator Gas — See flue gas. 


Inclined Plate Conveyor — A separating device 
in which material is fed onto an inclined steel plate 
belt conveyor. Heavy and resilient materials like 
glass bounce down the conveyor while light and 
inelastic materials are carried forward by motion 
of the belt. 


Indore Process — It is an aerobic composting 
method in which refuse and human excreta are put 
in alternate layers in a pit. The material is turned 
three times while in the pit during the whole period 
of composting: the first time 15 days after filling 
the pit; the second time after subsequent 15 days; 
and the third after subsequent month. At each 


13 


IS 9569 : 2022 


turning, the material is mixed thoroughly and 
moistened with water. (FAO, 1980). 


Industrial Waste — Waste produced by various 
industrial processes which may be reused or needs 
disposal. 


Inerts/ Inorganic Waste — Wastes which are not 
bio-degradable, recyclable or combustible street 
sweeping or dust and silt removed from the surface 
drains. 


Informal Waste Collector — individuals, 
associations or waste traders who are involved in 
sorting, sale and purchase of recyclable materials; 


Inoculum — Micro-organisms placed in a culture 
medium, soil, compost, etc. 


Institutional Waste Generator — Occupier of 
the institutional buildings such as building 
occupied by Central Government Departments, 
State Government Departments, public or private 
sector companies, hospitals, schools, colleges, 
universities or other places of education, 
organisation, academy, hotels, restaurants, malls 
and shopping complexes; 


Integrated Solid Waste Management — 
coordinated use of a set of waste management 
methods, each of which can play a role in an 
overall management system plan. 


In-vessel Composting — composting in an 
enclosed vessel or drum with a controlled internal 
environment, mechanical mixing, and aeration. 


J 


Junk — Unprocessed material suitable for reuse 
or recycling. 


K 


k-Factor — The thermal conductivity of a 
material expressed as kcal/m h deg. 


Kerb Collection — Collection of solid waste from 
containers placed adjacent to a thoroughfare. 


L 


Land Disposal — Deposition of waste on or into 
trenches or uneven land surface. 


Landfill Blade — A U-blade having an extension 
at the top so that a larger volume of solid waste 
can be pushed and spread and protects the operator 
from any debris. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Lantz Process — Destructive distillation of solid 
waste in which combustible components are 
converted into gas, charcoal and a number of 
distillates. 


Landfill Gases — gases arising from the 
decomposition of organic wastes; principally 
methane, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide. 
Such gases may cause explosions at landfills. 


Leachate — Liquid that has travelled through 
solid waste or other medium and has extracted 
dissolved or suspended material from it. 


Lift — A compacted refuse layer and the top cover 
material in sanitary landfill. 


Liner — a protective layer, made of soil and/or 
synthetic materials, installed along the bottom and 
sides of a landfill to prevent or reduce the flow of 
leachate into the environment. 


Lining — The refractory material used on the 
inside of a furnace wall. 


Litter — Carelessly discarded material. 
Load Bearing Capacity 


a) Safe — Ratio of ultimate bearing capacity 
divided by a factor of safety. 


b) Ultimate — It is the load intensity transmitted 
by base of footing of foundation to soil and causes 
the soil mass to rupture or fail in shear. 


Local Body — The municipal corporation, nagar 
nigam,municipal council, nagarpalika, nagar 
Palikaparishad, municipal board, nagar panchayat 
and town panchayat, census towns, notified areas 
and notified industrial townships with whatever 
name they are called in different States and union 
territories in a country; 


Lysimeter — A device used to measure rate of 
movement of water through or from a soil layer or 
used to collect percolated water for quality 
analysis. 


M 


Manure — Excreta of animals which may contain 
some spilled feed or bedding. 


Marine Littering — Marine litter consists of 
items that have been deliberately discarded, 
unintentionally lost, or transported by winds and 
rivers, into the sea and on beaches. It mainly 
consists of plastics, wood, metals, glass, rubber, 
clothing and paper. Land-based sources account 


14 


for up to 80 percent of marine litter — these include 
tourism, sewage and illegal or poorly managed 
landfills. The main sea-based sources are shipping 
and fishing. 


Material Balance — An account on hourly basis 
of material entering and leaving a processing unit 
such as an incinerator. 


Materials Recovery — Obtaining materials that 
can be reused or recycled. 


Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) — A facility 
where non-compostable solid waste can be 
temporarily stored by the local body or any other 
entity as stipulated in rules or any person or agency 
authorised by any of them to facilitate segregation, 
sorting and recovery of recyclables from various 
components of waste by authorised informal sector 
of waste pickers, informal recyclers or any other 
work force engaged by the local body or entity 
mentioned in rules for the purpose before the waste 
is delivered or taken up for its processing or 
disposal. 


Membrane Barrier — A thin layer of material 
impermeable to flow of gas or water. 


Metals — In the secondary materials industry, 
metals include all ferrous, nonferrous and alloy 
materials. 


Methane — A colourless, odourless, asphyxiating 
gas that can explode under certain conditions, and 
can be produced by anaerobic decomposition of 
solid wastes. 


Methanogenic Bacteria — Anaerobic bacteria 
which facilitate methane production. 


Micro Plastics — Microplastics are tiny pieces of 
plastic debris with diameters less than 5 mm in the 
environment resulting from the disposal and 
breakdown of consumer products and industrial 
waste. It is not the same thing as 'Microbead”, 
which is a synthetic material with high polymer 
content, solid articles, insoluble in water, and not 
degradable. 


Milled Refuse — Solid waste which has been 
mechanically reduced in size. 


Mixing Chamber — A chamber normally placed 
between primary and secondary combustion 
chambers where products of combustion are 
thoroughly mixed by turbulence created by 
increased velocity of gas, change of flow direction 
etc. 


Moisture Content — Percentage ratio of loss in 
mass to the original mass when the sample is dried 
to a constant mass at a temperature of 100-105°C. 


Moisture Penetration — The depth to which 
water penetrates the solid before its rate of flow 
becomes negligible. 


Multilayered Packaging — Any material used or 
to be used for packaging and having at least one 
layer of plastic as the main ingredients in 
combination with one or more layers of materials 
such as paper, paper board, polymeric materials, 
metalised layers or aluminium foil, either in the 
form of a laminate or co-extruded structure; 


Municipal Collection — Collection of solid 
wastes by municipal employees and equipment 
carried out under the supervision and direction of a 
municipal department or official. 


Municipal Solid Waste, MSW — All solid waste 
generated in an area except industrial and 
agricultural wastes. Sometimes includes 
construction and demolition debris and other 
special wastes that may enter the municipal waste 
stream. Generally excludes hazardous wastes 
except to the extent that they enter the municipal 
waste stream. Sometimes defined to mean all solid 
wastes that a city authority accepts responsibility 
for managing in some way. 


Municipal Solid Waste Management, MSWM 
— Planning and implementation of systems to 
handle MSW. 


N 


Non-biodegradable Waste — Any waste that 
cannot be degraded by micro organisms into 
simpler stable compounds. 


O 


Occupier for Bio-medical VVaste — A person 
having administrative control over the institution 
and the premises generating bio-medical vvaste, 
which includes a hospital, nursing home, clinic, 
dispensary, veterinary institution, animal house, 
pathological laboratory, blood bank, health care 
facility and clinical establishment, irrespective of 
their system of medicine and by whatever name 
they are called. 


Odour Threshold — The lowest concentration of 
a substance in air at which its odour is perceptible. 


Offal — Intestines and discarded parts including 
paunch manure of slaughtered animals. 


15 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Open Burning — Uncontrolled burning in open. 
Open Dump — See dump. 


Operator of a Facility — A person or entity, who 
owns or operates a facility for handling solid waste 
which includes the local body and any other entity 
or agency appointed by the local body. 


Organic Content — It is synonymous with 
volatile solids except for some small traces of 
some inorganic materials such as calcium 
carbonate which lose mass at temperatures used in 
determining volatile solids essentially the carbon 
and nitrogen content. 


Organic Waste — Technically, waste containing 
carbon, including paper, plastics, wood, food 
wastes, and yard wastes. In practice in MSWM, the 
term is often used in a more restricted sense to 
mean material that is more directly derived from 
plant or animal sources, and which can generally 
be decomposed by microorganisms. 


Organism — Any living thing. 


Orsat Apparatus — An apparatus used to 
volumetrically analyse flue gases by measuring 
amounts of carbon dioxide, oxygen and carbon 
monoxide present. 


Oxo-degradable Plastics — These are 
conventional plastics that contain additives that 
promote the oxidation of the material under certain 
conditions. They are used in applications such as 
agricultural films, rubbish and carrier bags, food 
packaging, and landfill covers. They can break 
down into very small particles, potentially 
contributing to environmental contamination by 
microplastics. 


P 


Pathogen — An organism capable of producing 
disease. 


Peephole Door — A small door or a hole in an 
incinerator through which combustion can be 
observed. 


Percolation — Downward movement of water 
through soil, solid waste or other porous medium. 


Permeability — The capacity of a porous medium 
to conduct or transmit fluids. 


Pest — Small flies or other arthropods which tend 
to infest waste material. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Pest Control—Method that control 


infestations 


pest 


pH — Logarithm to the base 10 of reciprocal of 
hydrogen ion concentration. 


Picking Table (or Belt) — Table or belt on which 
solid waste is manually sorted and some 
constituents removed. 


Plastic Waste — any plastic discarded after use or 
after their intended use is over; 


Pollution — Presence in the environment of some 
substances of such type and quantity that the 
quality of the environment is impaired or rendered 
offensive to life. 


Polyvinyl Chloride — A common plastics 
material which releases hydrochloric acid when 
burned. 


Post-consumer Materials — Materials that a 
consumer has finished using, which the consumer 
may sell, give away, or discard as wastes. 


Pre-processing — The treatment of waste to make 
it suitable for co-processing or recycling or for any 
further processing; 


Primary Material — A commercial material 
produced from virgin materials used for 
manufacturing basic products. Examples include 
vvood pulp, iron ore, and silica sand. 


Primary Collection — collecting, lifting and 
removal of segregated solid vvaste from source of 
its generation including households, shops, offices 
and any other non-residential premises or from any 
collection points or any other location specified by 
the local body: 


Private Collection — The collection of solid 
waste by individuals or companies from 
residential, commercial or industrial premises: the 
arrangements for the service are made directly 
between the owner or occupier of the premises and 
the collector. 


Processing — Any scientific process by which 
segregated solid waste is handled for the purpose 
of reuse, recycling or transformation into new 
products. 


Producer Responsibility — A system in which a 
producer of products or services takes 
responsibility for the waste that results from the 
products or services marketed, by reducing 
materials used in production, making repairable or 
recyclable goods, and/ or reducing packaging. 


16 


IS 9569:xxxx 


Producer Responsibility Organisation (E Waste) 
— A professional organisation authorised or 
financed collectively or individually by producers, 
which can take the responsibility for collection and 
channelisation of E-waste generated from the ‘end- 
of-life’ of their products to ensure environmentally 
sound management of such e-waste. 


Products of Combustion — Gases, vapours and 
solids resulting from the combustion of a fuel. 


Pulverization — Crushing of material into small 
pieces. 


Putrefaction — Microbial decomposition of 
organic matter accompanied by odours. 


Pyrolysis — Destructive distillation of a material 
in the absence of oxygen. 


Pyrometer — An instrument for measuring 
temperature. 
Pyrometer, Optical — A pyrometer based on 


optical principles. 


Pyrometer, Radiation — A pyrometer which 
measures temperature of a material from the 
intensity of radiation at all wavelengths emitted by 
it. 


Q 


Quench Trough — A water filled trough to 
receive burning residue from an incinerator. 


R 


Radioactive material: Substances which emit 
ionizing radiations or particles. 


Rasper (Rasp Mill) — A size reduction unit 
having a large vertical drum with heavy hinged 
arms rotating horizontally over a rasp and sieve 
floor. 


Rated Load (of Crane) — The maximum load 
that a crane can handle. 


Reclamation — Restoration to a better or more 
useful state or the obtaining of useful materials 
from solid wastes. 


Recovery — The process of obtaining materials or 
energy resources from solid wastes. 


Recycler — Any person who is engaged in 
recycling and reprocessing of waste and having 


facilities as elaborated in the 


regulations; 


respective 


Recycling — Reclamation and processing of waste 
in an environmentally sound manner for the 
originally intended purpose or for other purposes; 


Recyclables — Items that can be reprocessed into 
feedstock for new products. Common examples are 
paper, glass, aluminum, corrugated cardboard, and 
plastic containers. 


Redevelopment — Rebuilding of old residential 
or commercial buildings at the same site, where 
the existing buildings and other infrastructures 
have become dilapidated. 


Refurbisher (Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment) — Any company or undertaking 
registered under the respective regulations engaged 
in refurbishment of used electrical and electronic 
equipment. 


Refuse — See solid waste 


Refuse Chute — A pipe, duct or trough through 
which solid waste is conveyed to a central storage 
area. 


Refuse-derived Fuel (RDF) — Fuel derived from 
combustible waste fraction of solid waste like 
plastic, wood, pulp or organic waste, other than 
chlorinated materials, in the form of pellets or fluff 
produced by drying, shredding, dehydrating and 
compacting of solid waste ; 


Refuse Train — See container train. 


Refurbishment — Repairing of used products for 
extending its working life for its originally 
intended use and selling the same in the market or 
returning to owner. 


Residue — Material remaining after gases, liquids 
or solids have been removed. 


Residue Conveyor — A conveyor, usually a drag 
or flight type used to remove incinerator residue 
from a quench trough to a discharge point. 


Residue, Incinerator — All solid material 
collected after incineration process is completed. 


Residual Solid Waste — The waste and rejects 
from the solid waste processing facilities which are 
not suitable for recycling or further processing; 


Resource Recovery — The extraction and 
utilization of materials and energy from wastes. 


17 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Reuse — The reintroduction of a commodity into 
the economic stream without any change. 


Ringelmann Chart — Printed or photographically 
reproduced illustration of 4 shades of grey used to 
estimate density of smoke from a source. 


S 
Salvage — Utilization of waste material. 
removal of waste 


Salvaging — Controlled 
material for utilization. 


Sanitary Landfill — A site where solid waste is 
disposed of by using method of sanitary 
landfilling. 


Sanitary Landfilling — The final and safe 
disposal of residual solid waste and inert wastes on 
land in a facility designed with protective 
measures against pollution of ground water, 
surface water and fugitive air dust, wind-blown 
litter, bad odour, fire hazard, animal menace, bird 
menace, pests or rodents, greenhouse gas 
emissions, persistent organic pollutants slope 
instability and erosion. 


Sanitary Landfilling Method 
a) Area — A method which utilizes uneven surface 
of ground. The waste is spread on the undulating 


surface, compacted and then covered by soil layer. 


b) Quarry — A variation of area method in which 
the wastes are spread and compacted in a 


depression. Cover material is brought from 
elsewhere. 
c) Ramp — Another variation of area method 


where the cover material is obtained by excavating 
in front of working face. 


d) Trench — A trench is excavated and the space 
filled by refuse which is compacted. The excavated 
soil is used as cover material. 


e) Wet Area — Method used in swampy area 
where first inert layer is given till it rises above 
normal water level and then normal area method is 
used. 


Sanitary Waste — Wastes comprising of used 
diapers, sanitary towels or napkins, tampons, 
condoms, incontinence sheets and any other similar 
waste; 


Sanitation — Control of all such factors which 
affect the physical environment which can affect 
human health, survival and development. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Satellite Vehicle — A small vehicle which 
discharges its contents into an accompanying large 
vehicle. 
Scavenger — A person involved in uncontrolled 
removal of material at any point in a solid waste 
stream. 


Scrap — Discarded or rejected materials or parts 
resulting during fabrication and manufacture, 
which can be reprocessed. 


Scrap, Home — Scrap that is reprocessed in the 
place where it is produced. 


Scrap, Obsolete — Scrap that results when the 
material gets worn out and cannot be used for its 
original purposes. 


Scrap, Prompt Industrial — Scrap left over from 
the fabrication of iron and steel products. 


Screen 


Rotary — An inclined cylindrical mesh rotating on 
its axis which screens material placed at its upper 
end. 


Vibrating — Inclined screen which is mechanically 
vibrated to screen material placed over it. 


Screw Conveyor — A rotating helical shaft that 
moves material along a trough or tube. 


Scrubber, Flue Gas — Equipment to remove fly 
ash and other objectionable material from flue gas 
by use of sprays, wet baffles etc. 


Secator — A separating device which throws 
mixed material onto a rotating shaft, heavy and 
resilient materials bounce off one side of the shaft 
while light and inelastic materials land on the other 
and are cast in the opposite direction. 


Secondary Material — A material that is used in 
place of primary or raw material in the 
manufacture of a product. 


Secondary Storage — The temporary containment 
of solid waste after collection at secondary waste 
storage depots or MRFs or bins for onward 
transportation of the waste to the processing or 
disposal facility; 


Secure Landfill — A disposal facility designed to 
permanently isolate wastes from the environment. 
This entails burial of the wastes in a landfill that 
includes clay and/ or synthetic liners, leachate 
collection, gas collection (in cases where gas is 
generated), and an impermeable cover. 


18 


Segregation — Sorting and separate storage of 
various components of solid waste namely 
biodegradable wastes including agriculture and 
dairy waste, non-biodegradable wastes including 
recyclable waste, non-recyclable combustible 
waste, sanitary waste and non- recyclable inert 
waste, domestic hazardous wastes, and 
construction and demolition wastes. 


Separator 


a) Ballistic — A device in which mixed materials 
having different physical characteristics are 
dropped on a high speed rotary impeller when they 
are hurled at different velocities and fall in 
separate collection bins. 


b) Inertial— A device that relies on gravity 
separation of materials having different physical 
characteristics. 


c) Magnetic — A device which removes ferrous 
metals by a magnet. 


Septage — Sludge removed from a septic tank (a 
chamber that holds human excreta). 


Service Provider — An authority providing public 
utility services like water, sewerage, electricity, 
telephone, roads, drainage, etc; 


Settlement — A gradual subsidence of materials. 


Settlement, Differential — Non-uniform 
subsidence of material from a fixed horizontal 
reference plane. 


Settling Chamber — A chamber to reduce 
velocity of fluid to help separate out suspended 
solids. 


Sewage Sludge — A semi-liquid containing 
settled sewage solids and varying amounts of 
water and dissolved material. 


Site Remediation — Treatment of a contaminated 
site by removing contaminated solids or liquids or 
treating them on-site. 


Shear Shredder — A size reduction unit which 
cuts material between two large blades or between 
a blade and a stationary edge. 


Shredder — A device to reduce discarded 
automobiles and other low grade sheet and coated 
metal in a continuous operation to small pieces. 


Shut off Gate — A device used to stop out flow of 
hot gases backward during feeding of waste in 


grate/hopper of incinerator/gasifier/during co- 
processing at cement plant. 


Siftings — The fine material which falls from fire 
bed through grate openings in incineration. 


Sintering — A heat treatment that causes adjacent 
particles of a material to cohere below a 
temperature that would cause them to melt. 


Slag — A substance formed by chemical action 
and fusion at furnace operating temperatures. 


Slagging of Refractories — Destructive chemical 
action which forms slag on refractories subjected 
to high temperatures. It also refers to molten or 
viscous coating produced on refractories by ash 
particles. 


Sloughing — Disattachment of slime and solids 
accumulated on a contact surface as in tricking 
filters. 


Sludge — A semiliquid sediment. 


Smoke — A suspension in air or gas of 
particulates produced by incomplete combustion of 
carbonaceous material. 


Smoke Alarm — An alarm given by an 
instrument which continuously measures density 
of smoke on the basis of obscuring of a beam of 
light and gives an alarm when the smoke density 
exceeds a preset value. 


Smoke Eye — A device consisting of a light 
source and a photoelectric cell that measures the 
degree to which smoke in a flue gas obscures light. 


Spore Bacteria or Fungi under adverse 
conditions develop this rounded resistant form. 


Solid Waste — Means and includes solid or 
semisolid domestic waste including sanitary waste, 
commercial waste, institutional waste, catering and 
market waste and other non- residential wastes, 
street sweepings, silt removed or collected from 
the surface drains, horticulture waste, agriculture 
and dairy waste, treated bio-medical waste 
excluding industrial waste, bio-medical waste and 
E-waste, battery waste, radioactive waste 
generated in the area under the local authorities 
and other entities mentioned in Solid Waste Rules. 


Solid Waste, Agriculture — Solid waste resulting 
from processing of field crops and orchards and 
from rearing and slaughtering of animals. 


19 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Solid Waste, Commercial — Solid waste 
generated by shops, offices and other commercial 
activities which do not actually turn out a product. 


Solid Waste, Industrial — Solid waste resulting 
from industrial and manufacturing processes. 


Solid Waste, Institutional — Solid wastes 
originating from educational, health care and 
research facilities. 


Solid Waste, Municipal — It includes 
commercial and residential wastes generated from 
a community. 


Solid Waste, Pesticide — Residue resulting from 
manufacturing, handling or use of chemicals for 
killing animal and plant pests. 


Solid Waste, Residential — Solid waste 
generated from residential environment. It is also 
called domestic solid waste. 


Solid Waste, Management — A purposeful 
systematic control of the generation, storage, 
collection, transport, processing and disposal of 
solid waste. 


Sorting — Separating various components and 
categories of recyclables such as paper, plastic, 
cardboards, metal, glass, etc., from mixed waste as 
may be appropriate to facilitate recycling; 


Source Reduction — The design, manufacture, 
acquisition, and reuse of materials so as to 
minimize the quantity and/or toxicity of waste 
produced. 


Source Separation — Setting aside of 
compostable and recyclable materials from the 
waste stream before they are collected with other 
MSW, to facilitate reuse, recycling, and 
compostinSpalling of Refractories — Breaking or 
crushing of a refractory unit due to thermal, 
mechanical or structural causes. 


Special Wastes — Wastes that are ideally 
considered to be outside of the MSW stream, but 
which sometimes enter it and must often be dealt 
with by municipal authorities. These include 
household hazardous waste, medical waste, 
construction and demolition debris, war and 
earthquake debris, tires, oils, wet batteries, sewage 
sludge, human excreta, slaughterhouse waste, and 
industrial waste. 


Spray Chamber — A chamber equipped with 
water sprays to cool products of combustion 
passing through it. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Stabilising — The biological decomposition of 
biodegradable wastes to a stable state where it 
generates no leachate or offensive odours and is fit 
for application to farm land ,soil erosion control 
and soil remediation; 


Stack — See Chimney. 


Stack Effect — Vertical movement of hot gases in 
a stack occurring due to its being lighter than 
atmosphere. 


Stack Sampling — Collection of representative 
sample of gases and particulate matter flowing 
through a stack. 


Stoker — A mechanical device to feed solid fuel 
or solid waste to furnace. 


Stoker, Chain Grate — A stoker having a 
moving chain as a grate surface. The grate consists 
of links mounted on rods to form a continuous 
surface which is generally driven by a shaft with 
sprockets. 


Stoker, Incinerator — A mechanically operable 
moving grate arrangement for supporting, burning, 
and transporting solid waste in a furnace and 
discharging the residue. 


Stoker, Inertial Grate — A stoker consisting of a 
fixed bed of plates carried on rollers and activated 
by an electrically driven mechanism. It draws the 
bed slowly back against a spring and then releases 
it so that the entire spring bed moves forward until 
stopped abruptly by another spring. The inertia of 
solid waste carries it a small distance forward 
along the stoker surface and then the cycle is 
repeated. 


Stoker, Oscillating Grate — A stoker in which 
the entire grate surface oscillates to move the solid 
waste and residue over grate surface. 


Stoker, Reciprocating Grate — A stoker 
consisting of a bed of bars or plates so arranged 
that alternate pieces or rows of pieces slowly 
reciprocate in a horizontal sliding mode and act to 
push the solid waste along the stoker surface. 


Stoker, Rocking Grate — A stoker consisting of 
a bed of bars or plates on axles which are rocked in 
a coordinated manner to lift and advance the solid 
waste along the grate surface. 


Stoker, Rotary Kiln — An inclined rotating 
cylindrical unit in which solid waste cascades and 
moves forward. 


20 


Stoker, Travelling Grate — A stoker in the form 
of a moving chain belt carried on sprockets and 
covered with separated small metal pieces called 
keys. The entire top surface acts as grate which 
moves to the bottom side at end of furnace and 
again enters the furnace at other end. 


Storage — Means to store segregated waste at 
household/community level separately. 


Storage Pit — A pit for storing solid waste before 
processing. 


Street Refuse — Refuse collected from streets 
when they are cleaned either manually or 
mechanically. 


Street Vendor — Any person engaged in vending 
of articles, goods, wares, food items or 
merchandise of everyday use or offering services to 
the general public, in a street, lane, side walk, 
footpath, pavement, public park or any other public 
place or private area, from a temporary built up 
structure or by moving from place to place and 
includes hawker, peddler, squatter and all other 
synonymous terms which may be local or region 
specific; and the words “street vending” with their 
grammatical variations and cognate expressions, 
shall be construed accordingly. 


Sweeper — Any person engaged in sweeping of 
public places such as roads, parks etc with the help 
of brooms or any other suitable equipments. 


T 

Tailings — Second grade or waste material 
obtained when raw material is screened or 
processed. 


Target — The quantity of waste to be collected by 
the producer in fulfilment of responsibilities 
decided by the authorities such as Extended 
Producer Responsibility. 


Teepee Burner — See Burner, Conical. 
Tempering Air — See Air, Cooling. 


Thermocouple — Device to measure temperature 
in which two lengths of wires made from different 
kind of homogeneous metals are used. 


Tipping Fee — A fee or support price determined 
by the local authorities or any state agency 
authorised by the State government to be paid to 
the concessionaire or operator of waste processing 
facility or for disposal of residual solid waste at the 
landfill; 


Tipping Floor — Unloading area for vehicles 
which deliver solid waste to a processing plant. 


Toe — Bottom of working face of a sanitary 
landfill. 


Topsoil — Topmost soil layer which is normally 
expected to contain humus and support plant 
growth. 


Transboundary Movement — Any movement of 
hazardous or other wastes from an area under the 
jurisdiction of one country to or through an area 
under the jurisdiction of another country or to or 
through an area not under the jurisdiction of any 
country, provided that at least two countries are 
involved in the movement; 


Transfer — The act of moving waste from a 
collection vehicle to a larger transport vehicle. 


Transfer Station — A facility created to receive 
solid waste from collection areas and transport in 
bulk in covered vehicles or containers to waste 
processing and, or, disposal facilities. 


Transportation — Conveyance of solid waste, 
either treated, partly treated or untreated from a 
location to another location in an environmentally 
sound manner through specially designed and 
covered transport system so as to prevent the foul 
odour, littering and unsightly conditions. 


Transporter — A person or company or entity 
engaged in the off-site transportation of waste by 
air, rail, road or water carrying a manifest system 
issued by the person or company or entity who has 
handed over the waste to the transporter, giving the 
origin, destination and quantity of the waste being 
transported; 


Trash — See rubbish. 


Treatment — Means the method, technique or 
process designed to modify physical, chemical or 
biological characteristics or composition of any 
waste so as to reduce its volume and potential to 
cause harm. 


Trommel Screen — See screen rotary. 

Tyre — Waste from vehicle. 

U 

U-Blade — A dozer blade having projections on 


either side at an obtuse angle so that larger volume 
of waste can be handled. 


21 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Unloading Bulkhead — A steel plate to eject 
waste out of the rear door of an enclosed transfer 
trailer. 

Used Oil — Any oil 


(i) derived from crude oil or mixtures containing 
synthetic oil including spent oil, used engine oil, 
gear oil, hydraulic oil, turbine oil, compressor oil, 
industrial gear oil, heat transfer oil, transformer oil 
and their tank bottom sludges; and 


(ii) suitable for reprocessing, if it meets the 


specification laid down Hazardous Waste 
Management Rules. 

Utilisation — Use of waste as a resource; 

V 

Vector, Disease — A carrier capable of 


transmitting a pathogan from one vector to 
another. 


Vermi Composting — The process of conversion 
of bio-degradable waste into compost using earth 
worms; 


Vermiculture — See worm culture. 


Volatile Matter — Material lost from a dry solid 
waste sample which is heated till red in a closed 
crucible. 


Volatile Solids — Material lost from a dry solid 
waste sample which is heated till red in an open 
crucible in a ventilated furnace. 


Virgin Materials — Any basic material for 
industrial processes that has not previously been 
used, for example, wood-pulp trees, iron ore, crude 
oil, bauxite. 


Vehicle Waste — Waste from service station, 
small mechanics like engine oil scrap fibres, glass 
etc. 


W 


Wall, Air Cooled — A refractory wall having a 
lane directly behind it through which cool air 
passes. 


Wall, Core — The central course of the common 
wall between the two combustion chambers which 
is not exposed on either side. 


Wall, Curtain — A refractory construction or 
baffle which deflects combustion gases 
downwards. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


VYall, VVater Cooled — A furnace vvall composed 
of boiler tubes. 


Waste — Materials that are not products or by- 
products, for which the generator has no further 
use for the purposes of production, transformation 
or consumption. 


NOTES 


1 Waste includes the materials that may be generated 
during, the extraction of raw materials, the processing 
of raw materials into intermediates and final products, 
the consumption of final products, and through other 
human activities and excludes residuals recycled or 
reused at the place of generation; and 


2 By-product means a material that is not intended to 
be produced but gets produced in the production 
process of intended product and is used as such; 


Waste, Bulky — Very large sized waste, the 
handling of which poses problem in normal 
collection, processing or disposal methods. 


Waste Characterization Study — An analysis of 
samples from a waste stream to determine its 
composition. 


Waste Picker/Waste Collector — A person or 
groups of persons informally engaged in collection 
and recovery of reusable and recyclable solid 
waste from the source of waste generation, the 
streets, bins, material recovery facilities (MRF), 
processing and waste disposal facilities for sale to 
recyclers directly or through intermediaries to earn 
their livelihood. 


Waste, Construction or Demolition — Building 
material or rubble resulting from construction, 
remodelling, repair and demolition operations. 


Waste Exchange — An independent market 
instrument offering assistance or independent 
systems offering services for sale and purchase of 
waste generated from end-of-life product between 
agencies or organisations authorised under these 
rules; 


Waste Generator — Every person or group of 
persons, every residential premises and non 
residential establishments including Indian 
Railways, defense establishments, which generate 
solid waste; 


Waste Dealer — A middleman who buys 
recyclable materials from waste generators and 
itinerant buyers and sells them, after sorting and 
some processing, to wholesale brokers or recycling 
industries. 


Waste Management Hierarchy — Means the 
priority order in which the solid waste is to should 


22 


be managed by giving emphasis to prevention, 
reduction, reuse, recycling, recovery and disposal, 
with prevention being the most preferred option 
and the disposal at the landfill being the least; 


Waste Oil — Any oil which includes spills of 
crude oil, emulsions, tank bottom sludge and slop 
oil generated from petroleum refineries, 
installations or ships and can be used as fuel in 
furnaces for energy recovery, if it meets the 
specifications laid down in Hazardous Waste 
Management Rules either as such or after 
reprocessing. 


Waste reduction — All means of reducing the 
amount of waste that is produced initially and that 
must be collected by solid waste authorities. This 
ranges from legislation and product design to local 
programs designed to keep recyclables and 
compostables out of the final waste stream. 


Wastes, Special — 
management. 


Needing extraordinary 


Waste Processing — Operations which change 
the physical or chemical properties of wastes. 


Waste, Sources of — Various activities which 
generate wastes. 


Waste stream — The total flow of waste from a 
community, region, or facility. 


Waste-to-energy (WTE) Plant — A facility that 
uses solid waste materials (processed or raw) to 
produce energy. WTE plants include incinerators 
that produce steam for district heating or industrial 
use, or that generate electricity; they also include 
facilities that convert landfill gas to electricity. 


Water Table — Level below the earth's surface at 
which the ground becomes saturated with water. 


Wet Milling — Mechanical size reduction of solid 
waste which has been wetted to soften the paper 
and paper product constituents. 


Wetland — An area that is regularly wet or 
flooded and has a water table that stands at or 
above the land surface for at least part of the year. 


Wet Pulping — See wet milling. 
Working Face — That portion of sanitary landfill 
where collection vehicles discharge material prior 


to placement of cover material. 


Windrow — An elongated pile of aerobically 
composting materials that are turned periodically to 


expose the materials to oxygen and to control the 
temperature to promote biodegradation. 


Vorm Castings — The material produced from 
the digestive tracts of vorms as they live in earth 
or compost piles. The castings are rich in nitrates, 
potassium, phosphorous, calcium, and magnesium. 


Worm Culture — A relatively cool, aerobic 
composting process that uses worms and 
microorganisms. Also known as vermiculture. 


Y 
Yard Tractor — Small tractor used exclusively 


for manouvring trailers into and out of loading 
position. 


23 


IS 9569 : 2022 


Yard Waste — Leaves, grass clippings, prunings, 
and other natural organic matter discarded from 
yards and gardens. 


Z 


Zone of Aeration — Zone above water table the 
pores of which are not completely filled with 
water. 


Zone of Capillarity — Zone above water table 
where some or all of the pores are filled with water 
that is held by capillarity. 


IS 9569 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, Delhi 


Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Science, 
GOI 
Development Alternative 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 


New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 
Jadavpur University 


Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 


Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Material, New 
Delhi 


24 


Representative(s) 


MISS ANURADHA SHUKLA (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
DR H. S. DAS (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI GOPAL GUPTA (Alternate I) 
DR RACHANA SHARMA (Alternate ID) 


MISS DIVYA SINHA 


DR SIKSHA SWAROOP KAR 
DR RINA SINGH (Alternate) 


DR SANTOSH KUMAR YADAV 
MISS ANJALI (Alternate) 


DR (SHRIMATI) ANUBHA MANDAL 


DRR. K. JOSHI 


DR K. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
DR PALAS KUMAR HALDAR (Alternate) 


SHRIR. S. PRASAD 
SHRI VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


MISS ARCHANA DATTA 
MISS SUCHISMITA MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADIP KUMAR BANERJEE 
SHRI SOUBHAGYA KUMARTRIPATHY (Alternate I) 
MISS RASHMI GUPTA (Alternate ID) 


SHRIT. K. BANDOPADHYAY 
SHRI GOPAL JHA (Alternate) 


DR N.J. SINGH 
SHRI A. A. PANJWANI (Alternate) 


DR M. P. SINGH 
DR SADAN K. GHOSH 


SHRI SATYENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI SHRI AMIT LOVE (Alternate) 


SHRI UDIT RATNA 
SHRIP. K. DURIA (Alternate) 
SHRI ANUPAM 
SHRI PRATEEK SHARMA (Alternate) 


National Solid Waste Association of India 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


PHD Chamber of Commerce 
Steel Authority of India Limited, New Delhi 


Steps Pvt Ltd 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


In personal capacity 


In personal capacity 


In personal capacity 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 9569 : 2022 


SHRI AMIYA KUMAR SAHU 
CAPT MANJU MINHAS (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI ASHWINI KUMAR VERMA (Alternate) 


Nomination Awaited 


SHRI RAJNEESH KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI INDERPAL DHULL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. RAGHAVENDRA RAO (Principal) 


Awaited 


DR SUNEEL PANDEY 
SHRI KAUSHIK CHANDRASHEKHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
SHRIG.M. PATEL (Alternate) 


DR VIMAL KUMAR 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR KHANDELWAL (RETD. CHIEF 
ENGINEER, EDMC) 


DR N. B. MAZUMDAR 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRISHTI DIXIT 
SCIENTIST D/JOINT DIRECTOR 


(CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT), BIS 


25 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright ofall its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form vvithout 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 33 (19334). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern  : 8” Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


