NAT Alan IS 17164 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


amat Bisa Al Laat site Frater — 
feontadst 


Design and Construction of Cyclone 
Shelters — Guidelines 


ICS 91.120.99 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2020 Price Group 4 


Cyclone Resistant Structures Sectional Committee, CED 57 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cyclone 
Resistant Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


India is highly vulnerable to a variety of natural and manmade disasters. Among natural hazards, the most notable 
ones are earthquakes, cyclones, floods and droughts. Tsunami is an additional concern after the Indian Ocean 
tsunami of 26 December 2004. These natural hazards pose an enormous threat to the developmental process 
of the country and lead to avoidable losses of life and property. India’s vulnerability to tropical cyclones is 
well known. 


Cyclones are destructive because of their associated large spread, long duration high speed rotatory winds, 
accompanied by very heavy rainfall and storm surge. It is more so when these strike coasts of countries/states 
bordering the North Bay of Bengal because of the associated high storm surge in this region. Shallow bay, low flat 
zigzag terrain, high astronomical tides, high density of population, socio-economic conditions, lack of awareness, 
inadequate preparedness and absence of hedging mechanisms add to the problem. 


Most parts of coastal India are susceptible to high wind speed exceeding 50 m/s (180 km/h) and short duration 
gusts of higher speeds, and probable maximum storm surge height varying considerably. Surge varies from place 
to place and variation is not linear. At some places, variation of surges between two points close to each other is 
large due to bathymetry and terrain conditions. 


The only prescribed measures to save vulnerable populations from the onslaught of a cyclone are to temporarily 
evacuate the population on receipt of advance warnings and look after them for 2 to 3 days by arranging shelter, 
food and health-care facilities. Therefore, construction of shelters along vulnerable coastal areas is one of the 
important cyclone risk mitigation measures. 


Worldwide, construction of cyclone shelters has been a proven means of disaster preparedness as the vulnerable 
population can be evacuated to these structures immediately after receiving the cyclone warning. Realizing the 
need, initiatives were taken by engineering establishments including research and development outfits to design 
and construct cyclone shelters. There is now a history of almost 50 years in construction and maintenance of 
cyclone shelters, notably in states such as Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Tamilnadu. Cyclone shelters constructed 
in these states have proved effective and become a source of motivation for improved preparedness. The existing 
number of cyclone shelters in India is, however, not sufficient to accommodate the vulnerable population in 
coastal areas. Hence, action is needed to bridge the existing gaps. These shelters may also be used during/ 
post-tsunami hazard. Cyclone shelters can be utilized, at normal times, as community buildings, which will permit 
the use of the building as emergency shelter without any difficulty. Consideration of the local ethos and values in 
the design of shelters would improve their acceptability and use. These facts have to be taken into consideration 
while designing the cyclone shelters. 


This standard has been formulated to provide guidelines to concerned authorities and stakeholders in design and 
construction of cyclone shelters. In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international 
coordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating them to the 
practices in the field in this country. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17164 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF CYCLONE 
SHELTERS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down guidelines for the selection 
of location, capacity, design, structural safety, water 
supply, sanitation, lighting, ventilation, power back-up, 
and, maintenance and some other aspects necessary for 
the design and construction of cyclone shelters. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards given below: 


IS No. Title 

456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 

800 : 2007 General construction in steel — 
Code of practice (third revision) 

801 : 1975 Code of practice for use of cold- 
formed light gauge steel structural 
members in general building 
construction (first revision) 

875 (Part 3) : Code of practice for design 

2015 loads (other than earthquake) for 
building and structures: Part 3 
Wind loads (third revision) 

1786 : 2008 High strength deformed steel 
bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement — Specification 
(fourth revision) 

1905 : 1987 Code of practice for structural use 
of un-reinforced masonary (third 
revision) 

15498 : 2004 Guidelines for improving the 


cyclonic resistance of low rise 
houses and other buildings/ 
structures 


3 GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN OF 
CYCLONE SHELTERS 


While designing cyclone shelters, the issues given 
in 3.1 to 3.3 should be given due consideration. 


3.1 Normal Use and Emergency Uses 


Cyclone shelters are often used for a short period of 
time during the occurrence of cyclones. Sustainability 
of these shelters depends on their use and maintenance 
during normal times when there is no occurrence of 
cyclone. 
NOTE — Substantial investments are made to erect cyclone 
shelters. It is thus prudent that these structures are put to 


various other uses that will take care of maintenance of the 
shelter as well. 


3.2 Number of Cyclone 
Accommodation Capacity 


Shelters and 


The number of cyclone shelters to be built largely 
depends on the number of vulnerable people to be 
sheltered during emergencies. The effectiveness of a 
cyclone shelter, thus, depends on the assessment for the 
number of likely users and considerations thereof in the 
functional and structural design aspects of the shelter. 


Some of the parameters to be considered are the 
population density and the likelihood of its increase 
based on town/city planning. Similarly, in hilly terrains 
the possibility of occurrence of landslides cutting off 
regions into pockets should be considered. 


Experience on capacity assessment of cyclone shelter 
indicates that, on an average, about 50 to 60 percent of 
total population of vulnerable locations may be using 
the cyclone shelter during emergencies. Area required 
shall be computed on the basis of catchment area and 
number of people expected at the time of disaster. The 
shelter design density may be taken as a minimum floor 
area of 1 m? per person. 


Separate cooking area with proper hygiene, storage, 
water supply, and drainage and fire safety is necessary 
under such emergency conditions and accordingly 
provisions should be made during floor area planning. 


3.3 Multi-Hazard Resistance of Cyclone Shelters 


It is necessary that the cyclone shelters are multi-hazard 
resistant for the reason that part of the coastal areas are 
multi-hazard prone. 


4 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


4.1 Based on the experiences of various states in 
construction and maintenance of cyclone shelters a 
common strategy has been evolved for sustainable use 
of the shelters. It is to be noted that the states need to 
have maximum leverage in deciding the appropriateness 


IS 17164 : 2020 


of each element described in this standard. The 
larger experience suggests that the construction and 
maintenance of cyclone shelters would be sustainable 
only when the local communities are involved at all 
stages which enables the communities to identify 
the aesthetically appealing and functionally efficient 
cyclone shelters as their own and put to use throughout 
the year. Hence, it is suggested that the states may 
associate the local bodies such as Panchayat Raj 
Institutions and Urban Local Bodies in the selection 
process for the location and use of the shelters. 


4.2 The long coast line of India, is also vulnerable to 
various other kinds of natural hazards, whose intensity 
varies. Whereas the design of the shelters in the cyclone 
affected parts will consider the relevant wind speeds 
and the associated surge and flooding due to rain, the 
design should be safe also for other hazards, primarily 
seismicity. 


4.3 Understandably the primary loading for shelters, 
except where seismicity is also to be considered, will 
be on account of wind. However being uncommon 
structures of non-standard shapes, shelters are unlikely 
to be covered in wind loading codes for their wind 
pressures. It is advisable, therefore, that for these life- 
line structures required to cater to emergent situations 
of cyclone occurrence, wind pressures are determined 
through wind tunnel study. Even more important, from 
this point of view, is the case of shelters constructed on 
stilts preferred for escape of flood waters (on account of 
surge or heavy rains accompanying a cyclonic storm). 
For such cases, the bottom floor slab is subject to large 
suctions, which are additive to dead and imposed loads. 
While developing designs likely impact of wind/water 
borne debris should also be accounted for and it shall be 
ensured that the buildings are capable of withstanding 
such impacts. 


4.4 The recommendations for construction of cyclone 
shelters deal with the following design and construction 
aspects of cyclone shelters: 


a) Accommodation capacity, 
b) Location, 
c) Building, 
d) Height of the cyclone shelter, 
e) Material selection, 
f) Structural specifications, 
g) Inner design, 
h) Staircases, 
j) Water supply, 
k) Toilets and sewerage, 
m) Provision for helipads, 
n) Construction of earthen mounds (Killas), 
p) Sustainable Use (see ANNEX A), 


q) Special foundation design, and 
r) Other considerations. 


5 LOCATION AND EASE OF ACCESSIBILITY 
TO VEHICLES/PEDESTRIANS DURING AND 
AFTER EMERGENCIES 


The effectiveness of a cyclone shelter depends on 
its location. Considering the logistics of rescue, 
evacuation and transfer to a shelter, as well as the 
likely catchment area, the shelter may be located, as 
far as possible from the coast, but not less than 1.5 km 
unless topography permits so. A larger distance will 
help in much reduced levels of water (due to surge or 
flooding) that will be encountered, and will ease the 
accessibility to the shelter. The following points may 
also be considered: 


a) Cyclone shelters should be located on available 
elevated land. Guidance on the levels can be taken 
from large scale maps or from Survey of India. 
Exact location within the broad contour is left to 
the decision making mechanism adopted locally 
involving communities and local authorities. 


b) In the absence of available elevated area, the 
structure may be elevated through construction 
of a mound or shelter be built on stilts. However, 
it is pointed out that foundations will be flooded 
during cyclones and the design of the soft story (in 
case of stilts) shall have to provide for adequate 
safety under that condition against wind as well 
as, where applicable against seismic loading. 


c 


wm 


States are advised to carry out a survey within 
10 km band width from the coast and identify all 
villages therein and submit the list to the Survey 
of India which should provide the information on 
astronomical high-tide levels and ground levels 
within a level range of + 0.5 m. 

NOTE — High tide line on the coast may be verified from 


the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification by authorized 
agencies. 


d 


wm 


Regenerating mangroves and raising shelter belt 
plantations will help in reducing the fury of the 
storm surge. Suitable isolation distance must be 
provided between the shelter belt and the cyclone 
shelter to avoid damage to the foundation of the 
building by the roots of the trees in the belt. In 
case of open foundation, necessary protection be 
given to the mounds by providing pitching and by 
constructing toe wall. 


e 


Na 


The cyclone shelter should be easily accessible 
to vehicles and pedestrians and the road should 
not have steep slope and not be crossing a flood 
prone water body. The approach road and the 
shelter location should be so selected that they 
have very low risk of falling trees or falling 
structures or overhead lines. In case of one route 
getting choked/jammed/blocked, alternate route 


is essential. If shelter is not in the elevated land, 
ensure the access is free of flooding for emergency 
vehicles. 


f) Geotechnical investigation should be carried out 
to ensure that during flooding there is no risk of 
sliding through slip-circle failure at the chosen 
location. 


The shelter shall not be located near hazardous 
materials like fuel or chemical storage, physical 
hazards like other building or heavy falling debris, 
high voltage overhead power lines etc. 


wa 


8 


6 BUILDING 


The following considerations may be kept in view with 
respect to the cyclone shelter building: 


a) The maximum number of stories shall not exceed 
two. These may be constructed using RCC, braced 
steel frame or masonry, with or without stilt, 
depending on the storm tide levels (high tide + 
storm surge). Height depends on the storm tide 
levels. In view of general soft top soil in coastal 
areas, pile foundation is preferable. However, 
suitable type of foundations should be considered 
based on recommendation of geotechnical 
investigation, local conditions and soil strata. 


b) Plan shape — Any shape (preferably circular, 
hexagonal or octagonal) is suitable. However, 
square or rectangular shape may be used provided 
the peripheral corners are rounded for improving 
the aerodynamics of the structure. 


c) Doors — To be made of fibre reinforced plastics 
(FRP)/anodized aluminium, should be openable 
outwards and use sturdy stainless steel fittings to 
be able to sustain high wind pressures, and impact 
by debris. 

d) Windows — Louver type of window is suggested 
with non-breakable and non-brittle material. Fibre 
reinforced plastics (FRP)/anodised aluminium 
should be considered. These should be able to 
sustain high wind pressures, and impact by debris. 


e 


wm 


Doors and Windows should be provided with 
suitable bolting/locking mechanism to ensure 
that they are not blown out due to internal wind 
pressure. 

f) Parapet — The height of the parapet should be 
minimum 1.2 m. 


7 HEIGHT OF THE CYCLONE SHELTER 
The total height of the structure may be worked out as 
per the following guidelines: 
a) Finished ground level should be at least 1 m above 
the storm tide levels. 


b) Raise the plinth about 1.2 to 1.5 m above the 
finished ground level. 


c) Storey height should be kept as 3.5 m minimum. 


IS 17164 : 2020 


8 MATERIAL SELECTION 


The following considerations may be kept in view 
while selecting materials: 


a) Load bearing brick masonry structure as per 
IS 1905 may be adopted where there is no 
requirement of stilt. All stilted shelters should be 
raised on RCC or steel frame and upper portion 
(first floor and above) could be constructed 
with load bearing confined brick masonry 
structure as an alternative to continuing the 
framed structure. 


b) For RCC frame structure, minimum grade of 
concrete shall be M 30. Good concrete with proper 
cover to steel results in a durable structure. In this 
regard, provisions of IS 456 shall be applied. An 
additional cover of 5 mm, as compared to the 
normal provisions of IS 456 shall be provided. 
Selection of cement type shall be in accordance 
with IS 456, suitable to environment and 
aggressive conditions encountered. Reinforcing 
steel conforming to IS 1786 shall be used. 


c 


wm 


Wherever steel structure is constructed, it shall 
conform to IS 800 or IS 801. Suitable corrosion 
resistance measures should be taken, particularly 
since shelters will be on the sea coast and 
subjected to marine environment. 


d 


wm 


With steel frame construction, insulating puf 
panel can be used on roof and external walls. For 
internal wall, light weight dry wall option may 
be considered. Use of metal sheet alone should 
be avoided on external surfaces, since that could 
produce unacceptable noise levels during a 
storm. 


All the materials shall conform to the relevant 
Indian Standards. 


9 STRUCTURAL CONSIDERATIONS 


The following structural considerations shall be made: 


a) Imposed load for floor slab and roof terrace shall 
be taken as 5 kN/m? and 3 kN/m’, respectively. 


b) Wind load shall as per IS 875 (Part 3) and 
IS 15498. 


c) Earthquake load shall not be considered 
simultaneously with that of wind load. Earthquake 
Importance Factor shall be taken as 1.5 for the 
shelter design. Other norms should be followed 
from the relevant Indian Standards. 


d 


ww 


Vents shall be provided as per the norms for 
adequate ventilation. Louvered vents to be used 
in shelter in various walls just above floor level 
to drain water flowing in and out in case of higher 
than first floor surge height. 


e 


ma 


All internal walls, etc, shall be designed to 
withstand internal wind pressures. 


IS 17164 : 2020 


10 INNER DESIGN 


The following functional aspects shall be taken care of 
while designing the space/utilities: 

a) Bunk beds with resting facility one for every 
25 persons may be provided for small children, 
elderly/sick persons. 

b 


wm 


Storage shelf facilities of 0.05 m° per person may 
be provided for accommodating the personal 
belongings of the occupants. 
NOTE — it is intended that people enter the shelter with 
minimal personal effects, such as personal papers and 
valuables, special medicines, baby needs, battery radio, 
torch, light snacks and drinks. 


c 


wm 


Provide adequate storage facilities to 
accommodate first aid kits, drinking water 
containers, search and rescue equipment, 
common kitchen utensils, etc. 


d 


wn 


Adequate provision shall be made for proper 
lighting and ventilation even during a storm to 
prevent people from panicking. 


11 STAIRCASES 


The following considerations shall be made for design 
of staircase: 


a) Staircases need to be located up to terrace level 
and shall be spacious enough for the movement 
of the people. The staircases shall have a width of 
2.0 m to 2.5 m depending on shelter capacity with 
multi-entry possibilities. The maximum height 
of riser shall be 150 mm and the number of steps 
should be limited to 15 per flight. 


A ramp with a slope of 1 in 12 shall be considered 
up to the first floor for carrying persons with 
disabilities and the elderly. The ramp shall have a 
width of 2.0 m to 2.5 m. 


Staircases shall be health, safety and environment 
(HSE) compliant. 

Provide handrails on both sides of the staircase 
and ramp even if these are next to a wall. 


b 


wm 


c 


wa 


d 


wa 


e) The provision of the fire exit shall be made. 
If ramp and staircase are provided at two extreme 
ends of the building then these may be treated as 
fire exit. For fire exit slider may also be used. 


12 ROOFS 


Roofs may be flat or sloped. In case of sloped roof the 
slope should be less than 15° to avoid horizontal impact 
of flying debris. 

In case of flat roofs the drainage of the roof should 
be so designed as to be capable of discharging more 
than normal rainwater falling in short duration. These 
rainwater outlets should be properly maintained and 
kept free from choking. 


13 WATER SUPPLY 


The following considerations shall be made with 
respect to water supply to the shelters: 


a) For shelters, a water supply of 75 litre per day per 
person shall be considered. 


b) Minimum 5 day water storage capacity shall be 
provided, with 50 percent of water requirement 
stored on roof top and other 50 percent of water 
requirement stored on ground. 

Minimum of two tanks (Suitably interconnected) 
should be provided at terrace as well as on 
ground. 


c 


wa 


d) Tank should be manufactured from such material 
that these do not fly off in high wind. Also these 


should be suitably anchored. 


wa 


e 


wm 


A battery of six hand-pumps at the first floor 
level in stilt structures and at the ground floor 
for non-stilt structures for drawing ground water 
during normal use as well as emergencies, shall be 
provided. 


f) Regular cleaning of the terrace at least during 
the rainy and cyclonic season (April-May and 
Oct-Dec) such that the harvested water from roof 
is clean, shall be ensured. The water harvesting 
system (including the tank) shall be cleaned once 
in a month in all seasons and water purification 
system as found necessary, shall be adopted. 


14 TOILETS AND SEWERAGE 


The following considerations shall be made with 
respect to sanitation: 


a) There shall be separate male and female toilets. 
Minimum 1 toilet shall be provided for every 
15 males and every 10 females, respectively. 


b) In addition, urinals shall be provided for, at the 
rate of one every 30 persons. 
c) Size of each toilet should be minimum 1.1 m°. 


d 


Ye wa 


Minimum 4 wash basins be provided for every 
100 persons. 


e 


nN 


Septic tanks provided should be properly sealed 
and roof sufficiently elevated so as to prevent 
inundation during flooding. 


15 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 


The following additional consideration shall be taken 
into account: 


a) Elevated approach road may be laid up to the 
shelter with gravel/concrete. 


b) Provision for appropriate power back-up facilities 
such as generator/solar power cells may be made. 
These should be located above the design surge 
level. 


c) Communication facilities such as wireless radios/ 
walkie-talkies may be provided. 

d) Maintenance and management committees may 
be formed for the regular maintenance of the 
shelter, involving the community. 

e) Medical kit consisting of general medicines 
should be made available for emergencies in the 
shelters. 

f) Life jackets shall be made available. 

g) Rope/wooden ladder shall be kept inside shelters. 


h) Participatory approach to facilitate maintenance 
of cyclone shelters should be as per Annex B. 


16 PROVISION FOR HELIPADS 


Heavy cyclones often inundate large areas and 
situations may arise that helicopters may have to 
be used to access the affected areas. The terraces of 
cyclone shelters may be used to provide space to 


IS 17164 : 2020 


land one helicopter, as these are elevated and sturdy 
structures. The design of the shelter structure should 
account for the dynamic forces generated during 
landing/takeoff of the helicopter. 


If adequate clear area around the shelter is available 
to enable the landing of helicopters, this should be 
utilized instead. 


The provision to use helipads should be exercised only 
when, there are, 


a) large stretches of low-lying areas which are 
difficult to reach quickly with the available means 
of water based transport. 


b) areas with higher density of vulnerable populations 
with high frequency of cyclones. 


c) areas with critical/strategic installations that could 
prove fatal when a secondary disaster is triggered 
due to floods and cyclones. 


IS 17164 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
[ Clause 4.4 (p) ] 


SUSTAINABLE USE OF CYCLONE SHELTERS 


A-1 The more a shelter is used in normal time, the 
better it is maintained and the more successfully it 
serves in emergencies. The regular use also provides 
economic justification for the investment. Among a 
number of alternatives suggested, primary schools have 
been found to be the most suitable and compatible for 
normal time use of shelters. These could also be used 
temporarily for community gatherings, health camps, 
election booths, etc. The following guidelines would 
help in sustainable use of the shelters: 


a) The primary use of the cyclone shelter is for 
protecting people from the vagaries of nature, 
such as flood, cyclone and tsunami, and to act as 
relief camp during other disasters. 


b 


ma 


The shelter should always be made and protected 
keeping in view all concerns pertinent to its 
primary use. 


c 


wa 


The features pertinent to other uses should then 
be overlapped with those of the primary use of 
the shelter with no compromise on its primary 
use. 


d 


wn 


Broadly, the states will have maximum say on 
the kind of sustainable use the shelters be put to. 
States are advised to encourage innovations based 
on local needs and necessities identified by the 
village communities should be fitted in. 


e) The use of cyclone shelters for housing the offices 
which are of a more permanent occupation nature 
(for example, Panchayat offices and hospitals) 
has to be discouraged, since these offices cannot 
be relocated during the periods of occurrence 
of natural disasters, which occur without prior 
notice. Hence, these would hinder the usability of 
the shelter for the primary purpose for which it is 
meant. 


f) The cyclone shelter should ultimately become a 
‘Community asset/Resource’ such that it will have 
a broader impact on the livelihood of the villages. 
Hence, it is appropriate to locate the cyclone 
shelters inside or near the villages. Ultimately, 
the idea is to assure their regular use during the 
normal period as well. 


ae 


Using the shelter as primary school on regular 
basis will not come in the way of sheltering since 
most rural primary schools use mats for seating 
the children and where low height desks/benches 
may be used, they could be stored in a small space 
or used for people sitting or standing on them. 


8 


h 


© 


Other temporary uses may be for village gatherings, 
camps, marriages, and other community activities. 


j) Such a sustainable use should also generate 
required finances to supplement proper 
maintenance of the structure. 


ANNEX B 
[ Clause 15 (h) ] 


PARTICIPATORY APPROACH TO FACILITATE MAINTENANCE 
OF CYCLONE SHELTERS 


B-1 Even strongly built structures can deteriorate in the 
absence of proper maintenance. Proper maintenance 
is possible through involvement of communities in 
planning and design of the shelter, such as a design 
would include the features necessary for the sustainable 
use ofthe shelter. The experience from elsewhere reveals 
that the communities have actively used these shelters 
when their opinions were considered in choosing its 
location and design parameters. Such a participatory 
approach not only brings the sense of ownership but 
also the pride of possession. For example, it is logical 
that a shelter can be used for running a school when 


features necessary for a school are also made available 
in the shelter. However, adequate resources should be 
made available for maintenance of the shelters. 


Cyclone shelters should not be looked upon only as a 
means of mitigation but also as a means of development 
as these shelters provide facilities for a wide variety of 
sustainable uses, such as education and health-care and 
promote the local development. Efforts should be made 
to promote local imagination and innovation without 
leaving any doubts/gaps that would create confusion on 
important issues. 


IS 17164 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cyclone Resistant Structures Sectional Committee, CED 57 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity, (B-03-3, Raheja Atlantis, 
National Highway 08, Sector 31-32A, Gurugram) 
Adlakha & Associates, New Delhi 


AP Disaster Management Agency, Hyderabad 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gujarat State Disaster Management Authority, 
Gandhinagar 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


India Meteorology Department, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology — BHU, Varanasi 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian National Centre for Ocean Information 
Services, Hyderabad 


Indian Society for Wind Engineering, Roorkee 


Jaypee University of Engineering and Technology, 
Guna 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer- in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Institute of Disaster Management, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr Prem KrisHNA (Chairman) 


SHRI PRAMOD ADLAKHA 
SHRI ABHAYA ADLAKHA (Alternate) 


Dr T. RADHA 
SHRI B. RAJENDRA PRASAD (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
SHRI RAJESH Kuare (Alternate) 


Dr AcHAL MITTAL 
SHRI SIDHARTH BEHRA (Alternate) 


Dr P. HARIKRISHAN 
Sarı G. RAMESH Basu (Alternate) 


Dr G. G. S. ACHARY 
SHRI BHASKAR PaL (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ANURADHA MALL 
SHRI SANTOSH Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. CHAUDHARY 
SHRI MALAY CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri B. K. BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr M. Monaratra (Alternate) 


Dr S. MANDAL 
DR A. SARKAR (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. JAIN 
Dr Dipti RANJAN SAHOO (Alternate) 


Pror K. MURALI 
ProF S. A. SANNASIRAJ (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI MAHESH TANDON 
Pror Ajay GAIROLA (Alternate) 


Dr S. ARUNACHALAM 


CoL PRADEEP TIWARI 
Suri R. K. SinGu (Alternate) 


Suri B. L. Ravi 
Suet L. P. Sincu (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHENDRA MEENA 
Suri S. N. SINGH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 17164 : 2020 


Organization 


National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai 
Nuclear Power Corporation India Ltd, Mumbai 
Paradip Port Trust, Paradip 

S. V. National Institute of Technology, Surat 


Skeleton Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 
Nagpur 


In Personal Capacity, (4, Jorawar Bhavan, 
93, Maharishi Carve Road, Marine Lines, 
Mumbai) 


In Personal Capacity, (X-/4, First Floor, Hauz Khas 


Enclave, New Delhi) 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI A. SATAYA KIRAN RAJU 
SHRI K. MULLAIVENDHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI AMIT VIYAJWARGIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. Ravi KUMAR 
SHRI Karı Prasan Misura (Alternate) 


Dr ATUL K. DEsAI 
ProF AsHoK J. SHAH (Alternate) 


Dr ABHAY GUPTA 


Dr O. R. JAISWAL 
Dr L. M. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ALPA SHETH 


Suri T. N. GUPTA 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Dr Mano) Kumar RAJAK 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CiviL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 57 (12848). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


