**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2597-3 (1969) : Code of Practice for the use of Electron 
Tubes, Part III: Transmitting and Industrial Tubes [LITD 4: 
Electron Tubes and Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 2S97 ( Part 111). 1969 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
USE OF ELECTRON VALVES 

PART III TRANSMITTING AND INDUSTRIAL VALVES 



UDC 621*385: 621 -375-2 




© Copyright 1969 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 




NEW DELHI 1 

Gr, 3 



July 1969 



IS:2597 (Part HI)- 1969 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
USE OF ELECTRON VALVES 

PART III TRANSMITTING AND INDUSTRIAL VALVES 

Electron Tubes and Valves Sectional Committee, ETDC 39 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi C. R. Subbamanian Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Members 

Dr S. S. S. Aoarwala Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Pilani 
Dr R. P. Wadhwa ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. N. Deobhakta Directorate General of Technical Development 

( Ministry of Industrial Development & Com- 
pany Affairs ) 
Shri Balraj Bhanot ( Alternate ) 
Director Electrical Enqi- Naval Headquarters 

NEBBING 

Director, Electronics and Directorate General of Research & Development 
Radar Development Estab- ( Ministry of Defence ) 

LISHMENT 

Dr R. R. Dutta Gupta Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of 

Defence ) 
Shbi R. C. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R. K. Jain Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers* Associa- 

tion of India ( RETMA ), Bombay 
Shri A. K. Gopalakbishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Majumdar Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ) 
Shri J. S. Monoa All India Radio Merchants' Association, Bombay 

Shri V. J. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 

( Bombay ) 
Shbi D. N. Chaudhuri ( Alternate ) 

( Calcutta ) 
Shri L. S. V. Easwar ( Alternate ) 
( Madras ) 
Prof S. Sampath In personal capacity ( Indian Institute of Technology, 

Madras ) 
Shri S. N. Sen All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri K. T. Shastrt Directorate of Technical Development & Produc- 

tion ( Air ), Ministry of Defence 
Shri P. M. Shank ab Rao ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI I 



ISi2597 (Part III )-l%9 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. S. Srkb Prakash Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi A. V. Ramachandra 
Rao (Alternate ) 
Shri G. H. Vaze Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri Y. S. Vbnkateswaran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 
Director ( Eiec tech ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. Srinivasan 

Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 

Panel for Transmitting and Industrial Tubes, ETDC 39:P2 



Convener 
Shri S. N. Sex 

Members 

Shri A. K. Majumpar 
Shbi V. M. Rao 



All India Radio, New Delhi 



Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 



IS 1 2597 (Part IU)-1969 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
USE OF ELECTRON VALVES 

PART III TRANSMITTING AND INDUSTRIAL VALVES 
0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard (Part III) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 April 1969, after the draft finalized by the Electron Tubes 
and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended to give general guidance to the designers of 
electronic equipment to be supplemented by data sheets from the valve 
manufacturers so that optimum efficiency, performance, life, etc, can be 
obtained. 

0.3 This standard deals with the additional aspects that are to be covered 
in the use of transmitting and industrial tubes. The general and other 
more common aspects have already been dealt in IS: 2597 (Part I)- 1964*, 
which is, therefore, a necessary adjunct to this standard. 

0.4 In preparing this code, considerable assistance has been derived from 
B.S. CP 1005 ( 1962 ) 'Code of practice for the use of electronic valves', 
issued by the British Standards Institution. 

0.5 The other parts of the standard published so far are: 

IS:2597 (Part I)-1964 Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: 
Part I Commercial receiving valves. 

IS: 2597 (Part II)-1967 Code of practice for the use of electronic 
valves: Part II Special quality receiving valves. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part III) covers recommendations for the use of high 
power thermionic valves for transmitting and industrial purposes. 

" " ■ ! ■'*■ > » 

♦Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 

3 



IS:2597 (Part III) -1969 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions contained in IS: 1885 
(Part IV/Sec 1 )-1965*, and IS: 2597 (Part I)-1964f shall apply. 

3. GENERAL 

3.1 This standard shall apply to large valves, for example, valves used in 
transmitters, large public address amplifiers, r.f. heating equipment, etc. It 
is additional to and shall be read in conjunction with the recommendations 
specified in IS:2597 (Part I)-1964|. 

4. HEATER OR FILAMENT VOLTAGE 

4.1 Tungsten Filaments and Thoriated Tungsten Filaments 

4.1.1 Tungsten Filaments — The life of a pure tungsten filament depends 
upon its operating temperature. Manufacturers usually state for each valve 
of this class a filament voltage corresponding to a particular value of 
emission. If less emission is required for a particular application, it is 
permissible to operate the filament at a lower voltage with resulting 
extension of its life. As a general guide, to conserve the available life of a 
tungsten filament its supply should be switched off or reduced during times 
of non-operation. Any equipment intended for intermittent operation 
should incorporate a means of reducing the filament voltage by specified 
percentage during the non-operational periods. However, valve manu- 
facturers shall be consulted for specific guidance. 

4.1.2 Thoriated Tungsten Filaments — Large valves should be operated as 
close to its rated value as possible. 

4.1.2.1 The source of emission in a thoriated tungsten filament is a 
layer of thorium on the surface of the wire. The thorium in this layer is 
constantly being removed during operation and is replenished from within 
the wire. At full power rating the filament should be operated within a 
relatively narrow predetermined range of temperatures to maintain the 
balance between loss of thorium and replacement of the active layer of 
thorium. In special cases, at reduced ratings, improved life may be 
obtained by operating at reduced filament voltage, since the loss of thorium 
from the surface is dependent on the anode current. 

4.1.2.2 Because of a progressive change in the carburized state of the 
filament during life, the filament resistance will change, with consequents 
alteration of filament current. At the end of its life, the hot filament 
resistance will usually be 10 to 20 percent less than at the start of its life. 
Allowance should be made for this effect, either in the rating of the filament 

♦Eiectrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes and valves, Section 1 Receiving 
valves. 

fCode of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 



IS : 2597 (Part IU). 1969 

transformer or by providing means for maintaining constant filament power. 
The latter method is generally preferable. Guidance should be sought 
from the valve manufacturer. 

4.1.3 Switching of Tungsten Filament and Thoriated Tungsten Filament 
Valves — It is recommended that the filament current of large tungsten 
filament and thoriated tungsten filament valves should be limited when 
switching on from cold, and that the current should be reduced slowly 
when switching off. 

4. 1.3.1 Convenient methods of limiting the filament current are: 
(a) switching in two or more steps, and (b) the use of a saturated-core 
filament transformer. In general, the surge filament current while 
switching-on the cold filament should not be allowed to exceed the limits 
specified by the valve manufacturers. 

4.1.3.2 These precautions are required to minimize stress due to 
magnetic or thermal effects, and manufacturer's instructions normally state 
when they are necessary. 

4.1.4 R.F. or Pulse Operation of Heaters or Filaments — For certain purposes, 
it is necessary to supply the heaters or filaments of valves from a power 
supply generated by an r.f. oscillator or from a pulse source. In such 
circuits it is often impracticable to keep within the tolerances mentioned 
previously, and valve manufacturers, having allowed for this in their valve 
design, specify wider tolerances for this application when necessary. 
Commonly the valve is a high voltage rectifier and it is, therefore, impracti- 
cable to measure the voltage by a normal voltmeter, or even by a electronic 
voltmeter, to check that the supply is correct. 

4.1.4.1 In some cases the current may be checked directly with a 
thermal ammeter suitably insulated and calibrated for the frequency in use, 
but it is often more convenient to utilize a visual comparison of filament 
temperature. In this method a selected average valve is set up in close 
proximity to the one in the equipment, but its filament or heater is operated 
from dc or 50 c/s ac supply. 

4.1.4.2 The voltage applied to the second valve is varied until careful 
observation of the colours of the cathodes indicates that their temperatures 
are equal; this voltage is taken as the operating figure. The measurement 
may be assisted by the employment of a suitable optical pyrometer and it 
is recommended that the valves be interchanged and a second measurement 
made, the mean being taken as the true figure. 

4.2 Oxide Coated Cathodes — The precautions outlined in 3.4 of 
IS: 2597 (Part I)-1964* shall apply to oxide coated cathodes in large 
valves. 



♦Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 

5 



18:2597 (Part IU)-1969 

5. MOUNTING AND INSTALLATION OF LARGE VALVES 

5.1 Mounting — All large valves should be mounted with the filament 
vertical. In some instances the manufacturers' data may state that care 
shall be taken to meet this requirement with some accuracy. The filament 
may sag towards the grid under its own weight unless the mounting is as 
specified. 

5.1.1 With large valves, particular care should be taken to observe the 
provisions specified in 3.5.6 of IS: 2597 (Part I)-1964*. 

5.1.2 In mobile or portable equipment and in fixed installations subject to 
vibration, care should be exercised to ensure that the valve supports or 
chassis are suitably designed to protect the valve from mechanical shocks 
and vibration in excess of the limits specified by the manufacturer. 

5.2 Corona Effects — Metal parts (particularly sharp points or edges) 
which might cause intense electrostatic fields should not be located in the 
vicinity of valves operating at high voltages since corona discharge may 
occur and cause damage to the valve. On installation, filament and 
flexible leads should be kept well clear of the envelope and adjacent con- 
ductors respectively. Wherever necessary, suitable corona rings may be 
provided on such metal parts. 

6. APPLICATION OF VOLTAGES 

6.1 General — The various voltages (namely, filament, grid bias and 
H. T. ) to a valve shall be applied in the sequence specified by the manu- 
facturer. The operation of cooling system, if any, in relation to the appli- 
cation of the voltages shall also be as stipulated by the manufacturer. 
Otherwise, the valves may either be destroyed or may have their useful 
life reduced. 

6.2 Application of High Voltages — In high power valves, large electro- 
des may release sufficient gas during storage, causing a flash arc when a 
high voltage is subsequently applied. When the supply is from a low 
impedance source, this arc may be sustained and cause damage to the 
valve. Arcing is avoided by the clean-up of the gas during operation at a 
lower voltage. It is, therefore, advisable for high voltages to be applied in 
two or more steps. 

6.2.1 For new valves or for valves kept in storage for a long period, it is 
also preferable to pause at each step for a period of at least 15 minutes. 
The manufacturer should be consulted for his recommendations, particular- 
ly in the case of new valves under development. 

♦Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 



IS : 2597 ( Part HI)- 1969 

6 .3 Application of Filament Voltages — It is advisable for new high 
power valves and for valves (either low power or high power) kept in 
storage for a long period, the specified filament voltage shall be applied and 
maintained for a period of at least 30 minutes or for a period specified by 
the valve manufacturer before the application of high voltages. 

6.4 Delayed Switching of H. T. — If the anode voltage is applied before 
the cathode is sufficiently hot to provide the required current, the voltage 
drop across the valve will be abnormally high and the resulting bombard- 
ment of the cathode with positive ions of unusually high velocity may cause 
serious damage to the emissive coating. This will result in a reduction of 
the useful life of the cathode, or, in extreme cases, a destructive anode-to- 
cathode arc. Therefore, most large directly-heated and all large indirectly- 
heated valves require the application of anode voltage to be delayed. For 
this purpose the use of an automatic time-delay switch is recommended. 
In smaller types this requirement often only applies to certain ratings. 
Where such delay is essential this is indicated in the manufacturer's data. 

6.5 Valves operated at high voltage and with external electrode connections 
should be kept free from accumulated dust to minimize surface leakage and 
the possibility of arc-over. This should be done periodically, when the 
tube is cold, using a clean, soft, lint-free cloth ( if possible, moistened with 
alcohol ). All tube terminals and connectors shall be kept bright and clean 
to provide good electrical contact. 

6.6 All large valves should be used under operating conditions and in 
circuits approved of or specified by the suppliers and in accordance with 
the general instructions contained therein. 

7. VENTILATION AND COOLING 

7.1 Natural Air-Cooled Valves — It is particularly necessary to ensure 
adequate heat radiation and circulation of cooling air round the valve 
envelope. The recommendations of 3.6 of IS: 2597 (Part I)- 1964* apply 
particularly in such instances. 

7,1.1 Manufacturers frequently specify local limiting temperatures, for 
example, to ensure that excessive stress is not introduced at the glass-to- 
metal seal and to ensure the conduction of heat from electrodes. In 
particular instances, manufacturers stipulate the employment of terminal 
radiators. The use of polished surfaces facing the valves should be avoided, 
as they reflect heat into the valve. Consideration should also be given to 
the air flow in systems with free circulation. Any obstruction to the air flow 
around the valve should be avoided and openings at the top of the cabinet 
should be provided to allow hot air to escape. Clearance space around the 

•Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 



IS : 2597 (Part m )- 1969 

valve, should be provided in accordance with the manufacturer's recom- 
mendations. If design requirements necessitate the enclosing of the valve, 
special arrangements should be made to ensure that the limiting envelope 
temperature is not exceeded. 

7.2 Forced Air Cooling — Many large valves are designed for forced air 
cooling; in such valves, heat is transferred from the electrodes to the cool- 
ing air stream by means of radiating fins through which cool air is forced. 
The volume and pressure of air required for a given electrode dissipation 
are specified by the manufacturer; due allowance should be made for 
pressure loss in the ducting, and any other obstruction to air flow. 

7.2.1 In addition to the main air cooling, special air jets directed at 
certain parts may be recommended by the manufacturer. Air flow should 
be started before the application of voltages to the valve and continued for 
a period as recommended by the manufacturer after voltages have been 
removed. 

7.2.2 It is not always appreciated that the inlet temperature of the cool- 
ing air may be affected by the hotter exhaust when, for example, the inlet 
and outlet ducts of a cooling system are in close proximity. Similarly, 
when equipment is operating in a room which is itself inadequately venti- 
lated, the air available for cooling may reach an undesirably high tempera- 
ture. Care should, therefore, be taken to avoid such contingencies. 

7.2.3 The use of an inlet filter in any air supply is recommended, parti- 
cularly in dusty or dirty locations, to avoid clogging of the air ducts and 
also for the reason outlined in 3.6.5 of IS : 2597 ( Part I )-1964*. 

7.2.4 For automatic protection of valves against failure of any of the air 
supplies, power supplies to all electrodes (including the filament) should 
be interlocked with the air supply system, so that when ventilation fails, 
power supplies are cut off from the valve. 

7 JS Water-Cooled Valves — The circulated cooling water should be as 
free as possible from all dissolved solid matter and the dissolved oxygen 
content should also be low. It is generally advisable that a closed water 
system using demineralized or purified water should be employed. 

7.3.1 The resistivity of the cooling water should be not less than 
3'3/kQ* and the inorganic solid content should not exceed thirty parts per 
million, but for some applications and some types of valve it may be desir- 
able for the resistivity to be considerably higher and the solid content to be 
less. The valve manufacturer should in each case be consulted. If water 
containing appreciable dissolved solid matter is used for cooling, ' furring ' 
of the anode and water pipes will take place. Such ' fur f acts as a thermal 
insulating layer on the anode and seriously interferes with the conduction 

♦Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 

8 



IS: 2597 (Part III) -1969 

of heat from the anode to the cooling water. The resultant overheating of 
the anode may he sufficient to cause gas evolution resulting in failure and 
in extreme cases lead to local melting of the metal envelope itself. 
Dissolved oxygen in the water will cause the deposition of oxide on the hot 
anode surface and other metal surfaces and similarly interfere with the 
efficient conduction of the heat away from the valve. This oxide may be 
produced from metal in the piping and tanks. 

7.3.2 Except where the valve anode is at earth potential, excessive con- 
ductivity of the water or insufficient hose column length will result in 
leakage current which, through electrolytic action, will damage metal con- 
nections in the water-cooling system. 

7.3.3 Rates of water flow and maximum water outlet temperature are 
normally specified by the manufacturer. Cooling water should be circulating 
before power is applied to the filament and should continue circulating 
for sufficient time to conduct away the residual heat after the supply 
voltages have been cut off. The heat from the filament alone may cause 
serious damage in the absence of cooling water. The water outlet tempe- 
rature from the anode should be continuously monitored during operation 
and should generally not be allowed to exceed 70°C or the value recom- 
mended by the manufacturer. 

7.3.4 It is also desirable to periodically clean the anodes to remove sur- 
face contamination and scale formation, if any. This can be done by 
dipping the anode in a dilute hydrochloric acid of 5 to 10 percent con- 
centration. 

7.3.5 Power supplies to all electrodes ( including the filament ) should be 
interlocked with the water supply system so that in the event of a failure of 
the water supply the power supplies are cut off from the valve. Where 
water or forced air-cooled filament-leads or grid-seals are used, similar pre- 
cautions should be taken. 

7.4 Vapour Cooled Valves — In this method, the heat is dissipated 
through water vapour. This method is an improvement over air and water 
cooling systems, where high powers are concerned. It consists in immers- 
ing the anode ( fitted with a specially shaped radiator ) into a tank contain- 
ing a few litres of distilled water. The water around the radiator is brought 
to its boiling point and converted into steam, thus absorbing the latent heat 
of vaporization from the anode. The steam generated flows through a 
steam separator and enters the heat exchanger, where the steam is con- 
densed and the coolant returns to the boiler. Since the heat dissipation 
of the valve is absorbed by a change in state of the coolant, the efficiency is 
greater and the water requirements much smaller, as compared to a water- 
cooled valve. Since the boiler is at anode potential, it should be mounted 
on insulators capable of withstanding high r.f. voltage. In addition, 



IS:2597 (Part in )- 1969 

insulating sections are to be built into the water and steam-piping adjacent 
to the boiler. The efficiency of the vapour cooling is dependant on the 
anode and boiler design. 

7.4.1 Only distilled water should be used as the coolant. If some impu- 
rities are contained, scale may deposit on the anode and the efficiency of 
cooling may be reduced. To remove scales^ the anode is cleaned by dipp- 
ing it in dilute hydrochloric acid of 5 to 10 percent concentration. 

7.4.2 It is important that the level of water in the boiler is maintained 
within limits, as recommended by the manufacturer. Too high and too 
low a level of water in the boiler are injurious to the valve. The inside of 
the boiler should also be checked periodically for precipitation. A protec- 
tive system should be provided to guard against low and high water levels 
in the boiler. 

7.4.3 When replacing a valve or distilled water, sufficient time should 
be allowed for the boiler to cool, to prevent the operators from getting 
scalded. 

7.5 Cooling of Other Electrodes — Where forced air-cooled filament 
leads and/or grid seals are used, it is to be ensured that the specified air 
flow is started prior to the application of filament voltage and continued 
for some time even after removal of all voltages. The manufacturer 
should be consulted for his recommendations. 

8. MULTI-VALVE WORKING 

8.1 When valves are used in parallel or push-pull, separate grid resistors 
should be provided for each valve. Means should also be provided for 
balancing the operating conditions to avoid exceeding the rating of any 
valve. Since it is unlikely that two or more valves will have precisely 
identical characteristics, the load may not be equally shared between them. 
Further, although they may be approximately matched initially, it is 
unlikely they will remain matched during life. If balance is not con- 
tinuously maintained, it is recommended that the maximum anode current 
drawn per valve should be 10 percent less than the rating for one valve. 

9. SAFETY PROTECTION 

9.1 General — In all applications the valves should be provided with 
adequate safety protection against damage or failure due to operational 
overload (see 9.2) and inadequate cooling (see 7). In addition high 
power valves should be protected against any flash-over ( see 9.3 ) and 
excessive temperatures (see 9.4). The necessary safety devices should be 
provided in accordance with the protection recommended by the manu- 
facturers of valves. 

JO 



IS : 2597 (Part III)- 1969 

9.2 Protection Against Operational Overloads — Overcurrent relays 
should be provided in the anode and grid circuits to trip h.t. supply at 
120 percent of the normal currents within 50 milliseconds and h.t. should 
not be reapplied before a minimum period of 100 milliseconds or as speci- 
fied by the manufacturers of the valves. Overcurrent protection should be 
provided individually in case of valves in parallel or in push-pull. 

9.2.1 A protection resistance of 10 to 100 Q, depending on the normal 
anode current, may be introduced in the anode load to limit the flow of 
current until overcurrent relays come into operation. 

9.2.2 An under-bias relay may be incorporated to prevent application of 
h.t. voltage when the grid-bias is below a certain predetermined level. 

9.2.3 Suppressors for parasitic oscillations should be provided in anode 
and grid circuits. 

9.2.4 Provision should exist for reduction of h.t. for test and adjustment 
purposes. This may be done either by star /delta arrangement in h.t. 
transformer or by other suitable methods. 

9.3 Protection Against Internal Flash-Over in High Power Valves — 

Frequent internal flash-over in high power valves will result in permanent 
damage to valves unless devices for high speed protection are provided. 
The usual method is to provide an instantaneous by-pass of the direct 
current h.t. supply to earth. This is generally achieved by means of 
electronic shorting devices or triggered spark gaps so that protection could 
be afforded within 50 microseconds. 

9.4 Protection Against Excessive Temperature — The manufacturers 
of valves may be consulted regarding the necessity of incorporating ther- 
mal fuses in order to protect against excessive temperature due to any 
cause. 

10. STORAGE AND TRANSIT 

10.1 The recommendations of 3.16 of IS: 2597 (Part I)-1964* are parti- 
cularly important for large transmitting valves. In addition, any rack 
employed should be designed to protect the valve from excessive shaking or 
vibration and be so constructed that no stresses are imposed on the glass to 
metal seals or the glass envelope. 

It is strongly recommended that large transmitting valves should be 
transported in their original packing. 

10.2 Valves are weak especially against lateral vibrations and shocks and 
it is necessary to avoid dropping, upside down handling, or direct and 
indirect vibrations and shocks during transportation. 



♦Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 

11 



ISi2597( Part IH). 1969 

10.3 When handling transmitting tubes, they should be held by the strong 
metal parts and not by the glass parts. Placing the tubes directly on the 
floor should be avoided. They should be placed slowly on a cushion only. 

11. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR VALVES USED IN 
EQUIPMENT FOR INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS 

11.1 Rating — Many transmitting valve types designed primarily for use in 
communication equipment may also be used in industrial application. In 
some instances the ratings for such valves have been determined by the 
valve manufacturer only for the former type of service. The service condi- 
tion associated with industrial application can be more severe than those 
normally associated with communication service, hence close co-operation 
should exist between the industrial equipment designer and the valve 
manufacturer. 

11.1.1 The more severe conditions are mainly due to the wide variations 
in load impedance usually encountered. These can cause correspondingly 
large variations in grid current, anode current, grid dissipation and anode 
dissipation. The risk of exceeding the valve ratings is therefore increased. 

11.1.2 Particular attention is invited to 3.3 of IS: 2597 (Part I)-1964*. 

11.13 Designer of industrial equipment should allow in their design for 
additional factors of safety within the absolute maximum ratings published 
by the valve manufacturer for communication service. 

11.2 Protection — To avoid damage to the valve in the event of an over- 
load, it is recommended that the minimum protection incorporated in 
industrial equipment should include rapid action devices to cut off h.t. 
voltage if the anode or grid current exceeds the manufacturer's maximum 
rating. If the anode dissipation at zero grid-bias exceeds the valve rating, 
then grid under-current protection is also recommended in case oscillation 
ceases while h.t. is on. Where water or forced air cooling of the valves is 
used, protection against failure of the coolant is necessary (see 7). To 
avoid excessive grid dissipation due to variable anode load in industrial 
applications, non-linear circuit elements like glow-lamps may be incorpo- 
rated in the grid circuit. 

11.2.1 The permissible operating conditions will vary according to the 
type of power supply used and the adequacy of protection incorporated ir> 
the equipment may involve considerable reduction of anode input as 
compared with adequately smoothed and protected supplies. 

113 Installation — Designers of industrial equipment should pay atten- 
tion to the mechanical construction of the connectors to the valve since 
these valves will be changed and handled by unskilled personnel. 

♦Code of practice for the use of electronic valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves. 

12 



AMENDMENT NO, I AUGUST 1973 

TO 

IS: 2597 ( Part III )-1969 CODE OF PRACTICE 
FOR THE USE OF ELECTRON VALVES 

PANT III TRANSMITTING AND INDUSTRIAL VALVES 

Alterations 

( Fitst (aver page, pages I and 3 t Title) — Substitute the following for 
the existing title: 

* Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOlt THE USE OF 
ELECTRON TUBES 

PART III TRANSMITTING AND INDUSTRIAL TUBES' 

Substitute 'electron tubes • for 'electronic valves' and ' electron 
tubes ami valves ' wbctcvrr it appears in the standard. 

Substitute ' tube 'Jot * valve ' wherever it appeals in the standard. 

( EI DC 3«> ) 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 5000 Indian Standards, broadly classified under the following 
main heads, have been issued so far: 

Agriculture & Food Electrotechnical 

Chemical Mechanical Engineering 

Civil Engineering Structural & Metals 

Consumer Products Textile 

Of these, the standards belonging to the Electrotechnical Group 
fall under the following categories: 

Acoustics Insulating Materials 

Appliances Insulators and Accessories 
Automobile Electrical Equipment Integrating Meters 

Batteries Lamps and Accessories 

Cinematographic Equipment Lifts and Escalators 

Conductors and Cables Lightning Arresters 

Electric Welding Equipment Motors and Generators 

Electrical Instruments Mica 

Electron Tubes and Valves Nomenclature and 

Electronic Components and Symbols 

Equipment Power Capacitors and Con- 
Environmental Testing Procedures verters 

Fans Semiconductor Devices 

High Voltage Techniques Switchgear and Controlgear 

Illuminating Engineering Transformers 

Instrument Transformers and Winding Wires 

Relays Wiring Accessories 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

Rs 

tSI Bulletin ( Published Every Month) 

Single Copy ... ... ... ... 3'0? 

Annual Subscription ... ... ... ... 25'0? 

Annual Reports (from 1948-49 Onwards)... ... ... 2*00 to 3'00 each 

Handbook of ISI Publications, 1969 ... ... ... lO™ 



Available from 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 

Tilepbontt 27 36 1 1 - 20 Teltgrams Manakuntthi 

Branch Offices 

Telegrams Manaksanstha 

534 SardarVallabhbhaiPatel Road Bombay 7 Telephone 35 69 44 

5 Chowrlnghee Approach Calcutta 13 •• 23-18 23 

$.9-201/2 Chirac All Lane Hyderabad 1 „ 3 23 35 

117/411 B Sarvodaya Nagar Kanpur 5 „ 6 76 95 

14 General Patter* Road Madras 2 „ 8 72 78 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



