Wdta Ah IS 18289 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


qha eh UAT AAA CHT AAT ATH T 


— fmia 


Post-earthquake Safety Assessment 
of Buildings — Guidelines 


ICS 91.120.25 


© BIS 2023 


aea AM À 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 SER ME AHL ATT, Ag Reet - 110002 
w MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Earthquake 
Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


About 80 percent of India’s housing stock is located in a landmass that is likely to sustain moderate to severe 
earthquake ground shaking. Also, a significant part of the existing stock of buildings in India is an outcome of 
unregulated construction. Losses of life and damage in buildings have been significant during past earthquakes 
in India. The above facts suggest that large losses are likely in buildings in future also. In the aftermath of an 
earthquake, it is necessary to undertake a damage assessment to help: 


a) Determine whether a building that has sustained earthquake shaking can be continued to be used for 
the function it has been intended; and 


b) Learn the deficiencies in the current building stock to eventually make a critical change in the 
building bye laws. 


The nuances are many behind assessment of buildings in the Indian context, where the number of typologies is 
large and the variation within the typologies is significant. This standard can be used to meet the above needs. 
This standard recognizes that the damage assessment can be performed at four levels, namely: 


a) Level 1: Simplified qualitative assessment; 

b) Level 2: Detailed qualitative assessment; 

c) Level 3: Simplified quantitative assessment; and 
d) Level 4: Detailed quantitative assessment. 


The standard uses the Level 1 method of assessment as the basis for post-earthquake damage assessment of 
buildings through life-threatening factors, which are specific to each building typology. 


The standard is expected to be used only by competent safety assessment inspectors (SAIs), who are formally 
trained to undertake field surveys in earthquake-affected areas. Competent authorities of the Government of 
India, state governments or UT administrations should commission the SAIs to: 


a) Undertake field surveys immediately after the emergency period is over and capture the information 
needed towards the safety assessment of buildings; and 
b) Tag (as per colour code) the buildings using the forms given in this standard. 


The intended outcome of the safety assessment survey is a decision on whether or not the building is occupiable 
and the recommendation for further level(s) of technical evaluation. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 
This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: 


a) A primer on rapid visual screening (RVS), consolidating earthquake safety assessment efforts in India, 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi, 2020. 


b) Earthquake disaster risk index (EDRI) report, 50 towns and 1 district in seismic zones III, IV and V, 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi, 2018. 


c) FEMA 178, NEHRP Handbook for the seismic evaluation of existing buildings, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, Washington DC, USA. 


d) FEMA 310, (1998), Handbook for the seismic evaluation of buildings, Federal Emergency Management 
Agency, Washington DC, USA. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 18289 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


POST-EARTHQUAKE SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF BUILDINGS 
— GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 The provisions of this standard are applicable to 
ascertain whether or not a building affected during 
an earthquake can be occupied immediately after the 
earthquake. 


1.2 This standard provides guidance only for the two 
common building typologies, namely: 


a) Unreinforced masonry 
buildings; and 

b) RC moment frame buildings with 
unreinforced masonry infill walls. 


load-bearing 


1.3 Provisions of this standard shall be applicable to 
buildings hosting the following: 


a) Residential buildings; 

b) Educational namely schools, colleges, 
institutes, and university buildings; 

c) Hospitals and healthcare facilities; 

d) Police headquarters buildings and police 
stations; 

e) Fire stations and fire brigade facilities; 

f) Food and civil supplies facilities; 

g) Transportation facilities; 

h) Power generation and distribution facilities; 

j) Communication facilities; 

k) Disaster management facilities; 

m) Business and mercantile buildings; and 

n) Governance facilities. 


The competent authorities may identify additional 
facilities that need to be examined after the 
earthquake. 


1.4 The provisions of this standard seek filling of 
forms based on visual inspection of the building, and 
do not require any calculations to be performed 
using geometric dimensions of buildings or current 
properties of materials used in the construction of 
the building. 


1.5 The provisions of this standard exclude the loss 
estimation, and correlation between the damage and 
loss. However, the standard provides clear 
recommendation as to which level of technical 
assessment is needed if the building is not green 
tagged (see 5.3 for colour coded tagging of 
buildings). 


1.6 The provisions of the standard may be suitably 
used to evaluate/assess the buildings damaged by 
any other disaster by the agencies/authorities 
concerned. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard given below contains provisions, 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 13935 :2009 Seismic evaluation, repair and 
strengthening of masonry 
buildings — Guidelines (first 
revision) 


IS 15988 : 2013 Seismic evaluation and 
strengthening of existing 
reinforced concrete buildings 
— Guidelines 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall be applicable: 


3.1 Architectural Elements and Utilities — Three 
sets of finishes of buildings that need to be supported 
by the structural elements, namely: 


a) Contents of buildings — Items required for 
functionally enabling the use of spaces, 
such as: 


1) furniture and other items, for example, 
storage shelves; 

2) facilities and equipment, for example, 
refrigerators, multi-level material 
stacks, false ceilings; and 

3) door and window panels and frames, or 
plyboard or aluminium partitions. 


b) Appendages to buildings — Items 
projecting out from buildings, either 


IS 18289 : 2023 


horizontally or vertically, such as chimneys, 
exterior glass or stone cladding (pasted on 
the building surface as façades), parapets, 
small water tanks rested on top of buildings, 
sunshades, advertisement hoardings and 
communication antennas atop buildings. 


c) Services and utilities — Items required for 
facilitating essential activities in the 
buildings, such as water mains, electricity 
cables, air-conditioning ducts, rainwater 
drainpipes, firefighting, gas pipes, 
instrumentation cables and elevators. 


3.2 Architectural Form — The three features, 
namely: 
a) Overall geometry [shape of geometry 
(convex or concave), absolute dimensions 
(too tall, too long and too wide, relative 
dimensions (plan and elevation aspect 
ratios)]; 


b) Choice of © structural configuration 
(regularity of the load paths, regularity of 
mass, stiffness and strength in plan and 
elevation); and 


c) Choice of non-structural elements and 
their configuration (interference of the 
non-structural elements with structural 
elements during the lateral earthquake 
shaking). 


3.3 Damage Assessment — The process of 
measuring qualitatively or quantitatively the extent 
of damage, which the structure has sustained. 
During the aftermath of the earthquake, damage 
assessment is done to verify whether the building is: 
(a) occupiable, (b) not occupiable, or (c) needs 
further examination. 


3.4 Fissure — An opening or crack in the surface of 
ground. 


3.5 Hybrid Building — A building in which the 
loads on the reinforced masonry (RC) slab are 
carried by unreinforced masonry walls made 
primarily of burnt or unburnt clay bricks, adobe or 
concrete blocks. 


3.6 Liquefaction — A process during which 
granular soils lose their shear strength (and thereby 
the bearing capacity) under saturated condition 
when shaken by earthquake ground motion, which 
occurs primarily in loose saturated cohesionless 
soils. 


3.7 Masonry Building — A building in which the 
loads on the RC slab are carried primarily by 
unreinforced masonry walls made primarily of burnt 
or unburnt clay bricks, adobe or concrete blocks. 


3.8 Material — The construction materials used for 
the structural elements of the building. 


3.9 MSK Intensity Scale — Scale used to define the 
severity of earthquake shaking manifested at a site, 
evaluated based on three aspects, namely: 


a) Behaviour of human beings during the 
earthquake, 

b) Performance of buildings during the 
earthquake, and 

c) Changes induced in the natural 
surroundings by the earthquake. 


NOTE — The scale was proposed by three Russian 
scientists, namely Medvedev, Sponheur and Karnik, in 
1964. 


3.10 Non-Structural Elements — The elements 
which imposes loads and not resist the building 
loads. Examples include equipment, services such 
as fire water system, ventilation system, drainage 
systems and masonry infill walls. These are 
supported necessarily by structural elements. 


3.11 Occupancy — The intended use of the 
building, for example, residential, business, 
educational, institutional use, etc. 


3.12 RC Moment Frame Building — A building in 
which the loads on the RC slab are carried by 
monolithically casted RC frames made of beams, 
and columns and resting on an RC foundation. 


3.13 Safety Assessment — The process of 
measuring qualitatively or quantitatively the extent 
of departures in the structure as compared to ideal 
house of the same typology. Safety assessment is 
done to verify whether the building needs to be 
retrofitted or not. The same is done to ensure the 
safety of the people and services and process 
systems to avoid life threats. 


3.13.1 Level 1: Simplified Qualitative Assessment — 
This level of assessment is based on a rapid visual 
survey of critical aspects of buildings, after 
earthquakes, involving limited aspects of details of 
the building along the five facets, namely site 
conditions, architectural form, structural system, 
material condition, and construction details. 


3.13.2 Level 2: Detailed Qualitative Assessment — 
This level of assessment is based on a detailed visual 
survey of conceptual aspects of buildings, after 
earthquakes, involving all details of the building 
along the five facets, namely site conditions, 
architectural form, structural system, material 
condition, and construction details, without the use 
of any engineering equipment and without 
necessarily examining the interiors of the building. 


3.13.3 Level 3: Simplified Quantitative Assessment 
— This level of assessment is based on a simplified 
estimation of lateral safety of buildings, involving 
the estimation of horizontal shear capacity along two 
principal plan directions of buildings to determine 
the overall horizontal safety of buildings. 


3.13.4 Level 4: Detailed Quantitative Assessment 
— This level of assessment is based on the 
detailed structural safety of buildings, involving 
complete structural safety evaluation of buildings to 
determine the deficiencies at the component 
and overall building levels. 


3.14 Site Conditions — The topographical features 
(for example, flat or sloping ground, and ground 
with cracks/fissures), and soil behavioural features 
(for example, potential of liquefaction and lateral 
spreading, possibility of landslide, or rolling debris) 
at the location where the building is resting. 


3.15 Sliding — A condition in which the 
earthquake-induced horizontal force is more than the 
frictional resistance at the base of the object. 


3.16 Structural Elements — Members (for 
example, slabs, beams, columns, foundation(s) and 
joints between them) of a building that carry inertia 
forces from mass points to the ground underneath. 


3.17 Structural System — Structural system of a 
building defines the primary load path along the 
horizontal and vertical elements connected to each 
other from the mass points where inertia force is 
induced to the ground underneath. 


3.18 Tagged Buildings — Buildings inspected post 
an earthquake by Safety Assessment Inspectors and 
identified using colour coded tags. 


3.18.1 Green Tag Buildings — Green tag buildings 
have no life-threatening or economic loss-inducing 
feature present in them. 


3.18.2 Red Tag Buildings — Red tag buildings have 
at least one life-threatening feature present in them. 


3.18.3 Yellow Tag Buildings — Yellow tag 
buildings have no life-threatening features present in 
them but have economic loss-inducing features 
present in them. 


3.18.4 Black Tag Buildings — Black tag buildings 
have severely damaged vertical load-carrying 
elements and severely damaged life-threatening 
features. 


3.19 Tilt — The out of the vertical plumb state of 
the building after earthquake shaking, which can 
happen when any of the following three happen: 


IS 18289 : 2023 


(a) soil underneath liquefies, (b) soil underneath 
settles, or (c) the structural element in the 
foundation fails. 


3.20 Toppling — A condition in which the 
overturning force generated during earthquake 
shaking is more than restoring force. 


3.21 Visual Inspection — The act of examining 
visually the condition of the building along with 
five aspects namely: 


a) site conditions, 

b) architectural form, 

c) structural system, 

d) material condition, and 

e) construction details, without the use of any 
engineering equipment and without 
necessarily examining the interiors of the 
building. 


3.22 Wythe — A single vertical layer of the 
masonry wall, which behaves independently, during 
earthquake shaking. 


3.23 Safety Assessment Inspector (SAD — A 
qualified person with a bachelor's degree in civil 
engineering or architecture; in addition to the above 
having competence as mentioned in 7.1.1. 


4 SYMBOLS 


The symbols and notations used in this standard are 
given as under: 


AEUs Architectural Elements and Utilities 

DDMA District Disaster Management 
Authority 

NDMA National Disaster Management 
Authority 

SAIs Safety Assessment Inspectors 

SAPR Safety Assessment and Performance 
Rating 

SDMA State Disaster Management Authority 

5 GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


5.1 Evaluation Criteria 
Criteria for post-earthquake evaluation of buildings 
considered in this standard include: 


a) Loss of vertical load-carrying capacity 
after the earthquake, and 


b) Loss of overall integrity of the building. 
5.2 Safety Assessment Inspection 


The procedures described in this standard assume 
that local authorities have the authority to inspect 
buildings, even apparently undamaged structures, in 
the post event period. Also, the local authorities can 


IS 18289 : 2023 


authorize Safety Assessment Inspectors (SAIs) to 
inspect the building. 


5.3 Tagging of Buildings 


After the inspection, it is necessary to post the 
building's safety rating. This is done to let the 
owner, occupants, and public know whether the 
building is safe for occupancy and general use. 
Three different safety posting categories for 
buildings are as follows: 


a) Red tag (unsafe): This indicates that the 
building shall not be occupied. 


1) Buildings categorized as the red tag 
may be examined in detail for 
structural safety by a competent 
structural engineer. 


2) Based on the examination by a 
competent structural engineer a 
building may undergo repair or retrofit 
as may be required and subsequently 
re-categorized as a green tag building 
for occupancy. 


b) Yellow tag (requires further evaluation): 
This indicates that the building shall be 
evaluated further using a_ higher-level 
method (level 2~4). 


c) Green tag (safe): Indicates that the building 
can be occupied. 


5.4 Barricading of Buildings 


All buildings, which are yellow tagged or red 
tagged, shall be barricaded compulsorily with clear 
signage indicating: 


a) Yellow and red tags, and 
b) Type of entry. 


6 EARTHQUAKE SAFETY ASSESSMENT 
6.1 Assessment Strategy 


Damage assessment of buildings can be performed 
at four levels specified in IS 13935, namely: 


a) Level 1: Simplified qualitative assessment, 

b) Level 2: Detailed qualitative assessment, 

c) Level 3: Simplified quantitative assessment, 
and 

d) Level 4: Detailed quantitative assessment. 


This standard uses level 1 as the basis for 
post-earthquake safety assessment of buildings. In 


this step, building safety shall be examined for the 
purpose of immediate occupancy of buildings 
through life-threatening factors. 


6.1.1 Life-Threatening Factors — These shall be 
examined in each of the following aspects: 


a) Structural elements: 
1) Site/ground conditions, 
2) Architectural form and elements, 
3) Structural system and components, 
4) Material condition, and 
5) Construction details. 


b) Non-structural elements: 
1) Toppling or falling AEUs, and 
2) Sliding or breaking AEUS. 


7 FIELD SURVEY 


Field surveys shall be performed to undertake 
earthquake safety assessments after an earthquake. 
The following forms shall be used for the said 
assessments of the two typologies of buildings 
considered in this standard: 


a) Unreinforced masonry load-bearing 
buildings: Use Form 1A for post- 
earthquake building safety assessment as 
given in Table 1. 

b) RC moment frame buildings 
with unreinforced masonry infill walls: 
Use Form 2A for  post-earthquake 
building safety assessment as given in 
Table 2. 


7.1 Field Survey Team 


The field survey team consists of Safety Assessment 
Inspectors (SAIs). They shall undertake the 
earthquake safety assessment of buildings. They 
shall be performed only by a formally trained team 
of three assessors consisting of at least one 
architect, and at least one structural engineer, who 
has a good understanding of the earthquake 
behaviour of buildings and experience in handling 
the design and construction of buildings. 


7.1.1 Competence 


The SAIs shall be selected only if they have the 
following qualities: 


a) Positive attitude (for example, proactive 
and willing) to assist the government and 
the people in a fair and objective 
post-earthquake damage assessment, 

b) Sufficient technical skills are required to 
identify the structural and non-structural 
damages in buildings during field surveys, 
and 


c) Sound technical knowledge of the 
behaviour of buildings during strong 
earthquake ground shaking. 


7.1.1.1 The competent authority shall lay down 
academic qualifications for the SAI (team lead shall 
have the qualification not less than a Bachelor’s 
degree in Civil Engineering or Architecture). 


7.1.1.2 The competent authority shall arrange to 
train such persons as provided in 7.1.2. 


7.1.2 Training 


Making SAIs technically competent requires formal 
training well before the earthquake. The competent 
authorities shall arrange for such training of 
pre-identified eligible civil engineers, structural 
engineers and architects. This training shall have at 
least the following three components embedded in 
them: 


a) Performance of buildings in the past 
earthquake in India and worldwide, 


b) Detailed discussion on the field survey 
forms, and 


c) Pilot field exercises to undertake the safety 
assessment and performance rating first 
assisted and next unassisted. 


After the training, the SDMAs can issue certificates 
to SAIs, upon successful completion of the training. 


7.2 Safety Assessment Inspection 
7.2.1 Main Shock and Aftershocks 


Safety assessment inspection shall be undertaken 
after an earthquake or an aftershock of MSK 
intensity VI or higher. A building inspected after an 
earthquake and tagged red and yellow shall be 
re-inspected after the said aftershock. 


7.2.2 Managing Human Behaviour after Disaster 


The post-earthquake scenario involving severe 
damages and collapses is demanding on the Safety 
Assessment Inspectors. Utmost care shall be taken 
to ensure the aspects listed hereunder. 


a) General public — During inspections, the 
SAIs shall ensure the following: 


1) The negative features of any building 
shall not be discussed aloud even 
amongst the group of SAIs. 


2) The SAIs shall keep reiterating that the 
assessment is in progress and 
interested persons may approach the 


IS 18289 : 2023 


competent authorities regarding the 
final assessment or rating. 


b) Owners and tenants — The SAIs shall: 


1) Examine any building only in the 
presence of a person duly appointed by 
the Competent Authority to assist in 
the process. 


2) Not convey to the owner or tenant that 
their building is safe or unsafe. 

3) Remain empathetic to the owner or 
tenant throughout the process of 
inspection. 


c) Self — _  Post-earthquake, the building 
damage evaluation can be grueling work for 
the SAI. Hence, the SAI shall: 


1) Have requisite field survey forms 
customized for the said even and the 
location of inspection before 
beginning the survey to eliminate 
repetitive work at the site. 


2) Keep engaging with fellow Safety 
Assessment Inspectors to share notes 
and support each other. 


7.2.3 Judgement 


The decision on any building shall be conveyed 
only to the competent authorities and not to the 
owner, tenant or a representative of the society. 


a) Objective decision making 


This standard provides only typical damages 
commonly observed in buildings, and not an 
exhaustive list of all potential damages likely in 
buildings. When new types of damages are 
observed (for which guidance has not been 
provided in this standard, or guidance provided 
in this standard does not match the field 
condition), the Safety Assessment Inspectors 
shall use their experience and judgment, and 
document the same carefully. At all times, the 
Safety Assessment Inspectors shall provide the 
most objective decision irrespective of the 
consequences and without fear or favour. 


b) Building demolition 


When a building is black tagged and requires 
demolition, the competent authorities shall take 
due precautions to ensure that the adjoining 
buildings, structures, and facilities do not 
sustain any detrimental effects during or after 
demolition. In addition, the aspect of 
environmental pollution (dust), disposal of 
garbage has to be managed by competent 
authorities. 


IS 18289 : 2023 


8 EARTHQUAKE SAFETY ASSESSMENT building safety assessment as given in 
FORMS Table 1. 

For the post-earthquake safety assessment of b) RC moment frame buildings 
buildings, the following forms should be used: with unreinforced masonry infill walls: 


a) Unreinforced masonry load-bearing Use Form 2A for post-earthquake building 
buildings: Use Form 1A for post-earthquake safety assessment as given in Table 2 


Table 1 Form 1A for Level 1 Post-Earthquake Safety Assessment of Masonry Buildings 
[Clauses 7(a) and 8(a)] 


Post-Earthquake Safety Assessment 


Masonry Buildings 


Inspection Identification Date Time 
Inspector 1 Inspector 2 Inspector 3 
Building Description | Building Name Address Coordinates 
ns 
E® 
Structural System Load-bearing Masonry with 
( ) Igneous rocks (__) Sedimentary rocks ( ) Slate blocks 


(__) Others (please specify) 

Floor System (€ )RC slab 

( ) Timber planks and beams 
(__) Others (please state) 


Material Geometry 
( ) RC slab (__) Flat 
( ) Wooden truss with ( ) Pitched 
Clay tiles 
( ) Corrugated sheets (_) Hipped 
( ) Wood planks ( ) Others (please state) 


( ) Steel truss with 
corrugated sheeting 
( ) Others (please specify) 


( ) Cement ( ) Mud 
( ) Lime ( ) Others (please state) 
Occupancy Residential (__) Individual house (_) Apartment 
Educational (__) School ( ) College 
(__) Institute or university 
Lifeline (__) Hospital ( ) Police station 
(__) Fire station ( ) Power station 
( ) Water plant ( ) Sewage plant 
Commercial ( ) Hotel ( ) Shopping 
(_) Recreational 
Office ( ) Government ( ) Private 
Mixed Use ( ) Residential-Commercial | ( ) Residential-Industrial 
Others (__) Please state 
i) Siting/Ground Building has the following Siting Issues: 
Issues 1) Ground that has failed due to landslide or fissure. Re 
2) Resting on cracked river terraces during the EQ. Re 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


IS 18289 : 2023 


3) Resting on hill slopes or adjacent to hill slopes, and Red 
has damaged or/& tilted adjoining or uphill building. 

4) Resting on hill slopes that has loose boulders. Red 

5) Vulnerable to falling debris from uphill. 

ii) Soil and | Building has the following Soil & Foundation Conditions: 
Foundation 1) Has uneven settlement of foundation. Red 
Conditions 2) Soil underneath liquefied. Red 

iii) Architecture Building has the following Architecture Features: 

Features and 1) Outer dimensions of building at plinth level less than 
Elements those at the top in any of the two plan directions. 
2) Cracks in large unanchored projections and 
Red 
overhangs. 
3) Plan aspect ratio of the building is more than 5. 
4) Building has heavier upper storeys which are 
Red 
damaged. 
5) Building is located adjacent to damaged building. Red 
iv) Structural Building has the following Structural Aspects: 
Aspects and 1) Visible damage due to pounding from adjoining 
ae Red 
Components building. 
2) Tilted during earthquake. Red 
3) Collapsed/damaged staircase or stair cabin. Red 
4) Plinth masonry severely damaged. Red 
5) Sliding shear failure in the walls in any storey. Red 
6) Separation of walls at corners. Red 
7) Diagonal shear cracks in wall panels and/or spandrels. ii 
8) Floor-wall junction separated with walls out-of- 
plumb. Red 
9) Gable collapse. Red 
10) Walls separated into wythes. Red 
11)Collapsed cantilevers balconies, chimneys and Red 
parapets. 
12)Uneven settlement of adjacent building. Red 
13)Damage to large unanchored projections or 
Red 
overhangs. 
14) Sliding of roof visible over walls. Red 
15) Crushed masonry at wall base or at any level. Red 
16) Openings in masonry walls are cracked at corners. 

v) Material and | Building has the following Material and Construction Details: 
Construction 1) Walls made with mud mortar and deteriorated 
Details significantly. 

2) Walls are made with no mortar. 

3) Poor quality materials. 

4) Poor quality construction. 
None of the above 


If GREEN 


(with no Red or Yellow flag) 
Usable 


Suggested interventions: 


If at least one RED flag 


Unusable 


Actions 
Building to be sealed ( 
Building to be demolished ( 


) YES ( 
) YES ( 


)NO 
)NO 


IS 18289 : 2023 


Table 2 Form 2A for Level 1 Post-Earthquake Safety Assessment of RC MRF Buildings 


[Clauses 7(b) and 8(b)] 
Post-Earthquake Safety Assessment Reinforced Concrete Building 
Inspection Identification Date Time 
Inspector 1 Inspector 2 Inspector 3 
Building Building Name Address Coordinates 
Description 
N o 
E Z — °” 
Structural System ( ) Moment Frame ( ) Moment Frame with Structural Walls 
(_ ) Moment Frame with Braces (__) Others (Please state) 
Structural Floor System (__) In-situ (__) Precast Planks with In-situ screed 
Components ( ) Precast ( ) Others (Please state) 
Roof System ( )Flat ( )Hipped 
( ) Pitched ( ) Others (Please state) 
Occupancy Residential ( ) Individual House ( ) Apartment 
Educational ( ) School ( ) College 
(__) Institute or University 
Lifeline ( ) Hospital (  ) Police Station 
(  ) Fire Station (__) Power Station 
( ) Water Plant ( ) Sewage Plant 
Commercial (_) Hotel ( ) Shopping 
( ) Recreational 
Office ( ) Government ( ) Private 
Mixed Use ( ) Residential-Commercial ( ) Residential-Industrial 
Others ( ) Please state 
Sl Feature Parameters Tag 
No. 
i) Siting Issues Building has the following Siting Issues: 
1) Ground that has failed due to landslide or fissure. 
2) Resting on cracked river terraces. 
3) Resting on hill slopes or adjacent to hill slopes, and 
has damaged and tilted adjoining or uphill building. 
4) Resting on hill slopes that has loose. 
5) Vulnerable to falling debris from uphill. 
ii) | Soil and | Building has the following Soil and Foundation Conditions: 
Foundation 1) Has uneven settlement of foundation. 
Conditions 2) Soil underneath liquefied. 
3) Punching shear failure of foundation. 
iii) | Architecture Building has the following Architecture Features: 
Features and 1) Outer dimensions of building at plinth level less than those at 
Elements the top in any of the two plan directions. 
2) Cracks in large, unanchored projections and overhangs. 
3) Openings in infill masonry walls are cracked at corners. 
4) Plan aspect ratio of the building is more than 5. 
5) Building has heavier upper storeys. 
6) Building has more than 3 storeys. 
7) The minimum transverse dimension of columns is 200 mm. 
iv) Structural Building has the following Structural Aspects: 
Aspects and 1) Pounding from adjoining building. 
Components 2) Tilted during earthquake. 
3) Collapsed/damaged staircase or stair cabin. 


IS 18289 : 2023 


Table 2 (Concluded) 
4) Open storey at ground /other level with shear cracks in columns. (Bil 
5) Floating columns with cracked supporting beams. Red 
6) Main load resisting columns and walls have shear cracks. Red 
7) Main load resisting short columns have shear cracks. Red 
8) Flat slab with 7-way punching shear cracks initiated at column. [Mize 
9) Flat slab with 2-way punching shear cracks initiated at column. BG 
10) Spalling of cover concrete in main load resisting columns. Red 
11) Extensive cracking or out-of-plane collapse of infills. Red 
12) Collapsed cantilevers, balconies, chimneys and parapets. 
13) Plastic water tanks on roof displaced from their supports. 
14) Separation of infill wall - frame, with no damage in columns. 
v) | Material and | Building has the following Material and Construction Details: 
Construction 1) Poor maintenance of the building. 
Details 2) Concrete grade is less than M15. 
3) Corrosion of reinforcing bars visible at some places. Red 
4) Poor quality materials. 
5) Poor quality construction. 
vi) | All None of the above Green 


If GREEN 
(with no Red or Yellow 


flag) 


Usable 
Suggested interventions: 


If at least one RED flag 


Unusable 


Actions 
Building to be sealed 


Building to be demolished ( 


( ) YES ( 
) YES ( 


)NO 
)NO 


IS 18289 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Central Soils and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 

Creative Design Consultants Private Limited, 
Ghaziabad 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - National Geophysical Research Institute, 
Hyderabad 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


DDF Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 


Indian Association of Structural 


New Delhi 


Engineers, 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, 
Bhubaneswar 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
PROF C. V. R. MURTY (Chairperson) 
DR ROSHAN A. D. 
SHRI RAVI KUMAR 


DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI SHARAD GUPTA (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (D&DM) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR CMDD (E & NE) 
DIRECTOR EMBANKMENT (NW&S) (Alternate) 


DR N. P. HONKANDAVAR 
DR MANISH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMANDEEP GARG 
SHRI BARJINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


DR NAVJEEV SAXENA 
DR AJAY CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


DR PRANTIK MANDAL 
DR SANDEEP KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA 
DR K. SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR PRATIMA R. BOSE 
SHRI SADANAND OJHA (Alternate) 


DR G. G. SRINIVAS ACHARY 
DR SUDIP PAUL (Alternate) 


SHRI L. H. MOIRANGCHA 
SHRI SNEHASIS BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ MITTAL 
SHRI RAJIV AHUJA (Alternate) 


DR K. P. JAYA 
DR DEBASHISH BANDOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


DR SURESH RANJAN DASH 


DR RAVI SINHA 
DR ALOK GOYAL (Alternate) 


DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO 
DR VASANT MATSAGAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Palaj 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 


International Institute of Information Technology, 
Hyderabad 


Ministry of Earth Sciences, National Centre for 
Seismology, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation India Limited, Mumbai 


Power Grid Corporation of India, Gurugram 


SD Engineering Consultants LLP, New Delhi 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Vakil Mehta Sheth Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 
Nagpur 


In Personal Capacity (Row House 4, Sun City Housing 
Society, Vadgaon Budruk, Pune) 


In Personal Capacity (36, Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Road, Nagpur) 


IS 18289 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR AMIT PRASHANT 
DR MANISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR HEMANT B. KAUSHIK 
DR DURGESH C. RAI 


DR A. MEHER PRASAD 
DR RUPEN GOSWAMI (Alternate I) 
DR ARUN MENON (Alternate ID) 


DR YOGENDRA SINGH 
DR MANISH SHRIKHANDE (Alternate I) 
DR B. K. MAHESHWARI (Alternate II) 
DR P. C. ASHWIN KUMAR (Alternate III) 


PRESIDENT 
VICE PRESIDENT (Alternate) 


DR PRADEEP KUMAR RAMANCHARLA 


DR O. P. MISHRA 
DR H. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. OJHA 
SHRI BRIJESH SINGH (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANUP GHATAK (Alternate II) 


JOINT ADVISOR (MP & P) 
DR SUSANTA KUMAR JENA (Alternate I) 
SHRI MOHAMMAD JAVED IQBAL (Alternate II) 


DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
SHRI SAURABH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAGHUPATI ROY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. V. M. PRAKASH 
SHRI AKASH SHRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


MS SANGEETA WIJ 


PROF MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI VINAY K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN C. R. 


Ms ALPA R. SHETH 
SHRI R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


DR O. R. JAISWAL 
DRR. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


DR I. D. GUPTA 


SHRI L. K. JAIN 


IS 18289 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (H-102, VVIP Addresses, DRA. K. MITTAL 
Rajnagar Extn, Ghaziabad) 


In Personal Capacity (174/2 F, Solanipuram, Roorkee) DR S. K. THAKKAR 


BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR CHAUDHARY 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Composition of the Working Group under CED 39, WG 52 


Organization Representative(s) 
International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad, DR PRADEEP KUMAR RAMANCHARLA (Convener) 
Hyderabad 
CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee DR AJAY P. CHOURASIA 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai PROF C. V. R. MURTY 
DR ARUN MENON 
DR RUPEN GOSWAMI 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai DR RAVI SINHA 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati DR HEMANT B. KAUSHIK 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee DR YOGENDRA SINGH 
R S Mandrekar & Associates, Mumbai SHRI JASWANT ARLEKAR 
Vakil Mehta Sheth Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai MS ALPA SHETH 
Visvesvaraya National Institute Of Technology, Nagpur DR O. R. JAISWAL 
In Personal Capacity (16-9-831/7/1, Sarojini Nagar DR D. SRINAGESH 


Colony, Old Market, Hyderabad) 


(Continued from second cover) 


e) FEMA 154, (2002), Rapid visual screening of buildings for potential seismic hazards, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, Washington DC. 


f) FEMA P154, (2015), Rapid visual screening of buildings for potential seismic hazards: A Handbook, 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington DC, USA. 


g) FEMA P-2055, (2019), Post-disaster building safety evaluation guidance, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, Washington DC, USA. 


h) METU, (2003), Metropolitan municipality of Istanbul — Earthquake master plan for Istanbul, Middle 
East Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey. 


j) NRCC, (1993), Manual for screening of buildings for seismic investigation, National Research Council 
of Canada, Ottawa. 


k) JBDPA, (2001), Standard for seismic capacity evaluation of existing reinforced concrete buildings, Japan 
Build Disaster Prevention Association, Tokyo. 


m) NZSEE, (2006), Assessment and improvement of the structural performance of buildings in earthquakes, 
New Zealand Society for Earthquake Engineering, Wellington, New Zealand. 


n) NZSEE Provisions, “The seismic assessment of existing buildings’, Technical guidelines for engineering 
assessments, Assessment objectives and Principles, Part A, July 2017. 


In addition to the above, the relevant ISO standards on the theme are formulated by the ISO TC 292 on security 
and resilience. Some of them have already been adopted by the Risk Management, Security and Resilience 
Sectional Committee of the Bureau of Indian Standards, namely: 


a) IS/ISO 22320 : 2018 Security and resilience emergency management guidelines for incident management; 

b) ISASO 22395 : 2018 Security and resilience community resilience guidelines for supporting vulnerable 
persons in an emergency; and 

c) IS/ISO TR 22370 : 2020 Security and resilience urban resilience framework and principles. 


This standard contributes to the following United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9, ‘Industry, 
Innovation and Infrastructure’ towards building resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and sustainable 
industrialization and fostering innovation; and Goal 11, ‘Sustainable cities and communities towards making 
cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded-off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 39 (20611). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


