**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9405 (1980) : Method of test for conveyor belt fasteners 
[PGD 31: Bolts, Nuts and Fasteners Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



'2*S> W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621'867'2'0527 : 620*1 



IS : 9405- 1930 




Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



METHOD OF TEST FOR 
CONVEYOR BELT FASTENERS 



1. Scope — Specifies a static test method for measuring the strength of the conveyor belt mechanical 
fasteners. The joints may either be of the permanent type or capable of disconnection. 

1.1 This standard does not cover vulcanized joints. 

Note — The purpose of the test specified in this standard is to eliminate mechanical belt fasteners having an 
insufficient static strength. A dynamic test is to be established at a later date. 

2. Definitions — For the purpose of the standard the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Width of Fastening — The number of units multiplied by the pitch, or the number of hooks 
multiplied by the pitch. 

2.2 Pitch — The distance between a point on a unit or hook and the corresponding point on the next 
unit or next hook, according to the type of fastening (see Fig. 1 ). 





Width of Fastening = Pitch x 3 Width of Fastening = Pitch x 8 

FIG. 1 WIDTH OF FASTENING AND PITCH OF BELT FASTENERS 

3. Principle — Application of an increasing tensile force on a test piece until the joint made by the 
mechanical fastening breaks and comes apart. 

4. Apparatus 

4.1 Metallic adaptor plate for joints that can be disconnected. 

4.2 The testing machine shall be similar to that described in Appendix F of IS': 1891 ( Part I )-1978 
* Specification for rubber conveyors and elevator belting: Parti General purpose belting (second 
revision ) \ 

5. Test P feces 

5.1 Shape, Dimensions and Preparation 

5.1.1 Joints that can be disconnected — The test piece shall consist of a full thickness peice of 
belting cut in the longitudinal direction, with a length of 150 mm plus the gripped length, and shall 



Adopted 28 January 1980 



© May, 1980, ISI 



U. y$8fiteH*w 



^-^ 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 9405 -1980 

be 150 mm wide. It shall be connected to the connecting plate by the mechanical fastening to be 
used; the fastened width shall be at least 100 mm. When the overall width of the fastening 
elements In service is equal to the wklth of the belt, the width of the test piece may be made to the 
overall width of the fastening elements, under test and may be taken to be the ' fastened width ' but 
shall be not less than 100 mm. 

5.1.2 Joints that cannot be disconnected — The test piece shall consist of two lengths of belting 
each having a minimum length of 150 mm plus the gripped length and a width of 150 mm, 
assembled by means of the mechanical fastening to be used. When the overall width of the 
fastening elements in service is equal to the width of the belt, the width of the test piece may be 
made equal to the overall width of the fastening elements under test and may be taken to be the 
* fastened width • but shall be not less than 100 mm. 

5.2 Number — Three test pieces shall be tested. 

5.3 Conditioning — The test shall be conducted on pieces of belt cut at least 5 days after manu- 
facture (including the conditioning period). The test pieces shall be conditioned for 3 days at a 
temperature of 27 ± 2°C and a relative humidity of 65 ± 5 percent. The conditioning may be 
increased to a maximum of 14 days when agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser, 

6. Test Conditions — The test shall be carried out in a place having a temperature of 27 ± 2°C and 
a relative humidity of 65 ± 5 percent. 

7. Procedure 

7.1 Joints that can be Disconnected — Fasten the test piece in one of the grips of the dynamometer 
and attach the connecting plate to the belt at the distance between the grips as shown in Fig. 2. 
Exert the tensile force in such a way that it is applied symmetrically, that is, there is no tendency 
to start rupture at one end of the joint. 

Separate the grips at a rate of 100 ± 10 mm per minute; record the maximum force before 
the mechanical fastening breaks. 

Note — A rate of 50 ± 5 mm per minute can be used but the results will be different from those obtained with 
a rate of 100 mm per minute; in the event of dispute the rate of 100 ± 10 mm per minute shall be used. 

7.2 Joints that cannot be Disconnected — Fasten the ends of the test piece in the grips of the 
dynamometer as shown in Fig. 2. Exert the tensile force in such a way that it is applied sym- 
metrically, that is there is no tendency to start rupture at one end of the joint. Separate the]grips 
at a rate of 100 ± 10 mm per minute; record the maximum force before tha mechanical fastening 
breaks. 

8. Expression of Results — Find the mean of the values obtained and calculate: 

a) the average breaking strength of the fastening, in newtons per millimetre width of fastening 
(see Fig. 1 and 2 ). 

b) the strength of the mechanical belt fasteners expressed as a percentage of full thickness 
longitudinal minimum strength of the belt specified in the relevant Indian Standard. 

Note — The actual value required for the purpose of approval is subject to the agreement between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 

9. Test Report — The test report shall include the following particulars: 

a) The width of fastening; 

b) The brand of fasteners and whether they can be disconnected or not; 

c) The brand and the type of the belt, or the minimum longitudinal and transversal breaking 
strength; 

d) The rate of separation of the grip; 

e) The results obtained; and 

f) The type of failure of the fastening; whether tearing of the belt or breaking or opening of 
the fasteners. 



IS :9405- 1980 



100* 10 mm 




ISOtiomm 



GRIPPED 
LENGTH 



DYNAMOMETER GRIP 



£W0T {OPTIONAL* 



ADAPTOR PLATE 



ROD 



HALF FASTENING 



TEST PIECE OF BEU 



DYNAMOMETER GRJP 



FIG. 2. TENSILE TEST OF BELT FASTENERS 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is in conformity with ISO 1120-1976 ' Conveyor Belts — Determination of strength 
Of mechanical fastenings — Static test method ', issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization. 



Sharda Enterprises, New Delhi, India 



