NAT HIAF IS 16947 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


mia ch Met ch MA RATA, 
qaaa Ragstenat Us matae 
mantis arf uA atteror 


Fire Resistance Tests for Doors 
with Glass Panes, Openable Glass 
Windows and Sliding Glass Doors 


ICS 13.220.50; 91.060.50 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2018 Price Group 7 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Glass, 
Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


With the rapid increase in construction and increasing number of mixed used buildings, it has become imperative 
to provide compartmentalized safe fire zones and exit routes. Since glass as a building material is being used 
extensively specifically in doors, and since it is a transparent medium and can transmit infrared radiation during a 
fire, it is important to assess the radiation levels transmitted through glass during a fire. 


The committee has decided to formulate this standard to assess the behavior of a specimen (which is an element 
of building construction) when, subjected to defined heating and pressure conditions. The method provides a 
means of quantifying the ability of an element to withstand exposure to high temperatures, by setting criteria by 
which the fire containment (integrity), limiting the radiation (radiation criteria) and the thermal transmittance 
(insulation), functions amongst others can be evaluated. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following International 
Standards: 

a) EN 1363-1 : 1999 Fire resistance tests — Part 1: General requirements 

b) EN 1363-2 : 1999 Fire resistance tests — Part 2: Alternative and additional procedures 


c) BS EN 1634-1 : 2014 Fire resistance and smoke control tests for door and shutter assemblies, openable 
windows and elements of building hardware — Part |: Fire resistance tests for door and shutter assemblies 
and openable windows 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, calculated 


or observed, is to be round off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised )’. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


FIRE RESISTANCE TESTS FOR DOORS 
WITH GLASS PANES, OPENABLE GLASS WINDOWS 
AND SLIDING GLASS DOORS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard describes a method of test 
for determining the fire resistance behaviour of glass 
doors, shutters and openable windows, designed for 
installation within openings incorporated in vertical 
separating elements, such as hinged or pivoted doors, 
openable windows, sliding doors etc. 


1.2 The test provides for the determination of fire 
resistance of glass elements of architectural structures 
on the basis of the length of time for which the test 
specimens of specified dimensions satisfy the criteria 
laid down under the prescribed test conditions during 
the period of fire exposure. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
IS 1382: 1981 


Title 
Glossary of terms relating 
to glass and glassware (first 
revision ) 


IS 16231 (Part3): Use of glass in buildings — 


2016 Code of practice: Part 3 Fire 
and loading 
IS 16945 : 2018 Fire resistance tests for glass 
walls 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions as given in IS 1382 and IS 16945 shall apply 
in addition to the following. 


3.1 Associated Supporting Construction 


Specific construction in which the doorset or openable 
window, is to be installed in practice and which is 
used to close off the furnace and provide the levels of 
restraint and thermal heat transfer to be experienced in 
normal use 


3.2 Building Hardware 


Items such as hinges, handles, locks, exit devices, 
escutcheons, letter plates, kick plates, sliding gear, 
closing devices, electrical components, wiring, etc., 
which are, or can be, used in the doorset or openable 
window. 


3.3 Door or Shutter Assembly Doorset 


Pedestrian doorset or industrial type doorset, including 
any frame or guide, door leaf or leaves, rolling or folding 
curtain, etc., which is provided to give a fire resisting 
capability when used for the closing of permanent 
openings in fire resisting separating elements, which 
includes any side panel(s), vision panel(s), flush over 
panel(s) and/or transom panel(s) together with the 
building hardware and any seals (whether provided 
for the purpose of fire resistance or smoke control or 
for other purposes such as draught or acoustics) which 
form the assembly 


3.4 Double Action 


Action of a door leaf of a (single or double leaf) doorset 
that opens in two directions. 


3.5 Floor 


Upper surface of the horizontal element, on which the 
doorset or openable window is mounted and which 
extends from the exposed face to the unexposed face 
of the assembly. 


3.6 Flush Over Panel 


Panel which is incorporated within a doorset or openable 
window and fitted above the leaf or leaves within the 
frame head and the jambs and with no transom. 


3.7 Gap 


Clearance between two adjacent surfaces and/or edges, 
for example, between the edge of the leaf and the reveal 
of the frame or between the face of the leaf and the 
frame stop. 


3.8 Integrity 


The ability of a test specimen of a separating element 
of building construction when exposed to fire on one 
side to prevent the passage through it of flames and hot 
gases and to prevent the occurrence of flames on the 
unexposed side. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


3.9 Insulation 


The ability of a test specimen of a separating element 
of building construction when exposed to fire on one 
side, to restrict temperature rise of the unexposed face 
to below specified levels. 


3.10 Openable (For Windows Only) 


Applying to windows with one or more moveable leaf 
or leaves, including any side or over panel(s), perimeter 
frame and any elements of building hardware. 


3.11 Radiation/Heat Flux 


The quantity of heat energy, per unit area incident on 
the target of the measuring device. It includes heat 
transferred by convection as well as radiation. 


3.12 Side Panel 


Panel which is incorporated within a doorset or 
openable window and fitted at one side of a leaf and is 
bounded on all edges by the perimeter frame, the jambs 
and the transom (when applicable). 


3.13 Sill 


Member which connects two frame jambs together at 
the base which may or may not be set into the floor and 
remains visible. 


3.14 Single Action 

Action of a door leaf of a (single or double leaf) doorset 
that opens in only one direction. 

3.15 Sponsor 

The sponsor is the party which intends to do a fire test 
for its product in an authorized testing laboratory. 

3.16 Standard Supporting Construction 


Form of construction used to close off the furnace 
and to support the doorset or openable window being 
evaluated and which has a quantifiable influence on 
both the thermal heat transfer between the construction 
and the test specimen and provides known resistance to 
thermal distortion. 


3.17 Sustained Flaming 

Continuous flaming for a period of time greater than 
10 seconds. 

3.18 Test Specimen 


Glass doorset or openable window which is to be 
installed in a standard or associated supporting 
construction to allow it to be evaluated. 


3.19 Through Component/Connection 


Internal spacer or fixing that either penetrates through 
the doorset or openable window from one face to 
another or directly connects the faces one to the other. 


3.20 Transom 


Member that extends across the frame from jamb 
to jamb at the head of the leaf and which creates an 
aperture to house a transom panel. 


3.21 Transom Panel 


Panel which is incorporated within a doorset or 
openable window and fitted above the leaf or leaves 
and is bounded on all edges by the frame head, the 
jambs and the transom. 


4 APPARATUS 


4.1 Furnace 


4.1.1 The test furnace shall be designed to employ 
liquid or gaseous fuels and shall be capable of: 


a) Heating of vertical separating elements on one 
face; 


b) Heating of columns on all sides; 
c) Heating of walls on more than one side; or 


d) Heating of beams on three or four sides, as 
appropriate. 


4.1.2 Other special furnaces may be used for specific 
elements. 


4.1.3 The furnace linings shall consist of materials with 
densities less than 1 000 kg/m. Such lining materials 
shall have a minimum thickness of 50 mm and shall 
constitute at least 70 percent of the internally exposed 
surface of the furnace. The furnace shall be capable 
of providing standard fire exposure conditions with 
respect to thermal exposure and pressure. 

NOTE — Furnaces may be designed so that assemblies of more 

than one element can be tested simultaneously, provided all the 

requirements for each individual element can be complied with. 


4.2 Test Frames 


4.2.1 Special test frames or other means shall be 
employed to reproduce the boundary and support 
conditions appropriate for the test constructions. 
Different types of test constructions will require test 
frames of different stiffness. 


4.2.2 The performance of the test frames shall be 
evaluated by applying an expansion force within the 
frame at mid-width between two opposite members and 
measuring the increase in the internal dimension. The 
increase shall not exceed 5 mm with an applied force of 
25 kN. This evaluation shall be conducted in both the 
directions of the frame. 


4.3 Measuring and Control Equipment 


Equipment prescribed at 4.3.1 to 4.3.5 are essential 
to monitor the test construction, the laboratory and 
the furnace environment and the behavior of the test 
sample during the test. 


4.3.1 Instrumentations 


4.3.1.1 Furnace thermocouples 


The furnace thermocouples shall be plate thermometers 
which comprise an assembly of a folded steel plate, 
the thermocouple fixed to it and containing insulation 
material. The plate shall be constructed from 
(150+ 1) mm long x (100+ 1) mm wide x (0.7+0.1) mm 
thick nickel alloy sheet strips. The measuring junction 
shall consist of nickel chromium/nickel aluminium 
(type K) wire, contained within mineral insulation in 
a heat resisting steel alloy sheath of nominal diameter 
1 mm, the hot junctions being electrically insulated 
from the sheath. The thermocouple hot junction shall 
be fixed to the geometric centre of the plate by a small 
steel strip. The steel strip can be welded to the plate or 
may be screwed to it to facilitate replacement of the 
thermocouple. The strip shall be approximately 18 mm 
x 6 mm if it is spot welded to the plate and nominally 
25 mm x 6 mm if it is to be screwed to the plate. The 
screw shall be 2 mm in diameter. The assembly of plate 
and thermocouple shall be fitted with a pad of inorganic 
insulation material nominally (97 + 1) mm x (97 + 1) 
mm x (10 + 1) mm, density 280 + 30 kg/m’. Before 
the plate thermometers are first used, the complete 
plate thermometer shall be aged by immersing in a pre- 
heated oven at 1 000°C for 1 h. 


4.3.1.2 Fixed specimen thermocouples 
As prescribed in 4.4.1.2 of IS 16945. 


4.3.1.3 Specimen internal thermocouples 


For measuring internal temperatures. 


4.3.1.4 Deformation measuring devices 
As prescribed in 4.4.1.3 of IS 16945. 


4.3.1.5 Radiometer 
As prescribed in 4.4.1.6 of IS 16945. 


4.3.2 Cotton Pad 
As prescribed in 4.4.2 of IS 16945. 


4.3.3 Gap Gauges 
As prescribed in 4.4.3 of IS 16945. 


4.3.4 Devices Used for Recording 
a) furnace temperature, 
b) furnace pressure, and 
c) specimen interior temperature. 
4.3.5 Other Ancillary Devices 
a) fixed and roving furnace temperature devices, 
b) radiation measuring devices, and 


c) timing devices. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


5 TEST CONDITIONS 


5.1 Heating Conditions 


5.1.1 The Temperature/Time Conditions 
As prescribed in 5.1.1 a) of IS 16945. 


5.1.2 Tolerances 
As prescribed in 5.1.2 of IS 16945. 


5.1.3 Uniformity of Temperature Distribution 
As prescribed in 5.1.3 of IS 16945. 


5.2 Pressure Conditions 
As prescribed in 5.2 of IS 16945. 


5.3 Ambient Conditions within the Laboratory 


As prescribed in 5.3 of IS 16945 except that prior to 
the heating period the ambient temperature shall be 
within 5°C to 45°C. 


5.4 Loss of Accuracy 
As prescribed in 5.4 of IS 16945. 


6 TEST SPECIMEN 


6.1 Size 


The test specimen and all its components shall be full 
size unless limited by the size of the front opening of 
the furnace which will normally be 3.0 m x 3.0 m. 
Doorsets and openable windows which cannot be tested 
at full size shall normally be tested to the maximum 
size possible consistent with 7.2. 


6.2 Number 
As prescribed in 6.2 of IS 16945. 


6.3 Design 


6.3.1 The design of the test specimen and the choice 
of supporting construction shall take into account 
the requirements of 12 if the widest field of direct 
application is to be achieved. The sponsor shall 
declare to the laboratory the design values for the gaps 
including tolerances. 


6.3.2 Where the doorset and openable window 
incorporates side, transom or flush over panels, whether 
glazed or unglazed, these shall be tested as part of the 
assembly. If only one side panel is incorporated, this 
shall always be installed on the latch side of the doorset 
and openable window. 


6.3.3 The test specimen shall be fully representative 
of the doorset and openable window intended for use 
in practice, including any appropriate surface finishes, 
elements of building hardware and fittings as these are 
an essential part of the test specimen and may influence 
its behaviour in the test. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


6.4 Construction 
As prescribed in 6.4 of IS 16945. 


6.5 Verification 
As prescribed in 6.5 of IS 16945. 


6.6 Building Hardware 


Any item of building hardware shall be measured, 
analysed and described in detail before the test 
commences. Where it is not possible to confirm the 
manufacturer’s description it shall be clearly stated. 


7 INSTALLATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


The test specimen shall be installed, as far as possible, 
in a manner representative of its use in practice. The test 
specimen shall be mounted in a supporting construction 
which covers the type in which it is intended to be used. 
The design of the connection between the doorset or 
openable window and the supporting construction, 
including any fixings and materials used to make 
the junction, shall be as used in practice and shall be 
regarded as part of the test specimen. The test specimen 
shall be mounted within the supporting construction so 
that it is flush with the exposed face of the supporting 
construction, unless a different position is used in 
practice. The whole area of the test specimen, together 
with at least the minimum dimensions of the supporting 
construction, shall be exposed to the heating conditions. 


7.1 Supporting Construction 


7.1.1 The fire resistance of any supporting construction 
shall not be determined from a test in conjunction 
with a doorset or openable window and shall be at 
least commensurate with that anticipated for the 
product. There shall be a minimum zone of supporting 
construction (either brick wall, gypsum partition or any 
other associated supporting construction) of 200 mm 
wide within the furnace opening, each side and over the 
top of the aperture into which the test specimen is to be 
fixed. The thickness of the supporting construction may 
be increased outside of the 200 mm zone. 


7.1.2 Standard Supporting Construction 
As prescribed in 7.1.1 of IS 16945. 


However, the rules governing the applicability of the 
chosen standard supporting construction to other end 
use situations are given in 12.4 and 12.5. 


7.2 Gaps 


7.2.1 The adjustment of the gaps shall be within the 
tolerances of the design values stipulated by the 
sponsor. These shall be representative of those used 
in practice so that appropriate clearances exist, for 
example, between the fixed and moveable components, 
however in all cases the maximum gap shall not exceed 
25 mm at the sill or 6 mm x 150 mm in other areas as 


gaps beyond these limits would constitute an integrity 
failure (gap gauge method). 


7.2.2 In order to generate the widest field of direct 
application (category B from 12.2.2), the ‘primary’ 
gaps, that is, gaps perpendicular to the face of the leaf 
for hinged or pivoted doorsets or openable windows 
shall be set in between the middle value and the 
maximum value within the range of gaps for each part 
of the doorset or openable window as specified by the 
sponsor. 


8 APPLICATION OF INSTRUMENTATIONS 


8.1 For Temperature 


8.1.1 Furnace Thermocouples (Plate Thermometers) 


They shall be evenly distributed over a vertical plane 
at 100 + 50 mm from the nearest plane of the test 
construction (see Fig. 1). There shall be at least one plate 
thermometer for every 1.5 m? of the exposed surface 
area of the test construction, subject to a minimum of 
four for specimens having an area less than 6 m’. 


8.1.2 Unexposed Face Thermocouples 


8.1.2.1 Where compliance with the insulation criteria 
is required to be evaluated, thermocouples of the 
type specified in 4.3.1.2 shall be attached to the 
unexposed face of the doorset or openable window for 
the purpose of obtaining the average and maximum 
surface temperatures. For leaves, the positioning of 
thermocouples for each leaf should be visible from the 
unexposed side. 


8.1.2.2 Evaluation of insulation behavior against a 
supplementary procedure (see 9.2.5), which requires 
additional thermocouples, is provided in addition to 
the normal requirement. The sponsor may instruct the 
laboratory to evaluate the doorset or openable window 
against the supplementary procedure, if required. 


8.1.2.3 The temperature of the supporting construction 
in which the test specimen is mounted is not required 
to be measured and therefore no thermocouples are 
required to be attached to it. 


8.1.2.4 No thermocouple shall be placed within 
100 mm (or 50 mm when evaluating as per 
supplementary procedure) from the centre of any 
component of building hardware which passes through 
the doorset or openable window. 


8.1.2.5 If a thermocouple has to be relocated because 
of the above requirements, then any other restriction, 
for example, the distance from the leaf edge, shall be 
maintained at new location. If the same situation occurs 
on the frame, an equivalent solution shall be followed. 


NOTE — This can result in some thermocouples being 
positioned on elements of building hardware. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


Dimensions in millimetn 


Fic. 1 DISTRIBUTION OF THERMOCOUPLES 
KEY 


1 Plane of furnace thermocouples 


2 Nearest plane of test construction 


3 Test frame 


8.1.3 Thermocouples are applied for determination of 
the maximum temperature rise of side, transom and 
flush over panels and discrete areas of different thermal 
insulation as in the case for leaves. 


8.2 For Pressure 


The pressure sensor shall be located where it will not be 
subjected to direct impingement of convection currents 
of the flames or in the path of the exhaust gases. It shall 
be installed such that pressure can be measured and 
monitored to provide conditions specified in 5.2. The 
tubes used to measure pressure shall be horizontal both 
in the furnace and as they exit through the furnace wall, 
so that pressure is relative to the same positional height 
from the inside to the outside of the furnace. 


8.3 For Deflection 


Appropriate instrumentation shall be provided to 
determine a history of all significant movements 
perpendicular to the face of the test construction during 
the test. The following components are required as 
areas where significant movement is likely to occur: 


a) leaf relative to frame, transom, over or side panel; 


b) double leaf doorsets or openable windows between 
primary and secondary leaves; 


c) frame relative to supporting construction; and 
d) flexible and/or associated supporting construction. 


8.4 For Radiation 


Heat flux meters shall be as prescribed in 9.4 of 
IS 16945. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


9 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


9.1 Integrity 


9.1.1 It is expressed as the measured time (in completed 
minutes) for which the test specimen continues to 
maintain its separating function during the test without 
the occurrence of the following: 


a) Causing the ignition of a cotton pad applied in 
accordance with 10.2.1; 


b) Permitting the penetration of a gap gauge as 
specified in 10.2.2; and 


c) Resulting in sustained flaming. 


9.1.2 If a specimen is tested for insulation (EI), the 
integrity value is determined by whichever of the three 
criteria (a, b and c) fails first. 


9.1.3 If a specimen is tested for integrity alone (E) 
(or) integrity and radiation (EW), but not insulation 
(EI), the integrity value is determined by whichever of 
criteria (b,c) fails first. 
NOTE — Cotton pad test is used to determine integrity failure 
only in insulation test. 


9.2 Radiation 


It is expressed as the measured time in completed 
minutes, during which the total radiation value as 
measured by the heat flux radiometer at 1m distance 
from the unexposed side is less than 15 kW/m’. 


9.3 Insulation 


9.3.1 General 


It is expressed as the measured time, (in completed 
minutes) for which the test specimen continues to 
maintain its separating function during the test without 
occurrence of either of the following: 


a) Increase the average temperature above the initial 
average by more than 140°C; or 


b) Increase at any location (including the roving 
thermocouple) above the initial average by more 
than 180°C in conjunction with 9.3.4 and 9.3.5. 

When required, the test specimen shall be evaluated 


against the insulation levels specified in 9.3.2, 9.3.3, 
9.3.4 and 9.3.5. 


9.3.2 Discrete Areas 


For doorsets or openable windows which incorporate 
discrete areas of different thermal insulation, 
compliance with the insulation criteria shall be 
determined separately for each area. 


9.3.3 Average Temperature Rise 


Compliance shall be derived from temperatures 
recorded from the thermocouples specified in 10.3.1. 


9.3.4 Maximum Temperature Rise (Normal Procedure) 


The test specimen shall be evaluated against the 
maximum temperature rise criterion of 180°C above 
the average initial temperature with the exception that 
the limit for temperature rise for any perimeter frame 
member of the doorset or openable window shall be 
360°C. Compliance shall be derived from temperatures 
recorded from the thermocouples specified in 10.3.1 
and 10.3.2. 


9.3.5 Maximum Temperature Rise (Supplementary 
Procedure) 


The test specimen shall be evaluated against the 
maximum temperature rise criterion of 180°C above 
the average initial temperature. Compliance shall 
be derived from temperatures recorded from the 
thermocouples specified in 10.3.1, 10.3.2 and 10.3.3. 


10 METHODS OF TEST 


10.1 Fire Test 


This test consists of measurement of performance of 
three tests namely: 


a) Test for integrity; 
b) Test for Insulation; and 
c) Test for radiation. 


10.1.1 Prior to the fire test, a pre-test examination 
and preparation shall be carried out in the following 
sequence: 


a) any mechanical pre-test conditioning (for example, 
operability and durability of building hardwares 
and other elements of the test specimen) carried 
out by the laboratory; 


b) gap measurements (see 10.1.2); 


c) retention force measurements when a closing 
mechanism provides assistance to fire resistance 
by retention of the test specimen (see 10.1.3); and 


d) final setting (see 10.1.4). 
10.1.2 Gap Measurements 


10.1.2.1 Gaps as defined in 3.7 shall be measured in 
accordance with the sequence given in 10.1.1. 


10.1.2.2 Sufficient measurements shall be made to 
adequately quantify the gaps. There shall be a minimum 
of three measurements made along each side, top and 
bottom of each leaf. Measurements to determine the 
gaps shall be made at intervals not greater than 750 mm 
apart and shall be given to an accuracy not exceeding 
0.5 mm. Inaccessible gaps shall be measured indirectly 
or calculated. 


10.1.3 Retention Force Measurements 


10.1.3.1 General 


The retention forces for all doorsets or openable 
windows which incorporate closing devices and which 
are meant to be opened without the aid of mechanical 
power shall be measured. These measurements are 
needed to establish the magnitude of the forces used to 
retain the leaf or leaves closed to ensure that they are 
representative of those used in normal practice. 


10.1.3.2 Procedure 


For each leaf, the retention force shall be determined 
for: 


a) double action doorsets or openable windows, the 
force shall be determined for each direction of 
opening; and 

b) folding doors, the force shall be determined in the 
direction of opening. 


The retention forces for all doorsets or openable 
windows which incorporate closing devices operated 
without the aid of mechanical power shall be measured 
as follows: 


Open each leaf slowly, using a force gauge attached 
to the handle and operating against the direction of 
closing, to a distance of 100 mm away from its closed 
position. 


10.1.3.3 Recording 


Record the highest gauge reading from opening of door 
to 100 mm positions. 


10.1.4 Final Setting 
10.1.4.1 General 


Here the doorset or openable window shall be subjected 
to a final closing involving opening the leaf or leaves 
to a distance of approximately 300 mm and returning 
it to the closed position. When applicable, this shall be 
done by the closing device. If the leaf or leaves does not 
contain any closing device or it cannot be used in the 
furnace then the leaf or leaves shall be closed by hand. 


10.1.4.2 Procedure 


10.1.4.2.1 When a doorset or openable window is 
intended to be supplied both with and without a closing 
device, the closing force may be released after the 
completion of the retention measurements required in 
10.1.1. 


10.1.4.2.2 Leaves may be latched prior to the fire test but 
shall not be locked unless each leaf can only be retained 
in the closed position during normal use by utilizing the 
lock (that is, there is no latch or closing device to hold 
each leaf in the closed position). This condition is only 
applicable to leaves normally maintained in a locked 
position. No key shall be left in the lock. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


10.1.4.2.3 If the final setting procedures are carried out 
with the test specimen in position on the furnace then 
the furnace shall be in an ambient pressure condition 
(that is, with no air input or extraction). 


10.2 Test for Integrity 


The integrity of separating elements shall be evaluated 
throughout the test by cotton wool pads, gap gauges and 
monitoring the test specimen for evidence of sustained 
flaming, unless otherwise prescribed. 


10.2.1 Procedure A (By Cotton Pad) 
This method shall be as prescribed in 10.4.4.1 of IS 16945. 


10.2.2 Procedure B (By Gap Gauges) 


This method shall be as prescribed in 10.4.4.2 of 
IS 16945. When monitoring for integrity by this 
method, the 6 mm gap gauge shall not be employed 
along the floor level, that is, only the 25 mm gap gauge 
shall be used at this position. 


10.3 Test for Insulation 


Temperature of the unexposed face of the test specimen 
to be measured as prescribed in 8.1.2, 10.3.1, 10.3.2 
and 10.3.3. 


10.3.1 Average Temperature 


10.3.1.1 Position five thermocouples (for single or 
double leaf doors), one at the centre of the leaf or 
leaves and one at the centre of each quarter section. 
These thermocouples shall not be located in any 
position excluded for the measurement of maximum 
temperature (in the normal procedure as prescribed in 
10.3.2) and shall not be closer than 50 mm to any joint, 
stiffener or through component, nor closer than 100 mm 
to the edge of the leaf or leaves. 


10.3.1.2 For a doorset or openable window which 
incorporates discrete areas of different thermal 
insulation more than 0.1 m? (for example, flush over 
panels, transom panels, side panels, or glazed panels 
within a leaf but not astragals) extra thermocouples 
shall be evenly distributed over the surface of those 
areas to determine the average temperature at a density 
of one thermocouple per square metre or part thereof. 
The average insulation performance of the sum of each 
type of discrete area shall be determined. 


10.3.1.3 When the total area of a single portion of the 
doorset or openable window represents less than 0.1 m?, 
it shall be disregarded for the purpose of ascertaining 
the average unexposed face temperature. 


10.3.2 Maximum Temperature 
10.3.2.1 General 


10.3.2.1.1 The thermocouples used for measuring the 
average temperature rise (as given in 10.3.1) shall also 


IS 16947 : 2018 


be used to measure the maximum temperature rise 
besides the additional thermocouples fixed as indicated 
in 10.3.2.2, 10.3.2.3 and 10.3.2.4. 


10.3.2.1.2 If the doorset or openable window 
incorporates discrete areas of different thermal 
insulation more than or equal to 0.1 m? (for example 
flush over panels, transom panels, side panels or 
glazed panels within a leaf but not astragals) which 
are required to be evaluated separately with respect 
to average temperature rise, then the evaluation of 
maximum unexposed face temperature of those areas 
shall also be undertaken separately. This may require 
extra unexposed surface thermocouples to be applied 
as given in 10.3.2.3 and 10.3.2.4. 


10.3.2.1.3 Thermocouples shall not be placed on 
fasteners with a surface diameter less than 12 mm. 


10.3.2.2 Temperature of frame 


10.3.2.2.1 Thermocouples shall be fixed at each of the 
following positions: 


a) One at mid-height on each vertical member of the 
perimeter frame; 


b) One on the horizontal top member of the perimeter 
frame and any transom fitted, at mid width. For 
a multi-leaf doorset or openable window, the 
thermocouple shall be fixed not closer than 100 
mm from the visible edge of the joint on the 
unexposed face; and 


c 


wa 


One on the horizontal top member of the perimeter 
frame and any transom fitted, 50 mm from each 
corner of the frame at the point of leaf entry. 


10.3.2.2.2 At each of the above mentioned positions, the 
thermocouple shall be fixed as close as possible to the 
junction of the frame and the supporting construction, 
that is, the centre of the copper disc of the thermocouple 
shall be at 15 mm away from the junction between the 
frame and the supporting construction. Irrespective of 
this, the distance of these thermocouples from the inside 
edge of the frame shall not be greater than 100 mm. 


10.3.2.2.3 For the frame, thermocouples shall be 
placed on that part of the frame which is visible 
from the unexposed side. For a single leaf doorset or 
openable window with narrow width of opening, if the 
thermocouples prescribed as per 10.3.2.2.1 of point 
b) and c) are closer than 550 mm to each other, then 
thermocouple shall be placed only as per 10.3.2.2.1 of 
point c) above. 


10.3.2.3 Temperature of leaf or leaves 
10.3.2.3.1 Thermocouples shall be fixed to the face of 
each leaf or leaves as follows: 


a) at mid-height, 100 mm away from the visible part 
of the vertical edges as prescribed at 10.3.2.3.3 to 
10.3.2.3.6; 


b) at mid-width, 100 mm down from the visible part 
of the top edge as prescribed below in 10.3.2.3.3 
to 10.3.2.3.6; and 


c) 100 mm away from the visible part of the vertical 
edges, 100 mm down from the visible part of the 
horizontal edge as prescribed in 10.3.2.3.2. 


10.3.2.3.2 The inside edges of the clear face for hinged 
or pivoted doorsets or openable windows opening shall 
be towards the furnace. The other visible part of the 
edge of the leaf or leaves for hinged or pivoted doorsets 
or openable windows opening shall be away from the 
furnace. 


10.3.2.3.3 If due to the narrow width of a leaf or leaves, 
the thermocouples prescribed 10.3.2.3.1 of point b) and 
c) are placed closer than 500 mm to each other, then 
those prescribed 10.3.2.3.1 of point b) shall be omitted. 


10.3.2.3.4 If an individual leaf is less than 200 mm wide 
(for example, as in a multi-leaf folding shutter) then 
the leaves shall be treated as if they are one leaf with 
respect to application of unexposed face thermocouples 
for evaluating maximum temperature rise. 


10.3.2.3.5 Additional thermocouples shall be fixed to 
other areas of the leaf or leaves, for example, over any 
through component/connection or position where the 
temperature might be expected to be higher than the 
mean for the surface subject to the limitations given in 
10.3.2.1. The additional thermocouples shall be placed 
not less than 100 mm from the edges of the leaf. 


10.3.2.3.6 Where the leaf or leaves incorporate 
discrete areas of different thermal insulation that are 
required to be evaluated separately, the maximum 
temperature rise of these areas shall be measured 
from additional thermocouples. If visible part of the 
perimeter of the framework of the leaf is less than 
115 mm wide, then the leaf shall be treated as one 
complete discrete area. 


In all cases thermocouples shall be placed as follows: 


a) If the visible width of the framework of the leaf 
is 115 mm or greater, position the thermocouples 
on the leaf at 100 mm away from the inside edges 
of the clear opening or from the visible part of the 
edge of the leaf; 


If the visible width of the framework of the leaf 
is between 85 mm and 115 mm wide, position the 
thermocouples on the discrete area of different 
thermal insulation as close as possible to the 
framework of the leaf; 


If the visible width of the framework of the leaf 
is 85 mm and below, position the thermocouples 
on the discrete area of different thermal insulation, 
100 mm away from the inside edge of the clear 
opening for hinged or pivoted doorsets or openable 
windows opening towards the furnace; 


b 


wm 


c 


wm 


d) If the visible width of the framework of the leaf 
is 85 mm and below, position the thermocouples 
on the discrete area of different thermal 
insulation 100 mm away from the visible part of 
the edge of the leaf for hinged or pivoted doorset 
or openable window, opening away from the 
furnace; 


10.3.2.4 Temperatures of other areas 


10.3.2.4.1 Thermocouples for the measurement of 
maximum temperature rise of side, transom and flush 
over panels and discrete areas of different thermal 
insulation shall be placed same as in the case for leaves. 
However, if there is more than one area of the same 
type then they shall be treated as one large area (as 
those for the average temperature rise). 


10.3.2.4.2 In addition, placing the thermocouples on 
flush over panels and transom panels above leaves 
(but not discrete panels within a leaf) shall be as 
follows: 


a) At mid-width, 100 mm away from the horizontal 
edge; and 

b) At the corners, 100 mm away from the vertical 
and horizontal edges. 


The conditions prescribed for placing thermocouples 
on leaves of decreasing width (see 10.3.2.3.6) shall 
also apply to transom panels, side panels and flush over 
panels. 

NOTE — Where no evaluation of the insulation criteria 


is required of the doorset or openable window, or any part 
thereof, no temperature measurements are required. 


10.3.3 Maximum 
Procedure) 


Temperature (Supplementary 


10.3.3.1 General 


This method shall be followed for evaluation of 
insulation criteria of leaves, wherein, it can be assumed 
that nobody would touch the frame, because of its 
position and hence, insulation criteria of frames need 
not be measured. 


The temperature shall be determined by the 
thermocouples prescribed at 10.3.2, besides the 
additional thermocouples fixed as indicated in 10.3.3.2 
and 10.3.3.3. 


10.3.3.2 Temperature of leaf or leaves 
10.3.3.2.1 Thermocouples shall be fixed to the face of 
each leaf as follows: 


a) at mid-height, 25 mm away from the visible 
part of the vertical edges as prescribed at 
10.3.3.2.2; 


b) at mid-width, 25 mm down from the visible part of 
the horizontal edge as prescribed at 10.3.3.2.2; 


IS 16947 : 2018 


c) at corners, 25 mm away from the visible part of 
the vertical edges, 25 mm away from the visible 
part of the horizontal edge as follows: 


1) At the inside edge of the clear opening, 
for hinged or pivoted doorsets or openable 
windows opening towards the furnace; 


2) At the visible part of the edge of the leaf, 
for hinged or pivoted doorsets or openable 
windows opening away from the furnace. 


10.3.3.2.2 Additional thermocouples shall also be 
placed to other areas of the leaf or leaves, e.g. over 
any through component/connection or position where 
the temperature might be expected to be higher than 
the mean, subject to the limitations given in 8.1.2 
and 10.3.2.1.The additional thermocouples shall be 
placed not less than 25 mm away from the edges 
of the leaf. Where the leaf or leaves incorporate 
discrete areas of different thermal insulation that are 
required to be evaluated separately, the maximum 
temperature rise of these areas shall be measured 
using additional thermocouples. If any visible part 
of the perimeter of the framework of the leaf is less 
than 40 mm wide, the leaf shall be treated as one 
complete discrete area. 


In such cases thermocouples shall be placed as follows: 


a) If the visible width of the framework of the leaf 
is more than or equal to 40 mm , position the 
thermocouples on the leaf at 25 mm from the 
inside edges of the clear opening or from the 
visible part of the edge of the leaf, as defined in 
10.3.3.2 above; 


If the visible width of the framework of the 
leaf is between 10 mm and 40 mm, position the 
thermocouples on the discrete area of different 
thermal insulation as close as possible to the 
framework of the leaf; 


If the visible width of the framework of the 
leaf is less than or equal to 10 mm, position the 
thermocouples on the discrete area of different 
thermal insulation at 25 mm away from the inside 
edge of the clear opening for hinged or pivoted 
doorsets or openable windows opening towards 
the furnace; 


If the visible width of the framework of the 
leaf is less than or equal to 10 mm, position the 
thermocouples on the discrete area of different 
thermal insulation at 25 mm away from the visible 
part of the edge of the leaf for hinged or pivoted 
doorsets or openable windows, opening away 
from the furnace; 


b 


ma 


c 


ma 


d 


wm 


If due to the narrow width of a leaf or leaves, the 
thermocouples prescribed at b) and c) are closer 
than 575 mm to each other, then the condition 
prescribed at b) shall be omitted; 


e 


ma 


IS 16947 : 2018 


f) Ifa leaf is less than 200 mm wide (for example as 
in a multi-leaf folding shutter) then the leaves shall 
be treated as one leaf with respect to application 
of unexposed face thermocouples for evaluating 
maximum temperature rise. 


10.3.3.3 Temperature of other areas 


10.3.3.3.1 Thermocouples for the determination of the 
maximum temperature rise of side, transom and flush 
over panels and discrete areas of different thermal 
insulation shall be applied as in the case for leaves. 
However, if there is more than one above such area of 
the same type, then they shall be treated as one large 
area (as those for the average temperature rise). 


10.3.3.3.2 Additional thermocouples shall be placed on 
flush over panels and transom panels above leaves (but 
not discrete panels within a leaf) as prescribed below: 


a) at mid-width, 25 mm away from the horizontal 
edge; and 

b) at a point 25 mm away from both the edges at the 
corner. 


The rules for reducing the number of thermocouples on 
leaves of decreasing width shall also apply to transom 
panels, side panels and flush over panels. 


10.4 Test for Radiation 


The measurement of radiation shall be taken by the 
method as prescribed in 10.4.6 of IS 16945. 


10.5 Deflection 


Deflection shall be measured against a fixed datum. 
The frequency of measurement of deflection of the 
specimen shall be such that a clear picture of history of 
the deflection of the test specimen throughout the test 
duration is obtained. The other details are prescribed 
in 8.3. 


NOTE — Measurement of deflection is a mandatory 
requirement although; there are no performance criteria 
associated with it. Information regarding the relative deflection 
between components of the test specimen, between the test 
specimen and the supporting construction and of the supporting 
construction itself may be important in determining the field of 
extended application of the test results. 


11 TEST REPORT 


By prior agreement with the test sponsor, additional 
information may be obtained for individual elements of 
building hardware. Based on the observations recorded 
during the test, the results may be reported in a separate 
report. 


11.1 Full Test Report 
The test report shall contain the following information: 
a) The name and address of the testing laboratory; 


b) The name and address of the sponsor; 
c) The date of the test; 


10 


d) The unique reference number of the test, if any; 


e) The name of the manufacturer (if known) of 
the test specimen and, of the products and 
components used in the construction, together 
with identification marks and trade names; 


The construction details of the test specimen, 
including description and drawings and principal 
details of the components. The description and the 
drawings which are included in the test report shall, 
be based on the information (as far as practicable) 
provided by the sponsor and verified by the survey 
of the test specimen. When full and detailed 
drawings are not produced by the laboratory in 
their report, then the sponsor’s drawing(s) of the 
test specimen shall be authenticated by the test 
laboratory. At least one copy of the drawing(s) 
shall be included in the test report. Reference shall 
be given in the report that the drawings are those 
provided by the sponsor; 


Detailed description of the associated supporting 
construction, as appropriate. The details of the 
associated supporting construction shall be verified 
and described as those of the test specimen; 


The relevant properties of materials and 
components that have bearing on the fire 
performance of the test specimen. Where it is 
impracticable to measure some of these properties, 
this shall be reported; 


The method of assembly and installation of the 
test specimen; 


g) 


h) 


Details of pre-testing conditions of the specimen; 
A statement regarding the ‘decision of the laboratory’ 
in the selection of the test specimen, if applicable; 
The support and restraint conditions employed 
during the test and the reason for their selection; 
For asymmetrical separating elements, the 
direction in which the specimen was tested and 
the reason thereof; 


p) 


Information regarding the location of all the 
thermocouples fixed to the specimen, pressure 
measurement and deflection measurement 
devices. Drawings shall be included which clearly 
illustrate the positions of the various devices and 
identify them relative to the data provided; 


q) 


The ambient temperature of the laboratory at the 
commencement of the test; 


The pressure conditions within the furnace relative 
to the position of the test construction; 

t) Temperature/time curves of the furnace heating 
conditions; 

u) The reasons conforming that the tolerances on 
the temperature/time curve, pressure conditions 
or ambient laboratory conditions are within the 


limits as prescribed in 5; 


v) 


w) 


y) 
z) 


aa) 


bb) 


The result slated in terms of the elapsed time (in 
completed minutes), from the commencement of 
heating to the time of failure taking into account 
the relevant criteria including: 


1) The rate of deflection, when same is the 
criterion used to assess load bearing capacity 
(including the value of d used in calculating 
the limiting rate of deflection for flexural 
members); 


2) The maximum deflection and the time and 
position at which it occurred, supported by 
adequate graphical data; 


3) The mode of failure with respect to all integrity 
criteria; 


4) The position(s) at which the maximum 
temperature rise was observed should this be 
the cause of insulation failure; 


5) Any alternative and additional tests. 


Output in the form of tables and/or graphs 
from all pressure measurement devices, 
deflection measurement devices, unexposed face 
thermocouples and where applicable, internal 
thermocouples; 
NOTE — The report only needs to include a selection of 
the measured data, sufficient to provide a history of the 
performance of the test specimen. For example, it is not 
necessary to tabulate the temperature of every thermocouple 
fixed to a beam at 1 min intervals for the whole duration 
of the 90 min test. However, it is recommended that all the 
measurements be included at around the time of failure of 
all the criteria being considered. Before and after this period 
the interval at which measured data needs to be included in 
the report may be longer, for example, at intervals of 5 to 
10 min. 
A description ofthe any significant behavior of the 
test specimen; 


The field of direct application of the results for the 
specimen, in accordance with 12; 


The following statements: 


“This report details the method of construction, the 
test conditions and the results obtained when the 
specific element of construction described herein 
was tested following the procedure outlined in IS 
16947. Any significant deviation with respect to 
size, construction details, loads, stresses, and edge 
or end conditions other than those allowed under 
the field of application in the relevant test method 
is not covered by this report”. 


Any other declaration as identified and having 
legal implications of the reported test results may 
be furnished by the lab. 


11.2 Short Form Test Report 


In addition to the full test report, a concise version of 
report may also be provided at the specific request of 
the sponsor. It shall include all the items listed in 11.1. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


However items f), h), j), K), m), n), p), s), t), v) and w) 
may be shortened. 


11.3 Illustrative Guide for expression of Test Results 
in the Test Report 


11.3.1 An example for expressing the test results 
is given below, for a separating element, where the 
integrity and insulation criteria were exceeded and the 
test was discontinued at the request of the sponsor. 


a) Integrity — Sustained flaming, 128 min, no failure 
(the test having been discontinued at the request of 
the sponsor) 


1) Gap Gauge : 124 min 
2) Cotton Pad : 120 min 
3) Insulation : 110 min 


11.3.2 Another example of the method for expressing 
the results is given below for a non-load bearing 
element: 


a) Integrity — Sustained flaming, 132 min no failure 
(the test having been discontinued at the request of 
the sponsor) 


1) Gap Gauge : 132 min 
2) Cotton Pad : 132 min 
3) Insulation : 20 min 
4) Radiation : 66 min 


11.3.3 In addition to the above, the following shall also 
be included in the test report: 


a) Reference that the test was carried out in 
accordance with IS 16947; 


b) Details of how the test specimen was verified in 
line with 6.5; 


c) A reference to which standard supporting 
construction was chosen, if appropriate; 


d) A description of the type of floor covering, if any, 
used in the test construction; 


e) The gap measures as prescribed in 10.1.2; 


f) The retention forces as measured according 
to 10.1.3; 


g) The results stated in terms of the elapsed time, 
(in completed minutes), from the commencement 
of the test to the time to failure of integrity and 
when required, the time of failure of radiation 
criteria and, when required, the time to failure of 
insulation; and 


h) In cases where the sponsor has requested that 
the test be continued beyond the first failure, all 
observed failures during the test shall also be 
recorded. 


11.3.4 On request of the test sponsor, a separate report 
can be produced to cover the performance of individual 
elements of building hardware. The separate report 


11 


IS 16947 : 2018 


containing the minimum following information could 
be provided. 


a) Reference to the full test report; 


b) The name of the producer/supplier of the item 
of building hardware under test, its trade name 
and/or the manufacturer’s code for the product, a 
visual representation and a full description of the 
product including any protection, with particular 
reference to dimension of components, location 
and fixing details and materials used within the 
building hardware items; 


A description of the associated construction with 
applied protection adjacent to the item of building 
hardware; and 
d) The duration for which the test specimen complied 
with the relevant criteria, expressed in minutes 
from the start of the test. 
NOTE — The field of direct application may only be 
defined, following the identification of classification(s). The 
field of direct and, where applicable, extended application 
will be included in the classification report. 


12 FIELD OF DIRECT 
TEST RESULTS 


APPLICATION OF 


The field of direct application defines the allowable 
changes to the test specimen following a successful 
fire resistance test. The allowable variations can be 
introduced automatically without the need for the 
sponsor to seek additional evaluation, calculation or 
approval. The field of direct application of test results 
is restricted to doorsets. The field of direct application 
tules for openable windows is restricted to test specimen 
subjected to fire resistance test. 
NOTE — When extended product size requirements are 
envisaged, the dimensions of certain components within the 
test specimen can be less than those intended to be used, at full 
size in order to maximize the extrapolation of the test results 
by modeling the interaction between components at the same 
scale. 


12.1 Materials and Construction 


12.1.1 Unless otherwise stated in 12.1.2, the materials 
and construction of the doorset shall be the same as 
tested. The number of leaves and the mode of operation 
(for example, sliding, swinging, single action or double 
action) shall not be changed. 


12.1.2 Specific 
Construction 


Restrictions on Materials and 


12.1.2.1 For timber constructions 


a) The thickness of the door leaf or leaves shall not be 
reduced but may be increased. For doorsets with 
multiple leaves, the thickness of door leaves shall 
be increased by equal amount. For timber based 
board products (particle board, blockboard, etc), 
the composition (type of resin) shall not change 


12 


from that tested. The density shall not be reduced 
but may be increased. The door leaf thickness 
and/or density may be increased provided the total 
increase in weight is not more than 25 percent. 


b) The number, size, location and orientation of any 
joints in the timber framing shall not be changed. 


c) The cross-sectional dimensions and/or the density 
of the timber frames (including rebates) shall not 
be reduced from that tested but may be increased. 


12.1.2.2 For metal constructions 


a) The dimensions of metal wrap around frames 
may be increased proportionally to accommodate 
increased supporting construction thickness. The 
thickness of the metal may also be increased by 
up to 25 percent. The type of metal shall not be 
changed from that tested. 

b) The number of stiffening elements for uninsulated 

doorsets and the number and type of fixings of 

such members within the fabricated panel may be 
increased proportionally with the increase in size 
and shall not be reduced. 


12.1.2.3 For glazed constructions 


The type of glass and the edge fixing technique, 
including type and number of fixings per metre of 
perimeter, shall not be changed from those tested. 
The number of glazed apertures and dimensions 
(width and height) of glass of each pane used in a test 
specimen shall not be increased but may be decreased 
accordingly: 


a) in proportion with door size reductions; 


b) by maximum of 25 percent for integrity only and/ 
or radiation control doorsets and for doorsets 
which satisfy the insulation criteria where the 
unexposed surface temperature for both the door 
leaf and the glazing have been maintained for the 
classification period; or 

c) without restriction provided that the total area of 

the tested pane(s) is less than 15 percent of the 

door leaf or side/over panel area. 


The distance between the edge of glazing and the 
perimeter of each leaf, or the distance between glazed 
apertures shall not be reduced from those incorporated 
in test specimens. Other repositioning within the leaf 
can only be carried out if the same does not involve the 
removal or repositioning of structural members relative 
to the glazing. 


12.1.3 Decorative Finishes 


12.1.3.1 Paint finish — Where the paint finish has 
no contribution to the fire resistance of the doorset 
alternative paints are acceptable and may be added to 
leaves or frames for which unfinished test specimens 
were tested. Where the paint finish contributes to the 


fire resistance of the doorset (for example, intumescent 
paints) then changes are not permitted. 


12.1.3.2 Decorative laminates finish — Decorative 
laminates and timber veneers up to 1.5 mm thickness 
can be added to the faces (but not the edges) of leaves 
and frames in doorsets which satisfy the insulation 
criteria (normal or supplementary procedure). 


12.1.3.3 Decorative laminates and timber veneers 
cannot be applied to doorsets which do not satisfy the 
insulation criteria (normal or supplementary procedure) 
unless subjected to a fire test. Decorative laminates and 
timber veneers in excess of 1.5 mm thickness shall be 
tested as part of the test specimen. For doorsets tested 
with decorative laminate faces, the only variations 
possible are changes in colour, pattern, manufacturer 
for similar type and thickness of the material. 


12.1.4 Fixings 


The number of fixings used to attach doorsets to 
supporting constructions may be increased but shall 
not be decreased from that tested. The distance between 
fixings may be reduced accordingly. 


12.1.5 Building Hardware 


12.1.5.1 The number of components restricting the 
movement such as locks, latches and hinges may be 
increased from that tested and shall not be decreased. 


12.1.5.2 Where a doorset has been tested with a closing 
device, the doorset may be provided either with or 
without that closing device, that is, where self closing 
characteristics are not required. 


NOTE — Exchange of building hardware is not covered by the 
field of direct application. 


12.2 Permissible Size Variations 
12.2.1 General 


12.2.1.1 Doorsets of sizes different from those of the 
tested specimen are permitted within certain limitations 
but the variations depends on product type and the 
length of time that the performance criteria are fulfilled. 


12.2.1.2 The changes in dimensions permitted under 
the field of direct application (see 12.1) are applicable 
to the overall size of each leaf, each side panel, each 
transom panel and each over panel independently and 
including any rebates which may be present on the leaf 
or panel. 


12.2.1.3 The dimensions (width and height) of any 
glass pane cannot be increased in view of 12.1.2.3. 


12.2.2 Test Periods 


Table 1 prescribes classifications times for category 
A and category B at which specimen withstand 
the test. The amount of variation of size permitted 


13 


IS 16947 : 2018 


depends whether the classification time just reached as 
prescribed for Category A or Category B. 
Table 1 Classification into Categories A and B 
(Clause 12.2.2) 


Classification time for Overrun Time Required for 


Category A Category B 
(min) (min) 
15 18 
20 24 
30 36 
45 52 
60 68 
90 100 
120 132 
180 196 
240 260 


12.2.3 Size Variations Related to Product Type 
12.2.3.1 General 


12.2.3.1.1 The rules that govern increase or decrease 
of size without additional considerations are applicable 
only to hinged or pivoted doorsets. 


12.2.3.1.2 Doorsets that satisfy both the radiation 
control levels and insulation criteria may have their 
sizes increased. This is because any increase in size 
will increase the radiation received at a fixed distance 
away from the doorset. This is accepted because the 
increase in radiation resulting from a size increase for 
an insulated doorset as it will still satisfy the required 
radiation control levels. Size decreases are permitted 
for both doorsets which satisfy radiation control levels 
and for those which satisfy insulation criteria and 
radiation control levels. 


12.2.3.2 Hinged or pivoted doorsets 


12.2.3.2.1 For category ‘A’ classification (with no 
overrun of classification period) no size increase 
is allowed. Unlimited reductions from the tested 
specimen are permitted with the exception of insulated 
metal doorsets where the size reduction is limited (see 
Annex A). 


12.2.3.2.2 For category ‘B’ classification (with overrun 
in accordance with 12.2.2) increases are permitted 
provided that the doorset is tested with the ‘primary’ 
gaps, (gaps perpendicular to the face of the leaf or 
leaves) set between the middle value and the maximum 
value as declared by the sponsor as stated in 7.2. If 
the gaps were not set according to 7.2, then no size 
increases are permitted for category ‘B’ classification. 
However, the test result is still applicable to doorsets 
with gaps less than the average of the medium and 
maximum measured values (see Annex A). 


IS 16947 : 2018 


12.2.3.2.3 Other changes 


a) For smaller doorset sizes, the relative positioning 
of components which restrict movement (for 
example, hinges, latches, etc) shall remain the same 
as tested. Any change to the distances between 
them will be limited to the same percentage 
reduction as the decrease of test specimen size. 


b) For larger doorset sizes the following shall also 
apply: 

1) the height of the latch above floor level shall be 
equal to or greater than the tested height, and 
the maximum of any change in height shall be 
proportional to the increase in the height of the 
doorset; 


2) the distance of the top hinge from the top of door 
leaf shall be equal to or less than that tested; 


3) the distance of the bottom hinge from bottom 
of door leaf shall be equal to or less than that 
tested; and 


4) where three hinges or distortion preventers are 
used, the distance between the bottom of the 
door leaf and centre restraint shall be equal to 
or greater than that tested. 


12.2.3.2.4 Side and transom panels 


The variation in tested specimens of side and transom 
panel arrangements are the same as those applied 
generally to hinged or pivoted doorsets. 


Due to the constraints of the furnace size, if only one 
side panel could be tested, provided conforming to type 
‘B’ overrun classification, a second panel up to the 
same size may be added to the opposite side. Where an 
additional side panel is to be added to a tested single- 
leaf doorset then the tested panel shall be positioned on 
the latch side. 


The addition of a second side panel is only allowed 
for doorsets which satisfy the radiation criteria and the 
insulation criteria (see 12.2.3.1). 


12.2.3.2.5 Timber constructions 


Where decorative timber veneers more than 1.5 mm 
thick, or other claddings which themselves provide 
constructive benefits, are part of the test specimen, 
they shall not be substituted with alternatives of lesser 
thickness or strength. 


12.3 Asymmetrical Doorsets 


Separating elements required to be fire resisting from 
both sides, two test specimens shall be tested (one for 
each direction) unless the element is fully symmetrical, 
i.e. the construction of the doorset is identical on both 
sides of a centre line through the thickness of the door 
leaf when viewed in plan (from above). However, in 
some cases it is possible to develop rules whereby the 
fire resistance of an asymmetrical doorset tested in one 
direction shall also apply when the fire exposure is 
from the other direction to asymmetrical doorset. The 
rules in 12.3.1 represent the minimum level of common 
agreement which shall be followed. 


12.3.1 Specific Rules 


The rules governing the applicability of tests carried 
out in one direction to other directions are given in 
Table 2. They are based on the following premises: 


a) Each of the leaves are themselves of symmetrical 
construction with the exception of the edges, for 
example, lock/leading edge and hinge edge or 
double rebated doors; 


b) Any restraining/supporting elements of building 
hardware have a melting point not less than 
1 000°C, or the element of building hardware 
previously satisfied a test as per this Indian 
Standard, when exposed in both directions and 
will retain their function to the exposed heat 
during the test; 


c) There is no change in the number of leaves or the 
mode of operation, for example, sliding, swinging, 
single action or double action; and 


d) Side, over and transom panels are excluded from 
Table 2 unless they are fully symmetrical. 


Table 2 lists the type of doorset for which rules can 
be generated for the direction in which it should be 
tested to cover the opposite direction. The separate 
columns for the integrity and insulation criteria 
reflect the different conditions to deriver the rules 
for integrity only doors as opposed to those which 
satisfy both criteria. ‘Yes’ means that it is possible 
to identify the direction of test which also satisfy the 
opposite direction. ‘No’ indicates that it is not feasible 
to identify the direction which will also satisfy the 
opposite direction. 


Table 2 — Type of Doorset and Direction to be Tested to 
Cover the Opposite Direction 


(Clause 12.3.1) 


Type of doorset Direction to be tested to Integrity and Insulation 
cover opposite direction radiation 
Hinged or pivoted, timber leaf, timber frame Opening towards the furnace Yes Yes 
Hinged or pivoted, timber leaf, metal frame (no transom) Opening towards the furnace Yes No 
Hinged, metal leaf, metal frame (not pivoted) Opening away from the furnace Yes No 


12.4 Supporting Constructions 
12.4.1 General 


The fire resistance of a doorset tested in one form 
of standard supporting construction may or may 
not apply when it is mounted in other types of 
construction. Generally, the rigid and flexible types 
are not interchangeable and rules governing the direct 
application within each group are given in 12.4.2 and 
12.4.3. However, in some cases it is possible for the 
result of a test on a particular type of doorset tested in 
one form of standard supporting construction will also 
be valid for that doorset when mounted in a different 
type of standard supporting construction. Specific rules 
governing the situation for hinged or pivoted doorsets 
are given in 12.4.3. 


12.4.2 Rigid Standard Supporting Construction (High 
or Low Density) 


The fire resistance of a doorset tested in a high or low 
density rigid standard supporting construction can be 
applied to a doorset mounted in the same manner in a 
wall provided the density and the thickness of the wall 
are equal to or greater than that in which the doorset 
was tested. 


12.4.3 Specific Rules for Hinged or Pivoted Doorsets, 
Openable Windows and Sliding Doors 


a) For timber door leaves hung in timber frames 
the result of a test in a rigid standard supporting 
construction is also valid for that doorset mounted 
in a flexible construction. 


b) For timber door leaves hung in timber frames, the 
result of a test in a flexible standard supporting 


15 


IS 16947 : 2018 


construction is valid for that doorset mounted in a 
rigid construction. 


For timber door leaves hung in metal frames the 
result of a test in a flexible standard supporting 
construction is applicable to that doorset mounted 
in a rigid construction but not vice versa. 


c) 


d) For insulated metal door leaves hung in metal 
frames there is no applicability of results in 
rigid standard supporting construction to flexible 
constructions or vice versa. To cover rigid and 
flexible types, tests shall be undertaken in each 


type of standard supporting construction. 


For uninsulated metal doorsets, the result of a 
test in a rigid standard supporting construction is 
applicable to that doorset mounted in a flexible 
construction, but not vice versa. 


e) 


12.4.4 The rules above are true when the fixing 
methods used in each type of supporting construction 
are appropriate to that construction. For example in 
a), the test on the timber door leaf in a timber frame 
would have been carried out with appropriate fixings 
for timber frames in rigid constructions. The result 
is equally valid for a timber door leaf in a timber 
frame mounted into a flexible construction with 
appropriate fixings for timber frames in flexible 
constructions. 


12.5 Associated Supporting Constructions 


The fire resistance of a doorset tested along with an 
associated supporting construction is not valid for 
change in field of direct application. The applicability 
of the result to other supporting constructions shall be 
the subject of extended application. 


IS 16947 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 12.2.3.2) 


FIELD OF DIRECT APPLICATION LIMITS OF PERMITTED SIZE VARIATIONS 
Table A.1 — Field of Direct Application — Limits of Permitted Size Variations 


Type of doorset 


Category ‘A’ allowances 


Category ‘B’ allowances 


Hinged or pivoted doorsets 


Unlimited size reduction is permitted for 
all types except insulated metal doorsets 
where a reduction to 50 percent width and 
75 percent height of the tested specimen is 
the limit of variation. Size increase is not 


Unlimited size reduction is permitted for 
all types except insulated metal doorsets 
where a reduction to 50 percent width and 
75 percent height of the tested specimen 
is the limit of variation. Size increase is 


permitted. 


A-1 EXAMPLE 


A-1.1 For a double leaf doorset with equal width leaves 
and category ‘B’ overrun time, the tested overall door 
leaf width (for example 1 600 mm) can be increased for 
the door leaves by + 15 percent to overall 1 840 mm. 
Each leaf could be increased equally by 15 percent up 
to 920 mm. For an insulated hinged or pivoted doorset, 
one leaf could be increased by 15 percent up to 920 mm 
whilst the other leaf could be decreased by 50 percent 
to 400 mm. 


NOTE — In this latter case, the full extended width of 
1 840 mm could not be achieved. 


16 


permitted except for those which satisfy 
integrity with radiation levels up to: 


15 percent height 
15 percent width 


20 percent area 


A-1.2 If these relationships, particularly the latter 
one for unequal leaves, are still not sufficient to cover 
a manufacturer’s needs, then a test specimen with 
unequal leaves could be tested following which, with 
a category ‘B’ overrun, the increase and decrease rules 
could be applied individually to each leaf in turn. 


A-1.3 For all doorsets which include unequal width 
leaves, the 50 percent reduction will apply to both 
insulated and non-insulated products. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 10 (02097). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


