**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13508 (1992) : Test Procedure for Measurement of Loss 
Tangent Angle of Coils and Bars for Machine Winding - Guide 
;etD 2 : Solid Electrical Insulating Materials and 
Insulation Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



REAFFIRMEftjTtjO'^ 

15 13508:1992 

Indian Standard 

TEST PROCEDURE FOR MEASUREMENT 

OF LOSS TANGENT ANGLE OF COILS AND 

BARS FOR MACHINE WINDING — GUIDE 



UDC 621-313048-2 : 621-30I7143 : 621-317-333-6 



e BIS 1992 

BUREAU OP INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

September 1992 W« Groap 3 



Electiical Insulation Systems Sectional Committee, ETD 4 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Electrical Insulation Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro- 
technical Division Council. 

In large capacity rotating electrical machinery it is economical to operate at higher voltage. 
The insulation system of machines requires careful selection of materials leading to lower 
dielectric losses. The modern insulation systems include polymers which crosslink during 
the curing process. 

The quality and condition of an insulation system can be evaluated in terms of dielectric strength, 
insulation resistance, dielectric loss, partial discharge, etc. 

The uniformity of manufacture is judged to some extent by measurement of dielectric loss 
tangent as a function of voltage and by statistical evaluation of the test results. 

For a known insulation system, it is possible to assess the following properties: 

a) A low tangent at lower voltage ( 0-2 Us ) indicates a higher degree of molecular cross 
linking of bonding medium ( degree of resin cure ), and 

b) The increment in tangent with increase in voltage gives indication of the void content of 
the insulation. 

In the preparation of this Standard, considerable assistance has been derived from lEC Publi- 
cation 894 ( 1987 ) *Guide for a test procedure for the measurement of loss tangent of coils and 
bars for machine windings' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( lEC ). 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 OCTOBER 1995 

TO 
IS 13508 1 1992 TEST PROCEDURE FOR MEASURE- 
MENT OF LOSS TANGENT ANGLE OF COILS 
AND BARS FOR MACHINE WINDING — GUIDE 

( Cover page and page 1, Title ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing title: 

«TESTS PROCEDURE FOR MEASUREMENT 

AND REQUIREMENTS OF LOSS TANGENT ANGLE OF 

COILS AND BARS FOR MACHINE 

WINDING — GUIDE* 

( Page 1, clause 3,6, line 2 ) — Delete the word *whlch*. 

(Page 2, clause 4.2, line 6 ) — Substitute MOO x lO-»' /or 
*100 X 10i\ 

( Page 2, clause 4.2. line 7 ) — Substitute the word •Sine' for 
•cosine*. 

[ Page 2, clause 5.1.2( b ) ] — Substitute •Increment ( tan delta 
0-6 Uv -^ tan delta 0-2 C/n Y for •Increment tan delta 0-6 Vs — tan 
delta 0-2 U^\ 

( Page 3, clause 5.2.2.1, line 3 ) — Add the word *the' after •for* 
and delete the word •the* after •shielding*. 

( Page 4, clause 5.3 ) — Add the following clauses after clause 5 J.l: 

^•5.4 Permissible Values of Loss Tangent 

5.4.1 Values likely to be achieved on systems commonly used are indi- 
cated in 5.4.2. 

5.4.2 The initial value of tan delta 0*2 (/«, the increment 0*5 x ( tan 
delta 0*6 C/x — tan delta 0*2 (7n ) and the increment delta tan delta 
per measuring step up Xo Uist shall not exceed the values in Table 1 for 
rated voltages up to 11 kV ( see also Fig. 1 ). For rated voltages above 
II kV the values should be fixed by agreement between manufacturer 
and user* 

5.4.3 If more than S percent of the samples show test results in the 
ranges between col 2 and 3 or between col 4 and 5 of Table 1, or in a 
different range of agreed values, the testing shall be continued with an 
equal number of further samples, if necessary up to the total number 
of bars or coil sides. If during these tests the values of Table I, or the 
agreed values, are not exceeded, the test of insulation shall be 
regarded as satisfactory. 

5.4.4 If an automatic measuring system is used, conformity to the 
standard shall be determined at the reference voltages defined in this 
standard. 

1 



Table 1 Highest Permissible Values of Loss Tangent 
( Rated Voltage not Exceeding 11 kV ) 





( Clauses 5,4.2 and 5.4.3 ) 




Tan Delta 
0-2 Un 


T«D Delta - Tan Delta 
0-6 Un 02 Uk 

2 


Delta tan Delta per Step of 
0-2 Un 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


All samples 
30 X 10-» 


95 percent 
samples 

2*5 X 10 • 


Remaining 
5 percent 
samples 

3 X 10-* 


95 percent 
samples 

5 X IO-» 


Remaining 
5 percent 
samples 

6 X 10-* 



5.5 Sampling Plan 

The recommended sampling plan for carrying out the test is given in 
Table 2. 

Table 2 Number of Bars or Coil Sides to be Tested 
( Clause 5.5 ) 



No. of Poles 


Rated Oatpot 


No. of Teit Simples 


All polarities 


Less than 

1 MVA or MW 


5 percent of coil sides 


All polarities 


1 to 5 MVA 
or MW 


10 percent of bars or coil sides 
with a minimum of 20 


Two and four 


50 MVA or MW 
or greater 


All bars or coil sides 


Less than 
50 MVA or MW 
but not less than 
5 MVA or MW 


At least 60 bars or 60 coil sides 
and in addition, 10 percent of 
all bars or coil sides 


Six and more 


5 MVA or MW 

or greater 



( ETD 4 ) 



Ptintad at N«w India Printing Prcw. Kburh, Indj* 



IS 13508 : 1992 



Indian Standard 



TEST PROCEDURE FOR MEASUREMENT 

OF LOSS TANGENT ANGLE OF COILS AND 

BARS FOR MACHINE WINDING — GUIDE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This Guide is applicable to a method of 
measuring dielectric loss properties of the insu- 
lation system of the slot portions of new coils 
or bars for rotating electrical machines having 
rated voltage Us of 5 kV and above. 

1.2 This Guide is applicable to form wound 
coils or bars in which the insulation is cured 
before the winding is inserted in the stator. 

1.3 This Guide also recommends in Annex A 
the test procedure of loss tangent on post 
impregnated machines but the evaluation cri- 
teria in not covered in this Guide. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are neces- 
sary adjuncts to this standard: 



IS No. 



Title 



2071 Methods of high voltage test- 

( Part 2 ) : 1976 ing: Part 2 Test procedure 
(first revision ) 

2260 : 1973 Preconditioning and testing 

of solid electrical insulating 
materials ( first revision ) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the 
following definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Loss Tangent ( Tan 5 ) 

The tangent of the dielectric loss angle of an 
insulation system as a function of voltage. 

NOTE — Other terms sometimes used for this pro- 
perty arc tan 5, dissipation factor and dielectric 
loss factor, 

3.2 Delta Tan Delta ( A tan 5 ) 

The difference in loss tangent measured at two 
prescribed voltages, usually at 0'2 J7n 
intervals. 

NOTE — Another term sometimes used for this 
property is power factor tip-up. 



3.3 t/N 

The rated rms phase-to-phase voltage by which 
the system is designated and to which certain 
operating characteristics of the system are 
related. 

3.4 Form Wound 

Coil or bars which are preformed to shape, 
insulated and substantially completed before 
insertion into the stator. 

3.5 Non-Linear Resistance Grading 

An extension of the corona shielding in the 
slot portion of the coil or bar embodying resi- 
stance characteristics which are non-linear 
with voltage. It has the purpose of reducing 
potential gradients along the surface of the 
coils where they protrude from the ends of the 
core. 

3.6 Room Temperature 

The reduced range standard ambient ( 18 to 
28°C ) which is permitted if the standard 
ambient temperature range up to 40''C given in 
Table 1 of IS 2260 : 1973 is considered too 
wide. 

3.7 Random Sample Test 

A test carried out on coils or bars which ade- 
quately represent the configuration of the 
finished item to be used in the machine, for 
the purpose of evaluating the basic design, 
type of materials, manufacturing procedures 
and processes used in the insulation system. 

4 INTRODUCTION 

4.1 The dielectric loss characteristics under 
consideration are those mainly relating to the 
main ground-wall insulation between the con- 
ductor structure ( including internal corona 
shielding if such exists ) and the external 
corona shielding. Only that part of the 
conductor insulation which is dielectrically in 
series with the ground-wall insulation enters 
into the measurement. 



IS 1350S : 1992 



4.2 The dielectric loss angle ( 5 ) of ths iasu- 
lation is declared in terms of the tangent of 
this angle ( tan 8 ), which for the purpose of 
this Guide is defined as loss tangent. When 
the loss tangent is within the range to appro- 
ximately 100 X lOJ it has practically the same 
value as the dielectric power factor ( the cosine 
of the dielectric loss angle ). 

4.3 Loss tangent is usually measured over a 
range of voltages at 0-2 1/k intervals starting 
at 0-2 Us and up to 1-0 [/n. The term delta 
tan delta ( A tan S refers to the differences in 
loss tangent measured between adjacent 0-2 
Utf intervals ( see Pig. I ). It is defined as 
delta loss tagent for the purpose of this 
Guide. 

4.4 Loss tangent measurement using guard 
electrodes at voltages below the inception of 
discharges represents the magnitude of dielec- 
tric loss in the solid insulation. A significantly 
higher than normal loss measured on any coil 
or bar indicates some difference in the struc- 
ture of the insulation, such as may 
incorrect resin composition or 
cure. The effect of the degree of 
( crosslinking ) on loss tangent can 
when measurement is made in service 



arise from 

inadequate 

resin cure 

be seen 

on fully 

wound stators, in that the loss tangent reduces 
during the early life of the machine. This 
indicates that the degree of resin cure often 
increases for some time after the normal manu- 
facturing process. 

4.5 As the test voltage is raised, partial dis- 
charges within gaseous inclusions ( voids ) in 
the insulation structure or at the interface of 
winding stack and ground insulation cause an 
increase in loss tangent as the critical gradient 



on each void is exceeded. As a result condu- 
ctive non-linear losses in the insulation 
structure may be present and also cause an 
increase in loss tangent with voltage. 

4.6 Maximum values of loss tangent at 0-2 Us 
( loss tangent 0-2 ) arid loss tangent diflFercnce 
per 0-2 Us voltage interval ( A tan 8 ) arc 
usually specfied in the relevant product 
standards. 

NOTE — Loss tangent at 0-2 C/,» ( loss tangent 0-2 )• 
the increment of ( tan delta 6 U^ — tan delta 0-2 
C/n ) And maximum value of loss tangent difference 
per 0-2 Un voltage interval ( delta tan delta ) are 
usually specified. 

4.7 The loss tangent measurments which are 
covered in this Guide relate to the mean, or 
global, loss characteristics of the insulation 
as a whole. They give no indication of the 
distribution of loss within the specimen; there- 
fore, the presence of localized areas of high 
loss in an otherwise low loss insulation is not 
detected. 

5 LOSS TANGENT 

5.1 Measurement of Loss Tangent ( tan 8 ) 

5.1.1 The loss tangent is measured on the coil 
or bar at sinusoidal voltage and at room temp- 
erature at voltage intervals of 0-2 Us over the 
range 0-2 Us to hOUs. 

5.1.2 For coils, each coil side is to be mea- 
sured separately and all results are recorded. 
The following information is obtained: 

a) Loss tangent at low voltage ( 0-2 Us ); 

b) Increment tan delta 0*6 Us — tan delta 
0-2 Us; 



TAN 



«i 





— Atan <5 








y 


/ 


















^ 


,0^* 






-H 




^ 


- 










o 


r? 


b 


> 
Z 




fo 


2 


p 


> 
Z 


P 


-1 


bo 


> 
Z 




Oi 




,,- 


r 




'" 











0.2 0.4 
U/U, 



0.6 



0.8 



1.0 



N 



Fio. 1 Curve op Tan 6 Against thb Ratio U/Uv 
( ExAMPLB OF A Series of Measurements ) 



IS 13508 : 1992 



c) Delta tan delta for each voltage interval; 
and 

d) Shape of voltage versus loss tangent 
curve ( see Fig, 1 ). 

5*1.3 If an automatic measuring system is used, 
the voltage is increased continuously. With 
this method of test it may be more convenient 
to express delta tan delta over smaller voltage 
intervals than 0*2 Um depending upon the 
automatic measuring and evaluating system. 

5.2 Method of Measurement 

5.2.1 Measuring Equipment 

5.2.1.1 Measurement is carried out by means 
of a Sobering b-idge or an equivalent type 
( Fig. 2 and Pig. 3 ) show connections of two 
typical bridges often used for normal measure- 
ment-Schcring bridge and transformer-ratio 
arm bridge, ampere turn bridge/comparator 
bridge respectively in which tan delta is equal 
to w CyR^, for ungrounded specimen ( see 
Note ). A guard ring arrangement is usually 
required A variable amplitude alternating 
voltage supply is used, having suflScient rating 
to provide the test voltage across the capaci- 
tance of the specimen and complying with the 
requirements of IS 2071 ( Part 2 ) : 1976. 



NOTE — For a grounded specimen, two measure 
ments with and without the specimen are needed to 
eliminate the effect of the components parallel to 
the specimen. 

5.2.1.2 The bridge shall give values of loss 
tangent accurate to ± 1 x 10""*. Checks on 
bridge and power supply shall be made to 
ensure that this accuracy is achieved what- 
ever the appropriate bridge actually used. 

5.2.2 Preparation of the Test Coil or Bar 

5.2.2.1 When a permanent conducting coating 
is applied to the slot portion of the coil or bar 
for, purpose of corona shielding the this coating 
is used as the measuring electrode. The effect 
of coating resistance on the loss tangent mea- 
surement is avoided by applying, for example, 
a spiral wrapping of metal foil or wire over the 
full length ( or slightly less than the full length ) 
of the concfucting coating. 

5.2.2.2 When no such coating is used, a tem- 
porary electrode of conducting material shall 
be applied and uniformity of coating shall be 
checked at 20-40 diflFerent points depending 
upon the length of specimen ensuring that it 
does not differ by ± 10 percent of the average 
value. 




I :L---'_. I 

Fro. 2 H. V. ScHBRiNO Bridge — Basic Circuit 



IS 13508 : 1992 



T^F'- 




STD CAPACITOR 



(NUa INDICATOR) 

Fio. 3 Ampere Turn Bridge also Called 

AS Comparator Bridge of Transformer — 

Ratio Arm Bridge — Basic Circuit 



5.2.2.3 Conducting guard rings, preferably of 
metal foil, should be applied so as to make 
intimate conduct around the coil or bar sur- 
face just outside the measuring electrode. The 
length of guard rings should be not less than 
10 mm; the distance between the measuring 
electrode and each guard ring should be as 
small as practicable and not greater than 4 mm. 
The electrode arrangement is shown in Fig. 4. 

5.2.2.4 Further practical details are given in 
Annex B. 

5.2.3 Test Procedure 

5.2.3.1 The coil or bar to be tested should be 



suitably insulated from earth. All the condu- 
ctors should be connected to the high voltage 
side of the supply and the electrode and guard 
ring connected to the bridge circuit. Figures 
2, 3 and 4 show the circuit and connection 
arrangements. 

5.2.3.2 For explicit details of the procedure for 
checking the test circuit for stray effects, 
making appropriate corrections and carrying 
out the test, reference should be made to the 
instructions in bridge manual. 

5.2.3.3 For good reproducibility of test results, 
each complete test sequence should be perfor- 
med in approximately the same length of time. 
In the case of automatic measurement, the time 
for recording the whole curve should be not 
less than 15 s. For either method of measure- 
ment, pre-electrification, for example 15 s at 
1-0 Ujx has been found necessary in order to 
stabilize the results. 

Readings shall be recorded in units per thou- 
sand to facilitate interpretation of results. 
Room temperature reading shall be recorded 
as tan delta varies with temperature. 

NOTE — In the event of breakdown of the specimen 
during the measurements, safety for the operator 
from electric shock hazards and protection to the 
bridge must be ensured. 

5.3 Evalaation 

5.3.1 In order to judge the uniformity of manu- 
facture, the initial value of tan 5 at 0-2 1/k, 
the value of tan 5 for the voltage interval 0-6 
C/n to 0-2 £/n and the maximum value of A tan 
6 per 0-2 I/n voltage interval may be plotted 
on a chart with a linear scale of these charac- 
teristics against the scale of the gaussian 
cumulative distribution function. From this plot 
the characteristic value for 95 percent or 99-55 
percent can be seen and may be limited. 



4mm max 
10mm min — 



HT 



-0 



•-a 



Z 



NOT LESS THAN 



CORE LENGTH 



MEASURINO ELECTRODE 



Hi 



t 



4mm rr\Q% 
— 10mm mIn 



n 



GUARD RING f GUARD RING 

BRIDGE CIRCUIT 



V 



-GUARD RING 
CIRCUIT 



Pio. 4 Elbctrode Arrangement 



IS 13508 : 1992 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 13) 

POST IMPREGNATED MACHINES 



A-1 In the case of machines whose windings 
arc cured — in the stator, tests on the separate 
coils or bars are not possible because ihe 
dielectric loss characteristics of the slot insu- 
lation are not achieved until after the winding 
is inserted in the stator and the curing opera- 
tion carried out. Tests can be carried out on 
the complete winding, but comparison of such 
results with those of tests on individual coils 
should take account of the fact that results 
from the complete winding can be considera- 
bly influenced by the non-linear resistance 
grading and the length of the slot portion. 

A-2 With this type of machine a random sample 



test may be agreed whereby two identical 
coils ( or four bars ) are manufactured as for 
the production machine, at the same time and 
under the same conditions as the production 
winding and accommodated in slot models. 



These samples are tested 
this standard. 



in accordance with 



A-3 Results of tests carried out on these sam- 
ples with guard electrodes and without guard 
electrodes but with non-linear resistance grad- 
ing can be used to judge the influence of the 
corona suppression system, but the evaluation 
is not covered in this standard. 



ANNEX B 

( Clause 5.2.2.4 ) 

MEASURING ELECTRODE AND GUARD RINGS 



B-1 When metal foil is used as the measuring 
electrode, any voids under this foil will result 
in a substantial increase in measured value of 
loss tangent particularly at the higher voltages. 
Every effort should be made to reduce the air 
space under the foil. 

B-2 Contact resistance with the measuring 
electrode and the resistance of the measuring 
electrode itself, unless reduced by means of a 
low resistance contact screen, can affect the 
results by showing a higher than true value at 
low voltage followed by reducing values ( nega- 
tive curve ) over the first voltage intervals. 

B-3 Normally there should be no electrical 
contact between the measuring electrode and 
guard rings and in the event of dispute, this is 
the standard arrangement. However, it is often 
found that guard rings can be applied on the 
non-linear resistance grading with no significant 
effect on loss tangent values, this method may 
be usefVil in routine production testing. 



B-4 When it is required to determine the true 
loss tangent values of coils or bars which have 
the non-linear resistance grading applied be- 
fore the resin is cured, it is necessary to 
introduce small gaps at both ends of the 
measuring electrode during manufacture. These 
gaps should be covered with a conducting 
coating after the test. 

B-5 The coil or bar specimen to be tested shall 
be mounted according to the manner in which 
the electrodes are connected to the test voltage 
and the bridge ( that is on ungrounded or 
grounded specimen mode ). For the purpose 
of high voltage connection to specimen all the 
conductors of the coil or bar must be bunched 
together and both ends of the specimen conn- 
ected to the high-voltage side. Care shall be 
taken to avoid sharp points in these connect- 
ions and if they are unavoidable, the resulting 
electric stresses to be relieved by suitable sheet 
metal caps with rounded edges securely placed 
over these sharp points and electrically con- 
nected to the copper conductor of the specimen. 



SteiiiriMark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau cfhuttm 
Siandardi AcU 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
oa, products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard imder a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control wfafch is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard nuurked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a Airther safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark mav be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bareao of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details^ such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc: No ETD4( 3216 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Pablication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all OfiSces ) 



Regional OflSces : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



C37 

137 



Telephone 

C331 01 31 
{331 13 75 

37 84 99, 37 85 61, 
86 26, 37 86 62 

J53 38 43, 53 16 40, 
)53 23 84 

[235 02 16, 235 04 42, 
[235 15 19, 235 23 15 

[632 92 95, 632 78 58, 
632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printen, Aligarh, India 



