UDC

621.922'025

: 614-8

IS : 1991 ( Part

6 ) - 1967

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE USE, CARE AND PROTECTION OF ABRASIVE GRINDING WHEELS
PART 6 INSPECTION / AND MOUNTING

Second Revision )
the types of inspections to be carried out on the and the mounting requirements of grinding wheels. shall be inspected handling
A

1.

Scope - This part of the standard covers abrasive grinding wheels just before mounting Prior to mounting, all

2. Inspection cracks. Wheels mounted.

wheels

by the user for or abusive storage
wheel

damage shall
might

and

which

show any evidence

of cracks,

abusive
be mounted. injury.

not be
disinte-

Defective grinding wheels are unsafe and must not grate while in operation which could result in personal

damaged

or cracked

If any evidence of cracks or other damage is found, the wheel should be reported to the manufacturer and arrangements made for inspection.

be destroyed

or the

information

should

2.1 tnspection an additional
Defects

Methods The user shall visually crack detection test when a suitable
such as broken wheels, chips and gauges

inspect each abrasive test is available.
visually.

wheel

and should

apply

can be detected

Cracks in abrasive wheels are developed to detect cracks which are and the vibration test.

frequently not visible to the naked eye. Effective not detected by visual inspection. Two of these

test methods have been methods are the ring test

2.1.1 Visual inspection have not been damaged

All wheels shall be carefully inspected visually in transit, handling, storage or from other causes.

to make sure that they

of a cracked wheel to 2.1.2 Ring test - The ring test depends on the damping characteristics alter the sound emitted when the wheel is tapped lightly. It is subject to interpretation by the inspector and is primarily applicable to vitrified bonded wheels. To perform the ring test, wheels should be tapped gently with a light non-metallic implement, such as the handle of a screw driver for light wheels or a wooden mallet for heavier wheels. Tap wheels about 45" each side of the vertical centre line and about 25 or 50 mm from the periphery as indicated by the spots in Fig 1. Then rotate the wheel 45" and repeat the test.
Large thick wheels may be given than the side of the wheel.

the

ring test by striking

the wheel

on the periphery

rather

A sound and undamaged wheel will and not a clear ring, and the wheel shall If the wheel is not too heavy,
be allowed to rest in a vertical

give a clear tohe. not be used.

If cracked,

there

will

be a dead sound

it may be suspended from the hole on a small position on a clean hard floor.

pin or finger.

Heavier

wheels

may

Tap the wheel gently with a non-metallic implement such es a wooden screw driver handle for light and a wooden mallet for heavy wheels. The best spot to tap a wheel for the ring test is about 45" either the vertical centre line and about 25 or 50 mm from the periphery ( see Fig. 1 1.

wheels side of

Adopted

15 December

1987

I OF
BHAVAN,

@ April

1989, BIS I

Gr 4

BUREAU
MANAK

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADtiR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 1991( Part 6 )- 1987
If struck directly along the vertical centre line, the ring, even in a sound wheel, is sometimes muffled and may give the erroneous impression that the wheel is cracked. This is especially true with large wheels which are SUPported on the floor when conducting this test ( see Fig. 1 ). Also, it is sometimes noticeable when the wheel is suspended from the hole. It is recommended that the test be repeated after rotating the wheel 45'to the right or left. Apply this ring test immediately before the sound with other wheels of the same lot different ring. mounting either and specification a new or used wheel on a machine. Comparison of will allow rejection of any wheel with a suspiciously

Got 4ti"
_. .,..
I.:..

2 ;..

.*..
_..,

,' . . . ,.j

a'

..,.A._

,.-:-,

_>'
J .,

3.
-

,:, ;, * :

-'

.

=.'
. ., . J
:

.**_.I .c.
-._::, .

,: J

.."-

@

TAP HERE

\LTAP HERE

LIGHT WHEELS
(SUSPENDED SMALL FROM PIN OR HOLE FINGER) FIG. 1 RING TEST BY

HEAVY WHEELS
(SUPPORTEO. ON CLEAN HARD FLOOR

1

2.1.2.1 Limitation of ring test - Wheels must ring test, otherwise the sound may be deadened. The ring test is not applicable Examples : a) b) c) d) e) f) Small wheels ( 100 mm diameter Plugs and cones. Mounted wheels. Segments. Plate-mounted wheels. Inserted nut and projecting and smaller to certain wheels

be dry and free of sawdust because ).

when

applying

the

of their shape or size.

stud disc wheels. sand or similar material

2.1.3 Vibration test - The vibration test is based on the way that loose is distributed on the side of a wheel when the wheel is vibrating,

To perform the vibration test, an abrasive wheel is set on a test fixture in the horizontal position and coated with a thin layer of fine, dry sand. The wheel is vibrated gently. As the wheel vibrates, the sand granules respond to the vibration energy. If the wheei is cracked, the granules move away from the crack; if the wheel is sound, the granules will continue to be uniformly distributed over the entire surface of the wheel.
The test should include an observation on both sides of the wheel. with the ring test. on a machine. The test is applicable to all The vibration test can be used either in lieu of or in conjunction bond types and is not impaired by ambient noise. Perform the vibration test before mounting either

a new or used wheel

2.2 Metal Centre Wheels - Steel centre abrasive cracks in the metal centre shall not be used, 3. Mounting Requirements

cutting-off

and diamond

cutting-off

wheels

with

3.1 Spindle Speed - It shall be determined at the time of mounting a wheel that spindle speed does not exceed the maximum operating speed marked on the wheel or wheel package. When a partly used wheel is remounted, spindle speed in revolution per minute may exceed the maximum revolutions per minute marked on the wheel provided the maximum peripheral speed established for the wheel when new is not exceeded. 2

IS : 1991 ( Part 6 ) - 1987
3.2 Arbor Ho/e Size - Abrasive under all grinding conditions. wheels shall fit freely on the spindle and maintain proper clearance

A controlled clearance between the wheel arbor hole and the machine spindle ( or wheel sleeve or adaptor ) is essential to avoid excessive pressure from mounting and spindle expansion [ For spindle dimension requirements see IS : 1991 ( Part 3)-1987 Safety requirements for the use, care and protection of abrasive grinding wheels: Part 3 General machine 1.
The machine spindle of adaptor size must be maintained by the user. can cause an out-of-balance condition, contributing to wheel failure. Worn or undersize spindles or adaptors

3.3 Surface Condifion - All surfaces between the wheel, blotters and flanges with each other during mounting shall be flat and free of foreign particles.
Flanges can be distorted by excessive tightening or burred by Inspection for foreign particles should be made on wheels, blotters Presence of foreign particles in these areas can wheel causing stresses that can lead to wheel failure. result dropping and and flanges. mounting should pressure

that come
be checked against

in contact
periodically.

in uneven

the sides of the

3.4 Reducing Bushings - Reducing bushings shall be specifically designed, properly manufactured and fitted, when used in abrasive wheels. The bushing shall fit freely on the spindle and maintain proper clearance under all conditions. Minimum machine spindle size as shown in Table 1 of IS : 1991 ( Part 3 )-1987, ,should not be violated. Reducing bushings shall not be used tomount a larger abrasive wheel on a grinder than the wheel for which the grinder was designed. When a reducing bushing is used in the wheel arbor hole, it shall not exceed the width of the wheel and shall not contact the flanges. Loose reducings ( not mechanically held ) should not be used with wheels less than 3 mm in thickness. Separate facturer, shall reducing bushings, unless supplied or recommended by the abrasive wheel not be used to adopt larger hole abrasive wheels to portable, hand held tools.
than the wheel in which it is used, it will interfere with proper If this tightening

manuof the or such

If a reducing bushing is wider flanges against the wheel.

The power required to drive a grinding wheel completely transferred through the reducing bushing, Only an appropriate as flat shim stock must reducing bushing

is transferred wheel failure

through the flanges. may result. for an oversize

power

is partially

may be used to compensate

arbor

hole and substitute

not be used. blotters or flange facings contact area of wheel flanges. of compressible material are

3.5 Blotters ( Washers ) - When required, they shall cover the entire
0 6

Highly compressible material such as blotting paper as normally used should not exceed mm in thickness. If greater blotter thickness is used, compressibility of the material will be less. Blotters need not be wheels: discs ( inserted wheels; in chucks such as cylinders cups and segmental wheels; that are mounted nut, inserted washer and projecting stud type );

used with the following

types of wheels:

a) Mounted

b)
cl

Abrasive Wheels

Plate mounted

4

e) Type 27 and Type 28 wheels; wheels; f) Type 1 and Type 27 A cutting-off 9) Internal wheels less than 50 mm in diameter;

h) i)

Diamond Modified

and cubic

boron

nitride

wheels; ( terrazzo

and ) ( blotters applied to flat side of wheel only ).

types 6 and 11 wheels

Blotters are used for several reasons. They tend to cushion the pressure of the flanges against high points or uneven surfaces and distribute the pressure evenly. They prevent damage to the surface of the flanges from the abrasive surface of the wheel. They provide a better co-efficient of friction than would be obtained between the flange and the wheel, thereby providing better transmission of the driving power to the wheel. Scuffed or damaged blotters should be replaced.

3.6 Flanges - All abrasive wheels shall be mounted between flanges which shall not be less than one-third the diameter of the wheel. For exceptions and further explanation, see IS : 1991 ( Part 5 )1987 `Safety requirements for the use, care and protection of abrasive grinding wheels: Part 5 Flanges'.
tion Flanges drive the wheel and must have sufficient causing damaging stresses in the wheel. contact area. They must be of proper design to prevent distor-

3

IS : 1991 ( Part 6 ) - 1987
-When more than one wheel mounted between a single set of flanges, 3.7 Multiple Wheel Mounting wheels may be cemented together or separated by specially designed spacers. Spacers shall be equal in diameter to the mounting flanges and have equal bearing surfaces. When mounting wheels which have not been cemented together or ones which do not utilize separating spacers, care must be exercised to use wheels specially manufactured for that purpose.
Soft material

compressible
rated

blotter

material

is not generally
such as soft copper

satisfactory
or brass.

for

use

as a spacer.

Spacers

should

be of

as of low compressiblity of the Mounting

3.8 Tightening

Nut and Screws and nut shall only be tightened sufhciently to drive the wheel

3.8.1 Spindleand nut and prevent slippage.

The spindle

Overtightening of the spindle and nut may spring the flange. A sprung flange can cause stress concentrations which may break the wheel ( for illustrations see Fig. 2 ). Undertightening of spindle and nut can permit wheel slippage which may result in breakage. CONTACT

I
NO CONTACT

INCORRECT
FIG. 2 EXCESSIVE TIGHTENING OF SPINDLE AND NUT causes should a cant always ITorque wrenches are not applicable rural change in the relationship between The means and procedure be followed. to tightening spindle and nuts because normal thread wear torque applied to the nut and flagne pressure on the wheel. by the machine builder for tightening the spindle and nut

recommended

3.8.2 Mu/tip/e screws -Multiple screw flanges shall be tightened uniformly of the flanges and to ensure even distribution of mounting pressure over flanges. They shall be tightened in the sequence illustrated in Fig. 3.

to prevent springing entire surface of the

Order FIG. 3

of Tightening l-2-3-4-5-6 OF TIGHTENING SCREWS

Order of Tightening l-2-3-4-5-6-7-6 ON MULTIPLE SCREW FLANGES

SEQUENCE

Torque wrenches should be used to tighten screws on multiple screw flanges. Applied torque should not exceed 15 Nm, unless greater torque is recommended or approved by the machine builder. Screws shall be clean and free running. Screws shall be of such length as to ensure proper clamping of wheel by the flanges. 4

IS : 1991 ( Part 6 ) - 1987
The gradual tightening of screws on multiple screw type flanges by use of a torque wrench is recommended. The tightening should proceed from one screw to other diametrically opposite and then in a criss-cross manner, Care must be taken to avoid excessive tightening until sufficient pressure is apolied uniformly to prevent slippage. This is most important, especially with as it may cause springing of,the flanges resulting in wheel breakage. wheels of 50 mm or more in thickness, when flange screws are tightened under hot operating conditions and the contraction on cooling may cause dlstortion and hence grinder is then allowed to cool down after use. Spindle Such `edge pressure' may result in wheel breakage. `edge pressure'. Maximum permissible applied torque is dependent on flange design and material. determined by the machine builder, his recommendations as to maximum applied torque some exceptionally torque of 15 Nm is common with single wheel mounting, however, greater torque. Since flange properties are must be followed. Applied severe operations require

Screws must be free of foreign material, and threads of screws and tapped holes must be in good condition. Otherwise, equal torque applied on all screws will not provide uniform clamping force. if clean screws are not free running, they must be replaced and/or holes retapped to provide adequate threads. If flange screws are too long, they may bottom in tapped holes are too long, they must be replaced with screws of correct length. 3.9 Direction resulting in a loosely clamped wheel. If screws

central

and Length of Thread on Machine Spindle nut, following three conditions shall be maintained: shall be of sufficient length to allow a full

If flanges

are tightened

by means

of a

a) Spindles

nut mounting

( see Fig. 4 ).

FIG.

4

LENGTH

OF MACHINE

SPINDLE

b) The threaded portion shall extend more than half way within the machine is designed.

from the spindle end to inside the outer flange, but not arbor hole of the minimum width wheel for which the

c) The direction of the thread shall be such that, to remove the wheel, the nut must be turned in the same direction as the wheel rotates when in use or means shall be provided to prevent the wheel or flanges from working loose as the spindle revolves. 3.10 Threaded Hole Wheels following types: Special consideration must be given to threaded hole wheels of the

6, 11, 16, 17, 18, 18 R and 19 The machine spindle for such wheels shall be provided flange to allow the wheel to be screwed firmly against it, The direction of the thread shall same direction it rotates when in use. The length wheels. Spacers Threaded fitting flange. of the spindle shall be such with an unrelieved flat fixed back in the type

that, to remove the wheel, not bottom in

it must be turned blind threaded hole

be such

that it shall

shall

not be used between

threaded

hole wheels

and back flanges. larger than 150 mm diameter.

hole wheel mounting

should

not be used with wheels

Threads in threaded against the flange

hole wheels should have suitable fit and should be relieved on the side so as to allow the wheel to be screwed firmly and flat against the back
hole can wheels pull the

When threaded must be kept within

hole wheels are used, as in cups, cones and plugs, the size and mass of threaded limits which have been found safe by experience for this mounting procedure. back flange must not be used. If made with a relief, it

With this fype of mounting, a relieved bushing out of the wheel (see Fig. 5 ).

3.11 Mounting
Machine face

foreign

Stud Type ) of Abrasive Discs ( Inserted Nut, Inserted Washer and Projecting plate ( steel disc wheel ) and mounting surface of the wheel shall be flat and free of particles. for mounting of abrasive 5 discs, see IS : 1991 ( Part 3 )-1987.

For other requirements

IS : 1991 ( Part 6 ) - 1987

`INDLE HOLE, PROPER

SHORTER CLEARANCE

THIAN

PROVIDING

FLAT GIVES

BEARING GOOD

SUPPORT

BUSHING PULLED CORRECT FIG. 5 MOUNTING OF THREADED `HOLE INCORRECT WHEELS

WILL OUT

3.12 Mounting of Plate Mounted Type Wheels ing surface of the wheel shall be flat and free.of For other requirements for mounting

Machine face plate ( steel disc wheel ) and mountforeign particles. type wheels, see IS : 1991 ( Part 3 )-1987.

plate mounted

3.13 Safely Guards - All the completion of wheel mounting and prior to starting the wheel, the safety guard shall be secured in place. The safety guard shall be inspected for condition and adjustment. All safety guard fasteners shall be in place and properly tightened [ see IS : 1991 ( Part 4 )-1987 Safety requirements for the use, care and protection of abrasive grinding wheels: Part 4 Safety guards, for full information and exceptions 1. 3.14 Mounted Wheels - Mechine speed shall be set and measured to make certain exceed the maximum operating speed for the mounted wheel as used. that it does not of

[ See IS : 1991 ( Part 10 )-1987 Safety requirements for the use, care and abrasive grinding wheels: Part 10 Mounted wheels, for explanation and speeds 1,
Since the overhang of the mandrel of a mounted operating speed, care should be taken to assure that ( Part 10 )-1987. wheel is a factor in the overhang conforms determining the to the limitations

protection

maximum allowable shown in IS : tggt

3.15 Type 27 and Type 28 Wheels - Type 27 and Type 28 wheels shall be mounted with adaptors or flanges as specified in IS : 1991 ( Part 5 )-1987. The specially designed adaptors described in the standard shall be used to mount only Type 27 and Type 28 reinforced organic bonded wheels, Flanges and adaptors shall be checked flanges or adaptors shall not be used. Mounts At operator which are affixed of the wheel mounting, by,its for flatness manufacturer of bearing shall surface. Sprung or warped

not be reused. the wheel and the

the completion position.

a safety guard shall

be in place between

Type 27 Type 27 and 28 wheels are designed for use on right angle head or vertical spindle portable grinders. Type 28 wheels wheels with flat outer area suited for notching and cutting operations as well as flat area grinding. with saucer shaped outer area are suited for corner cleaning work and must not be used for notching and cutting operations. The variance in diameter between the back flange and the adaptor nut, and use of side pressure in wheel operation limit the use of this mounting to reinforced organic bonded wheels. It is important the back flange. When these not be reused. when mounting wheels are supplied Type 27 and Type with a throw 28 wheels that proper attached contact is made between the wheel and must

away type

mount

by the manufacturer,

the mount

3.16 Type 27A Wheels - Type 27A cutting-off wheels shall be mounted having matching bearing surfaces and not less than one-fourth the wheel
Type clearance 27A wheels when used. are designed for cutting-off on specially designed

by means of flat flanges diameter ( see Fig. 6 ).
to provide side relief or

machines

6

IS : 1991 (Part 6) - 1987

`ING

FIG. 6

TYPE 27~ WHEEL SHOWING

TYPICAL

MOUNTING

DETAILS

3.17 Type 2 Cylinder Wheels - Type 2 cylinder wheels have diameter, wheel thickness and rim thickness dimensions. Grinding is performed on the rim face. The wheel is chucked orcemented directly to the machine face plate which is securely attached to the machine spindle. The machine face plate shall be flat, concentric and at a 90" angle as mounted to the machine spindle. Cylinder wheels shall be used only on machines equipped with bend type safety guards that conform to general specifications outlined in IS : 1991 ( Part 4)-1987. Minimum thickness IS : 1991 ( Part 3 )-1937. of machine face p!ate is the same as that shown for disc wheels in

3.18 Segments - Segments individually chucked in suitable holding mechanisms to form a grinding unit shall be mounted in a manner prescribed by the manufacturer of the chucking device. The safety guard should conform to that used for cylinder wheels.

IS:

1991 ( Part 6 ) - 1987 EXPLANATORY NOTE

The safe operation of abrasive wheels requires the understanding and cooperation of marby diverse groups and of all individuals concerned with their use or operation, This has been the basic viewpoint in establishing these safety requirements for the guidance of manufacturers, users and others involved in handling these products. A thorough knowledge of nature and characteristics of abrasive wheels, the grinding machines on which they are used and the safety and protection devices which can and shall be used to limit, if not eliminate, injury or damage in case of accidental wheel breakage, is necessary for proper understanding of these safety requirements. These safety requirements may be used as a guide and not as an alternative to constant educational programmes at all levels which are the best insurance against those unforeseen conditions or circumstances which result in an industrial accident. The mandatory requirements are printed in normal ( 10 points ) type and the explanatory information in smaller ( 8 point ) type. This is intended to facilitate a condensed document of mandatory requirements together with supporting tables and a figure. The explanatory information gives the basic reasons for the rules to encourage their implementation in practice. However, it may not be termed as part of the standard. The explanatory material has been included to encourage compliance and it is given only where it amplifies or clarifies a requirement. Operating rules are not included in these safety requirements unless they are of such a nature as to be important safety requirements equal in importance to other requirements included in this standard. This standard was first published in 1962 and its first revision was taken up in 1973, based on ANSI 6 7.1-1978. In order to review the individual section at any time reasons alike, this standard has been split up in the following Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 Part 7 Part 8 Part 9 Scope and definitions Handling Safety Flanges Standard Special General speeds speeds operating wheels and the details have rules and storage requirements General machine guards and also ten parts: for technical and drafting

Part 10 Mounted

While splitting, this part ( Part 6 ) of the standard has also been revised been made more explicit. More data has also been included. While revising this standard, assistance

has also been taken from the following

publications: issued by

`European safety requirement for the use, care and protection of abrasive the Federation of European Producers of Abrasive Products (FEPA). ANSI B 7.1-1978 `Safety requirement issued by the American National for the use, care and protection Standards Institute, USA.

wheels', of abrasive

wheels',

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuria, India

