IS 6939 : I-992 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF EVAPORATION FROM RESERVOIRS ( First Revision )

UDC

627'81 : 556'132'2

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

e

NEW August 1992

Price Group

4

Reservoirs

Sectional

Committee,

RVD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Reservoirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the driver Valley Division Council. It is an established fact that sizable quantities of water are lost by evaporation from storage reservoirs. With the rapid increase in the developmental activities of the country, the need for conservation of stored water is keenly felt. The hupe cost at which the stora'ge reservoirs are built calls for minimizing evaporation to the maximum extent possible. The need for minimization of evaporation loss is even greater in the case of semi-arid and arid regions. Therefore, it is important to have a knowledge of the methods and formulae~to evaluate evaporation loss, at the first instance. Assistance Department, has been derived in the formulation from the valuable of this standard. data supplied by the Indian Meteorological

Mean monthly and annual evaporation using mesh covered fixed point gauge class `A' pan evaporimeter with wire mesh (see IS 5973 : 1970) in respect of 43 departmental observatories for the period 1969-1975 and 72 agrometeorological observatories for the period 1966-1975 have been published by Indian Meteorological Department ( I.M.D.) in the publication `Evaporation Data of Observatories in India, 1980' and the same may be used wherever applicable. This standard was first published gained in the use of the standard revision include the following: a) Effect of radiation b) Uniformity c) Updating in 1973. This revision has been taken up in the light of experience during the last 18 years. The important changes effected in this

and size of evaporation used in various 1.

surface'on formulae, and

the rate of evaporation,

of notations

of data in text and Fig.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 6939 : 1992

Indian Standard
'

METHODSFORDETERMINATIONOFEVAPORATION FROMRESERVOIRS (First Revision )
1 SCOl'E

4.2 Temperature

of Both Water and Air

This standard covers the methods for the determination of evaporation from reservoirs. It also provides certain empirical formulae for use in the absence of actual measurements. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standard is a necessary adjunct to this standard:

The rate of emission of molecules from water is a functionof its temperature, theihigherthe temperature, the greater will be the energy of the molecules and the rate of emission. Experiments with heated water show that evaporation does increase with the temperature of the water surface. This is a direct result of the increase in vapour pressure with temperature. 4.3 Radiation The net radiation available at the evaporating surface affects the rate of evaporation. Net radiation is either observed directly or estimated as difference of incoming short wave and outgoing long wave radiation. Though conditions of total incoming radiation per unit horizontal surface area at both lake and pan sites may remain same, there would be differences in the outgoing fluxes at these two water surfaces. The albedo of the two surfaces may not differ greatly but the pan bottom would reflect appreciable amount of short wave radiation. Moreover, because of different dcgrees of roughness of the two water surfaces and also the influence of the metal pan itself, the net radiation received would differ. 4.4 Wind Since turbulence varies with wind speed, there should necessarily be a relation between evaporation and wind movement. Experimental data do not disclose the exact nature of this relation. It is commonly believed that the effect of increasing wind speed -decreases as some high value is approached. The effect probably depends on surface roughness and the dimensions ol the water body. 4.5 Atmospheric Yf'essure

IS No. 5973 : 1970
3 `IEEMINOI,OGY

Title
Pan evaporimeter

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, definition of evaporation shali apply. 3.2 Evaporation

the following

The process by which the water is cha,nged from the liquid state to gaseous state below the boiling point through the transfer ofheat andwind energy. 4 FACTORS AFFECTING EVAPORATION

4.0 The following are the major factors which influence the rate of evaporation: a) Vapour pressure difference between the water surface and the layer of air just above, b) Temperature of both water and air, c) Radiation, d) Wind, e) Atmospheric pressure, f) Quality of water, g) Heat storage in the water body, and h) Size of evaporation surface. 4.1 Vapanr Pressure Difference Between the Water Surface and the Layer of Air Just Above The rate at which molecules leave the water surface depends on the saturation vapour pressure of tne air at the temperature of the water surface (es). Similarly the rate at which molecules enter the water depends on the saturation vapour pressure of the air at the dew point (e,). The rate of evaporation, therefore, depends on the difference between the saturation vapour pressure of the air at the temperature of water surface and at the dew point. Evaporation is proportional to es - e, and continues until eS = ed.

Atmospheric pressure is so closely related to other factors affecting evaporation that it is practically impossible to study the effect of its variation in isolation. The number of air molecules per unit volume increaseswith pressure. Consequcnily, with high pressure there is more chance that vapour molecules escaping from the water surface will collide with an air molecule and rebound into the liquid. Evaporation would be expected to decrease with increasing pressure and vice verse. Changes in other meteorological factors accompanying pressure changes at a station generally conceal the effect of pressure. The reduction in pressure with increase in elevation acts to increase evapcration at high elevations. This effect is oft&t by the general decrease in temperature with elevation and .

IS 6939 : 1992 hence the relation between elevation is not clearly defined. 4.6 Quality of Water Turbidity of water decreases the rate of evaporation. The rate of evaporation is less for salt water than for fresh water and decreases as the specific gravity increases. The evaporation rate decreases about one percent for each one percent increase in specific gravity until crusting takes place, usually at a specific gravity of about 1.30. Evaporation from sea water has been estimated to be about 2 to 3 percent less than from fresh water when other conditions are the same. 4.7 Heat Storage in the Water Body For water bodies of shallow depth the amount of heat storage is negligible. In deep water bodies, however, the heat storage is considerable. A portion of the radiation energy received in summer is stored in the water and is returned later during winter. Therefore, for an equal quantity of radiation received the amount of evaporation will be less in summer and more in winter. Overall effect of heat storage onevaporation in a year may not be appreciable. Aa such, heat storage reflects appreciably on the monthly rates of evaporation in case of deep water bodies. 4.8 Size of Evaporation Surface and evaporation

P
I 0

= precipitation on the water surface; = surface inflow; = surface outflow; u = underground inflow or outflow into or from the reservoir; and AS = change in storage, .which is negative for increase in storage and positive for decrease in storage.

-5.1.1 The quantities are usually expressed in millimetres depth of the water area for some convenient time interval. 5.1.2 The iimitation of the method is that it is difficult to determine these quantities with sufficient accuracy. All these errors in measurement are reflected in the resulting value of E. It is particularly difficult to make an accurate assessment of the ground-water flow. The application of the method may be limited to those reservoir sites whose seepage inflow and outflow are small compared to evaporation. 5.2 Mass (Vapour) Transfer Method given

5.2.0 This method is based on the assumptions in 5.2.1.

The size/area of the evaporating surface affects the rate of evaporation because the air mass is modified by humidification as it travels over water surface causing variation of air and water temperature as well as of wind and humidity over the evaporating surface. The degree of this modification depends on wind speed, initial moisture content of the air mass and the stability of the atmosphere. 5 METHODS EVAPORATION SURFACES 5.0 The following rate of evaporation a) b) c) d) OF DETERMINING FROM FREE WATER

5.2.1 If a moisture gradient exists in the air, it uses the basic flux-gradient relationship of any atmospheric property whose average concentration also var~cs with height and gives water vapour transpori as:

E=pKw zwhere E Lv 4 di z= evaporation in mm ; = air density in g/cc ~; = eddy transfer coefficient vapour ; = specific humidity ; = height in metres; and for water"

4

methods are in use to determine the from open water surfaces:

may be derived from two observations = at different heights above the water surface.

Water budget~or storage equation method, Mass (vapour) transfer method, Energy budget or insolation method, Measurement in an auxiliary pan (or tank) and correlate pan evaporation to natural water surface evaporation, and e) Empirical formulae and graphical methods.

5.0.1 Of the.above methods, (a), (b) and (c) call for determination of parameters which are difficult to assess while the pan measurements and the graphica! m&hods have the advantage of simplicity. 5.1 Water Budget or Storage Equation Method This method involves E where E = evaporation; 2 = P+I-OtU%AS the equation:

5.2.2 In practice Kw is assumed to be equal to Km (the eddy transkr coefficient for momentum). Km is determined from measurement of changes in wind speed with height. Assumption of a logarithmic form of wind profile leads to the classical expression of Thornthwaite and Holzman for evaporation fromaerodynamically smooth surfaces involving wind speed and humidity measurements at two heights, namely: -lo* .P (42 - 4,) (u* - ur)

E= where E K=

= evaporation Von I&man's

in mm; constant = 0.41;

P = air density in g/cc;

IS 6939 : 1992 92' 4, = specific humidities at heights z2 and z, which may be 2 m and 1 m respectively above the water surface; and
=

And now evaporation E= 5.4 Measurement R-G I_ L

F; may be computed

from

112, 11)

wind speeds in cm/s at heights zz and z,.

5.2.3 The rate of movementofthe water vapour is accentuated by the -intensity of turbulence in the air. The humidity gradient may be determined from simultaneous measurement of moisture content of the air at the same two elevations above the surface with suitable, sensitive hygrometers as determination of the gradient of wind velocity requires the use of sensitive anemometers with low starting speeds (< 0.1 m/s) and which may register a 66 percent response to an instantaneous change in wind speed before an air travel of 1 m past the anemometer cups. 5.3 Energy Budget Method

from Pans and Lakes

The loss of water by evaporation from pans/lakes has been found to depend on, among~other factors, the size of pan/tank. As hydro!ogists and irrigation engineen desire to have evaporation from natural watersurfaces, it is necessary to determine a conversion factor/coefficient forconvertingevaporationmeasured from pan to evaporatintl from a free water surface/reservoir. It has been found that these coefficignts differ from pan to pndependingontbrirsi~cs,all otherconditionsbeing same. Experiments have shown that a limitingvalue of evaporation is reachc,d where the diameter of the pan/ tank approaches about 4.6 m, 5.5 Empirisai Formulae and Graphical Methods

5.3.0 This method of determining evaporation is based on the iaw of conservation of energy. For any given body of water a baiance should exist between: insolation or net.radiation: heat transferred from the water surface by radiation, conduction or convection; heat energy acquired or lost in raising or lowering the trmperature of water; and heat dissipated or acquired by evaporation or condrnsatiou. 5.3.1 The energy budget equation is as given below: R =H+LE+G where R = net radiation tlux received at thesurface measured by a net in Cal/cm2 radiometer; = sensible heat flux in callcm?; = latent heat tlux, whereL is the latent heat of vaporization in calig, and E is evapration in mm; and = heat flux in the soil or water in caljcmz.

5.5.0 Evaporation is expressed as a function of various atmospheric elements, such as temperature, pressure, humidity and wind speed in many empirical formulae based on observation of evaporation from pans, reservoirs and lakes. 55.1 Many cxprrimenters tavc tried to improve on the empirical approach of Dalton, which considers the bulk transfer of water vapour from surface to air as occurring along the gradient of vapour concentration with an intensity which may simply be related to the prevailing wind speed. Tbe~formula is as given below: it; = f(u) where f(U) f evaporation; an empirically derived function of wind speed commo_nly given in the form; aud a c bu or a(1 + Du) or cu.
(e, - e)

H LE

f(I0

=

where n; h and c are constants; c' a f? = = saturation vapour pressure at water surface temperature; and vapour pressure of overlying air.

G

As H is generally difficult to determine, Bowen ratio N may %e evaluated from the following equation: P = LE 13= where Ts = water surface temperature T eI e P = air temperature in oC; in OC;

Ts - T
e 5 -2

x0.61 x

P -I_ 1000

5.5.2 The variations i~i the mass transfer coefficient, namely, Ecu (es - cff are seen to be related to the surface area (A) of the reservoir. The formula is as given below: E = 0.0291 A-".u5cu (eS - e) where E is in mm/day, A in m2, 11in m/s at 2 m above the surface and ~1,and c are in hpa. 5.5.3 The difference between the above forntulae lie in the constants which may be due to the observer, the locality or the means and methods of nteasurement employed or a combination of these. 5.5.4 Many nomograms or graphical methods are also in vogue for easy computation of evaporation from 3

= saturation vapour pressure at Ts in hectopascal (hpa); = vapour pressure of air at Tin hpa; and = station level pressure in hpa.

IS 6939 : 1992

free water surfaces. The most widely used nomograms, that is, Kohler's co-axial technique has been described in 11.2.
6 PAN EVAPORIMETERS

interval between two observations 1970).

(XV cl/~) IS 5973 :

6.1.3 Evaporation obcrvations are taken thrice a day at 0830, 1400 and 1730 hrs IST. 6.2 Class A US Weather Bureau Land Pun

6.0 For measurement of evaporation many types of pans are used. Among them the following are more widely used:

a) b) cl 4 4 f) s)
6.0.1

Class A Pan (Modified); Class A US Weather Bureau Land Pan; Class A US Weather Bureau Floating Colorado Sunken Pan; Pan;

US Weather Bureau of Plant Industry Sunken Pan; GGI-3000 Pan (Russian); and US Geological Survey Floating Pan.

This pan is circular, 1 207 mm in diameter and 254 mm deep, mounted on a wooden open platform on thr ground (.see~Fig. 1Aj. It is constructed ol' galvanized iron or monel metal, preferably the latter whcrc corrosion is a problem. The pan is-filled within 5 I nm of the rim. Evaporation measurements arc made by ,hookgauge or refilling co a fixed point (see nl.so 6.1) 6.3 Class A IJS Weather
Bureau Floating Pan

A cylindrical tank of surface area 20 111~ and depth 2~1~(Russian) which is claimed to give shallow lake evaporation is also in use at some places.

6.1 Class A Pan (Modified) 6.1.1 The equipment consists of a large cylindrica! pan, 1 220 mm in diameter and 255 mm deep, made from 20 gauge (0.914 mm) copper sheet, tinned inside and painted white outside (see Fig. 1C). A stilling well provides an undisturbed water surface around the point of the fixed point gauge by breaking any ripples that may be present in the main part of the pan. It consists of a brass cylinder mounted on a heavy circular base, which ensures that its position in the pan is not affected by the wind. Three small openings along the circumference of the cylinder 120� apart near the base, permit the flow of water from or into the stilling well end and at the same time restrict surging action of water at$he point of measurement. The reference point is provided by the brass rod, fixed at the centre of the stilling well and tapered to end in a point, exactly 190 mm above the base of the pan. The pan rests on white-painted wooden stand which ensures that the bottom of the pan is above the level of surface water in rainy weather. It is covered with wire netting of standard mesh in ofder that loss of water from the pan due to extraneous agents such as birds and animals may be avoided. A thermometer to measure surface temperature of the water~is fixed with a clamp to the side of the pan so that the bulb dips 50 mm below the water surface. 6.1.2 The graduated measuring cylinderto pour the water into the pan is a brass container with a scale O-200 engraved inside it, along its length. It has a Jia-ieter exactly~one-tenth of the pan, namely, 122 mm so that the cross sectional area of the cylinder is onehundredth that of the pan. Thus 200 mm of water from the cylinder added to the pan will raise the level of water in the pan by 2 mm. Each small division of scale corresponds to 10 mm, and the level ofwater in the pan can, therefore, be measured correct to 0.1 mm. Since the capacity of the cylinder is only 200 mm, the cylinder has to be filled more than once if over 2 mm of water is lost by evaporation from the pan during the 4

6.3.1 The land pan USWB Class A type (SCYFig. 1B) used as floating pan, will have water level itlsidc the pan 75 mm below the top of the pan. The waler surface inside the pan is kept~at the same lcvrl as that of outside. Surging in the pan may be reduced by perforated baffle plates or screens, below the water line and the pan is surrounded by a raft to protect it from waves. 6.3.2 The amount of evaporation is dctcrminrd by the quantity of water required to bring the water'lcvcl up to I fixed index point in the centre of the pan. 6.3.3 Being 1ocatcJ in water, this type of pa11 is not affected by driftiug soil and snow, and is suhjectcd to conditions which are very similar to ihose over and in the lake or reservoir. This type of pan is, howcvrr, subject to splashing during high winds and is lcrs accessible for measurement than a land ran. 6.4 Colorado Sunken Pan

_

The pan is 914 mm square and 457 mm deep madz up of galvanized iron, and is set in the ground with the rim 51 mm above the ground level (SCL' Fig. 1Dj. Thr water level is maintained at or slightly below the ground lelvel. A hook gauge or the fixed point gauge is used for~measurement. 6.5 US Weather Pan
Bureau of Plant Industry Sunken

The pan is 1 829 mm in diameter and 610 mm deep made of galv&ized iron (see Fig. 1E). It is installed in the ground with rim 102 mm above #the ground level. The water level in the pan is maintained at approximately the surrounding ground level. 6.6 GGI-3000 Pan (Russian)

This pan is a cylindrical tank with a conical base made of galvanized sheet of iron. The diameter is 618 mm (surface arca 0.3 m2), the depth is 600 mm at the wall of the tank and 685 mm at the centrc (see Fig. 1F). The~tank is sunk in the ground with the rim approximately 75 mmabove. Aaimilarsunken tank with a funnel is installed alongside for measurement of precipitation. Sometimes pans of same dimensions bothformcasurementofevaporationandprecipitatiol~ and mounted above the ground are used.

IS 6939 : 1992 6.7 1JS Geological Survey Floating Pan 8.2.1 On the basis of 8.2 the following stations are suggested: network of

Since it is likely that the evaporation from a pan floating in a large body of water would be very

nearly the same as from the surrounding water, the
US Geological Survey has used a pan 900 x 900 x 450 mm deep supported by drum floats in centre of raft 4.25 x 4;87 m. The water level in the pan is supposed to be at the same elevation as that of the surrounding body, with the sides of the pan projecting 73 mm above. 7 MERITS PANS AND DEMERITS OF DIFFERENT

Base stations, one in each typical climatic~regime making uninterrupted observations, and Auxiliary stations to cover pedological and hydrogeological areas which are different from the base stations and recording observations for not less than five and not more than ten years. 8.2.2 The auxiliary set up should suffice to meet the hydrological needs of evfporation and evapotranspiration stations. 8.3 The recorded data of evaporation available for a period of five to ten years for a large number of stations may be used to fix up the number and distribution of the base stations. Data from stations already functioning should'be periodically reviewed so that suspect stations with poor location and exposure conditions are discontinued when fresh observations from new stations nearby show them to be unrepresentative. 8.4 The site for records of pan evaporation and associated meteorological observations should, as far as possible, be so chosen that it is representative of the principal agricultural soil of the areas and is fairly level and open with no obstruction casting any shadow on the pan except during sunrise and sunset. Trees, buildings, etc, should not be closer to the site than ten times their height. Where radiation or sunshine observations are envisaged there should be no sub@antial qbjects to the East or West subtending an elevation angle of more than 3O with respect to the level of the radiation instrument or sunshine recorder. Poles or masts of small diameter would be an exception. The highest ground water level at the site should not be less than 2 m from the surface and the site should be free of flooding or water logging even during heavy raiils. If the site is near a reservoir or lake, the evaporimeter enclosure should be lodated upwind of the reservoir along the most prevalent direction of the high winds and at a distance away from drifti of spray from the spillways. 111wooded areas, the site should be free of the influence of trees. In mountaineous are%s, the site should be on an open plateau or terrace. k areas of drifting sand, the site should be at a place with minimum drift and should be consolidated before the evaporimeter installation. When alternate sites are available, final selection should be governed by considerations, such as proximity to a source of water for cleaning and daily filling up of the evaporimeter and the convenience to the observer and proximity to his place of residence. 9 COEFFICIENTS FOR EVAPORATION PANS

7.1 The disadvantages pans zre:

frequently

cited for sunken

It is difficult to detect leaks, They tend to gather dirt and debris since they are close to the ground, They are difficult to clean, and Extra care required to maintain the surroundings since tall grass could significantly affect wind movement over the pan. 7.2 The main advantage claimed for sunken pans is that the aerodynamic and radiation characteristics are approximately same as of a lake. 7.3 Tanks above grouild are cheaper and easier to install. Detection of leaks and emptying the tanks for cleaning are also simple. The main objection to their use is the possibility that the pan might be subjected to radiation on the sides and bottom. 7.4 Difficulties in measurement ing are some of the disadvantages and frequent splashof the~floating pans.

7.5 Of the pans mentioned, Class A pan (modified) used at network of sta tions in India (see Fig. 1C) should be preferred. 8 LOCATION OF EVAPORATION STATIONS

8.1 The following are the recommendations ~of the World Meteorological Organization regarding minimum network of evaporation stations:

a) b)

Arid regions km*,

One station for every 30 Ooo One station for

Humid temperate regions every 50 000 km*, and regions km?.

c>Cold

One station for every 100 000

8.2 The object of a network is to ensure that the average and extreme values of a parameter at any point in the region covered by the network are obtained with sufficient accuracy by interpolation of data of the stations in the network. Evaporation values from pans show small area1 and time variation. As pan evaporation data has to be meteorological processed to obtain estimates of evaporation from a natural surface, the evaporimeter is required to be located in a meteorological station only. 5

9.1 The ratio of evaporation from a free water surface to that from an adjacent pan is known as the PanCoefficient. As already mentioned under 5.4 these coefficients differ from pan to pan.

IS 6939 : 1992 9.2 ,The coefficients for different pans inuse are given 11.1.2 Penman `s Formula = = = yEatRAa y t Aa 0.263 (ed - e) (0.5 t 0.0 062 tt2) and R, (1 - r) (0.18 t 0.55 n/N) - u Tm4 (OS6 - 0.092 4~) (0.10 t 0.90 n/N)

below: a) US Cla-ss A Pan - 0.7; b) Colorado Sunken Pan - 0.89; c) US Weather Bureau of Plant Industry Sunken Pan - 0.93; GGI-3000 Pan - varies from 9.75 to 1.00; d) inIndia4 Class APan(Modified),beingused The ratio is found to vary between 1.10 and ~0.90 for lake evaporation of the order of 4 to 5 mm/day and between 0.75 and 0.65 for lake evaporation of the order of 10 mm/day. The ratio is about 0.8 for transition months; and US Geological Survey Floating Pan - 0.8.
9.2.1 These coefficients are valid on an annual basis only for reservoirs and that the monthly estimates, which refer to an extensive shallow sheet of water, have to be corrected for energy storage or advection into or out of the reservoir.
NOTE-Thecoefficientsfor(ajto(d)aboveare basedon WMO Technical Note No. 53. Thiz coefficients for (ej are based on the paper `The role of mesh covered Class A pan in the extrapdlation of evapo-transpiration estimates' by M Gangopadhyapr, S. Venkataraman & V. Krishnamurthy of ICAR symposium on `Soil Water Management'. Hissar, March 1969. Thecoefficient for(tjis based on transactionsof American Society of Civil Engineers. Vol99, 1934.

E, Ea R

where
E, Y Ea = = =

An
R R, r n N u T, e en

=
= = = = = = = = =

10 DATA AND EQUIPMENT REQUIRED THE USE OF EMPIRICAL FORMULAE

FOR

evaporation-in mm; psychrometricconstant = 0.27; aerodynamic term; slope of vapour pressure curve at mean air temperature; net radiation; mean~cxtra-terrestrial radiation in evaporation unit (mm); reflection coefficient of the evaporating surface; actual hours of sun shine; maximum possible hours of sun shine Stefan-Boltzman constant; mean air temperature (absolute); vapour pressure of air in hpa; saturation vapour pressure at air temperature in hpa; and wind velocity in km/day at height 2 m.

For adoptingempirical formulae, in the abse.nce of any other method explained, observatipn of meteorological factors is quite essential. Information is required on temperature and humidity of air, temperature of water and wind `velocity.
11 EVAPORATION FORMULAE GRAPHICAL TECHNIQUE 11.1 AND

11.1.3

Slalyer and Mcilroy Eormula + (R-G) s p* stt t + W-Do); 0.63 P

E, =

s =
where E, s

,

s = -

A-W

Some of the important formulae used for computing evaporation ~from pan/free water surfaces are: a) Carl Rohwer's formula, b) Penman's formulti, and . c) Slatyer and Mcilroy formula.
11.1.1 Cnrl Rolwer's Formula E = '

0.075 (1.465 - 0.000 594 p ) (0.44 t 0.0 733~) (es - ed) and 0.771 E

Et

=

where pan evaporation in mm, lake evaporation in nml, atmospheric pressure in hpa, wind speed in km/h, saturation vapour pressure of air at water surface temperature in hpa, and saturation vapour pressure of air at dew point temperature in hpa. 6

= evaporation in mm; = slowly varying function depending on temperature; = 0.42 mg/g per degree celcius; c p. = atmcispheric pressure in hpa; Aw = slope of the saturation vapour pressure cufve at mean wet bulb temperature in hpa per degree celcius; L = latent heat of vaporization in Cal/g; R = net radiation in cal/cm*; G = soil heat flux ii\ Cal/cm'; I1 = transfer coefficient depending on wind speed; D = wet bulb depression at height z ; and Do = wet bulb depression at zero level.
Technique

11.2 Graphical

The most widely used graphic&technique

is Kohler's co-axial technique. This uses the mean air tempera- 1 ture, dew point temperature, wind velocity and radiation to obtain evaporation from free water surface.

IS ii939 : 1992 Referring to Fig. 2A, knowing the mean daily air temperature proceed horizontally to the corresponding mean daily dew point temperature (or the vapour pressure difference), and then proceed downward to the corresponding wind velocity and from this point proceed horizontally to obtain En, the value of daily pan evaporation assuming water-surface temperature to be equal to the air temperature. Referring to right hand top portion of Fig. 2B, proceed from the mean daily airtemperature horizontally to thecorresponding solar radiation value (Langleys) and from this point proceed downwards till the actual value ofEu (calculated from Fig. 2A) is reached. From this point proceed horizontally to the left hand quadrant of Fig. 2B till the mean daily temperature is reached and then proceed downwards to obtain the daily lake evaporation. The procedure is indicated by arrows in Fig. 2. In this process we will be able to find out the product of net radiation exchange Qn and the slope of the vapour pressure curve at the air temeprature, besides the factor y used in the Bowen's ratio by the use of the graph in the right hand lower quadrant of Fig. 2B. 12 MERITS AND DEMERITS OF VARIOUS EVAPORATION FORMULAE ANDGRAPHICAL TECEMQUE 12.1 Formulae Carl Rohwer's formula was found to give inaccurate values where evaporation rates exceed 6 mm/day. The formulae combining both aerodynamic and energy balance equations are reliable and widely used wherever data on relevant parameters are available (Penman, Slatyer and Mcilroy). ,~ 12.2 Graphical Technique Kohler's co-axial technique has been used successfully in USA. In India also it is found to yield fairly reliable results.

yWAlEt? \

LEVEL IN PAN

lTER

l------)207

c ------A
SUPPORT WATER LEVELS IN PAN AND TANK SAME

1A US WEATHER BUREAU CLASS A PAN
t-PAN SUSPENDED FROM \ STAND 0V ROPES

1C CL4SS

A P4N

(MODIFIED)

f

'

----

STEEL STAND OF UITABLE SECTION I---914Q

-1
SUNKEN PAN

L-STEEL e

STIFFENER 1210 + L

10 COLORADO A
LEVI3 IN PAN

16 US WEATHER BUREAU CLASS FLOATING PAN
I-WATER

1E US WEATHER INDUSTRY

BUREAU OF PLANT SUNKEN PAN

IF GGI-

3000

PAN

(RUSSIAN)

All dimensions in millimetres.

Fro. 1 EVAPORATION PANS
7

IS 6939 : 1992

~~001) 0

P~ESQJPE

5

IO

btFCEt?ENCE 15 20

IN MILLIME WE5 a0 35 25

OF WWJRV

0

040

0.20

0.30

0 -LO

oe.0

0.60

0.70

0.75

OAllV

l&KL

EWP 28

COMCUTATlON

OF DAILY LAKE E"APORATIO:n

FIG. 2 KOHLERS CO-AXIAL TECHNIQUE

8

i Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark 1s governed by the provrsrons or the Bureau oJ lrdrun Srandurds Act, I986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply wrth the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devrsed and supervrsed by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 131s for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Detarls of condrtions under whrch a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtarned from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Iodiau Standard@ BIS is a statutory institution established under the fmreau of llrldiurr Starrdurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country, Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publicattons may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the such as symbols and sizes, type or grade course of implemmenting the standard, of necessary details, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ). BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that 1they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to IBIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No RVD 4 ( 4683 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

t'

,

Marg.

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanrtha ( Common to all Officer ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

I 331 01 13 75 31

Eastern

: 1/14-C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, : C. I. T. Campur, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Maniktola ; 160036 600113

37 84 99, i 37 86 26, { 53 38 23 43, 84

37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40,

Northern Southern Western

MADRAS

{235 235 02 15 16, 19, : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093 Andheri ( East ) t 672 632 92 78 95, 91,

235 04 23 42, 15 632 63 27 78 80, 92

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JAlPUR. XANPU~R. (

Printed at Printrade,

New Delhi, India

