UDC 621-5221.524

IS:11745-1986
( Reaffirmed 2001 )
Indian Standard

TECHNICAL SUPPLY CONDITIONS FOR POSITIVE DISPLACEMENT PUMPS-RECIPROCATING
1. Scope use in special etc. 2. 2.1

Covers the technical
applications

supply conditions for reciprocating like oil exploration and its transportation, standard units in: used in this standard

positive displacement fertiliser and process are as follows:

pumps for industries,

Standard

Units-The
shall

Volume-This (I) and

be specified

a) Litre b) Cubic 2.2 Rate

metre

( m3).
shall hour and be expressed this in: shall be used)

of Flow -This metres per per

a) Cubic b) Litres c) Litres 2.3

(preferable

minute,

per second. shall be expressed in metre, formula used in converting pressure in the head.

Head-This

H = Pressure

in kgf/m'

X
shall

10 Idensity in kgjdm3
in centipoise in centistoke. (cP). be expressed be expressed be specified shall

2.4
2.5 2.6 2.7

Dynamic
Kjnematjc

Viscosity-This

Vjscosjty-This
-The pressure

shall shall

Pressure

in Pascal. in degree Celsius ("C)

Temperature -The

temperature

be specified

3. Terminology

3.1

Terminology-Generally

the

terms

used in the standard
pump driven

shall

be as given

below. source applied any portion manufacturer's designs handling to of

3.1 .I Power pump - is a reciprocating the crank shaft of the pump. 3.1.2 Piston or plunger the pumping cycle. 3.1.3 design load-

by power

from an outside

is the force acting is the

on one plunger highest speed

or piston during at which the

Maximum allowable speed (RPM)shall permit continuous operation.

3.1.4 Minimum allowable speed ( RPM ) -The shall permit continuous operation. 3.1.5 Maximum the specified fluid allowable temperafure -The at the specified pressure.

lowest

speed of which continuous

the manufacturer's temperature when

maximum

3.1.6 Maximum allowable manufacturer has designed temperature and capacity. 3.1.7 Rated speed, suction discharge pressure,

working pressure -The the equipment, when

maximum continuous handling the specified of the pump

pressure for which the fluid of the specified having a rated capacity,

pressure specific

-The discharge pressure gravity and viscosity.

3.1.8 Vapour pressure - Every liquid at any temperature above its freezing point exerts a pressure due to formation of vapour at its free surface. This pressure is known as the vapour pressure of the liquid.

Adopted 22 September

1986 I

@ October 1988

81s I

Gr 8

8UREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN.

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 1 loo02

IS:11745-1986
3.1.9 Rated capacityis the total volume of fluid actually delivered per unit of time at the stated operating conditions, this includes both liquid and any dissolved or entrained gases. 3.2 Rating-The following terms are used to designate (or are used in connection with) pump rating. These ratings are determined by pump design and not by conditions of specific application. 3.2.1 Volumetric efficiency-The is expressed as a percentage and Volume efficiency in open system ratio of the pump suction calculated as follows: (for water) capacity to pump displacement and

1 - pp1( 1 + g) = I - P/It
Volume efficiency -S system (for water)

in closed

= l-P/3+++)-S
Volume efficiency in open system (for hydrocarbons)

=I-[s-%(I-f)]
Volume efficiency in closed system (for hydrocarbons)

where .P= P= c= D= s= discharge pressure factor minus suction pressure (kg/m')

compressibility

at temperature, between valves Nhen piston is at the

fluid chamber volume in the passage of chamber end of discharge stroke in cubic metre, volume valve displacement slip (in decibels) in kg/cm3 in kg/cm3 at suction at discharge pressure, pressure. is the and per piston in cubic metre,

ps = density
pd =

density

3.2.2 Pump efficiency pump power input. 3.2.3 Net positive

(mechanical head

efficiency)

ratio

of the

pump

power

output

to the

suction

(NPSH)-

is the total suction

head of liquid

in metres

absolute.

3.2.3.1 Available net positive suction head (NPSHa)-The total suction head, deducting,. svstem acceleration head, available at the pump suction connection, minus the vapour head (vapour pressure -converted in head) of the liquid of pumping temperature. This is expressed in metre. 3.2.3.2 Required net positive suction head (NPSHr) - The total suction head, including pumps acceleration head, required by the pump at the pump suction connection, minus the vapour pressure of the liquid of pumping temperature. This is expressed in metre. 3.2.4 system Acceleration head (ha)-The pressure and may be calculated as follows: changes due to changes in velocity in the piping

where ha = acceleration L= v= R= C= 3.2.5 system length velocity pump head in metre, line line, and of pump). hydraulic pressure exerted to overcome friction resistance of a piping in metre,

of suction in suction speed

(RPM),

constant

(for type

Friction head-The to liquid flow.

IS:11745-1986
3.2.6 Static head -The hydraulic pressure exerted at the pump ,by the liquid at rest.

3.2.7 Flooded suction - Implies that the liquid shall flow from an atmosphere vented source to the pump without the average pressure at the intake port of the pump, dropping below atmosphere pressure with the pump operating at specified capacity. 3.2.8 Static suction lift (hss)-The the pump with the liquid at rest. It is usually expressed in millimetre hydraulic pressure below atmospheric of the intake port of

of mercury

vacuum.

3.2.9 Total suction head (hs) - The total hydraulic pressure above atmospheric at the intake port while the pump is in operation and is the difference between the intake static head and the intake friction head. 3.2.10 Total suction lift (hsj-The total hydraulic pressure below atmospheric of the intake port while the pump is in operation. The sum of the static suction lift plus the intake friction head or the difference between the intake friction head and the static suction head. 3.2.11 Total discharge head (hd)-The total hydraulic pressure at the discharge pump is in operation and is the sum of the discharge static head and the discharge 3.2.12 Total head (h)-The difference or the sum of the total discharge head 4. Types between the total discharge and total suction lift head. port while the friction head. head,

head and total suction

of Pumps
pump of the is reciprocating pump driven by power from an outside source pump. Power pumps fall into six basic types (see Fig. 1 to 3). is a reciprocating having pump having one piston or Its or

4.1

Power PumpPower applied to the crank shaft

4.1 .I Single pump (simplex)A single pump equivalent single or double acting plunger. 4.1.2 double Duplex pump -A acting plungers. duplex pump is a pump

two pistons pump

or their

equivalent pistons

single or

4.1.3 Triplex pump -A triplex equivalent single or double acting 4.1.4 or their

pump is plungers.

reciprocating

having

three

their

Multiplex pump -A multiplex pump is a reciprocating equivalent single or double acting plungers.

pump having more than three pistons pump having the axial centre-line of

4.1.5 Horizontal pump-A horizontal pump is reciprocating the cylinder or cylinders in a horizontal position. 4.1.6 cylinder 4.2 Vertical pump-A vertical or cylinders in a vertical Procedure/i4pDlication pump is a reciprocating position. of Reciprocating

pump having

the axial centre-line

of the

Selection

Pump

4.2.1 EnquiryThe purchaser shall complete the data as given in Appendix A to the extent possible and applicable and also specify any known abnormal conditions of working. In addition purchaser may also specify any of his additional requirements. 4.3 Proposal as per Appendix A Any other details

4.3.1 The supplier shall include a data sheet in his proposal required by the purchaser shall also be included. 4.3.2 The proposal complrance with the furnished. 4.3.3 The maintenance

shall include either a specific statement that all equipment are in strict purchasers specification or a specific list of deviation therefrom shall be submit a list of spare parts which are recommended for normal to between

supplier shall also of the machine.

4.3.4 The conditions for erection the supplier and the purchaser. 4.4 Pump Selection methods-

and commissioning

of the pumps shall be as agreed

4.4.1

Selection

Pumps

shall

be usually

chosen

by one

of the

three

methods:

The prospective purchaser shall supply one or more manufacturers with complete details of the pumping conditions and request a recommendation and bid on the units which appear best suited for the conditions;

b) 4

The purchaser shall make a complete calculation of the pumping a suitable unit from current catalogues and rating charts, or A combmation of these two methods shall be used to arrive

system at the

and then choose final selection.

3

VALVE COVER /-

f=@D

CHAMBER / STUFFING BOX \

I

I

=S
\

k#AO PIN

CROSS

I-IEAO

BE ARINGS T----

=R

FRAME

m

$E

AND

SEAT PIN BUSHING

CRANK

SHAFT GLASS GAUGE

FIG. 2 PLUNGER

PUMP

,U'

$LASrlC NUT CRANK CASE

`STOP p-u'-' PLUG \

Ii
FCUID END STUDDED\

\
SCTION COVER

COVER

iov_t_H

SRADlE __ -_

,

.a

/'

/

\

I
i

`\

FRAME

END

STUDDED

SUCTION

COVER

GASKET

FIG. 3 PISTON

PUMP

IS : 117461986
Regardless ot which method shall be used to select pumping equipment, responsibility for accurate determination of operating conditions shall rest with the purchaser. Even thgugh purchaser supplies a manufacturer with all pertinent data to calculate required flow, total head, and suction conditions, purchaser shall satisfy himself that the resultant operating condition determinations are cortect. The manufacturer's sole responsibility shall be to provide equipment that meets the stated operating conditions in all respects. 4.4.1 .l Mal?ufacturer's choice -This method shall be used for large pumps, for jobs having unusual conditions, and in instances where the engineer shall not have the time or desire to choose the pump himself. Though it appears to relieve the engineer of much of the responsibility in the choice of the pump, it actually shall not. Recommendations and bids shall be evaluated, and to do this requires 9 complete knowledge of the pumping problem, the relative merits of various designs, and the economics of the installation. 4.4.1.2 Data for manufacturerSummarize the essential data manufacturer before a recommendation and bid shall be prepared. Many forms which the engineer shall fill up when requesting a recommendation. useful because they help prevent omission of important data. When supplying data to concerning the installation recommendation because the the plant engineer requesting toward the manufacturer, and pump. 4.4:1.3 Essential of data units required by any pump manufacturers shall have These shall be extremely

a manufacturer extreme care shall be used to see that all the facts shall be given. Incomplete data may lead to a poor or wrong engineer choosing the unit may make the wrong assumptions. Thus, a pump recommendation or bid, shall have a definite responsibility If this IS neglected, the engineer may hardly expect to secure the right in selection of the pump

required required,

a) Number b) Nature 1.) fresh

of the or salt

liquid water,

to be pumped: acid or alkali, oil, gasoline, What slurry, or paper stock, pressure of the liquid

2) cold or hot and, at the pumping 3) what is its

if hot, at what temperature? gravity?

temperature?

is the vapour

specific or

4) is it vicous

non-viscous? gritty, if the latter, what If the liquid is of a pulpy or in the kg/m' of liquid? variations successful amount

5) clear and free from suspended foreign matter of dirty and are the slie and nature of the solids, and are they abrasive? nature, what is the consistency expressed either in percentage What` is the suspended material? 6) what are the chemical analysis, of this analysis? If corrosive, what materials and with unsatisfactory c) Capacityof liquid, d) Suction What is the required the pump shall ever conditions: lift; or pH value, have been materials?

etc? What are the expected the past experience, both with and maximum

capacity be called

as well as the minimum upon to deliver?

1) a suction 2) a suction 3) what e) Discharge 1) the 2) the 3) the f) Total g) Is the h) Is the shall

head? be the length and diameter of the suction pipe?

conditions: head. head, is it constant and pressure against (e) shall which cause the pump shall in the deliver total the head liquid. or variable?

static friction

maximum headservice pump

discharge

variations continuous to be pit? pit? power weight

in (d) and or

variations

intermittent? in a horizontal or vertical position? if the later, is

installed

1) in a wet 2) in a dry

j) What type of of this power? k) What space,

is available or transportation

to

drive

the

pump are

and

what

are

the

characteristics

limitations

involved?

7

IS:11745-1986
m) Location of installatron: location, above or outdoor see level, and

1) geographrcal 2) elevation 3) Indoor 4) range

installation, temperatures.

of ambient

n) Are there any special requrrements or design, construction or performance of the 4.4.2 Pump a) Pump specificafion, rated capacity, pressure, pressure/NPSH handled: available data Requirements for

marked pump? selection

preferences of the

with pumps

respect shall be:

to

the

b) Discharge c) Suction d) Liquid

1) comoosition/type; 2) vrscosity 3) vapour 4) specific 5) pH 6) solid value; at pumping pressure gravity; and particles, (indicate if any (details required ). locations). temperature; temperature;

at pumping

contents/suspended

e) Location-indoor/outdoor f) Transmission

clearly

in case

of hazardous

belt/chains/gears. motor/diesel power and engine. supply, scope if motor of supply. drive.

9)
h)

Drove Details Details

electric

of electric of utilrzation

j)

k) Special
4.4.2.1 a) Capacity b) Pressure.

details, shall (rate

if any be selected of flow ), and on the basis of' the following parameters:

Pump

4.4.2.2 Plunger diameterShall be selected depending on discharge pressure, higher the plunger diameter, lower is the maximum allowable discharge pressure. It is preferred to keep the plunger diameter as large as possible, since larger the plunger diameter, lower the pump speed and a low pump speed shall always be preferred from operating as well as maintenance point of view. 4.4.2.3 Pump speedPump speed is proportional to capacity.

4.4.3 Driver always required. vice-versa.

speed-Reciprocating pumps always run at lower speeds. Hence a gear reducer IS Depending on the motor speed and pump speed gear box ratio shall be decided and Driver speed = Pump speed X gear-box ratio it shall be of the gear of the

4.4.4 Gear box -Sometimes selected based on power pump box manufacturer. 4.4.5 Suction manufacturer.

gear box is inbuilt with pumps. If it is external then speed and driver speed according to the recommendations dampenerShall be as per the recommendatton

stabilizer/discharge

4.4.6 Other accessories either as per manufacturer's purchaser requirement. 4.4.7 Application a) Ammonia b) Carbonate c) Chemicals, d) Crude-oil pipe-line, Some

and unitization recommendations of the applications

Other accessories depending on for power

and unitization shall application requirement shall be:

be selected or as per

pumps

service, service,

8

IS : 11746-l 986
4 Cryogenic
service, plants, water cutting,

f) 9)
h)

Fertilizer High Hydro

pressure forming,

j)

Hydrostatic

testing, gas,

k) Liquid petroleum ml Liquid pipe line, n) Power
P) Power oil, press,

4) Soft-water r) Slung s) Slush pipe ash

injection line (70 service, descaling, service.

for water percent

flood,

by weight),

t) Steelmill u) Water-blast 5. Components box,

and

and Materials
manifolds and The liquid end consists of mainly the cylinder, cylinder head, etc. plunger or piston, valves,

5.1

Liquid End (Fluid End) -

stuffing

5.1 .I Cylinder-The cylinder is the body where the pressure is developed, it is continuously under fatigue. Cylinders, on many horizontal pumps have the suction and discharge manifolds made integral with the cylinder. Vertical pumps usually have separate manifolds, when a cylinder contains the passage for more than one plunger, it is called an individual cylinder. Individual cylinder shall be used where developed stresses are high. 5.1.2 Plunger-The 120 mm diameter. plunger Above that transmits the force that develops the pressure. dimension, it shall be made hollow to reduce It
is solid up to weight.

5.1.3 Pistons - Pistons are used to water up to 70 kg/cm'. For higher pressure a plunger is usually used. Pistons are most frequently used on duplex-double acting pumps. The latest trend is to use single-acting pistons on triplex pumps. Piston rods, both liquid and drive shall be of corrosion resistant material.
5.1.4 Stuffing boxes, packing and glands box bore shall have a minimum surface finish value packing of N9. rings or

5.1.4.1 three

Piston

rod, stuffing

5.1.4.2 The piston rod stuffing box shall accept a minimum of three square V-packing rings (with adopters) of a minimum size of 15 mm square.

5.1.4.3
V-packing

The valve rod stuffing box shall accept a minimum of three square packing rings (with adopters) of a minimum size of 10 mm square.

rings or three

5.1.4.4 Packing requiring lubrication shall be lubricated by oil entrained in gas, by oil fed into the stuffing box on the atmospheric side of the packing, or by oil injected into a lantern ring in the stuffing box. 5.1.4.5 Glands shall .be bolted or threaded to be stuffing box. Glands studs shall pass through holes ( not slots) in the gland axially-split glands shall be bolted together. Headed gland bolts in a slot shall not be acceptable. 5.1.5 Liners - Piston-type liquid end cylinders shall be provided with liners. For piston diameters of 100 mm or less, the liner may be pressed into the cylinder. For piston diameters larger than 100 mm, the liner shall be flanged and bolted to the cylinder, non-pressed liners shall seal against the cylinder with a gasket or O-ring. 5.1.5 Valves -Valve use depends on the application. The main parts of the valve are the seat and the plate. The plate movement shall be controlled by a spring or retainer, usually use a taper where it fits into the cylinder or manifold. The taper not only gives a positive fit, but also permits easy replacement of the seat.
Note-Some pumps use the same valves than discharge valves for NPSHr valve IS on top of the suctton valve. size suction and discharge valves for Interchangeabtlity. some use longer suction reasons other have large discharge valve than suction valves because the discharge

1

5.1.7 Manifolds - These are the chambers where liquid is dispressed or coilected for distribution before or after passing through the cylinder. On horizontal pumps the suction and discharge manifold is usually made integral with the cylinder. Some horizontal pumps and vertical pumps have only the discharge manifold integral with the cylinder Most vertical pumps have the suction and discharge manifold separate from the cylinder.

9

IS : 11745-1986
5.1.7.1 Suction manifolds shall be designed to eliminate air pockets from the flange to the valve dntrance. Separate suction manifolds are cast iron or fabricated steel. Discharge manifolds are steel% forging or fabricated steel. The manifolds shall have a minimum deflection to prevent gasket shift when subjected to the plunger load. 5.2 Power End-The bearings and frame. power end contains the crankshaft, connecting rod, cross head, Basic designs are horizontal and vertical with'sleeve or antifriction pony rod, bearings.

5.2.1 Frame -The outboard stuffing box. in tension. Frames are at various sites, are

trame absorbs the plunger load and torque. On vertical pumps with an The frame is in compression with horizontal single-acting pumps, the frame is usually close grain cast iron. Slurry pump frames, designed for mobile service usually fabricated steel. The frame shall be vented to the atmosphere.

5.2.2 CrankshaftCrankshafts shall be wrought or cast in one piece. In horizontal pumps, the crankshafts are usually nodular iron or cast steel. Vertical pumps use forged steel or machined billet crankshafts, because the crankshafts have relatively low speeds and mass counter weights are not used. 5.2.3 Connecting rep' -The connecting rods transfer the rotating oscillating force the wristpin. Connecting rods are split perpendicular crankspin and for assembly of the rod on to the crankshaft. 5.2.4 Wrisfpin - Located in the cross connecting rod to reciprocating motion. head, the wrlstprn transforms force of the crankpin to their centre line the oscillating motion to an at the of the

5.2.5 Cross head-The cross head moves in a reciprocating motion and transfers the plunger load to the wristpin. The cross head is designed to absorb the side or radial load from the plunger as it moves linerly on the cross way. Cross heads are grooved for oil lubrication with a bearing surface finish valve of N9. Cross heads are piston type (full round) or partial contact. The piston type shall be open end or vented to prevent air compression at the end of stroke. On vertical pumps the pull rods go through the cross head so that the cross head is under compression when the load is applied. 5.2.6'Bearingsframes use all 5.2.6.1 5.2.6.2 Both sleeve and antifriction sleeve, others use all antifriction pumps pumps shall and have bearings shall be used in power pumps. and others use a combination of both. of three a minimum main bearings. main bearings. Some

Quintuplex Multiplex

a minimum shall have

larger

of four

5.2.6.3 If antifriction bearings are used, they shall have a minimum rated life of either 25000 hours with continuous operation at rated conditions or 16 000 hours at maximum axial and radial loads and rated speed (the rated life is the number of hours at rated bearing load and speed that 90 percent of the group of identical bearings shall complete or exceed before the first evidence of failure ). 5.3 Lubrication or a

5.3.1 Lubrication, power end-The power and lubrication system may be splash, pressure, positive gravity as recommended by pump manufacturer or shall be as specified by the purchaser, sight glass, gauge or oil-level dip stick shall be provided. 5.3.1.1 All pressure containing approved by the purchaser. 5.3.1.2 finer-filter. 5.3.1.3 5.3.2 A power The filter A power end shall end liquid parts in the oil system shall shall shall be of steel, unless 25 otherwise micron switch.

pressure lubrication be accessible for pressure end by any lubrication

system servicing. system

incorporate include

a nominal a low oil

or

pressure

Lubrication

5.3.2.1 stuffing-box

When specified lubrication and

the purchaser, a mechanical lubricator other points requiring lubrication. ,

shall

be

furnished

for shall each

5.3.2.2 All lubricator feeds shall be rated for the highest pressure into which the lubricator pump for injection into a liquid end, stuffing box, lantern ring with packing on both sides, lubricator feed shall be rated at least equal to pump rated discharge pressure. 5.3.2.3 The lubricator shall be furnished required. Each lubricant compartment shall maximum expected pumping rate. with a separate component be sized for at least 24

for each type of lubricant hours of operation at the

5.3.2.4 Unless otherwise specified, the lubricator shall be mounted on the pump. In power pumps, the lubricator may be mechanically driven from the power frame driving mechanism or may be separately driven. 5.4 Materials be as specified by manufacturer for the specified

5.4.1 Materials of construction shall operating conditions, except as, required.

10

IS:117451986
5.4.2 adjusting 5.4.3 of these a motive External parts mechanisms) subject to rotary or shall be of corrosion sliding motions (such as control linkage joints and resistant materials suitable for the site environment.

Low carbon or stabilized grades of austenitic stainless steels shall be used when parts made materials shall be fabricated, hard surfaced, over laid, or repaired by welding and exposed to or process fluid or to an environmental condition that promotes integranular corrosion.

5.4.4 Where mating parts such as studs and nuts of 18-8 stainless steel or materials having similar galling tendencies are used, they shall be lubricated with a suitable antiseizure compound, mating parts made from materials having galling tendencies shall have a minimum hardness differential of Rockwell C5. 5.4.5 various 5.4.6 5.4.7 similar 6. 6.1 Out of various materials components and parts Pressure castings of construction available, a list of a few recommended of the pump are given in Appendix B. iron shall not be welded for repairs. or other etc. materials for

in cast

All castings shall be sound;free of shrink or blow holes, cracks, scale blisters surfaces of castings shall be cleaned by sand blasting, shot blasting, pickling, and Testing

Inspection General

6.1 .I The purchaser which are required to

shall specify, be witnessed.

if shop

inspection

by purchaser

is required

and

the

tests

6.1.2 Where shop inspection is specifiedaccess at all reasonable times to manufacturer's performed. 6.1.3 The purchaser shall receive prior test where this has to be witnessed. 6.1.4 No pressure parts shall

Inspector representing the purchaser shall have free plant while work on or testing of equipment is being of at least a week about mechanical/performance

notice

be painted

unless

inspection

is complete.

6.1.5 The manufacturer shall furnish the inspector with all necessary certificate on materials, purchase specification for all items on bill of materials, test data, result of quality assurance test to verify whether the specifications as per the order are being met. 6.1.6 in any Inspection way. by purchaser's inspector shall not relieve pump manufacturer of his responsibility examination, parts, that is, code may

6.i inspection - Normally the type of inspection shall be done are radiography ultrasonic, dye penetrant and magnetic particle, flaw detection and if any way the cylinder, plunger/piston, fluid end and connecting rod, etc. These shall be done as per relevant Indian Standards be followed as per the agreement of the purchaser 6.2.1 Radiographic examination practice for radiographic inspection of fusion according to 6.2.1 and the supplier. to 6.2.3.

Other

a) IS : 4853-l 982 Recommended in steel pipes (first revision).

welded

butt joints

b) IS : 1182-l 983 Recommended practice joints in steel plate (second revision ). c) IS : 2953-1964 6.2.2 Ultrasonic testing procedure for practice practice Glossary of terms used

for radiographic in radiographic

examination inspection

of fusion

welded

butt

of castings.

a)

IS : 7666-1975 Recommended carbon and low alloy steel. Code of tubular plates products.

for

ultrasonic testing

examination of ferrous

of ferrite welded testing in

castings pipes of

of and steel steel

b) IS : 7343-1974 cl IS : 4225ii979
( first
revision

practice

ultrasonic for for

Recommended revision ) Recommended

straight ultrasonic

beam testing

ultrasonic of welds

d) IS : 4260-1976
( first
6.2.3

ferritic

)
inspection Code of practice for practice magnetic for particle flaw particle detection testing of and steel crankof

Magnetic

particle

a) IS : 4901-1968 shaft forgings. b) IS : 7743-1975 steel forgings.

Recommended

magnetic

inspection

11

IS:11745-1986
6.3 Cleanliness shall be done to all cast passage and piping, etc. by pump supplier, these shall be fully cleaned to remove all dirt, rust, mill scale, welding beads or stage or other foreign matter, cleanliness of oil system at all be done carefully. 6.4 When specified by the purchaser, the hardness of parts, welds and heat affected zones shall be verified as being within the allowable values by testing of the parts. The methods extent, documentation and witnessing of test, shall be mutually agreed upon by the purchaser and the supplier. 6.5 The following shall be checked and before or during the test:

a) Alignment b) Direction c) Electrical d) Operation e) Clearance, f) Liquid 6.6 Testing

of pump of rotation, connections, of stuffing and

driver,

boxes

and

lubrication

system.

passages

6.6.1 material

Normally the type of testing shall be done are performance tests, etc (see Appendix C).

test, load tests, hydrostatic

test,

6.6.2 Performance,test check the speed, discharge 6.6.2.1 conditions: a). Two b) Two 5.6.2.2 Minimum hours hours During and test

The manufacturer shall operate pump in his shop for sufficient period to pressure, suction pressure, and capacity, etc (see Appendix D) run shall be for total four hours, with water under following ioad

at no load condition at 49-56 the above Lg/cm* four flour': test followrng parameter shall be recorded:

a) Fluid

breathing,

b) Vibration, c) Noise, d) Bearing e) Oil temperatures, and

leakage,

f) Proper

lubrication be aone for one hour at 105 kg/cm* the working pressure is less than at suitable 105 kg/cm*, 105 kg/cm*, RPM for duplex/triplexshall be tested shall be tested on full at extra

6.6.3. Load tests - Shall piston/plunger pumps. 6.6.3.1 load.

For pumps where

6.6.3.2 For pumps where the working pressure is beyond charges limited to maximum pressure of 210 kg/cm2

6.6.4 Hydrostatic test - Hydrostatic tests shall be done using water or in special cases, light oil or kerosene, at room temperature and at a pressure equal to one and half times the maximum working pressure unless specified otherwise. 6.6.4.1 Following end, cover, box. tests material test certificate which impact, etc) shall be submitted comprise chemical for following major and pressure parts of fluid end assembly shall be subjected to hydrostatic test:

a) Fluid b) Valve

c) Stuffing 6.6.5 Material

6.6.5.1 Nuid and assembly-On demand analysis and physical properties (that is, tensile, pressure parts of fluid end assembly: a) Fluid b) Valve c) Stuffing end, cover, box. and

12

IS:11745-1986
6.6.5.2 components If desired by the customer, the material of power end assembly shall be informed frame, of construction to the customer: of the following major

a) Power

b) Crankshaft, c) Connecting d) Cross 7. Guarantees head rod, and

7.1 Performance-The reciprocating pump shall be guaranteed for satisfactory performance at the specified operating conditions. These include a guarantee for flow rate and power at the time of performance test unless guarantees on other items have been specifically asked by the purchaser. The tolerances to be allowed on the flow rate and power consumption shall be according to IS : 9137-1978 `Code for acceptance tests for centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumpsClass C'. 7.2 Workmanship -All equipments, components and spare parts shall be guaranteed by the supplier against defects which despite proper use appear therein and arise from faulty design, defective or improper materials or poor or faulty workmanship. This guarantee shall be applicable for a period mutually agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. If any defects or malperformance occurs during the guarantee period the supplier shall make all necessary or desirable alterations, repairs and replacements free of charge. 7.3 Any between 8. 8.1 thing, other than the above guarantee the purchaser and the supplier. and Marking J condition shall be done as per the agreement

Despatch Despatch

(Packing

8.1 .l After tests and inspection are completed, all exposed machined surfaces shall be coated with suitable rust preventive coating. Cylinder, pistons and process piping, etc. shall be cleaned and suitably protected to prevent corrosion (see IS : 8221-l 976 `Code of practice for corrosion prevention of metal and metal components in packages `). 8.1.2 Unmachined exterior surfaces shall be painted with heat resistant paints.

8.1.3 Packing wood conforming (first revision)' and IS : 5247-1983 dust and water proof. 8.1.4 All openings shall

to IS : 6662-l `Converted with

980 `Timber species suitable for wooden packaging timber (coniferous)' shall be used. Joints shall be wooden, plastic or metal closures. so that if required by

be provided

8.1.5 In case of export order, top cover of the case shall be fixed with screws, the customs it may be opened for inspection and fitted back.

8.1.6 Components assembly, sub-assembly parts, hardwares, etc. inside the packing shall be done in such a way that they are tightly secured with the packing case and there is no movement of the same inside the packings. 8.1.7 All items shall be packed indicating part description, drawing 8.2 Marking The following a) Description, b) Kind, c) Rated d) Rated pressure capacity, of pump, details shall be stamped or embossed on name plate, etc, on the reciprocating in polythene cover wherever possible, along No/Part No., part list, serial No., reference with and proper tag quality.

8.2.1 pump:

e) Rated *speed, f) Rated g) Rated h) Stroke, j) Inside diameter of cylinder, or name of the manufacturer, and temperature, horse power,

k) Registered m) Serial

trade-mark

number

and year

of manufacture, mover.

n) Direction

of rotation

of prime

13

IS:11745-1986
8.2.2 Marking on packing case outside shall the cases shall be of packing water-proof cases paint to prevent

8.2.2.1 obliteration 8.2.2.2

All stencil in transit. The following

markings details

be marked

on the

clearly:

a) Sales b) Case c) From: d) To: e) Size

order No.------

number of total cases (if cases are more than one)

of cases

and weight sling and C.G. position wherever possible with red marking and stencilling

f) Marking

showing

g) All cases containing fragile items paint as `HANDLE WITH CARE' h) Any j)
`h3Orial

are to be stencilled customers

other

markings

required

by the

handling

instructions shall be shown on packing [see IS : 1286-l of goods in general (first revision)].

967

`Pictorial

markings

for

14

IS : 11745-l APPENDIX
(Clauses DATA SHEET 4.2.1

986

A
and 4.3.1 ) PUMP
1

RECIPROCATING

OPERATING

CONDITIONS NPSH. Required No. of Stages

PERFORMANCE

Duty

: : Outdoor 0
In door q n-?/h m2/h kg/cm* kg/cm* m "C kg/cm*

RPM

1 Liauid Handled Location Capacity, Minimum CapacitY, Maximum Suction Discharge Differential Pressure Pressure Head

1 Eff rcrehcv
Max Power Absorbed on the Shaft of

L I : Pump: Reducer-

Fluid Temperature Vapour Pressure at Pumping Temperature

Tests Required

:

Viscosity CPS at Pumping Temperature Sp. Gravitv at Pumping Temperature I Crvstallization Point OC m

I
: STEAM TURBINE/MOTOR Driver to be supplied by :
DRIVER Recommended Recommended HP/kW RPM

I

NPSH. Available Corrosion due to Solid in Suspension

CONSTRUCTION Type

: : Horizontal 0
No. 4: Dia

Lubrication Lubrication

System Pump

:

: :
"C

Cylinder

: Vertical 0

: Angle 0
mm mm m/set

Cooling Heating System : Cooling Heating Fluid Introduced at a Temp of

mm, Stroke

Plunaer/Piston I Averaae

Piston Soeed Rod

:
Distance

I

Washina Injecting Wt of

Svstem for Piston Fluid

:
m /h kg kg maintenance kg kg

I

Piston Guides : No. : Connecting

mm mm mm mm mm

: Centre to Centre `z& X L
: Centre to Centre

Capacity of Injecting Fluid

Small End Bearing : 4 X L -Big end Bearing 1 Main Bearina : aj X L

: Pump without Driver : Heaviest Piece

I
Valve Valve Seats

No. :
Cross Head Sliding Block

mm mm*

I I

: Heaviest Piece for normal : Bare Shaft of Pump

I
I
I

: Surface

Valve Springs Seal Gaskets -Piston Seal System

NOZZLE Suction

SIZE

'

RATING

FACING

POSITION

:

Discharge MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION

1 Cylinder I Cvfinder Liner I Plunaer/Piston Power Packing Packing Gland Valve Valve Scats Valve Springs Frame Surface Treat

I Connecting Rod

:

I Small end Bearing I Big end Bearing
Main Bearing Sliding Block Crosshead

I

Piston Guides Seal Gaskets Other Parts in contact with fluid

PREPARED

BY

:

CHECKED BY

:

APPROVED

BY

:

IS:11745-1986

DATA

SHEET

RECIPROCATING

PUMP

COUPLING Tvoe

BETWEEN

DRIVER AND PUMP

: : Type Ratio -

Reducer

: Axes : : : Variator & Driver : Reducer 81 Variator/ Driver : Pump & Reducer
OC : Capacity m'/h

Outline

&awing

No.

:
No. No.

Soeed Variator

Pump Sectional Seal Diameter Wr Clearance

Drawing Drawing Diameter

:

Belts or Chain Tracks Coupling between

:

Mech

Seal/Packing

:

Cooling Water. Inlet Temp

lPressure Indicator

ACCESSORIES

TO BE SUPPLIED

: Suction Side : Discharge Side
For Low Pressure Oil

: For High Pressure Oil
Temo Indicator for Bearing Metal Low Pressure Oil Pump

: Motor :
Motor

High Pressure Oil Pump V-Belt Pulley
nil Cnnler

: : I

Safety Valve on Discharge Side Companion Flange for Suction Side 81 Delivery Switch Side

Low Oil Pressure Safety Alarm

or Device

Remarks

:

PREPARED BY

:

CHECKED BY

:

APPROVED

BY

:

c 16

IS : 11745-l

986

APPENDIX ( Clause
RECOMMENDED Name Fluid Cylinder Cylinder head, valve cylinder liner Discharge Adopter Stuffing Stuffing Sleeve Plunger Piston valve fluid box box fluid end and gland stop cover, End of Parts Forged general MATERIALS 5.4.5 ) OF Relevant

B
CONSTRUCTION IS/Equivalent `Carbon (second (third Materials steel forgings revision)' revision)' for

steel, IS : 2004-1978 engineering purposes `Grey iron

IS : 210-1978 IS : 210-1978 IS : 210-1978 IS : 21 O-l 978 IS : 210-1978 Brass Aluminium -

casting

bushing end adopter

bronze

co-hard

IS : 21 O-l 978, IS : 617-l 975 alloy ingots and castings for ( second revision ) ' ring rod End frame IS : 8422-1977 `Piston rings

`Aluminium and aluminium general engineering purposes for IC engines'

Piston

Extension Power Power

St. 42-S, IS : 226-1975 `Structural steel (standard quality) (fifrh revision) and St. 42 W, IS : 2062-l 980 `Structural steel (fusion welding quality) (second revision)' or Cast iron FG 300, IS : 210-1978 rod Class 2 and IS : 961-1975 revision ) ' FG 300 sliding /block class 3 of `Structural 978 IS : 2004-1978, IS : 617-1975, steel (high tensile) (second

Connecting

Cross Cross

head head

IS : 210-l

Crankshaft Plunger Retaining Main Gear shank ring housing locking plate

Steel St. 42, IS : 1079-1973 and strip (third revision)' Spring steel

`Hot

roller

carbon

steel

sheet

bearing housino

Steel cast Gr. 2, IS : 1030-1982 `Carbon steel casting general engineering purposes', Steel St. 42, IS : 1079-l Steel St. 42, iron IS : 1079-1973 FG 300 IS : 210-1978

for 973

Diaphragm Small Main end

complete bearing

Cast Steel Steel

bearing baffle

O-ring/water Gaskets Pet cock valve, spring

Oil

resistant

synthetic

rubber asbestos fibre jointings

IS : 2712-1979 `Compressed ( second revision ) ' Brass/carbon check valve Forged Spring steel, steel 974 `V-belts steel IS : 2004-1978

Relief Valve V-belt

IS : 2494-l

for industrial

purposes

(first

revision

)

17

IS:11745-1986
Name of Parts Relevant WEouivalent Materials

Pipes

and

fittings gauge nuts

Carbon

steel

and

stainless

steel gauges (first revision )'

Pressure Bolts and

IS : 3624-l

979

`Pressure

and vacuum

IS : 1364-l 967 `Precision and semi-precision hexagon bolts, screws, nuts and lock nuts (diameter range 6 to 39 mm 1(first revision )' ,IS : 1365-l 978 Slotted countersunk head screws (third revision )`, (IS : 1366-l 968 `Slotted cheese head screws (dia range 1.6 to 20 mm) (first revision )' ball bearing IS : 6456-1972 1972 `Single `Double row fluid Suitable `Double row radial ball bearings' IS : 6457row cylindrical roller bearings', IS : 6458-1972 cylindrical roller bearings' to be included where applicable

Roller

bearing,

Other

parts

in contact

with

grades

18

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.6.1 )
TEST REQUIREMENT-

C
PUMP

RECIPROCATING

S.O.No.

CUSTOMER

ITEM No.

TYPE

QTY

PUMP

SPECIFICATION SIZE mm mm SHAFT RPM

PERFORMANCE

TEST PRESSURE kgf/cm* l-

REQD

WITNESS

PLUNGER/LINER STROKE CRANK/PINION DRIVE

NO LOAD PARTIAL LOAD

I

FULL LOAD TEST

I

I
PRESSURE kgf/cm*

I

HYDROSTATIC

SUCTION CONNECTION iz DISCHARGE POWER CONNECTION kW PARAMETERS TEMPERATURE AT PUMPING TEMPERATURE TEMPERATURE kgf/cm* REMARKS mwc kgf/cm* kgf/cm' m'/h :"C FLUID END ASSEMBLY FLUID END SUCTION CHAMBER CHAMBER

WITNESS

I I I

I I I

OPERATING PUMPING SP VAP GR

I I

FLUID END DISCHARGE STUFFING SUCTION BOX

ELBOW/MANIFOLD ELBOW/MANIFOLD

DISCHARGE

PRESS AT PUMPING AT PUMPING

VISCOSITY NPSHR

TEMPERATURE

SUCTION PRESS. DISCHARGE FLOW RATE LIQUID PRESS.

I I

DATE

PREPARED

BY

:

CHECKED

BY

:

I

I

I

I APPROVED BY

IS : 11745-l

986

APPENDIX
(Clause PROCEDURE D-l. D-2. The pump shall with regard to initially proper FOR PERFORMANCE 6.6.2)

D
TESTING OF PISTON PUMPS

be run on no load with assembly, oil leakage,

water as pumping fluid for general observation lubrication and bearing temperature.

It shall then be taken nearly up to the maximum speed and gradually loaded up to full load with an interval of 35 kg/cm* At each of these load points, the pump shall be held for a period of 30 minutes and the observations shall be recorded in following pro forma :

TEST Pumptype................................ Pump

CERTIFICATE ..,............................................

size...............................................................................

Pumpserialnumber................,..................................................... Sales Name order number......................................................................

of customer

......................................................................

Date oftest.............................................................................. Place oftest.............................................................................

TESTING Time Strokes

DETAILS per Minute Discharge Pressure, kg/cm'

Chain Ambient Crank

case

oil temperature

...............................................................

temperature case

.................................................................... ............................................................... filter .......................................................... filter

oil temperature
pressure pressure before after

Lubrication Lubrication Chain THE

...........................................................

case oil pressure PERFORMANCE

................................................................... OF THE PUMP IS FOUND SATISFACTORY.

Signature of Customer's Representative

Signature

of Supplier's Representative

EXPLANATORY
This standard gives detailed requirements of reciprocating

NOTE
pump.

20
PRINTED AT KAPOOR ART PRESS, MAYAPURI, NEW DELHI 110064.

