E16: 5510- 1966
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR SOIL SURVEYS FOR RJYER VALLEY PROJECTS ( Third
Reprint APRIL 1990 )

UDC 627'8 : 624'131'3

0 co~yrj& BUREAU
MANAK

1970 STk,#DARDS
Z&AR :. MARO

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

9 BAHADUR SH,&# NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 7

II.:1970

1$:5510-1969

GUIDE FOR SOIL SURVEYS FOR RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
Preliminary Investigation and .Collection of Data Sectional Committee, BDC 47

Chairman SHRI N. C. SAKSE.NA Members
.SJmI llALEWL WAR FJATM

Re)resenling
Nlinis(iy of Irrigation

& Power

SIMtL S. I.Mu

BANJJXJESZ

R. N. BJLAROAVA SUltI K. 1'. G~OSH ( Mtctnate ) SHJtI A. S. ChIANJ>ItASEKIKARAN Cent ral Water & Power Commission, New Delhi SUYEMNTEN~lNJJ ENQXNJZEI< INVESTICIATICJN CIncL~ No. II ( Alternule ) DU'UTY Su ItvIcYon GENERAL Survey of"India, Debra Dun DMUCTOR, LANLI RECLAMATION Irrigation & Power Department, Government of Punjab . Du S. R. SJiRUAL ( A&rna/e ) C;andbi Sagar Dam, Government of Madhya Pradesh EXECUTIW UNIJINICIIR Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Suit I R. G. GANDUI S Ii 1{1D. M. SAvun ( Alternate ) Mil]istry of Irrigation & Power SJII{J O. J". GARCI Central Water & Power Research Station, Poona SHI{lc. v. (;01410 SII RI S. V. CIIITALX ( Afternafe ) Ckmwal Board of Irrigation & Power, Ncw Delhi Slll{l s. ~. GU1'TA Government Irrigation & Power Department, SHNI N. V. KIltJnsAL~ of Maharashtra S11ill 1{. 1). (;lllwu ( Affcrnah ) SII l{L U. N. MLJur~LY Damudar Valley Corporation, Calcutta Galiunon India Ltd, Bombay Slll{l S. 1<. PINHEIRJJ India Meteorological Department, New Delhi Sf{nl D. 1". L. N. RAO Projects Construction National Corporation, SHR1 1'. sAm'A'rII ` Ncw Delhi of Irrigation & Power Dcpartmcmt, Government SH 1{1 h[. ]'. /!s\\'<iTllANAJtAYANA M ysore SE'T'XY ( Continued on page 28)

Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters

INDIAN MANAK

STANDARDS INSTITUTION BHAVAN, 9 lIAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 1

$$: S510 -1969

GUIDE FOR SOIL SURVEYS FOR RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS

Q. 1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 2 December 1969, after the draft finalized by the Preliminary Investigation and Collection of Data Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil J3nginecring Division Council.

.0.2

Soils differ wiclcly from place to place. Soil surveys are, therefore, carried out to determine the nature, distribution and extent of different soils existing in various regions. Since the type of cultivation and the management practices for clliclcnt agricultltrc dcl)cnd ol~ tl~c nature of the soil and in order to cullivate scientifically, it is cssclltial to dctcrminc various factors, such as the nature of the soil with respect to its moisture retentivity, requirement of water and fertilizers and type of crop most suitable for a particular soil, 0.3 Properties of soil may change after the introduction of an irrigation system in the region due to the development of salinity, alkalinity, water logging, etc. .4n exhaustive soil survey should, therefore, be conducted durin~ the plannin% sv:gc of a river valley project with particular emphasis to the suitability of sods for irrigation, reclamation, drainage and also in command areas where watcu is to be usccl for irrigation after impounding in a reservoir or rmuling a canal. 0.4 Soil surveys of tllc catcllmcut and command areas help in formulating measures for nlili~ating reservoir siltation, prevention of soil erosion aud suggesting relllcdlai measures for drainage and water loggi~l,~ pwblcIns. Soil surveys should proviclc for examination of the physical, chemical and engineering properties of tllc soil. From agricultural point of view the studies help in clctcrmining the availability of plant foods in the soil and the need for correcting tl~c deficiencies. `1'bus, soil surveys flnmish information requiied not o]dy for agricultural purloses but also for reclamation and conservation purposes and for engineering construction activities, like the highways, railways, etc. Jn this guide it is intendccl to clcscribe briefly as ~c&w& to soil s~[rvcys tlla~ arc the ~cncral princi]}les (Jr guid~liIlcs tllc-' Soil surcare':cd out for river valley lm)jccts. For detailed lNWCCCIWXX vey mnuu:tl ( reuisd )`, I~ltl~lislIcd Iy tllc AH India Soil and Land Use 2

IS: 5510-1969
Survey Orgztnizaticn may be referred. For conducting rapid prc-irrigation soil survey to determine the feasibility of a river valley proiect the `Manual for pre-kri~:~ tion soil survey, volumes I and II', published hy the Central \\"ater and ~ower Commission ( \\:ater \Ving ), may be referred. oog In the formulation of t~ls standard due \reightage has been given to international co-orclination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in acldkion to relating it to the practices followed in the field in this country. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular standard is complied with, the final value, observed or sing the result of a test or analvsis, shall bc rounded off IS :2-1960*. The number of $gnificant places retained value should be the same as that of the specified value . . requirement of this calculated, expresin accordance with in the rounded off in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down for river val:cy projects. 2. TERMINOLOGY the guidelinm for carrying out soil surveys

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions git'en in 1S: 2809-1 964? and the follo~ving definitions shall apply. 2.1 Acid Soil � .i soil that gives an acid reaction ( below PH 7"0 ).

2.2 Alkali Soil -- A soil which'has either so high a degree of alkalinity (#H 8-5 or higher) or so high a percentage of exchangeable sodium ( 15 percent or higher ESP ), or both, that the growlh of most crop plants is reduced. 2.3 Base Status -- The extent to which `a material or s~il component ( clay or humus) is saturated with exchangeable bases ( cations) other than kiydrogcr.. Ths is expre=ed as a percentage of the total base or cation exchange capacity of the material. 2,4 Class -- A group of soik having a definite range in a property or structure, land Cwability> degrattribute, such as acidity, S%X, text~e, of erosion, or drainage. -- The assignment of 'objects or units to groups within 2.5 Classification a system of catcgofics distin~hcd by their propertim. In the classification
"Rules for round!cg off numrrical values ( rcvi.red ). ?Glossary of term and symbols relating to soil mechanics.

3

IS : 5510 - 1969 of Loils. the fundamental unit is a soil type. Similar soil types are ,g;roupxi to form a series. Series are grouped into families, families into great soil groups, these into suborders: and suborders into orders ( of which there are three : zonal, azonal and intrazonal). 2.6 Land Classification - The classification of units of land for the purpose of showing tlieir relative suitabilities for some specific use. 2.7 Mapping Units - Classificational unyb that are shown on the maps. The kind of such units shown on the m&s depends upon the scale of maps. In reconnaissance surveys these units may be series or association of series, while in detailed surveys they will include types and chases of such soils. 2.8 pH Soil the iogarithm

-An

index of the acidity or alkalinity of a soil in terrns of of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.

2.9 Ped .- An individual natural soil aggregate. Refers -to aggregate of primary soil particles into compound particles which are' separated from adjoining aggregates by surfaces of weakness. 2.10 Photo Tone - Relative intensity and their shades on the photographs. of the darkness of the photo images

2.11 Soil Horizon - One of the layers of the soil profile, distinguished principally by its texture, colour, structure and chemical content. 2.12 Soil Monolith - Refers to soil profiles collected in an undisturbed manner to act as visual aids in soil study and identification or for display. 2.13 Soil Morphology - The constitution of the soil body as expressed in the kind, thickness and arrangement of the horizons in the profile, and in the texture, structure, consistence, porosity and colour of each horizon. In other words, soil morpholo g ) 1 is the property of the soil body or any of its parts. 2.14 Soil Phase - The sub-division of a soil type having variations in characteristics not signiticant to the classification of the soil in its natural landscape, tut significant to the use and management of the soil. Examples of the variations recognized by phases of soil types include difference in slope, stoniness and erosion. 2.15 Soil Profile - \-ertical section of a soil, showing the nature and sequence of the various layers, as developed by deposrtlon or weathering or both. 2.16 Soil Series -A group p.f soils that have soil horizons similar in their differentiating characteristics and arrangement in the profile, except for the texture of the surface soil, and are formed from a particular type 4

1s : 5510 - 1969
of parent material. classification. Soil series is an important category in detailed soil

2.17 Soil Types - A subgroup or category A soil type the texture of the surface'soil. zons similar in differentiating characteristics profile, and developed from a particular name of a soil type consists of the name of class name of the surface soil. Thus, Ooty type within the Ooty series.

under the soil series based on is a group of soils having horiand arrangement in the soil type of parent material. The the soil series plus the textural silt loam is the name of a soil related to

2.18 Taxonomic Soil Unit - Refers to unit of classification soils. These could be `soil series' or `soil types'. 2.19 Water Table which the pressure pressure. 3. STANDARD

-- The upper surface of ground water; elevations at in the water is zero with respect to the atmospheric

SOIL

SURVRY

3.1 Use of Base Maps - Standard soil surve\-s may be carried out at varying intensities dependin g on the nature of utjlization of the soil. Mapping may be done on varying scales and the mapping legends v,-.ry from narrowly to broadly defined units. Soil morphology shall be given utmost consideration in mapping differentiated soils. Soil survey shall be carried out making use of base maps on scales ranging from 1 : 50 000 to 1 : 4 000. The smaller scale maps are the Survey of India topographical -maps and the large scale maps are cadastral village maps. Air photographs in scales of 1 : 15 000 to 1 : 60 000 as available may be used as base maps since they help to increase accuracy of observations and location of soil boundaries and other features, besides helping to speed up the work. The choice of scale of base maps used shall depend upon the type of survey which in its turn will reflect the purpose and objective of the survey. 3.2 Type of Data to be Collected-The topographic and vegetation condition of the terrain should be noted. Soil samples on both profile and surface basis should be collected for laboratory examination and confirmation of the field observations. The soil samples for laboratory examination of engineering properties shall be collected in accordance with IS : 2132 1963*. 3.2.1 The PII value, available soluble salt contents, permeability be determined for interpretation varied uses. - -__~___ and total plant nutrients, base status, and other engineering properties may of the behaviour of the soils under

5

1s : 5510 - 1969 4. TYPES OF SOIL SURVEYS 4.1 Rapid Reconnaissance Survey - In the case of all project planning including irrigation projects, the feasibility studies require general information regarding the soil conditions, terrain features, and other disadvantageous features which militate against the succcss of the project. For such purposes a rapid reconnaissance survey, combined with studies on the soil characteristics may be adequate. In such surveys base maps in the scales ranging between 1 : 60 000 and 1 : 250 000 may be adequate for the purpose. The soil sampling shall be limited to studies on the variability of the soils, their depth characteristics, the occurrence of harmful factors, like salmity, alkalinity, etc, and delineation of the approximate extent of these features. The soil map prepared from such a rapid reconnaissance survey should indicate the extent and limits of the above features and such other observations that may be made to suit the requirementsof such a survey. 4.2 Reconnaissance Survey - Reconnaissance soil surveys help to fix the nature of soils occurring in the area and also to determine the areas suitable for more intensive development or to recognize the areas which require attention or amelioration because of their suffering from erosion, salinity, alkalinity, and such factors affecting their use. Reconnaissance surveys shall furnish the information to precede detailed surveys. The scale of mapping shall be 1 : 50 000 using topo sheets of the Survey of India, as base maps. The field work shall involve studies of soil profiles at intervals of 3 to 6 km or shorter intervals depending upon the soil heterogeneity. Auger sampling for every 0*25 to 1 km shall be carried out to study the variations in profile characters. Profiles showing similar horizon characters within narrowly defined limits may be grouped together into `series'. The `series' shall form the unit for mapping of soils in this type of survey. The soil series may be named after the place ( location, village or town ) near where the typical soil profile representative of the series was first recognized or described. The determination of soil ( `series' or the `association of series' ) boundaries in such surveys may be made partly by traversing and largely by extrapolation. 4.3 Detailed Survey - In this type of survey, maps in adequately large scale may be used to permit demarcation of soil phases and details of soil and terrain. In this type, the mapping units are narrowly defined to indicate variations in surface texture, soil depth, erosion, salinity, alkalinity, slope features or any other factors significant for land use or land development. Cadastral maps with village as a unit may be used. Aerial photographs in the scale of 1 : 10 000 to 1 : 15 000 may also be used. Studies of soils shall be similar as in reconnaissance survey, but at much closer in+ vals. Also the boundary delineated should be made by close traverse. 6

IS : 5510 - 1969 5. SOIL MAPS 5.1 Use of Soil Maps - A soil map is prepared after a soil survey and is intended to show the distribution of soils, their types and other mapping units decided upon. From such soil maps, interpreted single characteristic maps, or land use maps or maps showing engineering properties may be prepared. The single-characteristic maps may include such properties as Slope, erosion, nutrient status, salinity, drainage, etc. 5.2 Equipment - The following' are some of the important that may be required for soil survey: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j) Augers of various types; Tape, spade, pick-axe, etc; Abney level; Compass; Lables, bags for collecting samples; Munsell colour chart; Base maps and field note books; Indicators for PH measurement and hydrochloric acid; Soil monolith boxes, such as 1) macromonolith ( wooden frame 150 x 15 x 7.5 cm ); and 2) micromonolith ( plywood boxes with adjustable partitions 30X 7.5 X3-75 cm ). OF SOIL SURVEY equipment

6. METHODS

6.1 Traversing for Ret onnaissancc Soil Survey -The field operations include preliminary study of the soils of the area, the preparation of the mapping legend and identification of the soils. The mapping unit in this case is the soil series. In areas of complex geological formation and in highly undulating terrain where soil characters change abruptly within small distances, the delineation of boundaries between different identified series becomes a matter of difficulty, and their mapping as separate units presents cartographic difficulties. In such situations, it is necessary to delineate them in `associations' of series. The reconnaissance soil survey should be carried out on topo sheet (1 : 50 000) of the Survey of India or similar base maps, including air photographs. 6.1.1 Soil profiles may be located at intervals of 3 to 6 km depending upon soil heterogeneity and these should be examined. Soil monoliths should be collected for typical profiles for record and correlation purposes, 7

IS : 5510 - 1969
The traverses for identification of soils and for plotting boundaries may be spaced at greater intervals than in the detailed soil surveys. Under certain conditions of field work, especially in pre-irrigation surveys the adoption of grid method for locating the augering sites may be useful. Grid squaris of extent ranging from 1 to 8 km" depending upon the nature of terrain may be suitable. During traverses for marking boundaries of soil units, the available roads and paths should be followed. Observations in regard to depth, texture and terrain feature shall be recorded at every 1 km, and such obser-,rations may also be made at 0.25 to 0.5 km. 6.2 Traversing for Detailed Soil Survey - The reconnaissance survey should precede a detailed survey, as this furnishes adequate basic information about the nature and kind of soils occurring in an area and adequate background information becomes available in respect of the problems of erosion, cropping and their relationship with the utilization of soil and land resources. Detailed survey aims at bringing out details in respect of soil and terrain features and such comprehensive data could be used for proper interpretation to guide different technical classifications, including engineering properties. 6.2.1 The mapping legend is narrowly defined which includes the taxqnomic soil unit (series), the surface texture, soil depth, slope and erosion features of the terrain. The base maps used in such surveys may be of scale 1 : 15 000 to 1 : 4000. These may be cadastral maps or aerial photographs6.2.2 In proceeding with the operations of the detailed soil mapping, the field party should traverse the land on foot and depending on soil heterogeneity examine auger samples at intervals of 100 to 200 m. The profiles for detailed soil examination should be located at intervals of 1 to 2 km or where changes of soil are noted. The delineation of soil boundaries demarcating soil units should be made in the field with reference to fixed points on the map. Additional information, like drains, NULLAS, sand dunes, wet spots, etc, should be indicated on the map by conventional symbols. 6.2.2.1 The soil boundaries should be drawn made continuously in the course of the traverse. through should observations consist of the

6.3 Field Party for Soil Survey -A
following: a) Soil surveyor, b) Field assistant, c) Tracer, d) KHALASI, e) Jeep driver and (with a~jeep).

field party

IS : 5510 f 1969 6.3.1 Rates of Field Work ly Reconnausance and Detailed Sumys - Jn plain areas, a field party should cover per d.ay about 4 km" by reconnaissance survey or about 800 km" for a working year of 200 field days. In respect of detailed survey a party should cover 0.8 km2 per day in plain areas Thus, the annual outturn may be and about O-4 km" in hilly terrain. 160 kms in favourable terrain and only 65 to 80 km2 in difficrlt terrain. 7. SOIL

CHARACTERISTICS
of the soil shall be deter-

7.1 In a soil survey the following characteristics . mined and recorded horizon-wise: a) Soil reaction (PH), b) Carbonate content, c) Soil texture, d) Soil colour, c) Soil structure, f) Soil consistency, and g) Cementation.

7.2 soil Reaction - Soil reaction is an important characteristic in soil studies because of its intrinsic importance in various phases of soil develop ment. It has a large influence on microbiologic activities, availability and uptake of various plant nutrients, and the reaction of applied fertilizera to the soil. The intensity `of soil acidity or alkalinity is expressed as pH value. A pH value of 7 implies neutral characteristic. Values lower than 7 indicate acidity and higher ones .alkalinity. Soils with PH value round about neutrality are usually the best for agricultural purposes. The PH yalalyashall be determined in accordance with IS : 2720 ( Part XXVI ).
7.2.1 Ranges of PH values are classified as follows: pH value a) Extremely acidic below 4.5 b) Very strongly acidic 4.5-5.0 5.1-5.5 c) Strongly acidic 5.6-6.0 d) Medium acidic 6. I-6.5 e) Slightly acidic f) Neutral g) Mildly alkaline h) Moderate alkaline j) Strongly alkaline k) Very strongly alkaline fiH Value 6.6-73 7.4-7.8 7.9-8.4 8*5-9-O 9.1 and higher

7.2.2 In the field PH value of soil may be determined by the colorimetric method. Indicators that have different colours at different PH values are `Metho& of tc!+t for soils: Part XXVI
Determination of )H value.

9

1st it!516 - 1969
commonly used in the field. ranges arc as follows: Indicator Brom-cresel Chlorophenol Bromthymol Phenol Cresel Thymol red red blue solutions may also green red blue The indicators commonly -used and their pH Range 3.8-5.6 5:2-&U 6.0-76 6-8-8-4 7.2-8.8 8.0-9.6 be used for obtaining &H

7.2.3 Universal indicator approximate PH values.

7.3 Carbonate Content - The presence of free carbonates in the soil and parent material shall be tested with 10 percelft hydrochloric acid confm ing to IS : 265-I 962*. While testing very dry soil, the emission of air bubbles should not be confused for eflervesbence. The reaction shall be recorded as slight, strong, or violent effervescence. It may be noted whether the effervescence is due to the presence of fragments of limestone, or concentration of lime, or due to the fine earth itself. The calcium carbonate content in the soil shall be`determined in accordance with IS : 2720 ( Part XXIII )1966?. The pattern of free carbonates in the soil profile and in the parent material is a useful criterion for deciding between soil series. Where the presence of ~carbonates is doubtful or where quantitative results are required, soil samples may be sent to the laboratory for carbonate determination. may be made in the field by feel oi the soil with fingers and, if necessary, supplemented by examination under a hand-lens. This requires skill and experience, but sufficient accuracy may be obtained if the soil surveyor frequently checks his inference with that of laboratory test results. The feel for moist soil is different from that of dry soil. Frequently clay particles are grouped into small hard aggregates that give a feel of silt or sand when dry. Because of differences in relative size within the clay fraction itself, soil horizons of similar total clay content vary in physical properties. Variations in the kind of clay or other constituents give the soil hardness suggesting a high amount of clay. The soil must be well moistened and rubbed vigorously between the fingers for a proper classification of texture by feel. The field identification procedure for sand, sandy loam, loam, silt loam, clay loam, sandy clay and clay is given in Appendix A. `Specification li)r hyc\rochlwic
tMcthotls acid ( of test 1;,r soils : ParI XXIII

7.4 Soil Texture - The soil classification

revised ).
Determination of calcium carhonnte.

10

IStSSlO-19691
dependable definitions of soil texture are those baaed on ( mechanical analysis ) carried out in the laboratory in accordance with IS : 2720 ( Part IV ) - 1965* and interpreted from the tr' gular texture Diagram ( see Fig 1 )-. Even while soil survey is in progr AZn samples of soil horizons of doubtful texture should be forwarded to the laboratory and given hi,gh priority for examination so that the results may be sent back to the field at once to serve as guides.

7.4.1 More

grain size analysis

PtiCENT

SAN0

NOTE The upper limit of silt specified as 0.02 mm in this standard is for classification of soil:: for agriculturai purposes only. For other engineering classifications, IS : 1498-1959 `Classification and identification of soils for general engineering purposes' shall be followed.

FIG. 1 TRIANGULAR TEXTURE DIAGRAM BASED ON FRACTIONSWITH EFFECTIVEDIAMETERSOF 0.002, 0.02 AND 2.0 mm FOR THE UPPER LIMITS OF THE CLAY, SILT AND SAND FRACTIONS, RESPECTIVELY 7.5 S&l Colour - Colour is the most obvious and easily determined of all soil characteristics. From soil colour one may infer about a soil, such as its
`Methods of test for soils

: P&t IV Grain size analysis.
11

IS t SslO - I%9
nature, its organic matter content, state of hydration of. the iron oxide, etc. Soil colours are most conveniently determined by comparison with colour chart. Munsell colour chart shall be used in classifying soil colours. It consists of a number of colour chips systematically arranged with notations on cards in a loose-leaf book. The arrangement is by hue, value, and chroma, the three simple variables that combine to give all colours. The hue is the dominant spectral colour and a function of wavelength. Value refers to the relative lightness of colour and is a function of the total qmount of light. Chroma is the relative purity or strength of the spectral colour and increases with decreasing greyness. 7.51 In the Munsell colour chart, all colours in a given card arc of l constant hue, designated by the symbol in the upper right-hand corna of the card. Verticaily, the colours become successively lighter and their value increases. Horizontally, the colour increases in chroma to the right. The value and chroma of each colour in the chart is printed immediately beneath the colour. The first number is the value, and the second is the ehroma. 7.5.2 The nomenclature for soil colour consists of two complementary systems. They are the names of colour and the Munsell colour notation. Neither of these alone is adequate for ail purposes. The Munsell notations should be employed in all descriptions to supplement the colour names. This affords greater precision as a convenient abbreviation in field desuiptions, for expression of `the specific relations between colours and for statistical treatment of colour data. The Munsell notation is useful for international correlation, since no translation of colour names is needed. 7.6 Soil Structur'e - Soil structure refers to the aggregation of primasy soil parricles into compound particles or clusters of primary particles. There are four primary types of soil structures as given below: a) Platy -The horizontal. particles are arranged around a plane, generAlIy

b) Prism!ike L_ The particles are arranged around a vertical line atA bounded by relatively flat vertical surfaces. There are two subtypes: 1) Prismatic - without rounded upper ends, and 2) Columnar - with rounded caps. c) Blocklike or Polyhedral - The particles are arranged around a point and bounded by flat or rounded surfaces, which are casts of the moulds formed by the faces of surrounding peds. There are tyo sub-types: 1) Angular blacky - bounded by planes intersecting at relatively sharp angles, and 12

r

IS : !5510-1969 2) Sub-ungulur SIocky - having mixed rounded and plane faces
with vertices mostly rounded.

4

S@hcroidal or Polyhedral -The particles are arranged around a point Spheroidal is and bounded by curved or very irregular surfaces. sub-divided into granular, relatively non-porous and crumb and very porous.

7.6.1 Ped is a natural str'uctural aggregate in soils ( see 2.9 ). Each type of structure includes peds that vary in shape, and detailed soil descriptions may require supplemental statements about the shape of the individual peds.
7.6.1 Grade of structure represents the degree of aggregation. In the field, grade of structure may be determined by noting the durability of the ag<gregates and the proportions between aggregated material and the Grade rest that result when the material `is displaced or gently crushed. of structure changes wirh the moistening of the soil. If grade is designated at an unstated moisture content, it is assumed that the soil is nearly dry or only very slightly moist, which is commonly that part of the range~in soil moisture in which soil structure is most strongly expressed. 7.6.2.1 Old road cuts are not suitable places to determine grade of structure, but they alIord a clue to the type of structure present. 7.6.2.2 structure: The following terms are used in describing the grades of

a)

Structureless - It represents the condition in which there is no observable aggregation or no definite orderly arrangement of natural lines of weakness. It may be said to be massive if coherent and single grain if non-coherent. poorly When breaks much poses, erately It represents the degree of .aggregation characterized by formed indistinct peds that are barely observable in place. disturbed, soil material that has this grade of structure into a mixture of few wholesome peds, broken peds and unaggregated material. If necessary for comparison purthis grade may be further divided as very weak and modweak.

1)) Weak

c)

Moderate - It represents the grade of structure characterized by well formed distinct peds that are moderately durable and evident but not distinct in undisturbed soil. Soil material of this grade, when disturbed, breaks down into a mixture of many distinct wholesome peds, some broken peds, and little unaggregated material. 13

ISrSSlO-1969

4

Strong -

It represents the grade of structure characterized by durable peds that are quite evident in undisplaced soil, that adhere weakly to one another, that withstand displacement and become separated when the soils are disturbed. When removed from the profile, soil material of this grade of structure consists very largely of entire peds and includes few broken peds and little or no unaggregated material. If necessary for comparison, this grade may be sub-divided as moderately strong and very strong. Examples of strong grade of structure are in the granular type.

7.7 Soil Consistency - Soil consistency comprises the attributes of soil material that are expressed by the degree and kind of cohesion or by the Every soil material has consistency resistance to deformation or rupture. irrespective of whether the mass be large or small in natural condition or greatly disturbed, aggregated or structureless, moist or dry. Although consistency and structure are interrelated, structure deals with the shape, size and definition of natural aggregates that result from variations in the forces of attraction within a soil mass, whereas consistency deals with the strength and nature of such forces themselves. 7.7.1 -Although evaluation of consistency involves some disturbance, unless otherwise stated, descriptions of consistency customarily refer to that of soil from undisturbed horizons. 7.7.2 The various terms used in describing are given in Appendix B. the property of consistency

7J4 Cementation - Cementation of soil material refers to a hard consistency caused by some cementing substance other than clay minerals, such as calcium carbonate, silica, or oxides or salts of iron and aluntinium. Typically the cementation is altered little by moistening; the hardness persists in the wet condition. Semi-reversible cements, which generally resist moistening but soften under prolonged wetting; occur in some soils and give rise to soil layers having cementation that is pronounced when dry but become weak when wet. Some layers, cemented with calcium carbonate, soften with wetting. The degree of cementation is expressed as given in 7.8.1 to 7.8.3. 7.8.1 Weak& Cemented broken in the hand. Cemented mass is brittle and hard but can be

,

1.8.2 Strongly Cemented - Cemented mass is brittle and harder that may be broken in the hand but is easily broken with a hammer. 7.8.3 Indurated - Very strongly cemented; does not soften under prolonged wetting and is so extremely hard that for breakage, a sharp blow with a shammer is required.

IS : 5510 - 1969 8. STUDY OF SOIL PROFILE

8.1 After reconnaissance of *he area, a suitable si'e representing the normal conditions prevailing in the area shall be selected for profile examiWhile digging the pit, care shall be taken to expose the vertical nation. face to sunlight and the soil excavated from the pit shall be thrown on either side, The pit may be l-2 m wide and 1.8 m deep. In case of so& which are very shallow with hard bedrock or high subsoil water level and uniformity of the soil has been established by auger bores and other studies, profiles may not be dug to the requisite 1.8 m depth. The characteristics of the soil in the exposed profile should be studied horizon-wise and observations should be recorded. 9. CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS

9.1 After the field work is over, an expert on the subject shall study the data collected and the information furnished in the map. He shall also study the laboratory test results and demarcate the land according to-the The following factors shall he taken mto findings of the soil survey. account in the classificatian of soils pertaining to an area:

c>
4 f) 9)

a) b)

e>

Consideration of erosion; Considerations of slope of the land; Development of the soil, such as zonal ( well developed ), intrazonal (more or less developed) and azonal (not well developed) ; Soil series; Type of soil; Suitability of land use, whether suited for agricuhural purposes or not ( see Appendix C ); and Suitability of the soil for irrigation ( see 9.2 and 9.2.1). suitability, the

9.2 In the classification of soils and lands for irrigation > following data shall be collected:
a > Effective soil depth and texture of surface soils;

b) Content c) 4 4 f>

ZCAIWAR,

of coarse fragments, etc;

such as gravels,

cobbles,

stones,

Permeability; Available water holding capacity; Salinity up to 1.8 m depth according to the natural horiions or for every 0.3 m; Alkalinity determined by exchangeable sodium percentage (ESP); 15

IS t !BlO - 1969 g) S!ope of terrain; h) Depth of water table; and j ) Availability of outlets for surface and subsurface drainage. 9.2.1 Irrigation capability may be decided by consideration of soil characteristics and land features. The criteria for classifying lands into irrigability classes as suited to semi-arid and arid regions are given in Table 1. In this classification, four classes ( Classes 1 to 4) ofirrigable soils/lands are recognized. Class 5 relates to lands considered temporarily non-irrigable but which could become irrigable with correction and amendments. Class 6 relates to lands which are not fit for irrigation ( see Appendix D ).

10.MAPPING
10.1 It is essential to indicate the soil classification on a map. ing points shall be kept in view in this connection: The `follow-

4 b) cl

Whether the relative positions of the cultural features, physical features, drainage and soil boundaries, etc, agree to the geodetic control established; Whether sufficient number of controls have been established to check the accuracy of the said details; and Whether topographic features running from.one sheet to the adjoining sheet are in complete agreement and properly oriented. PHOTOGRAPHS AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS

11. AERIAL

11.1 Aerial Photogra*hs - Aerial photographs are pictures taken by an aerial camera fitted into a plane flying under certain specific conditions of flight. 11.2 Types-Aerial photographs are of two main types: a) Oblique photographs, and b) Vertical photographs. 11.3 Characteristics of the Two Types of Photographs ,11.3.1Oblique photographs are taken with camera pointed down at an angle such that the longitudinal axis of the camera forms an angle of less than 90" with the ground. Although oblique photographs serve many purposes and are useful in reconnaissance surveys as an aid to the identification of boundaries, they are not readily converted into maps, and are not so satisfactory for soil mapping as the vertical pictures. 11.3.2 Vertical photographs are taken with fixed level camera pointed st&ht down from the aircraft so that the longitudinal axis of the camera

16.

IS' :5510-1969

TABLE

1 CRITERIA

FOR

CLASSIIVING TO SEhlI-ARID

LANDS

INTO

IRRITABILITY

CLASSES AS SUITED

`.

AND ARID REG1ONS

( UduJ#9.2.1)
SL No. Pllclrk:ll'rlm lI{IIIOABI.E ..-- SO] L/ I.AXU ,., (5) ~~.~ 104~ cm CLAHHM -- 2 . ---- PROVILIIONALLX, h'ON-llll<lOAnLII UXOLAR81F11HI ANON-1 1[1{ 10A lILI?

C1.ASS 6

class 1
(1) 1)

class

(2)
EfTcc(i\c soil IIcplh to crops)

(3)

(4)
90cn1 45
to 90 cm

(q

(7)
C1ll --

(8) Less than 7.5 cm ; Any tcxturi

(LucrL8]

Iforc

than

7.5102'2.5 Sand; clay

2)

Trxturc

ofsurfacc

Sandy loam clay loam elusive
]C.S(

to

in-

Loamy Clay

sand;

sad;

cloy

--,

3)

Soil pc]mcnbili(y (of prrnlcablc Iaycr) (,tc Nolc 1)
Av3ilablc capncily '30 cm

5 to 50

mm/h

1.3 1" 5 mmlh: W [0 130 mru/h 9 to 12 cm

03 10 1.3 nmuh; 13010250 mn]/h G 109 Cfn

Less than 03 mm/l,; Grcnlrr than 250 mm/h 2 to 6 cm .

--'

4)

wa[cr holding to depth of

12 cm or nwrc

Less (ban 2 cm

~)

Cmrscrragmcnts,
G!avcl (25 and 75 mm

such

.5

cobbles and stones grcalcr than 75 mm size
h'ANKA R

Less (hall pcrcmt Less !han pcrccnt
40

5

5

[0

15

pcrc.sn[

15

to

35

paccnl

35 to 65 pmccnt

-

,.

Lforc

than

65

pcr-

ccn t 15 15 to 35 pcrcenl
20 `

6)

35 [0 55 pcrccnt 15 11to 12 milli1,1110s 201,>50 pcrccnt
ES

551070

pcrccnt
5

More

tlmn 70 per.

to

size) ( distance

cent Less than 5 " More than 16

7)
8)

Rock Uli[crops spa,-l in m )
Salinily

( in

Sat"ratio"

Cx-

Iract ) E. C. X 103
( ,(C Note 9) 2 )

Iha" Less millimhos Lcm than pcrccnt

4

4

[o 8 millimhos

12 to 16 mini.
II111OS

millirnlms

Salt alTcc[cd ( visual ), (p., cent orarca 2flcctcd)
SCVCt it y

20

L= than pclccnt ESP Ies thm pcrccm

20 " 15

.

20 to 50 pcrccnt Ml> more than I 5 prrccnt

-- -- --

Mole

t ban

50 pm.

cent

lo)
11)

or alkali problcr,,
substra~a c%aroc[ci istics

ESP Ics.$than 15 pcrccnt

P nmrc t ban I 5 pcrccnt

ESP nlOrc than 15 pcrccnt

Sub-soil

draimgc

Lower sub-soil & zt Imst modwalcly pcrmcablc nr a pmmcablc layer of atlcast IW mm thi'kmm occurs immdintcly bclo\v 11X wil hu[ within 3 m (sand, grawl)

XL, rnrdc,xtcly pcrrncablc subst, il or whcr pcrnlrable layer of ntlc.nst 150 mnl thicknm occurr \rith i,] tlcplh or3 nl

sameasfor clams
3and4'

12) 13)
14)

Suil cwsiun s[a[us Slupc of Icwain

Meets of sllcct ~nd rill crcnion arc icllccIrd iu cl~ccti\T toil dcpt 11, avoihblc mois[urc l)oldil]g capacity imci other f~ciors stm,v,, ab+, c, modcratc[y vr SCVC!CIY gullicd soils may be classified based on Ioml cxpcricncc

in some

Less (ban I pw. Cc,lt
Xo wst, ictiom.w

1 103 pcrccnt
Afodcra:c ti ictiom
Afodmlcl)' ,C, c

5

[0

10percent

Class" 5 includes lands
wb ich arc - temporarily non - irriga Mc, ir rigable will] corrections adverse properties. I'wlhcr vetigalions illof but

Class

6 incluclcs lands \+,hicll do not nlcct ,~c - .,njn i-....
mum rcquircmcnts for lhc oth.cr kind C1.lssm

sulracc grldi"g
( s,, A'otc 3 )

lcs-

3cI

!'cty nmdctatc rcstric [ions Suitable ou[l cts available Afurc thar] 5 m

cstric -

Scvcrc rcstric..
1ions

.

t ions

15)

Ou(lct$ Depth of lVa(Cr ml,lc

Suiwhlc oullcls a~ailablc
3t05m

Suilnhle outlets availahlc 1.5 l<]3m

Xo drainage OullCIS a~ailablc I.5 m and bclmv

lG)

-- --

nccdcd

and arc nut suimblc [or " irrig~ lion or snmll isolo[C(l t r:lcts not susceptible to dclivc,y nf i rrigation \\,atcr

Xtnw 1 -- Soil pcrmeabiiity, M a c,i~mia, is noI applicahtc arc inherently slowly 10 ~cly ~lo,vIy ~1,-1~,cahlc duc I. cxpz,lding for being placed in C1.vsu 2, 3 and 4.
J\'OTI! `2 -- For sali"i[y dc[cl "Iilla, i{)tl, I ; 2 ~ojl lo \vaIcr range given in item (8) uf `~ablc I arc as below:

10 deep black soils Ixxzlusc of their unique properties.
2 : 1 131tire (!]x miocrak do not qualiry rw irrigabili[y

Deep Mack soils (Vcrtisnls) which soil Class 1. mlcywould qualify. tO CJCh

, ~ii,, ,[l~y k F.d,,,,Ic(l

a"d

IIK

conductivity 2.5103 mini1,1110s

Iigurcs ( E.C. X 10$ ) tort'csponding

Salinity

in I:2 dil"ticm

Less than I millimho

1 to 1.5 n,illimhu~

1.5102.5 milli1I1I1O3

Jforc thim 3
millimhos

~oTIC

\wuld caliom

3 -- The rcstrictio,,s atc i" tc, "lS or the q"anti(y or t-at II,WOIk rxcavati,,n n.edrd iur cut atld fill. Spccificatiom Icq"irc to bc dcvcIopcd f,,, each a,m dcllclldjl,g ~,,, t[, c ,ta["rc ,,r mr{I, nmto iii and Ihc rconomicc or the operation
t_,,r

in rcgald required.

to the quootitics

Non 4 -- Sut t_acc cltai,]s i,>vol, ing mwk, =tc Ic,,gtI,~ of SIMI]"W drai,ts ax c rcqui[cd \vOuld ncml to be dra\Yrl up as suited ror c,cb a,ea.

unit arcit unclcr Classrs 1 and 2. For Classes 3 and 4, spccifi-

NOTE 5 -- Sub.su, face ,!, aim a, c not ncctlrd r_orClawcs I an,l 2, w CIWtl,r lands ate si~ua[cd !vilhiu rmsmlably short lcng{b of nalural dr3inagc ( A'ULL.4 01- river ). ,$pcciflclliom iu r rgard to sub-s mracc dl.aim will rcquir c 10 hc dra\\-n up iitr Classc.$ 3 aud 4. Cla S 4 may need pumping otlt dmin. ~ge w31cr.

17

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

fS : !mi - 1969
is perpendicula; to the horizontal plane of the ground. In general, single lens vertical photographs which are taken in a series of independent overlapping exposures are recommended for soil survey. They have convenient size for field use and map const.uctions, permit of stereoscopic study, give complete details of ground features and also have satisfactory ranges of scale. 12. AERdL

PHOTO

INTERPRETATION

IN SOIL SURVEY
identificultural and the

12.1 Aerial Photo Interpretation - This covers recognition, systematic analysis and classification of physical and cation, characteristics of the earth's surface as pictured on the photographs scientific deductions of the above aspects.

12.1.1 Hecogtlitim and Identihation - Air photo recognition is the direct classification of a directly visible object within a known category upon detection in the photo image. Photo identificatibn is then defined as the classification of a directly visible object or element by means of information. 12.1.2 Ana&sis - Analysis is the process of delineating groups of objects or of elements which have a separate individuality for the photo interpretation. 12.1.3 Classification - Classification includes the description of the indiinto a pertinent vidual objects delineated by analysis, their arrangement system for use in the field investigations, a112 the codification necessary to express their system. Thus, classification establishes the identity of the objects differentiated by analysis. 12.1.4 Deduction - Deduction is a more complicated process which is largely based on converging evidence. The evidence is derived from partially visible objects or from elements which give only partial indications on the nature of certain correlative indications. 12.2 Limitations of Aerial Photographs in Soil Survey-Aerial photographs arc only pictures of the earth's surface ( but not of the soil ) which is a three dimensional piece of landscape having specific physical, chemical and biological characteristics. For mapping soils, it is necessary to study the soils to the entire depth to know the arrangement and characteristics of the diffcrcnt soil horizons which reflect the overall effect of genetic processes. The morphological, physical and chemical characteristics of soil profiles will help soil classification into various taxonomic and mapping units which are shown in a soil map. 12.2.1 Since soil surveyors require data like the morphological, physical and chemic,al chnracterist'ics of the cliffercnt soil horizons, \vl1icl1 are not readily available on ncrial photographs, the convcntionnl Geld study of soil 19

p&es and field investigations which are essential for soil classification and mapping should not be by-passed by the use ,of aerial photo interpretations. 12.2.2 However, a large number of soil mapping units shown on a soil map may be interpreted and estimated with a combination ~of photo interpretation and field observations. The following soil mapping units given in 12.2.2.1 to 12.2.2.3 may be interpreted subject to the limitations indicated `against them. 12.2.2.1 Soil series - These are distinguished on the basis of internal characteristics of the soil profile and cannot always be expected ~tobe seen or distinguished on aerial photographs. In some cases if they are clearly related to any of the elements of the landscape clearly visible on air photos, these may be identified. 12.2.2.2 Soil slofie classes,- With adequate experience in photo interpretation and local knowledge of the terrain mapped, soil slope classes may be evaluated and separated through photo interpretation and a minimum of field work. 12.2.2.3 Suil texture - Broad variations in surface soil texture may be discerned by the study of photo tone but the exact soil texture has to be determined in the field. Generally, heavier the soil,' darker would be the photo tone. But variations of air photo tone are influenced by soil colour and soil moisture. Therefore, any deductions made from air photo tone without a good knowledge of the local conditions of the terrain may lead to erroneous conclusions. 12.3 Importance of Aerial Photographs in Soil Survgr - In spite of many limitations, aerial photographs are useful for soil mapping. In a normal soil survey, majority of the observations made in the field without air photos are needed for locating the soil boundaries, and a few of the observations are used to describe the soils. Although air photo interpretation may have limited application in the study of the soils, it is very useful in reducing the time spent for locating the soil boundaries which arc the most laborious and time-consuming part of the soil sutiey. Therefore, once all the soil characteristics have been observed in the field, aerial photographs and interpretation of these photographs will help considerably in the manner described in 12.3.1 and 12.3.2. 12.3.1 The aerial photographs help to locate and plot accurately the soil This is made possible by the several relationships existing boundaries. between soil mapping units and landscape units which are visible on air photos and which have to be judged and established by the soil surveyor. These relationships may be found only by experienced soil surveyor trained in the techniques of photo interpretation. 20

IS : 5510 - 1969
12.3.2 Considerable time is saved in the field by reducing the number of observations and traverses which would otherwise be required for locating the soil boundaries. 12.4 Approach of Photo Interpretation - Aerial photo interpretation in soil survey should be made in an orderly and scientific manner. The various techniques and methods used should provide data which are accurate and reproducible. The two main trends of photo interpretation used in soil survey are briefly described-in 12.4.1 and 12.4.2. 12.4.1 The analytical approach of photo interpretation consists of a systematic analysis on air photos of the individual elements of the landscape, such as landform, slope, drainage, vegetation and land use, visible on the photographs and which are supposed to be related directly or indirectly to the soil mappihg units. Tht result is a photo analytical map with lines and symbols indicating landscape units. This photo analytical map serves as a guide for the preparation of a final soil map. The mapping of the soils in the iield is done in a conventional way but all the photo interpretation lines which during ~the field investigations are found to be The photo analytical useful soil boundaries shall be examined in detail. map should be converted by subsequent field work and necessary corrections and additions of soil data should he incorporated in'to final soil map. This approach is useful particularly in the case of detailed soil survey. 12i4.2 The physiographic approach would be where the terr&n is analyzed and classified making use of the science of geography, geomorphology and geology. This approach requires thorough knowledge~of these sciences and is useful fin the case of reconnaissance soil survey. 12.5 Photo Material Required for a Soil Survey 12.5.1 The photo material required for a soil survey shall be as follows: 4 Copies of the photo index, h) One set of glossy contact prints on single or double weight paper, c) One or two sets of semi-matt or matt contact prints on double weight paper, d) For detailed soil survey, sometimes one set of enlargement of alternate photographs on semi-malt or matt on double weight paper may be required ( SEC Note ), 4 One set of glossy photo mosaic on double weight paper at the scale of contact prints ( see Note ), and Some semi-matt or matt photo mosaic on double weight paper at f> the scale of contact prints.
NOTE - The glossy contact prints are for stereoscopic study. The semi-matt or matt prints and the semi-matt or mkt mosaics are used in hz field. The glossy mosaic is used for the final soil map.

21

IS : 5510 - 1969 12.6 Instruments Required for Photo Interpretation - The instruments which will be needed for photo interpretation are as follows: a) Pocket stereoscopes; b) Mirror stereoscopes with parallax bar; c) Scanning stereoscope; d) Sketchmaster; e) Radial line plotter; f ) Simple instruments for the construction of planimetric map from aerial photographs; and g) Simple measuring devices, such as perspex scale and dot counter.

APPENDIX ( czause 7.4 )
FIELD IDENTIFICATION A-l. DETAILS ~OF IDENTIFICATION

A
OF SOILS BY FEEL

A-1.1 The method for identification to A-1.1.7.

of soils by feel is described in A-1.1.1

A-1.1.1 Sand - Snnd is loose and single-grain. The individual grains may be readily seen or felt. Dry sand may be held in hand under pressure and when this pressure is released, the grains fall apart. Moist sand may stay even after release of pressure, but will crumble if touched or disturbed. -A-1.1.2 Sandy Loam - A sandy loam is a soil containing greater proportion of sand but which has enough silt and clay to make it somewhat cohesive. The -individual sand grains may readily be seen and *felt. Squeezed when dry, it will form a-cast but will readily fall apart. But if squeezed when moist, a cast may be formed that will endure careful handling without breaking. A-1.1.3 Loam - A loam is a soil having a relatively even mixture of different grades of sand, silt and clay. It is mellow, somewhat gritty to feel, yet fairly smooth and slightly plastic. Squeezed when dry, it will form n cast that will endure careful handling. When squeezed moist, the cast formed may be handled quite freely without breakmg. A-1.1.4 Silt Loam -A silt loam is a soil having a moderate amount of the fine grades of sand and only a small amount of clay; ever half of
22

Iti : 5510 - 1969
the particles being silt. When dry it may appear cloddy ( often crumbly ) but the lumps may be readily broken and when pulverized it feels soft. When wet the soil readily runs together and puddles. Either dry or moist it will form casts that may be handled freely without breaking but when squeezed between thumb and finger, it will not ribbon but will give a broken appearance. A-1.1.5 Clay Loam - A clay loam is a fine textured soil which usually breaks into clods or lumps that are hard when dry. When the moist soil pinched OUL between the thumb and finger it will form a thin `ribbon' which will break readily, barely sustaining its own weight. The moist soil is plastic and will form a cast that will bear much handling, When kneaded in the hand it does not crumble readily but tends to woLk into a heavy compact mass. A-1.1.6 Sail& Clay - This is a mixed type of soil in which the sand and When dry the so;1 forms clay fractions will be in equal proportions. irregular clods which are quite hard and do not easily break or crumble. When wet it becomes plastic but no ribbon will be formed when pinched between the thumb and fingers. The soil gives a distinctly gritty and sticky feeling. A-1.1.1 Clay - A clay is a fine textured soil that usually forms very hard lumps or clods when dry and is quite plastic and usually sticky when wet. When the moist soil is pinched out between the thumb and fingers Some fine clays, very high in colloids it Wil form a long, flexible `ribbon'. are friable and lack plasticity under all conditions.

APPENDIX
( Clause 7.7.2 )
TERMS B-l. DETAILS RELATING TO

B

CONSISTENCY

OF TERMS when wet is determined at either in terms of stickiness

B-l.1 Consistency When Wet - Consistency or slightly above field capacity and is expressed or plasticity.

- Stickiness is, the quality of adhesion to other objects. B-l.2 Stickiness For field evaluation of stickiness, soil material is pressed between thumb Degrees of stickiness are described and fin,ger and its adherence noted. in B-1.2.1 to B-1.2.4. 23

B-1.2.1 Non-sticky - After release of pressure, practically no soil material 2~Iheres to thumb or finger.

B-1.2.2 SligLtfy Sticky - After pressure, soil material t~iumb and finger but comes off rather clear.!y.

adheres to both

B-1.2.3 Sticky - After pressure, soil material adheres to both thumb and finger and tends to stretch. B-1.2.4 Vrry Sticky - After pressure, soil material adheres strongly to both thumb and forefinger and is decidedly stretched when they are separated. B-l.3 Plasticity - Plasticity is the ability to change shape continuously under the influence of an applied stress and to retam the impressed shape on removal of the stress. For field determination of plasticity, roll the soil material between thumb and finger and observe whether or not a wire or The degree of resistance to deformation thin rod of soil may be formed. at or slightly above field capacity is expressed as given in B-1.3.1 to B-1.3.4. B-1.3.1 Non-@stic Soil cannot be drawn into a wire form. Soil may be drawn into a wire form but soil B-1.3.2 SlightLy Plastic mass is easily deformable.

B-1.3.3 Pkl.Gic -Soil may be drawn into a wire form but moderate pressure is required for deformation of the soil mass. B-1.3.4 Ve:y r'latic -- Soil mav be drawn into a wire form but much pressure is required for deformation of the soil mass. B-l.4 Consistency When Moist - Consistency when moist is determined at a moisture content approximately midway betw :en air dry and field capacity. At this moisture content, most soil mate. :als exhibit a form of consistency characterized by (a) tendency to break into smaller masses rather than into powder, (b) some deformation prior to rupture, (c) absence of brittleness, and (d) ability of the material after disturbance to join again when pressed together. The resistance decreases with moisture content, ant! z.ccuracy of field descriptions of this consistency is limited by the To evaluate this consistency, accuracy of estimating moisture content. select and attempt to crush in the hand a mass that appears slightly moist. El.5
B-1.5

Loose--Non-coherent.

Friable - Soil material crushes easily under gentle to moderate pressure between thumb and forefinger, and joins when pressed together. B-P. 7 Very Friable - Soil' material crushes under very gentle pressure between thumb and forefinger, and joins when pressed together. 24

IS: 5510-1969 E-1.$ F5rrn -Soil material crushes under modera!e pressure thumb:u:d fo~cfi]~:cr but ~csistance is distinctl: noticeable. B-I.9 Very Firm crushable betliccn -- Soil material crushes thumb and forefinger. under stron:; pressure between barely

EI.1O Extremely Firm -- Soil material crushes only under very strong pressure; cannot be crushed between thumb ancl forefinger ancl cannot be broken apart bit by bit. B-1.11 Consistency When Dry -- Tl~e consistency of soil materials when only dry is characterized `by rigidity, brittleness, maximum resistance to fragments ~vith rather sharp edges, and inability of the crushed material to join again \\llen pressed together. B-1.12 Soft -- soil mass is very \veakly cohere],t and fragile, breaks into powder or individual grains umler verj slight pressure. \ B-1.13 Slightly Hard -- I$reakly resistant to pressure, ween thumb and forefinger. easily broken bet-

B-1.14 Hard -- Moderately resistant to pressure; czn he broken in the hand ~,"ithout di~culty but is barely breakable betu"een thumb and forefin~er. B-1.15 Very Hard -- Very res~stant to pressure, can be broken in the hand only \{itll diff}cul~y, not breakable bct~vecn thum}] and forefinger. -. B-1.16 Extremely Hard -- Extremely resistant to prcssllre, cannot be broken in the hand.

APPENDIX C [ Clause 9.1, item (f) ]
LAND C-1 . LAND SUITED FOR USE CAPABILITY

CULTIVATION under four (liflcrent clmses as given

C-I.O The land is categorized in C-1.l to C-1.4.

C-1.l Class I Land -- This is very good lancl thnt may be cultivated safely with ordinary good farmin,q methods. It is nearlv level lanci ( slope less than one percent ) and has deep, productive, eas; f'y \\orkecl soils and is subject to only sli:ht erosion. It is well drained and is suited for intensive cropping. For The land is suited f~~ra ~vide variety of crops. continued good production, these lands reqllire the use of fertilizers, green manure crops and crop rotation.

25

15:5510-1969
C-l.2 Class II Land - This is good land that may be cultivated with easily available practices. Some of the limitations of this class of land are gentle slope, moderate susceptibility to erosion, moderate depth, moderate overflow and moderate weiness. Each of these limitations requires special methods for correction, such as contour bunding, strip cropping, contour tillage, crop rotations that include grasses or legumes, drainage and the application of fertilizers and manures. C-l.3 Class III Land - This class of land has restricted use for cultivation. The land is moderately good and may be used for cropping provided intensive management measures are taken. This kind of land is characterized by one or more of the following limitations:

a>Moderate
b) c) 4 4 f) d h) .i)

steep slope, High susceptibility to erosion, Moderate overflow, Slow sub-soil permeability, Excessive wetness, Shallow depth, Hard pan or clay pan, Sandy or gravelly with low moisture capacity, and Low inherent fertility.

C-l.4 Class IV Land - This class of land has very restricted use for cultivation and needs special care in handling and management. The variety of crops that may be grown is limited. Its cropping use is restricted by slope, erosion, unfavourble soil characteristics and adverse climate. c-2. I.AND UNSUITE3 FOR CULTIVATION under four differer,t classes as given

C-2.0 The land is categorized in C-2.1 to C-2.4.

C-2.1 Class V Land - This land is not suited for cultivation but is suited for pasture and grassland. Cultivation may not be feasible because of one or more factors, such as wetness, stoniness or some other limitations. 5.and is nearly level and not subject to more than slight wind or water erosion. It occurs in many swampy areas that cannot be drained easily. C-2.2 Class VI Land - This land is subject to moderate limitations under grazing or fcrestry use. It is t60 steep, subject to erosion, sh?llow, wet or dry but with careful management may be made suitable either for grazing or forcsrry. Gullies in -such areas should be controlkd by diversion of water, provision of contour furrows or ridges.

26

IS : 5510 - 1969
C-2.3 Class VII Land - This land is very steep, eroded, stony, rough; shallow, dry or swampy and is recommended particularly in humid regions only for forestry and wood land and not pasture.
C-2.4 Class VIII Land - This land includes such areas as marshes, deserts, deep gullies, rocky escarpments and very steep, rough stony, barren land. It is suited only for wild life, recreation of water-shed protection uses.

APPENDIX ( Ckluse 9.2.1 )
IRRIGATION D-l. D-l.1 CLASSIFICATION CAPABILITY

D

CLASSES

From the point of irrigation capability, soils/lands classified into six classes as given in D-1.1.1 to D-1.1.6.

should

be

D-1.1.1 Class 1 -The soil is quite suitable for irrigation having good texture, adequate depth and good available, moisture holding capacity. The soil has low salinity and alkalinity problems. The land slope and features are favourable with the water table at satisfactory level. Drainage The needs for levelling and land-forming arc conditions are satisfactory. minimum.
for irrigation D-1.1.2 Class 2 - Soil in this group is moderately.suitable l'he texture of the soil is within the satisfarming with limited hazards. factory range and the soil is moderately deep. The permeability and the available water holding capacity of the soil are moderately good. Saline and alkaline conditions are satisfactory. The slope of land and nature of The drainage restrictions and need terrain offers moderate limitations. for levelling and land-forming are moderate. and D-1.1.3 C%rss 3 - These soils are suitable for limited irrigation The texture of soil may vary between cropping suitability is also limited. extremes of sand and clay under moderate depth. Water holding capacity Soluble soils and exchangeable sodium are moderately high. is moderate. The slope of land and terrain features offer Internal permeability is fair. more severe restrictions compared to Class 2. D-1.1.4 Clnss 4 - The soils in this class are shallow and the texture may range between the extremes of sand and clay. Soil permeability may

27

also vary within wide range depending upon texture of the least permeable layer. The Icater holding capacity islow and th: salinity is high and the exchangeable sodium percentage is more than 13 percent. The terrain features offer more severe restrictions which limit the use of the lands for irrigation agriculture. Drainage difhculties are severe. D-1.1.5 Class 5 - These include lands which will require additional economic and engineering studies to determine tire irrigabihty. Such lands are classed as temporarily non-irrigable, pending exaecution of reclamation or corrective works. of soi! .+rl terrain features fall D-1.1.6 Class 6 - `l'he specification outside those for Classes I to 1. Because of the severe restrictions irrigation is uneconomic or wasteful. These lands at-d: to be considered as nonirrigable because the soil and land conditions do not meet the minimum requirements of the next higher class recognized in a particular survey. This class may also include small areas of arable lands lying within larger bodies of non-arable lands.

Members SHRI R.K. Director
SKNDARAX SHRI-R. NAGARA~AX,

Representing Geological Survey OF India, Calcutta Director General, IS1 ( Ex-@cio Member )

( Civ Engg )

SHRI !,. %~~I.~cII.~~I~RA RAO

Deputy

Director

( Civ Engg ): IS1

Ad hoc Panel for Soil Surveys for River BDC 47 : P2

Valley

Projects,

.
Convener
SHRI~.S.CHAN~RAS~~;~I~R.~~

Central

\\`ater

Br Power Commission,

New Delhi New Delhi New Delhi

Members DR I. C. Des M. P.LIS COI)IJI)U (_kntraI Wstet, & Power Commission, Agricultural Research Institute,
SHRI N. C. RAWAL ( Alternate ) Indian DR S. V. GOVIND.~ R.&JAN

28

Regjo,&

~ftT,.~~,a

Central *Eastern

: Manak Bhwan KNEW bEtH)& :' :I 114 C,LTL%i!

.! 36 24 99

?$+starn

^` .' : Manakalaya, E9 IV&e, Marol, Andhari BOMBAY 400093 ,.,

\ : (East),

41 2442 41 2519 41 ,%Kl6

.

,. - -2 93 48 Shaikh MSr$ &hapbur, [ 26349 ~AHMEPABAD 380001 .G> +&rtya h'&striai Area, 1 st Stage, B&galere Tumkur Road ,`~ t38'd9 65 `. %jffG&tK!RE 566056 138 49 56 mplsx, 5th floor, -Bha&hada Rgqd, ,.,i,.. T. T. Nagjax, Ii. 66716 I . ..&" BH.UBANESHW'# fpj3:0& is &id, ~$t~,`p; Barua Rptid, 5th B&n, .' ; 5 36 27 3 31 77 233083 l-6 16 21 1. 21 34 71 98 32 68 76 8292

&imh Oflc~s: `fQshpak' Nurmohamed

*' .) ,,"`._

p&$&&i; ii&r

Nagar Sauare, '

?jtr,&, Calc@$a 700072

Ofice in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Ap@xxc .`_ t%es offke ,in Bombw: b at Novelty `Chamb&, ".? Bomb&400967 ,~' *%ies OffIce in Baria'albre is-,at Unitv Buildina. Narasiki;

;

