"тайн ATAR IS 8433 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


facia wdrecira tra fufeisi cr 
fao эйч Ta-ta — tifa fear 


(«чт FRAT) 


Periodic Inspection апа 
Maintenance of Dissolved Acetylene 
Gas Cylinders — Code of Practice 


( Second Hevision ) 


ICS 23.20.30 


O BIS 2017 


ada res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ө WM чач, 9 етте WAL Art, ae fereit-110002 
lied ш МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2017 Price Group 2 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1977 and subsequently revised in 1984. In this revision following major 
changes have been made: 


a) Scope has been modified; 
b) Terminology has been included; 
c) Preparation of gas cylinder clause modified; and 


d) New clauses like internal for periodic inputs clause, identification of contents, marking, records, rejection 
and rendering cylinders unserviceable and disposal of unserviceable cylinder have been added. 


Acetylene cylinders differ from all other cylinders transporting compressed or liquefied gases in that they contain 
a porous mass and normally a solvent in which the acetylene stored is dissolved. For the periodic inspection 
cycle, due regard is to be given to the different types of porous masses. The remainder of this code should be read 
considering these differences. The primary objective of the presence of the porous mass is to limit an acetylene 
decomposition, should it be initiated, and thus prevent a cylinder incident. 


The requirements dealt with in this code are mainly those that are specific for acetylene cylinders; for more 
general requirements related to the periodic inspection of gas cylinders, reference is made to the relevant Indian 
Standards. 


In the preparation of this Code considerable assistance has been taken from ISO 10462 : 2013 “Саз cylinders — 
Acetylene cylinders — Periodic inspection and maintenance'. 


Due to the presence of a porous mass in the cylinder, neither a hydraulic or pneumatic pressure test, nor a visual 
inspection of the internal surface of the shell can be carried out. 


While implementing this Code compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this Code is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this Code is complied with, the final value, observed 
or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value 
should be the same as that of the specified value in this Code. 


IS 8433 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PERIODIC INSPECTION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF DISSOLVED 
ACETYLENE GAS CYLINDERS 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This code specifies the requirements for periodic 
inspection of acetylene cylinders. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this code. At the time of publication, editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision and 
parties to agreements based on this code are encouraged 
to investigate possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

170 : 2004 Acetone — Specification (fourth 
revision) 

3224 : 2002 Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 
Specification 

724] : 1981 Glossary terms used in gas cylinder 
technology 

7312 : 1993 Welded and seamless steel dissolved 
acetylene gas cylinders — 
Specification (second revision) 

9200 : 1988 Methods of disposal of unserviceable 


compressed gas cylinder (first 
revision) 


IS/ISO 11114- Transportable gas cylinders — Com- 


2 : 2013 patibility of cylinder and valve 
materials with gas contents: Part 2 
Non — metallic materials 
15975 : 2013 Gas cylinder — Condition for filling 
gas cylinder 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this code, the following definitions 
in addition to given in IS 7241 shall apply: 


3.1 Acetylene Bundle — Transportable unit consisting 
of two or more acetylene cylinders manifolded together 
within a rigid frame, equipped with all necessary 
equipment for filling and emptying in the assembled 
state. 


32 Dissolved Acetylene Cylinder — A portable vessel 


(see IS 7312) having a valve and with or without safety 
devices, filled with monolithic or non-monolithic porous 
mass, a solvent for the storage of dissolved acetylene 
and at least sufficient quantity of sufficient acetylene to 
saturate the solvent (acetone as per IS 170) at 
atmospheric pressure and at a temperature of 15°С. 
NOTE — Acetone or any other solvent used shall not be 


capable of chemical reaction with the acetylene gas or with 
the porous mass or with the metal of the cylinder or valve. 


3.3 Acetylene/Solvent Ratio — Ratio of the maximum 
acetylene content to the specified solvent content. 


3.4 Statutory Authority — Petroleum and Explosives 
Safety Organization, Ministry of Commerce, 
Government of India. 


3.5 Competent Person — Person who by a 
combination of training, experience and supervision 
is able to make objective judgments on the subject. 


3.6 Complete Cylinder — Cylinder shell ready to be 
charged with acetylene gas that is complete with porous 
mass, solvent with or without safety device. 


3.7 Cylinder Shell — Pressure vessel manufactured 
and tested and suitable for receiving porous mass, 
solvent and to be filled as an acetylene cylinder. 
Saturated gas-acetylene that remains dissolved in the 
solvent in the cylinder at the atmospheric pressure. 


3.8 Manufacturer — Company responsible for filling 
the cylinder shell with porous mass and which generally 
prepares it for the first charge of acetylene. 


3.9 Maximum Acetylene Content — Specified 
maximum mass of acetylene the cylinder is designed 
to contain. 


NOTES 
1 Maximum acetylene content is expressed in kilograms. 


2 When a solvent is used, it includes the saturation gas. 


3.10 Maximum Permissible Settled Pressure — 
Maximum permissible gauge pressure in bar when 
converted to a temperature of 15 ?C, in a cylinder 
containing the maximum acetylene content and the 
specified solvent content. 


NOTE— Maximum permissible settled pressure is expressed 
in bar. 


IS 8433 : 2017 


3.11 Porosity — Ratio of the total volume (water 
capacity) of the cylinder shell minus the volume of 
the solid material of the porous mass, to the water 
capacity of the cylinder shell. 


NOTE— Porosity is expressed as a percentage. 


3.12 Porous Mass Porous Substance — Single or 
multi-component material introduced or formed in the 
cylinder shell in order to fill it and that, due to its 
porosity, allows the absorption of the solvent and 
acetylene gas solution. 


NOTE — The porous mass may be monolithic or non- 
monolithic. Monolithic porous mass consists of a solid product 
typically obtained by reacting materials or by bonding materials 
together with a binder. Non-monolithic porous mass consists 
typically of granular, fibrous or similar materials without 
addition of a binder. 


3.13 Solvent — Liquid that is compatible to the porous 
mass and cylinder shell. 


3.14 Tare Weight — Acetylene cylinder means the 
weight of the cylinder together with any permanent 
with attachments, cylinder valve, solvent and saturation 
gas. 


NOTE — Total weight is expressed in kilograms. 


3.15 Water Capacity (Cylinder Shell Volume) — 
Actual water capacity of the empty cylinder shall 
measured in litres before being filled with porous mass. 


NOTES 
1 Water capacity is expressed in litres. 


2 The cylinder shell is defined as being empty of any porous 
mass ( see 3.7). 


4 INTERVALS BETWEEN  PERIODIC 
INSPECTIONS 


A cylinder shall be due for periodic inspection on its 
first receipt by a filler after the expiry of the interval 
in accordance with the requirements of the Gas 
Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


Provided the cylinder has been subjected to normal 
conditions of use and has not been subjected to abusive 
and abnormal conditions rendering the cylinder unsafe, 
there is no general requirement for the user to return a 
gas cylinder before the contents have been used even 
though the inspection interval may have lapsed. 


It is the responsibility of the owner or user to submit 
the cylinder for a periodic inspection and test within 
the interval specified in the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 
and IS 15975. 


5 PREPARATION OF GAS CYLINDER 
5.1 Removal of Gas 


Before proceeding with the inspection, cylinders shall 
be depressurized of gas. Cylinders shall be checked 


for pressure both before and after depressurization. 
Depressurization shall be carried out in a safe manner 
having due regard to the characteristics of acetylene. 
Depressurization shall be carried out over a period long 
enough to ensure removal of all acetylene, except 
saturation gas. Precautions shall be taken because 
variations in temperature influence the quantity of 
acetylene in the form of saturation gas. 


The absence of a positive pressure reading does not 
clearly indicate the absence of excess gas due to the 
possibility of a blocked valve (see Annex A). 


In case of any doubts regarding the efficiency of the 
depressurization cycle, the cylinder should be weighed. 


A cylinder weighing more than the tare weight (see 3.14) 
stamped on the cylinder is not always a clear indication 
of the presence of excess gas. Some relevant factors 
that have to be considered include a possible excess of 
solvent or contamination with water, etc. 


A cylinder weighing less than or equal to the stamped 
tare weight is not always a clear indication of the 
absence of gas under pressure. Some relevant factors 
that have to be considered include a possible solvent 
shortage and external corrosion causing a loss of shell 
weight. 


5.2 Preparation for External Visual Inspection 


When necessary, the cylinder shall be cleaned and have 
all loose coatings, corrosion products, tar, oil or other 
foreign matter removed from its external surface by a 
suitable method, for example by brushing (under 
closely controlled conditions to ensure that there is no 
leakage of acetylene into the brushing). The method 
used to clean the cylinder shall be a validated, 
controlled process. Care shall be taken at all times to 
avoid damaging the cylinder and pressure relief devices 
where fitted or removing excess amounts of cylinder 
wall (see Annex B). 


The external visual inspection in accordance with 6.1 
can be carried out at this stage using non-sparking tools 
recommended for acetylene gas. 


5.3 Valve Removal 


Before removing the valve from an acetylene cylinder, 
it shall be determined that the cylinder has been 
completely depressurized as described in 5.1. If there 
is any reason to believe that a valve is blocked, for 
example the lack of an audible release of gas when 
opening the valve, and that the cylinder may still 
contain residual gas under pressure, checks shall be 
made, for example by introducing an inert gas at a 
pressure lower than 5 bar and observing its discharge. 


If itis found that the valve is obstructed, then a suitable 


method shall be employed to remove the gas or the 
valve, taking into consideration the design of the valve 
and taking all necessary precautions having due regard 
to the hazards that can result from an uncontrolled 
operation (see Annex A). De-valving shall take place 
in the open or in a ventilated area. The temperature of 
the cylinder when removing the valve should be close 
to the ambient temperature to avoid either excess 
venting of residual gas from the cylinder or ingress of 
air into the cylinder. 


NOTE — The cylinders should not be left open or without 
valves longer than necessary for the inspection. 


5.4 Removal of Neck/Core Hole Filters 


Acetylene cylinders usually contain neck filters/core 
hole packing consisting of filter/gauze and felts. Neck 
filters and packing materials placed between the top 
of the porous mass and the base of the valve stem shall 
be removed to ensure no damage to porous mass in 
accordance with the inspection requirements of the 
porous mass manufacturer. АП neck filters and felts 
shall be rejected. When the inspection requirements 
cannot be established, a competent person shall define 
such inspection requirements. For various types of 
neck/core hole filters (see Annex C). 


Special care shall always be taken when removing 
filters or packing material in view of the possibility of 
some restrictions at the neck with residual pressure 
underneath, which, if suddenly released, might blow 
the filter out with some of the porous substance and 
may cause injury. The presence of fine carbon powder 
on the filters or packing material could indicate that 
flashback has occurred, all such cylinders shall be 
rejected. 


6 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE 
6.1 External Visual Inspection 


The external surface of each cylinder shall be inspected 
for: 


a) Dents, cuts, gouges, bulges, cracks, 
laminations (see Table 1 of Annex B) and 
excessive removal of material from the 
cylinder base; 


b) Heat damage, torch or electric-arc burns (see 
Table 1 of Annex B); 


c) Corrosion (see Table 2 of Annex B); Special 
attention shall be given to areas where water 
can be trapped. These include the entire base 
area, the junction between the cylinder shell 
and the foot ring and the junction between 
the cylinder shell and the valve and the neck 
ring (if applicable). 


IS 8433 : 2017 


d) Other defects such as illegible, incorrect or 
unauthorized stamp markings, ог 
unauthorized additions or modifications (see 
Tablel of Annex B); and 


e) Integrity of all permanent attachments (see 
Table 2 of Annex B). 


Damaged valve guards, threaded neck rings and foot 
rings can be repaired or replaced as appropriate. No 
welding or any heat shall be directly applied to the 
pressure containing part of the cylinder. 


For rejection criteria, see Annex B. Cylinders no longer 
suitable for future service shall be rendered 
unserviceable (see 10). 


SAFETY PRECAUTIONS — Acetylene cylinders 
cannot be completely emptied. They will always 
contain some residual gas and solvent (except for 
solvent-free acetylene cylinders). Therefore, special 
care should be taken when repairing acetylene 
cylinders using methods that can be a source of 
ignition (for example through heat or sparks). 


6.2 Examination of the Porous Mass 


After the removal of neck/core hole filters in 
accordance with 5.4, the porous material shall be 
inspected for the presence of visible contamination or 
other defects that could affect the ability to suppress 
an acetylene decomposition. The inspection shall be 
performed by the appropriate use of special non- 
sparking tools such as metal wire probes, rods, feeler 
or clearance gauges to check the firmness and the 
presence of voids or other defects in the porous 
material. Rejection criteria are given in 6.2.1 to 6.2.3. 
Care shall be taken to ensure that the porous material 
is not damaged by the inspection tools (see Table | of 
Annex B, flash back.) 


6.2.1 Contamination 


The porous mass shall be checked visually for 
contamination such as the presence of significant fine 
carbon powder (see 5.4), water, or oil deposits or 
whether there has been a discoloration of the porous 
mass. The following guidelines shall apply: 


a) Cylinders in which any soot is visible shall 
be rejected; and 


b) Cylinders in which water or oil deposits are 
visible shall be rejected depending on the level 
of such contamination. For monolithic porous 
materials, this is often visible through greying 
of the porous material 


6.2.2 Monolithic Masses — Cracking or Crumbling 


The visual inspection shall verify that the porous mass 
shows no excessive top clearance (gap between the 


IS 8433 : 2017 


top of the cylinder shell and the monolithic porous 
mass), and no excessive cracking or crumbling. 


Cylinders with masses that show cracking or crumbling 
less than 1 mm width when they do not incorporate 
break outs or dislodging of the mass are acceptable. 
Small break outs in the top of the cylinder neck/ 
shoulder area are acceptable as long as the maximum 
gap is not exceeded at any point (see Annex D). 


6.2.3 Cavitation or Compaction 


The maximum gap between the top of the cylinder and 
the monolithic porous mass shall not exceed that 
specified in the type approval for that cylinder. For the 
cylinders made to IS 7312, the total clearance between 
the cylinder shell and filling material, does not exceed 
0.5 percent of the respective diameter or length but in 
no case of exceed 3.2 mm measured diametrically and 
longitudinally. Only those gaps up to the maximum used 
in the type approval tests shall apply. If such data is 
unavailable for cylinders manufactured with monolithic 
asbestos-containing mass, the gap shall not exceed 3.2 
mm and for cylinders with monolithic asbestos-free 
porous mass, the gap shall not exceed 2 mm. If at a later 
stage, cylinders with other gap sizes pass the 
requirements of the flash back test and are approved, 
then these gap sizes may also apply. 


Additionally, the porous mass shall be checked to 
ensure that there is no significant lateral movement. 
Cylinders showing cavitation or significant lateral 
movement shall be rejected. 


Non-monolithic porous masses that show cavitation 
or compaction, or a loss of compaction shall be rejected 
or repaired in accordance with 6.3. 


6.3 Repair of Non-monolithic Porous Mass 


A non-monolithic mass that has been rejected due to 
cavitation shall only be repaired if the repair does not 
impair the safety of the cylinder. 


The repair of a non-monolithic mass shall be performed 
according to the instructions of the porous mass 
manufacturer. The quantity of porous material that may 
be added at each periodic inspection shall not exceed 
50 g. The cumulative total quantity of porous material 
added to the acetylene cylinder shall be limited so that 
the resulting porosity of the porous material is not 
decreased to an extent that it falls below the lower of 
the permissible limits. The minimum porosity of the 
porous material is either obtained from the type approval 
oris 1.5 percent below the nominal porosity (if no lower 
limit for the porosity is indicated in the type approval). 


The quantity of material added shall be recorded, the 
tare weight of the cylinder adjusted as appropriate and 
the stamp marking adjusted accordingly. 


A cylinder that contains a rejected porous mass that is 
not suitable for repair in accordance with this clause 
shall be rendered unserviceable or its porous mass shall 
be replaced according to 6.4. 


6.4 Replacement of Porous Mass 


If the porous mass is no longer acceptable, the 
complete cylinder shall be made unserviceable. 


6.5 Inspection of Pressure Relief Devices Including 
Fusible Plugs 


Where fusible plugs or other pressure relief devices 
are used, they shall be examined for damage. Where 
damage is found, the device shall be replaced and 
checked for gas tightness. 


6.6 Inspection of Valves and other Accessories 


If a valve or any other accessory is to be reintroduced 
into service, it shall be inspected and maintained to 
ensure that it will perform satisfactorily in service and 
meet the requirements of gas tightness from the valve 
manufacturing standards. An example of a suitable 
method is given in Annex E. 


6.7 Inspection of Cylinder Neck 
6.7.1 Cylinder to Valve Threads 


When the valve is removed, the cylinder to valve 
threads shall be examined to identify the type of thread 
and to ensure that they are clean and of full form, free 
of damage, free of burrs, free of cracks, and free of 
other imperfections. 


Cracks manifest themselves as lines that run vertically 
down the thread and across the thread faces. There 
should not be confused with tap marks (thread 
machining stop marks). Special attention should be paid 
to the area at the bottom of the threads. 


6.7.2 Other Neck Surfaces 


Other surfaces of the neck shall also be examined to 
ensure they are free of cracks or other defects. 


6.7.3 Neck Ring and Collar 


When a neck ring/collar is attached, a visual 
inspection shall be carried out to ensure that it is secure 
and that there is no thread damage. A neck ring shall 
be changed only using an approved procedure. If it is 
found that any significant damage to the cylinder has 
occurred by replacement of the neck ring/collar, the 
cylinder shall be rendered unserviceable. 


6.8 Reassembly 


Cylinders meeting the requirements of this code shall 
be reassembled by replacing, as specified by the porous 
mass manufacturer, any packing materials in the neck 


end and fitting new filters in such a way as to ensure 
that when the valve is fitted contact is made between 
the base of the valve stem and the filters/packings in 
accordance with IS 3224. 


Where relevant regulations require, a ring shall be fitted 
over the stem of the valve prior to the valve being fitted 
to indicate the date (year) of the next periodic 
inspection. 


7 IDENTIFICATION OF CONTENTS 


Before the cylinder is reintroduced into service, the 
contents shall be identified/labelled as per the Gas 
Cylinder Rules, 2004. 


8 MARKINGS 


Each cylinder that passes the shell and porous mass 
inspection shall be marked with the date of the 
inspection and the symbol of the inspection body or 
test station in accordance with the Gas Cylinder Rules, 
2004. The next inspection date shall be shown by an 
appropriate method such as a ring fitted between the 
valve and the cylinder indicating the date (year) of the 
next periodic inspection. 


For monolithic masses, stamping on the shoulder of 
welded cylinders is not permitted unless a data plate is 
provided for that purpose or unless it is provided for 
by the specification to which the cylinder is 
manufactured. In such cases, the stamping may be on 
a ring under the valve. 


9 RECORDS 


A cylinder inspection record shall be retained for 15 
years. It shall record sufficient information to positively 
identify the cylinder and the results of the inspection. 
The following information shall be available for 
inspection: 

a) Owner's name; 

b) Manufacturer's or owner's serial number; 

c) Typeand weight of porous mass added, if any; 

d) Attachment replacement, if any; 

e) Cylinder tare change, if appropriate; 

f) Result of inspection and test (pass or fail — 

in case of failure, the reasons should be 


IS 8433 : 2017 


recorded); 
g) Present retest date — year/month/day; 


h) Identification symbol of retest body or test 
station; 


j Identification of retester; and 


k) Details of any cylinder repairs made to defects 
as described in Annex B. 


10 REJECTION AND RENDERING CYLINDRS 
UNSERVICEABLE 


The decision to reject a cylinder may be taken at any 
stage during the periodic inspection and test procedure. 
If it is impossible to recover a rejected cylinder, after 
notifying the owner, the testing station shall make the 
cylinder unserviceable for holding gas under pressure 
soitis impossible for any part of the cylinder, especially 
the shoulder, to be re-issued into service as per the 
Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 and IS 9200. In case of any 
disagreement, it shall be ensured that the legal 
implication of the contemplated action is fully 
understood. 


Prior to taking any of the following actions, ensure 
that the cylinder is empty (see 5). 


The following methods may be employed for rendering 
cylinders unserviceable: 


a) Crushing the cylinder using mechanical 
means; and 


b) Irregular cutting of the cylinder in three or 
more pieces including the shoulder; 


11 DISPOSAL OF UNSERVICEABLE 
CYLINDERS 


Methods used for disposing of non-acetylene cylinders 
are inappropriate for acetylene cylinders because of the 
nature of the contents of an acetylene cylinder. 


When disposing of acetylene cylinders, very careful 
consideration shall be given to the fact that the 
cylinders could contain residual acetylene, solvent 
and porous mass, which could contain asbestos. 
Disposal shall be in accordance with statutory 
requirements. 


IS 8433 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 5.1 and 5.3) 


PROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN DE-VALVING AND WHEN IT IS SUSPECTED THAT 
A CYLINDER VALVE IS OBSTRUCTED 


A-1 CHECK FOR OBSTRUCTED VALVE 


The following procedures shall be carried out only by 
trained personnel. In view of the potential hazards in 
acetylene cylinders, this operation can lead to injury 
from stored energy release and fire, hence personnel 
shall take such precautions as deemed necessary for 
the work to be performed. When the acetylene, if any, 
has been released and the pressure within the cylinder 
has been reduced to atmospheric pressure as described 
in 5.1, the valve may be removed after an additional 
check is made to establish that there is free passage 
through the valve. 


As indicated in 5.1 and 5.3, a systematic check shall 
be made to establish that the passage through the valve 
is unobstructed. The method adopted shall be a 
recognized procedure such as by introducing inert gas 
at a pressure up to 5 bar and checking its discharge or 
a procedure that provides equivalent safeguards. 


Key 
1 = drive for de-valving machine 
2 = gas tight gland 
3 = gas tight seal 
4 = cylinder frame and clamping device 
5 = pressure gauge 
6 = vent valve 
а = direction of rotation 
b = to gas disposal 


A-2 VALVE UNOBSTRUCTED 


Only when it has been established that there is no 
obstruction to gas flow in the cylinder valve may the 
valve be removed. 


A-3 VALVE OBSTRUCTED 


When a cylinder is found to have an obstructed gas 
passage in the valve, the cylinder shall be set aside 
and handled only by specially trained personnel in this 
task. The preferred method to follow is to partially 
unscrew the valve within a glanded cap that is secured 
and joined to the cylinder and vented to a safe 
discharge. 


The principles of a suitable device are illustrated in 
Fig. 1. This procedure shall be performed in a 
controlled manner in such a way as to avoid personal 
injury. 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL DEVICE FOR THE REMOVAL OF AN OBSTRUCTED GAS CYLINDER 


6 


IS 8433 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 5.2, 6.1 and 9) 


DESCRIPTION AND EVALUATION OF DEFECTS AND CONDITIONS FOR REJECTION OF 
ACETYLENE GAS CYLINDERS AT TIME OF VISUAL INSPECTION 


B-1 GENERAL 


Gas cylinder defects can be physical or material, or 
due to corrosion as a result of environmental or service 
conditions to which the cylinder has been subjected 
during its life. 


B-2 PHYSICAL OR MATERIAL DEFECTS 


Evaluation of physical or material defects in the 
cylinder shall be in accordance with Table 1. 


Permanent attachments (for example footrings and 
shrouds) shall be inspected and shall be suitable for 
their intended purpose. 


B-3 CORROSION 


B-3.1 General 


The cylinder could be subjected to environmental 
conditions that could cause external corrosion of the 
metal. 


Extensive experience and judgment are required in 
evaluating whether cylinders that have corroded 
internally are safe and suitable for return to service. 
The surface of the metal shall be cleaned of 
corrosion products prior to the inspection of the 
cylinder. 


Table 1 Rejection Limits Relating to Physical and Material Defects in the Cylinder Shell 
(Clauses 6.1, 6.2 and B-2) 


Type of Defect Definition 
Bulge Visible swelling of the cylinder 
Dent A depression in the cylinder that has 


neither penetrated nor removed metal and 
is greater in depth than 1 percent of the 
outside diameter 
Cut or gouge A sharp impression where metal has been 
removed or redistributed and whose depth 
exceeds 5 percent of the cylinder wall 
thickness 


Crack 
Fire damage 


A split or rift in the metal 


Excessive general or localized heating of 
a cylinder usually indicated by: 


a) partial melting of cylinder; 
b) distortion of cylinder; 
с) charring or burning of paint; 


d) fire damage to valve, melting of plastic 
guard or date ring or fusible plug, if 
fitted. 


Flash back Ignition of acetylene within the cylinder 
Plug or neck Additional inserts fitted in the cylinder 
inserts neck or base 

Stamping Marking by means of a metal punch 


Arc or torch Partial melting of the cylinder, the addition 


burns of weld metal or the removal of metal by 
scarfing or cratering 

Suspicious Marks introduced other than by the 

marks cylinder manufacturing process and 


approved repair 


Rejection Limits 
АП cylinders with such a defect 
When the depth of the dent exceeds 3 percent of the external 


diameter of the cylinder or when the diameter of the dent is less 
than 15 times its depth 
For seamless-steel or 


seamless aluminium-alloy 
cylinder shells: 


For welded-steel cylinder 
shells: 


when the depth of the cut or gouge 
exceeds 10 percent of the wall 
thickness of the cylinder 


when the depth of the cut or 
gouge exceeds 15 percent of 


the wall thickness 
ог 


oF when the length of the cut or gouge 


exceeds 25 percent of the external 
diameter of the cylinder 


when the length of the cut or 
gouge exceeds 25 percent of 
the external diameter of the 
cylinder 

All cylinders with such defects 


All cylinders in categories (a) and (b) 
All cylinders in categories (c) and (d) may be acceptable after 
inspection and testing 


All cylinders with such a defect 


All cylinders unless it can be clearly established that 
addition is part of approved design 


All cylinders with illegible or incorrect markings (see 6.4) 
All cylinders with such defects 


All cylinders with such defects 


IS 8433 : 2017 


B-3.2 Types of Corrosion 


The types of corrosion shall in general be classified as in Table 2. 


Types of 
Corrosion 


General corrosion 


Local corrosion 


Chain, pitting or line 
corrosion 


Crevice corrosion 


Table 2 Rejection Criteria for Corrosion of the Cylinder Wall 
(Clauses 6.1 and B-3.2) 


Definition 


Loss of wall thickness over an area of more 
than 20 percent exterior total surface area of 
the cylinder 


Loss of wall thickness over an area of less 
than 20 percent of the total surface area of 
the cylinder, except for the other 

types of local corrosion 
described below 


Corrosion forming a narrow 
longitudinal or circumferential line ог strip, 
or isolated craters or pits that are almost 
connected 


Corrosion associated with and taking place 
at or immediately around an aperture 


Rejection Limits 


If the original surface of the metal is no longer recognizable 
ог 

If the depth of penetration exceeds 

10 percent of the original thickness of wall or 


If the wall thickness is less than minimum guaranteed wall 
thickness 


If the depth of penetration exceeds 

20 percent of the original thickness ofthe cylinder wall 
ог 

If the wall thickness is less than minimum guaranteed wall 
thickness 


If the total length of corrosion in any direction exceeds the 
diameter of the cylinder and the possible depth exceeds 10 
percent of the original wall thickness 


If, after thorough cleaning, the depth of penetration exceeds 20 
percent of the minimum guaranteed wall thickness 


2017 


IS 8433 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.4) 
TOPS OF ACETYLENE CYLINDERS CONTAINING MONOLITHIC POROUS MASS 


exo 


tet 


90 


metal screen on top of felt filter in valve 


> 


eee 
CIIS 
ee ES У 
5090599909099 У 
ооо 


wood or fibrous padding material 


5х5 
С 
000000000909 

00000 
RRR 

Sates 
RRS 

059 
ROSS 

09 
000000 

Фе 
00900 
оне 
Sede 


hole 


a) Monolithic porous mass without core hole, valve hole filled with felt, metal screen on top of felt filter 


b) Core hole filled with felt, 


Mono .ituHic Porous Mass: TYPES WITHOUT PRESSURE RELIEF DEVICES 


c) Core hole filled with granular material, metal screen on top of felt filter in valve hole 
Fic. 2 DIAGRAM OF THE Tops OF SEAMLESS (LEFT) AND WELDED (RIGHT) ACETYLENE CYLINDERS CONTAINING 


1 — neck ring 
2 — top clearance 
3 — head plate 
4 — weld area 


Key 


IS 8433 : 2017 


^o 


E 
"o, 


277272 


2222222222222222 


c) Ellipsoidal/toroidal head with collar: marking on collar 


Key 
] — fusible plug (location and quantity can vary). 


2 — top clearance. 


NOTE — Porous mass may exhibit no core hole or a core hole of varying depths. In all cases, the open space is filled with felt, fibrous 
padding material or a granular material. A metal screen is positioned between this material and the valve. 


Fic. 3 DIAGRAM OF ACETYLENE CYLINDERS WITH ELLIPSOIDAL Tops CONTAINING MONOLITHIC Porous MASS: 
CYLINDERS WITH PRESSURE RELIEF DEVICES 


10 


IS 8433 : 2017 


Fic. 4 ExAMPLES OF ToP CLEARANCE GAUGES FOR MEASURING THE TOP CLEARANCE BETWEEN THE CYLINDER SHELL AND 
THE MONOLITHIC Porous MATERIAL 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 6.2.2) 


ILLUSTRATION OF CRACKS IN THE POROUS MASS OF AN ACETYLENE CYLINDER, AND 
TOOLS AND CLEARANCE GAUGES 


D-1 Figure 5A shows an acetylene cylinder with mass 
that shows cracking and crumbling but that could be 
acceptable for further service. The cylinder may be 
further used provided there are no break-outs and the 


porous mass cannot be dislodged. 


D-2 Figure 5B shows an acetylene cylinder with a mass 
that shows cracking and crumbling and that shall be 
rejected. 


5A HAIRLINE CRACK WITHOUT VISIBLE SIDEWALLS 


5B CRACK WITH VISIBLE SIDEWALLS 


Fic. 5 CRACKS IN THE MONOLITHIC Porous MASS OF AN ACETYLENE CYLINDER 


11 


IS 8433 : 2017 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 6.6) 


INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF VALVES AND THEIR JUNCTIONS: RECOMMENDED 
PROCEDURES 


АП threads shall be checked to ensure the thread 
diameters, form, length and taper are satisfactory. 


Ifthreads show signs of distortion, deformation or burring, 
these faults shall be rectified. Excessive thread damage 
or serious deformation of the valve body, handwheel, 
spindle or other components is cause for replacement. 


Maintenance of the valve shall include general cleaning 
together with replacement of elastomers and worn or 
damaged components, packing and pressure relief 


devices, where necessary. 


Where the use of lubricants/elastomers is permitted, 
they shall be compatible with both the solvent and 
acetylene in accordance with IS/ISO 11114-2. 


After the valve has been re-assembled, it shall be 
checked for correct operation and shall undergo internal 
and external leak checks at intended operating pressure 
(for example, see IS 3224). This may be done prior to 
the valve being refitted to the cylinder. 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


АП India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


GSPC Gas Co Ltd, 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Inox India Limited, Vadodara 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), 


New Delhi 
Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


13 


Representative(s) 


Dn SupDARSHAN KAMAL (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri S. Аким (Alternate) 


SHRI. S. SRIRAM 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri Р. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


Suri Р. M. SAMVATSAR 
SHRI A. К. KHAMKaRr (Alternate 1) 
Sarı Н. D. KHATRI (Alternate 2) 


Suri K. S. R. PRASAD 


SHRI ALOK К. GUPTA 
А.Ѕнк Р. №. Kantu (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. КАмвнА:, (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN К. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA К. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESH К. Gago (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK V. PATWARDHAN 
Suri NIKHILESH K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri. S. СорАгАІАН (Alternate) 


Suri SUNIL K. Dey 
Suri S. B. BoLmat (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
Suri PRADEEP (Alternate) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN Kurrv 
Dr. A. KRISHNA (Alternate) 


Suri S. MURALI 
Suri ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI, ЈАЅС 
SHRI К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri Nauzer Dapasuoy (Alternate) 


Suri К. K. GANDHI 
Suri PANKAJ К. Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr ANJANA Deva (Alternate) 


IS 8433 : 2017 


IS 8433 : 2017 


Organization 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri Р. К. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri К. Benan (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. Rarrikar (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAIN 
Suri P. К. Матнов (Alternate) 


Suri S. J. VisPUTE 
Suri A.V KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri T. V. Sinca, Scientist ‘F’ and Head 
(MED)[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 


Scientist ‘В’ (MED), BIS 


14 


IS 8433 : 2017 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure 
Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:3 


Organization 
LINDE India Limited, Kolkata 
Adani Gas Ltd., Ahmedabad 


Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 

АП India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 

Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 
Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Rama Cylinders Private Limited, Mumbai 
Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 
Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (АКАР), 
New Delhi 
Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


15 


Representative(s) 
Suri VuTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


SHRI PEEYUSH TRIPATHI 
Suri Amit MALIK (Alternate) 


Suri Vuay К. ParikH 
Suri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


Suri SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri Р. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. G. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Ѕни V. Ramaswamy (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUDHIR JAIN (Alternate П) 


SHRI ALOK К. GUPTA 
Suri Р. №. Kantu (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RamBuat (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN К. PANDEY 


Suri D. К. GARG 
Suri N. К. Gara (Alternate) 


Suri Аѕнок К. NIGAM 
Suri Manu Kumar Nica (Alternate) 


Suri К. CHANDGOTHIA 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SanaN (Alternate) 


SHRI J. P. TIWARI 
Suri К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH 


SHRI SANJAY МАМРЕ 
Suri РкАмор №. Sancwal (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Gupta 
Suri SRINIVAS Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri Nauzer Dapasuoy (Alternate) 


Suri К. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ Kumar КАВМ (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri К. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri M. К. Сноорндкі (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


*BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1126). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


