**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6359 (1971): Method for conditioning of textiles [TXD 1: 
Physical Methods of Tests] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS £35? 1971 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 
METHOD FOR CONDITIONING OF TEXTILES 



UDC 677'06 : 677 017-4 [ 63CM7I3 J 





© Copyright 1972 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN t 9 BABADuH SHAH ZAPAR MARC 
1 NEW DELHI 1 

K*r A 

April 1972 



IS: 6359 -1971 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR CONDITIONING OF TEXTILES 

Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 1 

Chairman Representing 

Dr T. Radhakrishnan Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, Calcutta 

Vice-chairman 
Dr V. Sundaram Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( ICAR ), 

Bombay ^ 

Members 
Dr B. L, Banerjee ( Alternate to 

Dr T. Radhakrishnan ) 
Dr V. G. Munshi ( Alternate to 
Dr V. Sundaram ) 
Shri T. V. Ananthan The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri G. D. Bhogale Department of Agriculture ( Ministry of Food, Agri- 

culture, Community Development & Co- 
operation ) 
Shri T. S. Chandrasekhariah Government of Mysore 
Shri K. K. Chatterjee Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta 

Dr D. B. Das Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta 

Shri I. B. Dutt Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri P. N. Maitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. R. S. Gopalachar Central Silk Board, Bombay 

Dr B. V. Iyer Ahmedabad Textile Industries Research Association, 

Ahmedabad 
Shri B. R. Shelat ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. C. Jain Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. B. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Dr Jai Prakash Textiles Committee, Bombay 

Shrimati A. Kaplash The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Shri S. P. Mulligk National Test House, Calcutta 

Dr C. N. K. Murthy Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Lt-Col O. P. Bakshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. L. Patel Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspec- 

tion Wing ), New Delhi 
Shri A. K. Pramanick ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. Ramakrishna Pillay The South India Textile Research Association, 

Coimbatore 
Shri H. Sahasranaman The Millowners' Association, Bombay 

Shri A. D. Sule Wool Research Association, Bombay 

Shri G. R. Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. I. Taraporewala The National Rayon Corporation Limited, Bombay 

Shri D. S. Nadkarni (Alternate) 
Shri M. G. Thanawala M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay 

Shri S. M. Chakraborty, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director (Tex) 

Secretary 

Shri D. R. Kohli 

Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 



IS: 6359 -1971 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR CONDITIONING OF TEXTILES 
0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 31 December 1971, after the draft finalized by the Physical Methods 
of Test Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0*2 Most of the textiles being hygroscopic in nature, the relative humidity 
and temperature of the atmosphere affect their physical and mechanical 
properties appreciably. In order that reliable comparisons may be made 
among different materials and products and among different laboratories, it 
is necessary to standardize the humidity and temperature conditions and 
the procedure by which the textile material may be brought to the moisture 
equilibrium before testing. 

0.3 Assistance has been derived from the following in the preparation of this 
standard: 

Draft ISO Recommendation No. 815 Standard atmosphere for condi- 
tioning and testing textiles. International Organization for Standard- 
ization. 

ASTM Designation D 1776-67 Standard method of conditioning tex- 
tiles and textile products for testing. American Society for Testing 
and Materials. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a procedure for conditioning of all textile 
materials. 

1.1.1 This standard also prescribes a procedure for pre-conditioning of 
textiles which would be necessary if specified in the standard test method or 
specification for the material under test before conditioning. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 The principle followed is to allow the textile material to remain in the 
conditioning room during its absorption cycle for a sufficient time to reach 
moisture equilibrium. 



18:6359-1971 

3. TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 Atmospheric Conditions for Testing ( Standard ) — The atmos- 
phere in which physical tests on textile materials are performed. It has a 
relative humidity of 65 ± 2 percent and a temperature of 27 ± 2°G ( see 
also IS: 196-1966*). 

3.2 Moisture Equilibrium — The condition reached by a sample or 
specimen in a controlled atmosphere when the net difference between the 
amount of moisture absorbed and the amount desorbed, as shown by a 
change in weight, shows no trend and becomes insignificant. 

3.3 Moisture Equilibrium for Testing — The condition reached by 
sample or specimen during free exposure to moving air controlled at 
specified conditions. For test purposes, moisture equilibrium shall be reached 
by absorption, starting from a relatively low moisture content. Moisture 
equilibrium for testing is considered to have been reached when successive 
weighings carried out at intervals of not less than 2 hours of the textile 
materials freely exposed to the moving air differ by less than 0*25 percent. 

3.4 Preconditioning — To bring a sample or specimen to a relatively low 
moisture content [ equilibrium in an atmosphere between 10 and 25 percent 
RH and not exceeding 50°C ( see Note ) ] prior to conditioning in a controlled 
atmosphere for testing. ( While preconditioning is frequently translated as 
predrying, specimens should not, in fact, be brought to the oven-dry state. ) 

Note — These conditions may be obtained by heating air at 65 percent RH and 
27°G ( the standard atmosphere ) to a temperature up to 50°C in air circulating type 
oven. 

3.5 Relative Humidity — The ratio of the actual pressure of the water 
vapour in the atmosphere to the saturation vapour pressure at the same 
temperature. The ratio is usually expressed as a percentage. 

Note — Under normal circumstances, the sling or whirling hygrometer or Assmann's 
are the most convenient instruments for measuring relative humidity, they are suffi- 
ciently accurate for this purpose. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Conditioning Room or Chamber — equipped with apparatus capa- 
ble of maintaining standard atmosphere for conditioning and testing through- 
out the room or chamber within the specified tolerances of relative humidity 
and temperature and having arrangements for maintenance of proper air 
circulation ( see 3.1 ). 

4.1.1 It shall also be equipped with the instruments for recording relative 
humidity and temperature. 



♦Atmospheric conditions for testing ( revised ) . 

3 



IS: 6359 -1971 

4.2 Preconditioning Cabinet or Room — equipped with apparatus 
capable of maintaining atmosphere for pre-conditioning of textiles through- 
out the room or chamber within the specified tolerances of relative humidity 
and temperature (see 3 A). 

4.3 Balance — capable of weighing to an accuracy of 0*25 percent. 
5. PROCEDURE 

5.1 Determine the relative humidity and temperature of the conditioning 
room or chamber ( see 4.1 ) and, if preconditioning is also to be carried out, 
find the relative humidity and temperature of the preconditioning cabinet 
or room to check whether the conditions meet the specified values of 
relative humidity and temperature or not. If the conditions are not as 
required, make adjustments to bring them to the desired limits of tempe- 
rature and liumidity. 

5.1.1 If both preconditioning and conditioning are prescribed in the test 
method or the specification for the material, proceed as given in 5.2 and 5.3, 
and if only conditioning has been prescribed, omit 5.2. 

5.2 Expose the specimen or sample in the atmosphere for preconditioning in 
such a way as to expose, as far as possible, all portions of the material to the 
atmosphere until the moisture equilibrium is attained ( see Note 1 
under 5.3). 

5.3 Expose the specimen or sample ( already pre-conditioned, if so required ) 
in the standard atmosphere in such a way as to expose, as far as possible, 
all portions of the material to the atmosphere until the moisture equilibrium 
is attained ( see Notes ) . 

Note 1 — In case the material received is in package form, it is preferable to prepare 
test specimens in loose or open form so that all portions get uniformly exposed to the 
preconditioning or conditioning atmospheres. For example, in case of yarn in theibrm 
of cones or cheeses, suitable skeins may be prepared for conditioning. 

Note 2 — For guidance purposes, it may be noted that the minimum time required 
for the various types of textile materials having moisture regain values of less than 
5 percent is about 6 hours to reach moisture equilibrium while for those having 
moisture regain values of more than 5 percent it is 24 hours. 

5.4 The textile materials conditioned as above be tested according to the 
procedure laid down. 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS iNSTlTUTfON 



INDIAN STANDARDS 



Over G 500 Indian Standards covering various subjects have been 
issued so far. Of thes*, the standards belonging to the Textile Group 
fait under the following categories: 



Aeronautical textiles 
Chemical l&st methods 
Coluur IjitP^HS Of lt*U\t mateflaML 
Ct>ttoJi fab no 5 — handJoom , khndU 
And mill-made 

Grading ol fibres- and jams 

Grjrflna of raw silk 

Hosiery 

Jute — bags and fabrics 

Jute ttiHI access-ones 

Narrow iatirics 

Nations! flo[| of India 

Nylon tahrics 

Packaging- Codes 

Physical fast methods 
Rayon fabrics 



Rayon fabrics, hand loom 
Rapes and cordages 

Sampling of tetKle&i methods for 
Si Ik fabrics - hand loom and khadl 

Sizing and finishing materials 

Spinning lurachinory cnmponcinta 

Terminology 

Teatsre floor eowinfl* 

T&xtMe mate-rials tor fishing 

Teil'le mill accessories (other than 

jute mills} 
Twines 

Whining machrnery components 
Wool fabrics — h and loo rn , k h ad I , 

and mi 1 1- made 

Yam artd similar structure* 
Unclassified 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



LSI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) 
Single Copy 

Annual Subscription 

Si&ndafda! Monthly Additions 

Single Copy 

Annual Subscript] Ort 

Annual Rq- ports (from 1948-49 Onwards ) 
I SI Hand bQ 0d i 1372 



... RS 3'PJ 

Re B» 

Rs 2'Wio5uo 
Rs 2D-00 



INDIA 14 STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zaiar Marg. New Delhi 1 

Telephone: 2701 31 U« tinea) 

Branch Cflfces i 

B S«dhna* TulslvlhiLr, Khanpur 

F Block, Unity Bldfl, Narasimharaja Square 

534 Sardar Vaalabhbhai Fatol Road 

5 Chowriitflheo Approach 

5-3-201:2- A (First Ftoor}i Chkag All Lane 

1 17/418 B Sarvodaya Na»ar 

M General Patters Ro&d 



Telegrams : Manaksanslha 




Telephone 


AhniaddbaJ 1 


— 


BariBalore z 


2 76 da 


Bombay 1 


35 69 44 


Calcutta 13 


23-09 02 


Hyderabad 1 


53435 


Kan pur 5 


33 72 


Madras 2 


8 72 7S 



Proled 11 LlcJtii fruitr". I trllii fi. Id J it 



