IS 13484

: 1892

(Reaffirmed 2003)

Indian Standard METHOD FOR MACROETCH TEST FOR COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS

UDC

669.35*620* 183.255

@ BIS 1992

BllREAlJ
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARQS
ZAFAR MARU

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHl 110002

Jtrlv 1992

Price Graup

2

Metallography

and Heat

Treatment

Sectional

Committee,

MTD

22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Metallography and Heat Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. Macroetching is used to reveal the heterogeneity of metals and alloys. Metallographic specimens and chemical analysis will provide the necessary detailed information about specific localities but they cannot give data about variation from one place to another unless an inordinate large number of specimens are taken. Macroetching, on the other hand, will provide information on variations in ( ! ) structure, such as grain size, flow lines, columnar structure, dendrites, etc. ( 2 ) variations in chemical composition as evidenced by segregation. The information provided about variations in chemical composition is strictly qualitative but the location of extremes in segregation will be shown. Chemical analysis or other means of determining the chemical composition would have to be Macroetching will also show the presence of performed to determine the extent of variation. discontinuities and voids, such as seams, laps, porosity, flakes, bursts, extrusion rupture, cracks, etc. In the preparation of the standard assistance methods for macroetching metals and alloys. has been derived from ASTM E 340 Standard test

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 6Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13484: 1992

Indian Standard

METHOD FOR MACROETCH TEST FOR COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS
1 SCOPE 1.1 Macroetching is the etching of specimen for examination with lunaided eye at low magnifications and is used to reveal the macrostructure of copper and copper alloy products, such as bars, billets, forgings and castings. The present procedure is intended to be followed for copper and copper alloys, showing characteristic structure and incidence of certain processing defects and is applicable to wrought and cast products. 3.1.2 Forgings and Exxrrusion

Discs, cut transverse to the long dimension, are used for examining bursts, voids, etc. Forging should be cut parallel to flash lines to show flow lines. Macroetching of an unprepared specimen shows surface defects, such as shuts, flats, seams, etc. 3.1.3 Sheets and Plates While looking for defects in sheets, as large a sample as possible should be taken. When seeking information on lamination, a transverse section is used. 3.1.4 Castings Specimen should be cut from different depending upon the features sought. regions

2 SIGNIFICANCE 2.1 Macroetching is a simple test which provides information about the heterogeneity of the sample. It will show: ( a ) variation in structure such as grain size, flowlines columnar structure dendrite etc.; ( b ) presence of macro segregation and bandmg, coring and inclusion; and ( c ) the presence of discontinuities and voids, such as lamps, porosity, extrusion rupture, seams and bursts etc. 3 SAMPLING 3.1 When using macroetching as an inspection procedure, sampling should be done in an early stage of manufacturing so that if the material proves defective, the minimum amount of unnecessary work is done. However, the sample should not be taken so early that further working can introduce serious defects. The sample is usually taken after ingot breakdown and after most chances of flaking and bursting have passed. Billets or blooms going into small sizes are sampled after initial breakdown. Materials going into forging billets or other products are sampled at near finish size, sampling may be done systematicallv or on a random basis. 3.1.1 Some common methods listed as follows. of sampling are

3.2 When macroetching is used to solve LL problem, then the problem itself largely dictates the sample location on the work pieces and the stage of manufacture; for example, when looking for pipe, the sample should represent for top of the ingot, or when looking for burst, the sample should be taken as soon after hot working as possible. 3.3 Sample may be cold cut by any convenient means. Saw and abrasive cut off wheels and EDS cutting are particularly effiective. The surface to be examined should bc properly prepared before macroetching.
4 SPECIMEN

PREPARATION

3.1.1.1 Billets, blooms and hot-rolled products Discs arc usually cut from these products near the end, but fish tails should be nvoidcd. Discs from large blooms can be cut into smnllcr pieces for ease in handling. 1

4.1 Sample preparation need not be elaborate. Any method of presenting a smooth surface with a minimum amount of cold work will be satisfactory. Discs may be faced on a lathe or a shaper.The usual procedure is to take a roughi:lg cut, then a finish cut. This will generate a smooth surface and remove cold work Iayer
from prior operalior>s. Grinding may also be employed using a free cutting wheel and light finishing cut. When fine details ;\l-c required,

the specimen

should

be finished
paper.

through

the

series met:lllographic

IS 13484: 1992

4.2 After surface preparation, the sample with suitable should be cleaned carefully solvents. Any grease, oil or other residue left on the surface will result in uneven attack during macroetching. Care should be taken not to touch the sample surface or contaminate it in any other way after it has been cleaned.
5 SOLUTIONS

5.2 Caution must be observed in mixing the acids as many of the acids may cause chemical burns. The acid shou!d be added slowly to water. Mixing and etching should be done in a fume hood as many of the solutions are aggressive and may give irritaing fumes. 6 PROCEDURE
6.1 The

5.1 The most

etching in Table

common solutions for macrocopper and copper alloys are given 1.

specimen should be etched to reveal structure by immersion or by swabbing or by both means. The time of etching will vary depending upon the composition, size and

Table

1

Macroetchants for Copper and Copper Alloys
Procedure IO ml 90 ml Immerse specimen in solution at room temperature for a few minutes. Rinse in water and swab with alochol and dry. As above Comments Emphasize cracks. grains and

Alloy r-----CLIand all brasses HNO1, Ha0

Composition A_--_7

Cu and all brasses

HNOt HIO

50 ml 50 ml

Brings out grain, contrast. Pitting occurs unless the ctchant is ;;i$tlf. Aluminium may form smut which can be removed by brief immersion in concentrated HNOs. Good grail1 contrast.

Cu and all brasses

HCI FeCI, HZ0 or ethanol K&r&, saturated solution of NaCl HaSO, H,O HNO, AgNOa IW tziyrcent 5pynt 10 percent Ha0 acetic chromic

30 ml 10 ml 120 ml 2g 4 ml 8 ml 100 ml 50 ml 0.5 ml 50 ml 20 ml 10 ml

As above

CU and high Cu alloys, phosphor bronzes and tin bronzes

Immerse specimen in solution at room temperature for 15 to 30min then swab with fresh solution. Rinse in warm water and dry, Immerse specimen in solution at room temperature. Rinse in warm water and dry. As above

Emphasizes boundcrics inclusions.

grain and oxide

All

B~illant

deep etch.

Brass

Strain

lines

FeCl, in 5 ml 40 g 7.5 y 50 ml 8 ml 100 ml

Cr& NH&Cl HNO, (cone ) I$S&o, ( cone ) a

Immerse specimen in solution at room trmperaturc, rinse in warm water and dry.

General

structure.

2

IS 13484 : 1992

structural conditions. Generally speaking 30 s to 10 min will be sufficient. Etching should be stopped when the preferred structural details have been revealed. Over-etching can lead to misinterpretation and hence light etching is better. Table 1 gives the times for various etchants, but should be used as a guide only. The actual time to develop structure properly may be quite different from that suggested. After etching specimen should be washed in running water and blown dry with compressed air. 7 EXAMINATION
7.1 Any OF SPECIMENS

be reported. A low magnification ( x 10 ) stereo microscope can be used for observation if necessary. Normally it is essential to see the surface from various angles to observe 9ow defects and banding. fhe macrograin size of forged billets can be compared wtth specified level of grain size and macrostructures reported. 7.2 The acceptance and rejection criterion for these macrostructures has to be worked out according to the type of alloy and application. Therefore, the basis of macroetching inspection will be a matter of agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser, if this technique is being used as a quality test.

special conditions like segregation, banding, voids, etc, that can be observed should

3

Standard Mark
The use of the Standard Mask is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Stan&r& Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mask on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard masked products are also continuously checked by operated by the produces. BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bnreao of Indian Standard

established under the Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

Act,

1986

to

and

quality

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. N-0 part of these .publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writtmg of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designation. Enquiries relating ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards

are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued fl-om time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. sent to BIS giving the following reference:

Dot : No. MTD 22 ( 3758 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

Amend No.

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Officer ) Telephono 1 331 01 31 331 13 75

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktols CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH Southern Western Branches : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

I

37 84 99, 37 86 26. 53 38 23 43, 84

37 85 61, 37 85 62 53 16 40, 41 25 19, 41 29 16, 63 27 80,

41 24 42, 41 23 15, I 632 92 95, 632 78 92

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

: AHMADABAD,

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORB FARIDABAD, CHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers. Aligarh. India

