RAT AAF IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


STAT GEA eh aia AAT en fa 
ATT 1 Utero eq Gas Us cant 
(UGR) 


Methods of Test for Grain Dryers 
Part 1 Selection and Preparation for Test 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 65.060.99 


O BIS 2019 


Urea Ae A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UI, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Reef 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 5 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipments Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Agriculture and Food Processing Equipments Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


It is well known that if the crop having low moisture content is harvested, the shattering loss is more and if it 
is harvested at high moisture content the storability and quality of grain is very much reduced. In order to have 
compromise between these two extreme situations, it is desirable to harvest the crop at a comparatively high 
moisture content and dry the grain to required moisture content suitable for its storage and quality maintenance. 
Drying may be done in sun or by mechanical process. Sun drying is time consuming and a non-uniform process. 
Moreover, in some grains such as paddy, the quality of the grain is reduced if it is dried in the sun. It is, therefore, 
advisable to employ mechanical dryers. This would ensure the increased manufacture and use of the grain dryers 
by processing industry in the country. 


Although the function of a grain dryer is to remove excess moisture from grain without loss of quality, the evaluation 
of its performance is very complex due to a wide variety of designs and sizes to cover the diverse requirements 
for drying capacity and cost. This code is, therefore, being issued to provide a procedure for evaluation of the 
performance of the dryers which should be of practical use to both the users and the manufacturers. 

This standard was first published in 1977 and subsequently revised in 1984. First revision was taken up to 
incorporate details of fuel and air as well as correction for evaporation rate. The second revision of this standard 
has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international practices. 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the BS 3986 : 1966 ‘Methods 
of test for agricultural grain dryers’. 


This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part2 Method of tests for continuous dryers 
Part3 Methods of tests for in-silo dryers 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex E. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF TEST FOR GRAIN DRYERS 
PART 1 SELECTION AND PREPARATION FOR TEST 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) covers the method of selection 
and preparation of grain dryers and drying material for 
testing. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 
8420 : 2000 Grain dryers — Glossary of 
terms 
14818 : 2009 Cereal and cereal products — 
Sampling ( first revision ) 
4333 Methods of analysis for food 
(Part 1): 1996 grains: Part 1 Refractions 
4333 Methods of analysis for food 


(Part 2):2009 grains: Part 2 Determination 
of moisture content ( second 


revision ) 

Method of analysis for food 
grains: Part 3 Determination of 
bulk density, called mass per 
hectolitre ( second revision ) 


4333 
(Part 3) : 2009 


4333 
(Part 4) : 2010 


Methods of analaysis for food 
grains: Part 4 Determination of 
the mass of 1 000 grains ( second 


revision ) 

6894 : 1993 Malting barley — Specification 
(first revision ) 

16196 : 2015 Solid mineral fuels — 


Determination of carbon and 
hydrogen — High temperature 
combustion method 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 8420 shall apply. 


4 AMBIENT CONDITIONS 


The ambient conditions of temperature, pressure and 
relative humidity to which the result of dryer test are to 
be corrected, shall be as under: 


a) Temperature 25°C, 
b) Pressure 1.013 kPa, and 
c) Relative humidity 75 percent. 


5 SELECTION OF DRYER 


5.1 The dryer required to be tested may be either a 
proto type or a production model. In case of a proto- 
type, the testing authority shall accept the sample as 
submitted by the manufacturer. In case of a production 
model, the dryer shall be selected randomly by the 
testing authority from the production series. The dryer 
shall be complete with its usual accessories and in a 
condition generally offered for sale. 


5.2 The manufacturer shall supply the details of the 
specifications of the dryer consisting of the items listed 
in the specification sheet given in Annex A, as well 
as any further data required to carry out the tests. The 
manufacturer shall also supply material flow diagram 
and all the relevant literature, such as operation and 
maintenance manual and parts catalogues, normally 
supplied along with the dryer. 


5.3 The specification given by the manufacturer shall 
be checked and reported by the testing authority. The 
adequacy or otherwise of the literature and the manuals 
shall also be reported. 


6 INSTALLATION OF DRYER FOR TESTING 


6.1 At the time of test, the dryer shall be installed in 
such a way that the performance is not affected by the 
following: 


a) Inadequacy of ancillary grain elevating and 
conveying equipment, 

b) Unsuitability of the arrangements for allowing 
flow of air to and from the dryer, or 


c) Any other factor. 
6.2 A check shall be made by the manufacturer and the 


testing authorities that the dryer has been assembled 
and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


instructions. The dryer shall be fitted, for the purpose 
of the test, with such measuring devices as may be 
necessary, fitting of such devices to be carried out 
under the supervision of the testing authorities. 


7 GENERAL TEST PROCEDURE 


7.1 Site 


The dryer shall be tested as installed for normal working 
but it is important for the purpose of testing that the site 
should have adjacent to its premises facilities suitable 
for storing, dampening and turning a sufficient quantity 
of grain for drying during the test. 


7.2 Operation of the Dryer 


During the test dryer shall be adjusted by testing 
authority in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
published instructions. The testing authority shall make 
all measurements which form part of the test and take 
the prescribed samples of’ grain. 


7.3 Supply of Grain 


The bulk of grain for the test shall meet the requirements 
given in Annex B. 


7.4 Indication of Damage 


Samples of the grain used for the test shall be tested 
for germination capacity before and after drawing. 
Any depression of germination capacity which may 
occur during drying process, shall be regarded as an 
indication of damage for food grains as well as seeds. 
Although germination capacity is not directly relevant 
to the value of milling of grains, it is a more sensitive 
indicator of damage and is more easily measured than 
other properties. In case of wheat the baking properties 
should also be taken into consideration and appropriate 
tests before and after drying should be carried out 
to measure any loss in the baking properties. For oil 
bearing seeds, if the tests are carried out with the 
particular seed in question, the loss on evaporation 
in the dryer of the oil content shall be regarded as an 
indication of damage. 


7.4.1 Each type of grain has a so called critical 
temperature which shall not be exceeded if damage 
due to depression of germination and baking properties 
is to be avoided. The average permissible maximum 
temperature in the kernel at hot air drying is usually 
about 45°C. At moisture content under 20 percent 
however, approximately 5°C higher temperature is 
permissible, for example, wheat, barley, maize and 
oats have to have a lower temperature in the kernel 
as these grains do not stand as much heat. The critical 
temperature is somewhat less than the drying air 
temperature. For wheat with a moisture content of 
20 percent, a kernel temperature of 57°C is permissible 
from baking point of view but only 55°C if the wheat 
is used as seed. At a moisture content of 15 percent, the 
values are 67°C and 62°C, respectively. 


7.5 Measurement of Dryer Holding Capacity 


The amount of grain required to fill the dryer for proper 
operation shall be verified either when filling the dryer 
at the beginning of the test or when emptying it at the 
end. 


8 MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT 


8.1 Fuel and Air 


Fuel to be used in the test shall conform to the 
specification supplied by the manufacturer. In case 
such fuel is not easily available in market, the property 
of the fuel, to be used in the test, shall be informed to 
the manufacturer prior to test and shall be reported. 
The method for measurement of fuel and air is given in 
Annex C and Annex D respectively. 


8.2 Measuring Instruments 


The measuring instruments to be used shall be checked 
and calibrated prior to the measurements and shall be 
capable of taking the minimum scale and accuracy. 
The tolerance of the measuring instruments shall be 
reported. 


A-1 GENERAL 
a) Name of the manufacturer 
b) Address of the manufacturer 
c) Make of the dryer 
d) Model number of dryer 
e) Type of dryer 
A-2 BLOWER 
a) Type: 
1) Axial flow, and 
2) Radial flow 
b) Recommended speed 
c) Diameter of discharge port, 


d) Diameter of impeller, 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.2 ) 


SPECIFICATION SHEET 
To be filled in by 


Manufacturer Testing Authority 


e) Number of rotating impeller vanes, 


f) Blower rating, and 


g) Power requirement. 
A-3 SOURCE OF HEAT 


A-3.1 Burner 
a) Type of fuel recommended, 
b) Specification of fuel, 


c) Burner rating, 


d) Capacity of combustion chamber, 

e) Area of fire-crate, 

f) Temperature regulating system, 

g) Normal spacing range between burner and blower, and 


h) Provision to control temperature. 


A-3.2 Furnace 


a) Type, 

b) Fuel used, 

c) Fuel required, 

d) Size (diameter or L x B x H), 

e) Feeding mechanism, 

f) Size of chimney, 

g) Provision for temperature control, and 


h) Provision to remove ash and unburnt material. 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


A-3.3 Electric Heater 
a) Type (finned / plain), 
b) Capacity, 
c) Number of heaters, 
d) Size (L x B), and 


e) Provision to control temperature. 


A-3.4 Any Other 


A-4 MOTOR 
a) Type; 
b) Phase; 
c) Frequency, in Hz; 
d) Voltage, 
e) Amperes at full load, 
f) Rated speed, 
g) Rated power, and 
h) Type of enclosure. 


A-5 AIR FLOW GUIDE RACE 
a) Length and area of section: 
1) Blower side, and 
2) Dryer side. 
b) Connecting method: 
1) Size of holes of wire net, and 


2) Holding capacity. 


A-6 DRYING UNIT 
a) Plenum chamber size (L x B), 
b) Size of perforation in plenum, 
c) Holding capacity, 
d) Provision of discharge chute, and 


e) Provision for cleaning the plenum. 


A-7 SAFETY MEASURES 


a) Provision of covers for moving parts, 
b) Ground earthing, and 


c) Insulation for hot surfaces. 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX B 


( Clause 7.3 ) 


PROVISION AND SELECTION OF GRAIN 


B-1 SOURCES OF SUPPLY AND TYPE OF 
GRAIN 


The grain for test of continuous flow and batch dryer 
meant for drying food grains shall be milleable wheat, 
field harvested paddy, par-boiled paddy, maize or oil 
bearing grain. The grain as used shall not have received 
more than one drying treatment. The quantity used for 
a continuous flow dryer shall be 6 times the holding 
capacity of the dryer plus 4 times the rated hourly 
output of the dryer plus 10 percent calculated on the 
basis of dry grain at 15 percent moisture content. The 
quantity used for a batch dryer shall be 5 times the 
holding capacity of the dryer. 


B-1.1 For the test of an in-silo dryer, the grain shall 
have received no previous drying treatment. It shall be 
pre-cleaned, if necessary. The mean moisture content 
of the damp grain used for the tests shall be as near as 
possible to 21 percent and no grain shall be admitted 
which has below 19 percent moisture content. Quantity 
of damp grain used shall be sufficient to fill the silo up 
to the level specified by the manufacturer. 


B-2 CONDITION OF GRAIN BEFORE USE IN 
THE TEST 


For each 20 tonne of grains, intended for use in the 
test, a representative sample (see IS 14818) shall be 
delivered to the testing authority in a sealed air tight 
container at least 3 weeks before the time arranged 
for the test. This bulk sample shall be sub-sampled by 
the testing authority and the following tests shall be 
carried out: 


a) Refractions — In accordance with IS 4333 
(Part 1). 
b) Moisture determination — In accordance with 


IS 4333 (Part 2). 


c) Hectoliter mass — In accordance with IS 4333 
(Part 3). 


d) Mass of 1 000 Grains — In accordance with 
IS 4333 (Part 4). 


e) Germination test — In accordance with Annex A 
of IS 6894. 


f) Resistance to Heat Damage — This shall be 
checked as per B-2.1. 


B-2.1 Samples of grain having moisture content to 
21 + 0.5 percent shall be heated in sealed aluminium 
cylinders (inside radius 9 mm, length 150 mm and 
wall thickness 0.15 mm) to temperatures of 59°C, 
60°C, 61°C and 62°C. These temperatures shall 
be attained by a water bath controlled to + 0.1°C 
before immersion of the tubes in it and the samples 
heated for 65 min without drying at each of these 
temperatures. The germination capacity of the samples 
shall be subsequently determined and a curve drawn 
showing the relationship between grain temperature 
and germination capacity as a percentage of control 
and rejected if at 50 percent germination the curve 
is not reaching the temperature range of 59.5°C 
and 61.5°C. 


B-3 METHOD OF DAMPENING GRAIN 


The quantity of water required to raise the moisture 
content of the grain to 21 percent to be used for the test 
shall be added to the grain by any convenient method 
under the supervision of the testing authority during 
the first of the 3 days immediately preceding the test 
and subsequently grain are to be mixed. The grain 
shall also be mixed twice on each of the following two 
days. Any necessary adjustment of moisture content 
after the initial dampening shall be made early on the 
second day. 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX C 


( Clause 8.1 ) 


FUEL MEASUREMENT 


C-1 MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY USED IN 
THE DRYER 


The energy measured shall be the electricity or fuel 
consumption of the prime mover(s) which activate the 
moving parts of the dryer and the fuel or electricity 
consumption of the source of heat. The consumption 
of electricity shall be normally measured by Watt hour 
meter. The permissible error shall be + 2 percent of the 
electricity used. The following are the suitable methods 
for measurement of fuel consumption. 


C-1.1 For Gaseous Fuels 


a) Displacement Flow Meter — When the 
consumption of gaseous fuel is measured by 
volume, the temperature and pressure of gas shall 
be measured at the flow measuring point. 


b) Measurement of Reduction in Mass — After 
the gas is supplied from a container difference 
in mass of the container from which gas has 
been supplied could be used. Precautions shall 
be taken to ensure that the container is dry when 
measurements are taken. 


C-1.2 For Liquid Fuels 
a) Liquid flow meter like rotameter etc. 


b) By expressing the difference in volume of the fuel 
supply tank. Measurement of the temperature and 
density of the fuel at time of testing should also be 
taken at the flow measuring point. 


C-1.3 For Solid Fuels 


Measurement of the mass of fuel added to combustion 
chamber shall be done. Level of fuel in the combustion 
chamber shall be maintained as near constant as 
practicable. 


C-2 THE DEFINITION 
FUELS 


OF QUALITY OF 


The heat value of a unit of electricity shall be taken 
as 3600 kJ. The gross heat value of gaseous and solid 
fuels and the gross heat value and specific gravity 
of liquid fuels shall be determined by analysis from 
a sample of the fuel used following the methods of 
IS 16196 : 2015. 


C-3 MEASUREMENT OF CONDITIONS OF 
AIR TO BE MADE DURING TEST 


The conditions of the ambient air and the exhaust air 
shall be determined from measurements made of the 
dry bulb temperature and the wet bulb or dew point 
temperature at the main air inlets and outlets of the 
dryer respectively. The temperature of the drying air 
shall be measured as near as practicable to the entry 
of the food grains to the dryer and the temperature 
of the air meant for cooling shall be measured at the 
cooling fan inlet. The barometric pressure has also to 
be measured. 


C-3.1 From the above measurements, the values of 
relative humidity and absolute humidity can be arrived 
at by using standard psychrometric chart and a Mollier 
diagram. 


C-3.2 Variation in temperatures are liable to exist 
across a section of air stream and in order to obtain 
mean values the measuring sections shall be considered 
as being divided into equal areas and measurements 
necessary to derive the condition of air shall be made at 
the center of each area. Where automatic recording of 
temperature is not possible, sets of measurements shall 
be made at frequent intervals and average values for the 
test run should be indicated. 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX D 


( Clause 8.1 ) 


AIR DENSITY 


D-1 The density of the dry air in an air/water mixture 
(D) and the density of the mixture (D1), is to be 
calculated by the following: 


_ 0.348 (b-z) 


Kg/m 
T +273 a 


_ 0.348 (b-z) (1- dr) 
T +273 


DI Kg/m’ 
Where, 

b = barometric pressure, in MPa; 

z = Vapour pressure of water, in MPa; 

T = temperature, in °C, and 


dr = relative density of water vapour compared 
with air at same temperature and pressure 
that is 0.622. 


D-1.1 In this Annex the absolute value of density is not 
used directly and in normally small in comparison with 
b for all practical purposes: 

D, u b (T, +273) 

D, b (T, +273) 


Where, the suffixes £ and c relate to test and specified 
conditions respectively. 


D-2 Ina given system of fan and airways with constant 
fan speed and varying density it is assumed that the 
volume delivered is constant and the pressure is directly 
proportional to density thus the power required for the 
fan and the mass rate of flow of air are both directly 
proportional to the density. 


D-2.1 The changes in air density due to temperature 
changes and changes in absolute humidity in a system 
shall be neglected. The effective density is thus the 
density at the inlet of the main fan. In calculating 
density, the temperature at the inlet of the main fan 
shall be used, that is, ambient temperature, hot air 
temperature or exhaust temperature according to the 
location of the fan. The dry bulb temperature and the 
relative humidity of the ambient air shall be measured 
near the main air intake of the dryer, the measuring 
instruments being shielded from thermal radiation 
from the dryer. The weighted mean value of relative 
humidity over a period is that corresponding to a mean 
absolute humidity at mean dry bulb temperature of the 
air over that period. 


D-2.2 With dryers with controlled fuel rate and with 
the main fan handling hot air, it will be necessary to 
calculate the approximate temperature at the fan by the 
following: 


_ B (Ta +273) 


= T 
“o b (T, +273) | = 


+T ae © 


Where, 


T., = Temperature of hot air corresponding to 
specified conditions, °C; 


T, = Temperature of hot air on test; 


T,, = Ambient temperature on test; and 
b,b, as given under D-1.1 


D-2.3 Where the main fan handles exhaust air, 
differences in density due to differences in exhaust 
temperature between test and specified conditions shall 
be neglected. 


D-3 CORRECTIONS TO EVAPORATION 
RATE 


D-3.1 Method A is based on the assumption that for 
dryers with beds of grains thick in relation to the mass 
flow of air through them, the exhaust relative humidity 
tends to be substantially controlled by the moisture 
content of the grain from which the air leaves. As the 
correction is made to evaporation rate assuming only 
slight changes in input and output moisture content it 
follows that, Rce = Rte. 


For continuous and batch dryers it is further assumed 
that the ratio of the increase of total heat of the drying 
air from ambient to exhaust states under test conditions 
to that under specified ambient conditions, is the same 
as the ratio of the rates of fuel consumption by the 
air heater under the two conditions; some account is, 
therefore, taken of losses but the contribution of the 
fan to air heating is neglected. For in-silo dryers, where 
the grain bed is intrinsically thick Method A always 
applies, the temperature rise is always small so that 
corrections are based on drying at constant total heat. 
For in-silo dryers the contribution of the fan heat to 
drying cannot be neglected and the calculations are 
included for the amount of drying that takes place even 
when the heaters are switched off. 


D-3.2 Method B is based on the empirical formula 
proposed by Morris Thomas and applicable to dryers in 
which the exhaust relative humidity is not substantially 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


controlled by the moisture content of the grain from D-3.3 Summary of Symbols Used 
which the air leaves. Suffixes used for more than one symbol conform to the 


If T, = hot air temperature, °C following pattern: 


AM DAM | 
Log ee | = 0.0202 7, — 0.701 Log ar =0.0202 T, -0.701 
a Lm j] 
Where, [ AM, | 
AM = mean drying rate percent per hour (dry Log GM SET 
basis), and nz 
G „= relative mass air flow rate kg/h/kg grain (dry [ AM, ] AM 
basis). Log Guar — Log Gus = 0.0202 (T, -T,) 
D-3.2.1 Jn Dryers with Controlled Hot Air Temperatures Bi = 
p 0.414 
AM G 
I =I cm = 
ch th Log AM. d G | 0.0202 (T-T) 
AM. AM, = 
Log Goat = Log Goat E O 
i = Log = d2 | =0.0202 (T, -T,,) 
AM, Go. Ls : 
AM = Gos 
i = Where, 
The amount of dry matter is constant from test to c= value corresponding to specified ambient 
specified conditions: conditions; 
da t= value corresponding to ambient conditions on 
E, 7 D, test; 
E u D a = ambient; 
t t 
e = exhaust; 
D-3.2.2 In Dryers with Controlled Fuel Rate h = hot air (inlet); and 


T = hot air (inlet) temperature on test. 


ch 


D, o 
Ty =F (Ly —T,)+25%C 


IS 8108 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 


Indian council of Agriculture Research, New Delhi 
CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 
Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 


Central Institute of Post Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, Ludhiana 


Central Tuber Crops Research Institute, Thiruananthpuram 


Department of Agricultural Process Engineering (TNAU), 


Coimbatore 
Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola 
Essen Multipack Ltd, Rajkot 
Indian Council of Research, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology 


Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, Bangalore 


Indian Institute of Pulses Research, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow 
Mecto Engineers, Ludhiana 

Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi 


National Committee on Plasticulture Application in 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training & Testing 
Institute, Hissar 


OSAW AGRO Industries Pvt Ltd, Ambala 


OSAW Industrial Products Pvt Ltd, Ambala 

Post Harvest Technology Centre, Coimbatore (TNAU) 
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

The Solvent Extractors Association of India 

CIAE Bhopal (In personal capacity) 

BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Dr K. ALAGUSUNDARAM, (Chairman) 
Dr M. K. GARG 
Dr MANOHAR B 


Dr P. G. PariL 
Dr V. G. AruUDE (Alternate) 


HEAD, AGRO PRODUCE PROCESSING DIVISION 


DIRECTOR 


Dr S. K. CHAKRABARTI 


Dr S. GANPATHY 


Dr P. A. BORKAR 

SHRI SHAILDIP WAGH 

Dr KANCHAN K SINGH 
Dr SHANMUGA SUNDARAM 


Dr S. C. MANDHAR 
Dr G. SENTHIL Kumaran (Alternate) 


Dr PRASOON VERMA 

Dr AKHILESH KUMAR SINGH 
SHRI JAGMOHAN SINGH 

Deputy Commissioner (M/C-I) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI JAGDISH SINGH 
SHRI VIJAY SONKUSARE (Alternate) 


SHRI Vinop H. KALBANDE 

Dr R. VISVANATHAN 

HEAD (Deptts oF Foop PROCESS AND ENGG) 
Suri AKSHAY Mop! 


Dr S. D. DESHPANDE, Ex-PS AND HEAD 


Suri P. RAJESH, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (FAD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 
ScIENTIST ‘B’, BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 20 (12521). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


