IRT HAF IS 16380 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


UT — Hat h fet A a 
ia ae ee ara ees Et 
ustano Afà 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Geosynthetics — Method of Test for 
Measuring Pullout Resistance 
of Geosynthetics in Soil 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2020 Price Group 4 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Geosynthetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This Indian standard was first published in 2017. This standard has been revised to update COi factor along with 
the calculation of co-efficient of Interaction from the pull out resistance which is needed by the user to understand 
the behaviour of geogrid simulating the field condition with respect to frictional characteristics between soil and 
geogrid. For calculating the COi it is necessary to find out properties of soil used for shear angle and co-efficient of 
friction by direct shear method. Thus in this standard, the test methods for direct shear test for soil is also included 
as reference. Apart from this, soil compaction in the pull out box, depends on the moisture level, density and hence 
density and moisture determination test standards (Proctor density and moisture content) has also been included 
in this standard. 


The co-efficient of interaction shall lie in between 0.8 to 1.0 for better performance of geosynthetics. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised y. 


IS 16380 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — METHOD OF TEST FOR 
MEASURING PULLOUT RESISTANCE 
OF GEOSYNTHETICS IN SOIL 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This test method is used to determine the performance 
related property of a geosynthetic and other 
geosynthetic products (geogrid, geostrips, geotextiles 
etc) in terms of resistance to pullout force occurring 
due to the shearing, buried under compacted soil using 
a laboratory pullout box. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
SP45 and IS 13321 (Part 1) in addition to the following 
shall apply. 


3.1 Apertures — The openings in between transverse 
and longitudinal ribs of geogrids which enable soil 
interlocking to occur. 


3.2 Testing Condition — Air maintained at a 
relative humidity of 65 + 5 percent and a temperature 
of 25 + 2°C. 
NOTE — Any other atmosphere for testing may be agreed as 
per the agreement between the parties concerned. 


3.3 Cross-machine Direction — The direction in the 
plane of the geosynthetic perpendicular to the direction 
of manufacture. 


3.4 Machine Direction — The direction in the 
plane of the geosynthetic parallel to the direction of 
manufacture. 


3.5 Failure — A point at which a material looses its 
capability of functioning as per its intended use. 


3.6 Geosynthetic — A polymeric material used with 
soil, rock, earth, or other geo-technical engineering 


related material as an integral part of a man-made 
project, structure, or system. 


3.7 Junction — The point where geogrid ribs 
are intermingled in order to provide structure and 
dimensional stability. 


3.8 Pullout — The displacement of a geosynthetic 
over its entire buried (in compacted soil) length until 
ultimate pullout occurring with uniform displacement 
over the entire buried length (in soil). 


3.9 Pullout Force (kN) — Force required to pull a 
geosynthetic out of the compacted soil while pulling 
out horizontally at specified strain rate. 


3.10 Pullout Resistance (kN/m) — The pullout force 
per width of geosynthetic measured at a specified Load 
(stress) and displacement rate (strain rate). 


3.11 Rib — An element (which is a part of net like 
structure) of a geogrid which are either in the machine 
or cross-machine direction. 


3.12 Ultimate Pullout Resistance (kN/m) — The 
maximum pullout resistance of geosynthetics (force 
per width) measured during a pullout test. 


4 WORKING PRINCIPLE 


4.1 In this test method, a geosynthetics is sandwiched 
in between two layers of soil, (with the desired 
compressive stress) and a horizontal force is applied 
to the geosynthetics. The force required to pull the 
geosynthetics out of the compacted soil is recorded. 


4.2 Pullout resistance (in terms of force per width) is 
determined by dividing the maximum load by the test 
specimen width. 


4.3 The required compressive stresses (as desired 
by the user) is applied on to the top soil layer and 
geosynthetics under load is pulled horizontally at a 
constant rate of strain. 


4.4 If required same procedure is adopted for other 
rate of strain and stress. A Graph of pull out resistance 
versus applied normal stress is plotted. 


IS 16380 : 2020 


4.5 A Co-efficient of Interaction (COi) is determined 
from pull out resistance and shear strength of soil 
(see 9.5). 


5 APPARATUS 


5.1 Pullout Box 


A rigid box opening at top consisting of three 
plates, front plate with a split opening for pulling 
geosynthetics sample through it with specimen 
fastening arrangement, a bottom plate with load 
cell and a load transfer device (hydraulic jack). The 
top plate is fastened to main box by perpendicular 
thick bar placed on two sleeves fixed on main box 
and resting on top plate. A typical box is shown 
in Fig. 1. 


5.1.1 The box shall be rectangular with minimum 
dimensions as 650 mm long, 450 mm wide and 
300 mm deep. The box shall allow for at least 
500 mm embedment length. Inner side of box shall 
have minimum friction. 
NOTE — To minimize side wall friction a smooth layer of 
smooth geomembrane may be used. 


5.1.2 At the exit point through which geosynthetics 
is pulled off, metal plates shall be fitted along with 
friction less rollers to reduce stress on door and to 
transfer the force into the soil. For uniform distribution 
of load an air bag or a smoothed geomembrane may 
be used. 


A 


7 NAR 
Load cell pa % + ER ; 


Load Cell with hydraulic compactor 


5.2 Loading Device (Compressive Stress) 


The compressive stress applied to the upper layer of soil 
above the geosynthetics shall be constant and uniform 
throughout the test. The stress shall be controlled 
through software to get desired stress constantly 
throughout the testing period. The loading device shall 
be capable of applying stress up to 300 kPa. 


5.3 Pullout Device 


The pullout system shall be able to apply the pullout 
force (with accuracy of + 0.5 percent of total load) at a 
constant rate of displacement (1 mm/min + 10 percent 
or as specified by the user), slow enough to dissipate 
soil pore pressures. The applied force shall be at the 
same level of the (geosynthetics) specimen. 


5.4 Sample Clamping Devices 


Asuitable clamping device is required to avoid slippage, 
break or crushing to sample with swivel motion to 
allow sample to align itself for uniform tension. 


6 SAMPLING 


6.1 Test Specimens 


6.1.1 Sampling of geosynthetic shall be done as per 
IS 14706. 


6.1.2 Cut specimens from the laboratory sample 
(received from the user) with sufficient length as per 
box size and width with respect to clamping width (not 
more than 300 mm and in case of geogrid covering 


Top Plate 


Geogrid sample 


Fic. 1 Putt OUT APPARATUS 


minimum 3 ribs). Take three specimens if pullout force 

versus normal stress analysis is required or as agreed 

upon by the supplier and user. 
NOTE — The pullout characteristics of some geosynthetics 
may depend on the direction tested. In some applications, it 
may be necessary to perform pullout tests in both the machine 
and the cross-machine directions. For example in case of uni- 
axial geogrid, specimen shall be taken in machine direction 
only whereas for bi-axial geogrid, specimens shall be taken in 
both directions. 


7 SAMPLE CONDITIONING 


The testing is done in standard atmospheric condition 
or as selected by the user or mutually agreed upon by 
the user and the testing agency. 


8 PROCEDURE 


8.1 Pullout Box Preparation 


Determine the moisture content and density of 
soil being used as per IS 2720 (Part 9) and IS 2720 
(Part 3/Sec 1 or Part 3/Sec 2) respectively, prior to 
testing. Similarly, carry out direct shear test on soil as 
per IS 2720 (Part 13) or IS 2720 (Part 39/Sec 1 or Part 39/ 
Sec 1). Determine the amount of soil necessary to place 
in the lower half of the pullout box. The compaction 
of soil shall be done using suitable compaction device. 
The bottom layer of soil shall be slightly above the 
bottom half of the exit of box (approximately 10 mm) 
to avoid dragging of the geosynthetic on the exit. Level 
the soil surface. Compaction shall be at 90 percent 
modified Proctor density and the moisture content at 
the time of compaction may be the optimum moisture 
content. 


8.2 Laying Geosynthetic 


Make sure that clamping device shall be at extreme end 
(starting point) inside the box and measuring device 
reads zero. Clamp the sample (over compacted soil) 
inside the pull out box (as shown in Fig.1). To avoid 
damage to the specimen in a clamp, padding may be 
used. Connect (with sample) clamp to the pullout force 
device. See that the sample is laid straight without 
buckling. 


8.3 Putting soil over Geosynthetic 


Pour the desired amount of soil on top of geosynthetic 
to the required level. Manually compact it and level the 
surface. Place loading metal plate. A rubber foam or 
air bag may be used between soil and metal plate for 
alignment and uniform pressure distribution. 


8.4 Apply Normal Compressive Stress 


Normal stress or as suggested by the user is applied 
before starting the test using hydraulic loading 
device. Any change in pressure during testing shall be 
noted. 


IS 16380 : 2020 


8.5 Testing 


Before starting the test, make sure about complete 
connections of the pullout tester. Select the strain 
rate of displacement or as specified by the user. 
Feed necessary information before starting of testing 
like, soil details like source, moisture content, shear 
strength and angle, density and sample details like 
type of geosynthetics, source or user’s name, project 
name. Sample code or product code (user’s code and 
laboratory code). Start the test (pulling of embedded 
sample). The load and displacement will be shown in 
computer. 


8.5.1 Start the machine through software and continue 
pulling until the geosynthetic fails or until pullout 
occurs, or to a predetermined displacement is reached. 
Minimum displacement of 75 mm may be used to 
terminate the test. 


8.6 After completion of Test 


Release the load and disassemble the loading and 
pulling device. Observe the uniformity of deformation 
of geosynthetic sample. 


8.7 Same procedure shall be repeated as required under 
additional normal compressive stress and strain rate. 


9 CALCULATIONS 


9.1 Determine stress applied due to the weight of soil 
above the geosynthetic. 


9.2 The pull out force is automatically available 
through test software which is reported in Load per 
width (kN/m). Add the stress due to the soil above the 
sample which will be the total stress on sample. 


9.3 The pull out resistance is not sufficient for the user 
to decide about the product to be used for specified 
application. The coefficient of interaction is equally 
important factor to understand the product behaviour 
in used condition. The Coefficient of Interaction (COi) 
indicates the frictional characteristics between soil 
and geosynthetic (like geotextile, geogrid, geostrip 
etc). 


9.4 Before calculating COi it is required to find out 
residual soil shear strength and angle of friction 
obtained from direct shear test. 


9.5 The coefficient of interaction (CO1), Ci is determined 
using following equation: 


Ci=(P.W/2.W.L) / (8.tand + c) 


P/ 2L 
Ci = ——____ 
(ö.tand) + c 


IS 16380 : 2020 


Where, 
Specimen width, in m (for geogrid it can 
be calculated from ratio of numbers of ribs 
per meter and actual numbers of ribs in test 
specimen); 
c= Residual soil shear strength obtained from 
direct shear test [IS 2720 (Part 13) or IS 2720 
(Part 39)], load/ area, in kN/m?; 
P= Pull out resistance, load / width, in kN/m; 
= Specimen embedded length, in m; 
= Normal stress, load/area, in k N/m?; and 
¢ = Residual soil shear angle obtained from direct 
shear test (degree) tan d. 


Example: 

W L 9 g c p COi 
mm mm N/mm? N/mm? kN/m 

50 600 0.0981 0.6 0.0981 17.462 0.927083 


10 REPORT 


10.1 The report shall include the following: 
a) Identification and description of geosynthetic 
sample(s); 
b) Dimensions of geosynthetic specimen within the 
pullout box; 
c) Test conditions; 
d) Any deviation from standard procedure; 


e) Information of soil including soil characteristics, 
moisture content, unit weight, grain size, 
shear strength and angle and other identifying 
information; 


f) Normal stress, strain rate; 
g) Plot(s) of pullout resistance versus normal stress; 


h) Description of the geogrid grade and type, 
manufacture’s name, specimen condition before 
and after testing; and 


j) Results : Pull out resistance, kN/m and COi 
(Coefficient of Interaction ). 


IS No. 


2720 


(Part 3/Sec 1) 
: 1980 


(Part 3/Sec 2) 
: 1980 


(Part 9) : 1992 


(Part 13) 
: 1986 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


IS 16380 : 2020 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Methods of test for soils 


Determination of specific 
gravity, Section 1 Fine grained 
soils (first revision) 
Determination of specific 
gravity, Section 2 Fine, medium 
and coarse grained soils (first 
revision) 

Determination of dry density- 
moisture content relation by 
constant mass of soil method 
(first revision) 

Direct 
revision) 


shear test (second 


IS No. 


(Part 39/Sec 1) 
: 1977 


(Part 39/Sec 2) 
: 1979 


13321 (Part 1) 
: 1992 


14706 : 1999 


SP 45 : 1988 


Title 


Direct shear test for soils 
containing gravel, Section 1 
Laboratory test 


Direct shear test for soils 
containing gravel, Section 2 
In-situ shear test 


Glossary of terms for 
geosynthetics: Part 1 Terms used 
in materials and properties 


Geotextiles — Sampling and 
preparation of test specimens 


Handbook on glossary of textile 
terms 


IS 16380 : 2020 


ANNEX B 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association Council, 
Coimbatore 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Best Geotechnique Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Charankattu Coir Mfg Co (P) Ltd, Kerala 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


DKTE Centre of Excellence in Nonwovens, Ichalkaranji 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Geosynthetics Testing Services Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


ICAR- National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering & 
Technology, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar 

Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 

Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkatta 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


International Geosynthetics Society, India Chapter, 
New Delhi 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
Suri JIGAR Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH NAIK 
Dr D. ANITA RAVINDRANATH 
SHRIMATI SUMY SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Dr R. CHITRA 
Suri MANIsH Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri C. R. DEVRAJ 

Suri C. D. ATHUL Ras (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr SWAPAN GHOSH 

Pror (Dr) A. K. SAMANTHA (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIKET S. BHUTE 
SHRI A. K. SINHA 

SHRI Manos Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI RAJENDRA GHADGE (Alternate) 
Dr DEEPAK MANJUNATH 


SHRI MANIK BHOWMICK 
Dr SanJoY DEBNATH (Alternate) 


PROF AMIT PRASHANT 
Pror A. K. GHOSH 


Dr MAHUYA GHOSH 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate) 


Dr Anup RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI Rucuita Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, 
Navi Mumbai 


Megaplast India Pvt Ltd, Daman 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Thane 


National Highways Authority of India, Ghaziabad 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Texel Industries Limited, Gandhinagar 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


In personal capacity [Bhakta Nivas, 12-1-170/46 P, 
Hanuman Nagar, Jaipuri Colony, Nagole, 
Hyderabad 500 068] 


In personal capacity [104, Kanchanban, A. W. Vartak 
Marg, Vile Parle (East), Mumbai 400 057] 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16380 : 2020 


Representative(s) 
Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
Suri C. V. RAJESH 
SHRI HEMENDRA BEHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR 


Dr VISHAL RAMESH THOMBARE 
SHRI MANDAR BHALCHANDRA PINGLE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH PRAKASH SINGH 
Suri Mupit GARG (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. Roy 
SHRI SOUMYADIPTA DATTA (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAABH GOENKA 
SHRI PRAVEEN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH SHARMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
SHRI SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R MEHTA (ALTERNATIVE) 


SHRI V. K. PATIL 
DRANJAN K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


Dr G. V. Rao 


SHRI V. N. GORE 


Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (14512). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


