Waa HAF IS 16533 : 2016 
Indian Standard 


fren waea wone — Afh 
Wi co fore Tore cat 
nayat 


Education Management System — 
Quality Requirements for 
Educational Organizations 


ICS 03.120.10; 03.180 


© BIS 2016 


mA AM E 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM AJ, 9 age WHC Í, we feeei-110002 
i MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2016 Price Group 7 


Education, Education Services and Other Related Services Sectional Committee, MSD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Education, 
Education Services and Other Related Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and 
Systems Division Council. 


All educational organizations, large and small, have an established way or system of providing education service. 
An education management system is the way an educational organization directs and controls its activities associated 
with establishment of its policy and objectives for providing quality education and then achieving these objectives. 


The adoption of an education management system should be a strategic decision of an educational organization. 
The design and implementation of an organization’s education management system is influenced by its learning 
environment, changes in that environment, or risks associated with 


a) its varying needs, 

b) its educational objectives, 

c) service it provides and competence required, 
d) its processes, and 

e) its size and organizational structure. 


In general, a quality management system is about identification of various processes (activities), why and how 
these are performed and documenting those processes, which are necessary for effective operation of the system. 
Further, as objective evidence some records have also to be established and maintained. 


Education management system helps an educational organization to build in systems so that it is able to provide 
quality education consistently which result in enhancing students’ satisfaction and competitiveness. 


The first step necessary in establishment of an education management system is the commitment and involvement 
of top management. If the top management is not committed, then the intended benefits of establishing this system 
cannot be realized. It is not the purpose this standard to impose a totally new way of managing the education 
business. One should integrate this standard into its existing practices. The educational organization needs to 
identify what this standard requires and how these requirements relate to activities of the organization. This 
comparison should identify the areas requiring further development of education management system. Probably 
many of the requirements are already being met or perhaps partially met. For example, when placing job 
advertisements for teachers, the job description, are written down; when an instruction is written on how some 
activity is to be carried out, a work instruction is being created. Similar other examples may include the students’ 
assessment plans, etc. 


Having determined how the requirements of this standard apply to an educational organization, the next step is to 
look at the activities and record what is actually being done. It has to be seen which requirements of this standard, 
are already being met and those which are not. It is important to realize that there should be no reason to substantially 
change the way the organization is functioning. 


After doing this gap analysis and knowing the quantum of work, it has to be decided as to how much can be done 
within the organization? This depends upon availability of competent personnel, time and other resources. This 
will determine whether external assistance is required and if yes, to what extent and in which areas? 


For the gaps identified, it has to be determined whether the documentation is compulsory as per requirements of 
this standard, for example, documentation of “Educational Quality Policy”, “Procedures on corrective action”, 
“Preventive action”, “Document control”, etc. If some documentation is required, responsibility should be assigned. 
It is important that all people in the organization are involved in this process and one individual should not be 
made responsible for carrying out all jobs. It should also be ensured that documentation as per the requirements of 
this standard and also those necessary for effective operation of the education practices are established. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 16533 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


EDUCATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — QUALITY 
REQUIREMENTS FOR EDUCATIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 General 


This standard specifies quality requirements for an 
Education Management System where an educational 
organization 


a) needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently 
provide education service that meets students’ 
requirement conforming with applicable 
statutory and regulatory requirements, and 

b) aims to enhance the satisfaction of students 
and other key stakeholders through effective 
application of its education system, including 
processes for continual improvement of the 
system and assurance of conformity to 
students’ and other key stakeholders’ 
requirements and applicable statutory and 
regulatory requirements. 


1.2 Application 


All requirements of this Standard are generic and are 
intended to be applicable to all educational 
organizations, regardless of type, size and education 
service provided. 


Where any requirement(s) of this standard cannot be 
applied due to the nature of an educational organization 
and its service, this can be considered for exclusion. 


Where exclusions are made, claims of conformity to 
this standard are not acceptable unless these exclusions 
are limited to requirements within 7, and such 
exclusions do not affect the organization’s ability or 
responsibility to provide education service that meets 
student and applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent edition of this standard. 


IS No. Title 
IS/ISO 9000: Quality management systems — 
2005 Fundamentals and vocabulary 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS/ISO 9000 shall apply, in addition to the following: 


3.1 Education — A form of learning in which the 
knowledge, skills, values, beliefs and behaviour of a 
person or group of people are transferred to learners 
through teaching, training and/or research. 


NOTE — Education takes place in formal or informal settings. 


3.2 Educational Organization — Any person or group 
of people and facilities providing education. 


Examples: 


Primary/upper primary grade schools, secondary/senior 
secondary grade schools, undergraduate collegiate 
schools, universities, post-graduate schools/institutions, 
trade and vocational schools, industrial training 
facilities, professional development courses, open and 
distance learning (self-study programmes), continuing 
education, military academics, technical institutes, etc. 
NOTE — All educational and training organizations and 
courses, whether on-site or off-site, are within the scope of this 
standard. 
3.3 Education Service — The results generated by 
activities at the interface between the educational 
organization and the student and by organization’s 
internal activities, to meet students’ educational 
requirements. 


3.4 Learning — Acquiring knowledge, understanding, 
skills, preferences, values and behaviour. 


3.5 Learner — Person engaged in learning. 


3.6 Student — Learner who attends an educational 
institution. 


3.7 Management System — Set of interrelated or 
interacting elements of an organization to establish 
policies and objectives and processes to achieve those 
objectives. 


NOTES 


1 A management system can address a single discipline or 
several disciplines. 


IS 16533 : 2016 


2 The system elements include the organization’s structure, roles 
and responsibilities, planning and operation. 


3 The scope of a management system may include the whole of 
the organization, specific and identified functions of the 
organization, specific and identified sections of the 
organization, or one or more functions across a group of 
organizations. 


3.8 Top Management — Person or group of people, 
who directs and controls an educational organization 
at the highest level. 


NOTE — Top management looks after the day-to-day activities 
of the organization. 


3.9 Educational Quality Policy — Overall intentions 
and direction of an educational organization to quality 
as formally expressed by its top management. 


3.10 Educational Quality Objectives — Something 
sought, or aimed for, related to organization’s education 
service quality. 


3.11 Key Process — Process essential to the 
educational organization, its mission, objectives and 
education services. 


3.12 Stakeholder (Interested Party) — Individual, 
group or organization with a direct or indirect interest 
in the educational organization, including its 
management and outcomes, or the processes involved, 
or both. 


Example: 


Students, parents/guardians, owners, people in an 
organization, associates, facilitators, employers, 
sponsors or society. 


3.13 Key Stakeholders — All users and beneficiaries 
of the products and services of an educational 
organization. They consist of learners and all other 
interested parties whom the institution is obliged to 
serve by virtue of its objectives. 


Example : 


Students, parents/guardians, owners, staff members, 
sponsors. 


NOTE — This term does not imply a commercial relationship. 


3.14 Associate — Entity or person not employed by 
the educational organization, but working under its 
auspices to provide education services. 


Example 


Organizations or independent contractors, such as 
instructors, instructional designers. evaluators, project 
managers, or career counsellors 


NOTE — An associate is not a staff member of the educational 
organization. 


3.15 Sponsor — Organization or individual that 
provides financial or other support for the student or 


that has a vested interest in the outcome of the education 
service. 


NOTE — This includes corporations, government agencies, 
relatives, employers, etc. 


3.16 Facilitator — Person who works with students 
to assist them with learning. 


NOTE — A facilitator is also often referred to as a teacher, a 
trainer, a coach, a tutor, or a mentor. 


3.17 Competency — Knowledge, understanding, skill 
or attitude that is observable or measurable, or both 
observable and measurable, which is applied and 
mastered in a given work situation and in professional 
development or in personal development, or in both 
professional and personal development. 


3.18 Curriculum — Plan prepared by the educational 
organization which describes the aims, content, learning 
outcomes, teaching and learning methods, assessment 
processes, etc, relating to education process. 


3.19 Evaluation — Normative as well as self- 
referenced approach to analysing the learning process, 
learning indicators or learning outcomes measured 
against the learning goals. 


3.20 Transfer of Learning — Application of what has 
been learnt during the education service to other 
situations 


4 EDUCATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


4.1 General Requirements 


The educational organization shall establish, document, 
implement and maintain a management system for 
education services and continually improve its 
effectiveness in accordance with the requirements of 
this standard. 


The educational organization shall 


a) determine processes for the education 
management system and their application 
throughout the organization (see 1.2); 


b) determine the sequence and interaction of 
these processes; 


c) determine criteria and methods needed to 
ensure that both the operation and control of 
these processes are effective; 


d) ensure the availability of resources and 
information necessary to support the operation 
and monitoring of these processes; 

e) monitor, measure (where applicable), and 
analyse these processes; and 

f) implement actions necessary to achieve 
planned results and continual improvement of 
these processes. 


These processes shall be managed by educational 
organization in accordance with the requirements of 
this standard. 


Where an educational organization chooses to 
outsource any process that affects conformity to 
requirements, the organization shall ensure control over 
such processes. The type and extent of control to be 
applied to these outsourced processes shall be defined 
within the education management system. 


NOTES 


1 Processes needed for the education management system 
referred to above include processes for administrative activities, 
provision of resources, lesson planning, curriculum mapping, 
teaching-learnings; grading, testing, student performance, 
remedials, analysis and improvement. 
2 An outsourced process is identified as one needed for the 
educational organization’s education management system but 
chosen to be performed by a party external to the educational 
organization. In case it has to do with a learning service, the 
external party would be a learning service provider. 
3 Ensuring control over outsourced processes does not absolve 
the educational organization of the responsibility of conformity 
to students’ requirements, and to statutory and regulatory 
requirements. The type and extent of control to be applied to 
the outsourced processes can be influenced by factors such as 
a) the potential impact of the outsourced process on the 
educational organization’s capability to provide education 
service that conforms to requirements; 
b) the degree to which the control for the process is shared; 
and 
c) the capability of achieving the necessary control through 
the application of 7.4. 


4.2 Documentation Requirements 
4.2.1 General 


The education management system documentation shall 
include the organization’s vision, mission, values and 


a) documented statements of an educational 
quality policy and educational quality 
objectives; 

b) a quality manual; 

c) documented procedures and records required 
by this standard; and 


d) documents, including records, determined by 
the educational organization to be necessary 
to ensure the effective planning, operation and 
control of its processes. 

NOTES 

1 Where the term “documented procedure” appears within this 

standard, this means that the procedure is established, 

documented, implemented and maintained. A single document 

may address the requirements for one or more procedures. A 

requirement for a documented procedure may be covered by 

more than one document 

2 The extent of the education management system 

documentation can differ from one educational organization to 

another due to 

a) the size of the educational organization and type of 
activities, 


IS 16533 : 2016 


b) the complexity of processes and their interactions, and 
c) the competence of personnel. 


3. The documentation can be in any form or type of medium. 
4.2.2 Quality Manual 


The educational organization shall establish and 
maintain a quality manual that includes 


a) educational quality policy and educational 
quality objectives; 

b) background of the organization; 

b) organization structure; 

c) linkages/affiliations/recognitions; 

d) profile of senior management; 

e) facilities; 

f) the scope of the education management 
system, including details of, and justification 
for, any exclusions (see 1.2); 

g) the documented procedures established for the 
education management system, or reference 
to them; and 

h) a description of the interaction between the 


key processes of the education management 
system. 


Records and documents shall be available for tracking 
students’ progress on key educational measures and 
assessments. 


4.2.3 Control of Documents 


Documents required by the education management 
system shall be controlled. 


Records are a special type of document and shall be 
controlled according to the requirements given in 4.2.4. 


A documented procedure shall be established to define 
the controls needed 


a) to approve documents for adequacy prior to 
issue, 

b) to review and update as necessary and re- 
approve documents, 

c) to ensure that changes and the current revision 
status of documents are identified, 


d) to ensure that relevant versions of applicable 
documents are available at points of use, 


e) to ensure that documents remain legible and 
readily identifiable, 

f) to ensure that documents of external origin 
determined by the educational organization to 
be necessary for the planning and operation 
of the education management system are 
identified and their distribution controlled, and 

g) to prevent the unintended use of obsolete 


documents, and to apply suitable identification 
to them if they are retained for any purpose. 


IS 16533 : 2016 


4.2.4 Control of Records 


Records established to provide evidence of conformity 
to requirements and of the effective operation of the 
education management system shall be controlled. 


The educational organization shall establish a 
documented procedure to define the controls needed 
for the identification, storage, protection, retrieval, 
retention and disposition of records. 


Records shall remain legible, readily identifiable and 
retrievable. 


5 MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY 


5.1 Management Commitment 


Top management shall provide evidence of their 
commitment to the development and implementation 
of the education management system and to continually 
improve its effectiveness by 


a) communicating within the organization the 
importance of meeting interested party 
requirements, 

b) establishing the educational quality policy, 


c) ensuring that educational quality objectives 
are established, 


d) conducting management reviews, and 
e) ensuring the availability of resources. 


5.2 Student Focus 


Top management shall ensure that students’ and other 
key stakeholders’ requirements are determined and are 
met with the aim of enhancing their satisfaction 
(see 7.2.1 and 8.2.1). 


Faculty and management shall determine students’ 
educational requirements by integrating the requisites 
from educational accreditation bodies, professional 
societies, licensing agencies, communities, and other 
interested parties into curricular requirements that 
include learning outcomes and specific performance 
indicators. 


5.3 Educational Quality Policy 


The top management shall establish educational quality 
policy which, through the use of formal planning efforts 
and the provision of resources, shall support the 
educational organization’s vision, mission, values, 
goals, and strategies for achieving the goals. 


Top management shall ensure that the educational 
quality policy 
a) iS ap propriate to the purpose of the 
organization, 
b) includes a commitment to comply with 


educational requirements and continually 
improve the effectiveness of the education 
management system, 

c) provides a framework for establishing and 
reviewing educational quality objectives, 

d) is communicated and understood within the 
organization, and 


e) is reviewed, atleast annually, for continuing 
suitability. 


5.4 Planning 
5.4.1 Educational Quality Objectives 


Top management shall ensure that educational quality 
objectives, including those needed to meet the 
requirements for the education service [see 7.1 (a)], 
are established at relevant functions and levels within 
the educational organization. The educational quality 
objectives shall be measurable and consistent with the 
educational quality policy. 


5.4.2 Education Management System Planning 
Top management shall ensure that 


a) the planning of the education management 
system is carried out in order to meet the 
requirements given in 4.1, as well as the 
educational quality objectives, and 

b) the integrity of the education management 
system is maintained when changes to the 
education management system are planned 
and implemented. 


5.5 Responsibility, Authority and Communication 
5.5.1 Responsibility and Authority 


Top management shall ensure that responsibilities and 
authorities are defined and communicated within the 
educational organization. 


5.5.2 Management Representative 


Top management shall appoint a member of the 
educational organization’s management who, 
irrespective of other responsibilities, shall have 
responsibility and authority that include 


a) ensuring that processes needed for the 
education management system are established, 
implemented and maintained, 

b) reporting to top management on the 
performance of the education management 
system and any need for improvement, and 

c) ensuring the promotion of awareness of 
students’ and other key stakeholders’ 
requirements throughout the educational 
organization. 


NOTE — The responsibility of a management representative 
can include liaising with external parties on matters relating to 
the education management system. 


5.5.3 Internal Communication 


Top management shall ensure that appropriate 
communication processes are established within the 
educational organization and that communication takes 
place regarding the effectiveness of the education 
management system. 


5.6 Management Review 
5.6.1 General 


Top management shall review the organization’s 
education management system, at planned intervals 
(atleast once in a year), to ensure its continuing 
suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. This review 
shall include assessing opportunities for improvement 
and the need for changes to the education management 
system, including the educational quality policy and 
educational quality objectives. 


When new or revised curricula are adopted, the 
education management system shall be reviewed by top 
management to evaluate any impact on existing 
education service and support systems, student 
satisfaction, assessment criteria, and evaluation results. 


Records from management reviews shall be maintained 
(see 4.2.4). 


5.6.2 Review Input 


The input to management review shall include 
information on 


a) results of audits, 
b) student and other key stakeholders’ feedback, 


c) process performance and education service 
conformity, 


d) status of preventive and corrective actions, 


e) follow-up actions from previous management 
reviews, 


f) changes that could affect the education 
management system, 


g) recommendations for improvement, and 
h) students’ performance data (results). 


5.6.3 Review Output 


The output from the management review shall include 
any decisions and actions related to 


a) improvement in the extent to which planned 
activities are realized and planned results are 
achieved by the education management system 
and its processes, 


b) improvement of the education service related 
to students’ requirements, and 


IS 16533 : 2016 


c) resource needs 
6 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 


6.1 Provision of Resources 


The educational organization shall determine and 
provide the resources needed 


a) to implement and maintain the education 
management system and continually improve 
its effectiveness, and 


b) to enhance students’ and other key 
stakeholder’s satisfaction by meeting their 
educational requirements. 


Examples 


a) establish information channels for identifying 
resources needed; 

b) plan resource acquisition and verify that 
delivered resources are suitable and fit for use; 


c) provide procured resources effectively to the 
teaching staff, the administrative staff, 
employees, and students; and 

d) evaluate the effectiveness of resources, 
including processes performing below 
acceptable levels. 


NOTE — Instructors identify and request resources when and 
where needed to support effective education service delivery. 


6.2 Human Resources 
6.2.1 General 


Personnel performing work affecting conformity to 
educational quality requirements shall be competent 
on the basis of appropriate education, training, skills 
and experience. 


NOTE — Conformity to educational quality requirements can 
be affected directly or indirectly by personnel performing any 
task within the education management system. 


6.2.2 Competence, Training and Awareness 
The educational organization shall 


a) determine the necessary competence for 
personnel performing work affecting 
conformity to education service quality 
requirements; 


b) where applicable, provide training or take 
other actions to achieve the necessary 
competence; 

c) evaluate the effectiveness of the actions taken; 
and 


d) ensure that its personnel are aware of the 
relevance and importance of their activities 
and how they contribute to the achievement 
of the educational quality objectives, and 


IS 16533 : 2016 


maintain appropriate records of education, 
training, skills and experience (see 4.2.4). 


6.3 Infrastructure 


The educational organization shall determine, provide 
and maintain the infrastructure needed to achieve 
conformity to education service quality requirements. 
Infrastructure includes, as applicable, 


a) buildings, workspace and associated utilities 
including facilities for differently abled 
learners; 

b) process equipment (both hardware and 
software); and 


c) supporting services (such as transport, 
communication or information systems). 


NOTES 


1 The infrastructure and equipment should meet applicable 
safety standards, such as, building safety, fire safety etc. 


2 Where appropriate, the transport facilities should meet 
applicable safety standards including regular maintenance and 
upkeep of vehicles. Special attention should be given to drivers 
and other support staff with regard to their skill, behaviour and 
health condition. 


3 Where appropriate, the establishment/organization should 
meet applicable standards of nutrition, safety and hygiene 
(preparing, storing and serving) for facilities like canteen. 


6.4 Work and Learning Environment 


The educational organization shall create and maintain 
psychologically safe and an inclusive environment 
conducive to work and learning. 


Assessments (formative and summative) shall be made, 
at least annually (preferably quarterly), of the degree 
to which adverse learning conditions prevented planned 
learning activities from being realised and planned 
learning results from being achieved. 


Outputs from these assessments shall be included in 
the management review (5.6.2) and serve as part of the 
basis for continual improvement (8.5). 


6.4.1 Health and Safety Policy 


The educational organization shall determine, maintain 
and comply with a Health and Safety policy towards a 
safe and healthy campus, that contributes to student, 
staff, and community well being: 


a) The policy shall address the improvement of 
working environment to promote a positive 
social and work climate including promotion 
of holistic health, healthy eating, concept of 
balanced diet and food safety, mental, 
emotional and spiritual well being 

b) It shall also address 


1) Gender sensitivity and safety issues 
related to females; 


2) Environmental sensitization; 


3) Health and sanitary services, management 
of infectious diseases; 


4) Prevention of habits like substance abuse) 
, including tobacco and alcohol; 

5) Prohibition of videography and 
photography; 

6) Emotional issues including cyber 
bullying, anger management, stress 
management; 

7) Theft, eve teasing, bullying, violent 
behaviour, abuse of technology; and 


8) Issues relating to children having special 
needs. 

c) The organization shall have a sound 
emergency response mechanism in place in 
order to deal effectively with emergent 
situations like natural disasters (such as, 
earthquakes, floods, cyclone), fire outbreaks, 
accidents, violence, falls, stampedes, incidents 
of hostage, kidnapping, terror attacks, suicide 
attempts, strikes, medical emergencies, 
management of epidemics, etc. An emergency 
response team shall be constituted for the 
purpose with requisite training and records 
maintained. 

d) The organization shall also have appropriate 
procedures and training for all staff members 
to implement emergency and crisis plans and 
handle such unforeseen situations. Mock drills 
at periodic intervals shall be conducted and 
records maintained. 


6.4.2 Environmental friendly practices shall be 
identified and followed, as appropriate. 


7 EDUCATION SERVICE REALIZATION 


Education service is the product category realized in 
educational organizations. The dominant element is 
information transacted in the context of knowledge 
facilitation, skills and development of competencies. 
NOTE — Service includes tangible products (for example 


classroom material, library materials, programmed instruction, 
and training delivered on compact disc etc). 


7.1 Planning of Education Service Realization 


Planning of education service realisation shall be 
consistent with the requirements of the other processes 
of the education management system (see 4.1). 


In planning the education service, the educational 
organization shall determine the following, as 
appropriate: 


a) educational quality objectives and educational 
quality requirements; 


b) the need to establish processes and documents, 
and to provide resources specific to the 
education service; 


c) required verification, validation, monitoring, 
measurement, inspection and test activities 
specific to the education service, and criteria 
for education service acceptance; and 


d) records needed to provide evidence that the 
education service realisation processes and 
resulting learning meet requirements (see 
4.2.4). 


The output of this planning shall be in a form suitable 
for the educational organization’s method of operations. 


NOTES 


1 A document specifying the processes of the education 
management system (including the education service realization 
processes) and the resources to be applied to a specific education 
service, project or contract can be referred to as a education 
quality plan. 


2 The educational organization can also apply the requirements 
given in 7.3 to the development of education service realisation 
processes. 


The educational organization shall plan the design, 
development, and expected results of the education service, 
including 

a) preparing and maintaining student learning plans, 

b) ensuring appropriate teaching methods, 

c) defining evaluation criteria, 

d) conducting learning assessment, 

e) defining and conducting improvement procedures, and 

f) providing support services. 


3 Process control is part of the management review (see 5.6) 
and is aimed at ensuring that education service requirements 
are well defined, understood, enforced, and fully met. 


Control methods shall be consistent with accepted 
quality practices. 


Control method effectiveness shall be verified and 
records maintained. 


7.2 Student Related Processes 


7.2.1 Determination of Requirements Related to the 
Education Service 


The educational organization shall determine 


a) requirements specified by the student and 
other key stakeholders, including the 
requirements for delivery and post-delivery 
activities; 

b) requirements not stated by the student but 
necessary for specified or intended use, where 
known; 


c) statutory and regulatory requirements 
applicable to the education service; and 

d) any additional requirements considered 
necessary by the educational organization. 


IS 16533 : 2016 


NOTE — Post-delivery activities include, for example, 
articulation between education levels, job placement services, 
or contractual obligations such as certification of competencies 
or skills. 


7.2.2 Review of Requirements Related to the Education 
Service 


Top management shall review the quality requirements 
related to the education service. This review shall be 
conducted prior to the educational organization’s 
commitment to provide education service to the student 
and shall ensure that 


a) education service quality requirements are 
defined, 

b) application or admission requirements 
differing from those previously expressed are 
resolved, and 


c) the educational organization has the ability to 
meet the defined requirements. 


Records of the results of the review and actions arising 
from the review shall be maintained (see 4.2.4). 


Where requirements are changed, the educational 
organization shall ensure that relevant documents are 
amended, accepted, agreed upon and signed, and that 
relevant personnel, including those updating student- 
teacher files, are made aware of the changed 
requirements. 


7.2.3 Student Communication 


The educational organization shall determine and 
implement effective arrangements for communicating 
with students and parents/guardian, as appropriate, in 
relation to 


a) service information (academic calendar and 
planners), 

b) enquiries, application, admission, or 
registration, and 

c) student feedback, 
complaints 


including student 


7.3 Design and Development 


All requirements of this clause are intended to be 
applicable to each education service/course offered by 
the educational organization. 


7.3.1 Design and Development Planning 


The educational organization shall plan and control the 
design, development, and expected results of the 
education service, including 


a) preparing and maintaining student learning 
plans, 


b) ensuring appropriate teaching methods, 
c) defining evaluation criteria, 


IS 16533 : 2016 


d) conducting learning assessment, 


e) defining and conducting improvement 
procedures, and 


f) providing support services. 


During the design and development planning, the 
educational organization shall determine 


a) the design and development stages, 


b) the review, verification and validation that are 
appropriate to each design and development 
stage, and 

c) the responsibilities and authorities for design 
and development. 


The educational organization shall manage the 
interfaces between different groups involved in design 
and development to ensure effective communication 
and clear assignment of responsibility. 


Course instructors shall actively participate in the 
design and development of education processes. 


Procedures shall exist to ensure that all applicable 
education service materials match education service 
quality requirements. 


Each delivery medium process shall be documented. 


Assessment of educational quality requirements include 
potential or actual performance requirements for 
determining the following: 


a) how students become competent in the 
required knowledge and skills, 


b) how learning requirements are met, 


c) which service methods are most effective at 
meeting the educational requirements, 


d) what skills are needed to meet the educational 
requirements, and 


e) how learning is assessed. 


A needs analysis report shall provide input to the 
instructional design process, describe the results of the 
needs assessment, and state the goals for improvement. 


Needs assessment results shall be used in the design 
and development review process. 


The development process shall be documented. The 
documentation shall include the sequence of steps in 
the development process, the personnel involved, the 
review processes, and associated criteria. 


Expected outputs of design and development planning 
shall be updated as appropriate, as the design and 
development progress. 


NOTES 


1 Where empirical validation of instruction is not practicable, 
a peer review process may be adopted. 


2 There may be a specific process statement for each instruction 
delivery medium, or a generic process for all media. These 
processes may include the sequence of steps in the development 
process, the personnel involved, the review processes, and 
associated criteria. 


3 Design and development review, verification and validation 
have distinct purposes. They can be conducted and recorded 
separately or in any combination, as suitable for the education 
service and the educational organization. 


7.3.2 Design and Development Inputs 


Inputs relating to educational quality requirements shall 
be determined and records maintained (see 4.2.4). 
These inputs shall include 


a) functional and performance requirements; 


b) applicable statutory and regulatory 


requirements; 

c) where applicable, information derived from 
previous similar designs; and 

d) other requirements essential for design and 
development. 


The inputs shall be reviewed for adequacy. 
Requirements shall be complete, unambiguous and not 
in conflict with each other. 


7.3.3 Design and Development Outputs 


The outputs of design and development shall be in a 
form suitable for verification against the design and 
development input and shall be approved prior to 
release. 


Design and development outputs shall 


a) meet the input requirements for design and 
development 

b) provide appropriate information for 
purchasing (see 7.4) and service provision, 

c) contain or refer to education service 
acceptance criteria, and 


d) specify the characteristics of the education 
service that are essential for its safe and proper 
use. 


NOTE — Information for education service provision can 
include details for the preservation of the education service 
and its constituent parts. 


7.3.4 Design and Development Review 


At suitable stages, systematic reviews of design and 
development shall be performed in accordance with 
planned arrangements (see 7.3.1) 


a) to evaluate the degree to which the results of 
design and development meet requirements, 
and 

b) to identify any problems and propose 
necessary actions. 


Participants in each identified stage shall review the 
design and development results versus the 
corresponding requirements (for example, professional 
profiles, competence certification). 


Records of the results of the reviews and any necessary 
actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.4). 


NOTE — Records of complex matters can be the Minutes of 
formal meetings. 


A design review process shall be used for all education 
service design. This review shall be accomplished by 
those who are responsible for the design, interested 
parties, and persons not responsible for the design. 
Consideration shall be given to the fact that design 
review is an advisory activity. It is intended to verify 
the work of the design development team. 


The design process shall be evaluated and reviewed in 
terms of the education service outcome desired. This 
review shall be based upon the experience of successful 
projects and information from the subsequent 
development and implementation phases. A 
development report or checklist shall be generated to 
document the procedures used to ensure that the 
education service meets the design specifications. 


Functions responsible for authorizing the progression 
of the design to the next phase shall be identified. 


Criteria for acceptance, in terms of readiness for use in 
education service, shall be specified and can include 
the following: 


a) approval of the prose, illustrations, and visual 
presentation by editorial and graphics 
specialists; 

b) approval of the technological soundness by a 
technology specialist; and 


c) trials of both the education service and the 
criterion-referenced assessments with students 
from the target population, and revisions made 
on the basis of students’ experiences; at least 
one of the trials shall be conducted in an 
environment similar to that in which the 
education service will be delivered, including 
support materials for students as well as 
procedures and support materials for 
preparation of instructors. 


Procedures shall describe how the development process 
shall be reviewed and revised based upon successive 
project-by-project experience with the process, 
including any student/parent/guardian’s complaints that 
become available during the process. 


7.3.5 Design and Development Verification 


Verification shall be performed in accordance with 
planned arrangements (see 7.3.1) to ensure that the 


IS 16533 : 2016 


design and development outputs have met the design 
and development input requirements. Records of the 
results of the verification and any necessary actions 
shall be maintained (see 4.2.4). 


Design verification shall be performed in one or several 
stages according to the design and development plan. 


This activity shall be performed internally by any 
specialist who has not participated in the design and 
development review, or externally, to carry out an 
independent verification of the review. 


The design and development output stage shall match 
the design and development input specifications. 


7.3.6 Design and Development Validation 


Design and development validation shall be performed 
in accordance with planned arrangements (see 7.3.1) 
to ensure that the resulting education service is capable 
of meeting the requirements for the specified 
application or intended use, where known. 


Wherever practicable, validation shall be completed 
prior to the delivery or implementation of the education 
service. 


This process is carried out to ensure that planned 
characteristics of the education service are met by the 
resulting curriculum or syllabus design. 


Validation shall be performed generally on the final 
design stages. 


NOTE — Among others, pilot testing and certification are 
accepted validation methods. 


7.3.7 Control of Design and Development Changes 


Design and development changes shall be identified 
and records maintained. The changes shall be reviewed, 
verified and validated, as appropriate, and approved 
before implementation. The review of design and 
development changes shall include evaluation of the 
effect of the changes on constituent parts and education 
service already delivered. Records of the results of the 
review of changes and any necessary actions shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4). 


Curricula, syllabus review, and any resulting revisions 
shall be identified, documented, authorized, and 
communicated. 


7.4 Purchasing 
7.4.1 Purchasing Process 


The educational organization shall ensure that 
purchased products and services conform to specified 
purchase requirements. The type and extent of control 
applied to the supplier/service provider and the 
purchased products and services shall be dependent 
upon the effect of the purchased products and services 


IS 16533 : 2016 


on the subsequent education service realization or the 
final service, based on 


a) value added to the educational organization’s 
activities and ability to meet its performance 
requirements, and 

b) efforts to improve the suppliers’/service 


providers’ own capabilities. 


The purchasing processes shall include the timely, 
effective, and accurate identification of the cost of 
purchased products and services, based on criteria that 
conform to the educational organization’s requirements. 


The educational organization shall evaluate and select 
suppliers/service providers based on their ability to 
supply products and services in accordance with the 
educational organization’s requirements. Criteria for 
selection, evaluation and re-evaluation shall be 
established. Records of the results of evaluations and 
any necessary actions arising from the evaluation shall 
be maintained (see 4.2.4). 


7.4.2 Purchasing Information 


Purchasing information shall describe the service or 
product to be purchased, including, where appropriate, 


a) requirements for approval of products, 
services, procedures, processes and 
equipment 

b) 


requirements for qualification of personnel; 
and 


c) 


The educational organization shall ensure the adequacy 
of specified purchase requirements prior to 
communicating with suppliers. 


education management system requirements. 


7.4.3 Verification of Purchased Products and Services 


The educational organization shall establish and 
implement inspection or other activities necessary for 
ensuring that purchased products and services meet 
specified purchase requirements. 


Where the educational organization or its students 
intend to perform verification at the supplier’s/service 
providers’ premises, the educational organization shall 
state intended verification arrangements and method 
of product or service release in the purchasing 
information. 


Inspection of purchased services or products shall be 
made to ensure they meet specified purchasing 
requirements. 


A record shall be made of inspection results and actions 
taken. 


Records shall be kept of suppliers’/service providers’ 
assessments and of any actions taken as a result. 


10 


7.5 Production and Service Provision 
7.5.1 Control of Education Service Provision 


The educational organization shall plan and carry out 
education service provision under controlled 
conditions. Controlled conditions shall include, as 
applicable, 


a) the availability of information that describes 
the characteristics of the service; 

b) the availability of work instructions, as 
necessary; 

c) the use of suitable equipment; 

d) the availability and use of monitoring and 
measuring equipment and devices; 

e) the implementation of monitoring, 
measurement and assessment; and 

f) the implementation of education service 


release, evidence of education service release, 
as well as delivery and post-delivery activities. 


The educational organization shall establish acceptable 
measures for determining conformity with the learning 
objectives. 


The availability of curricula, guidelines for students, 
suitable equipment, required laboratories, computer 
aids, monitoring, measuring and assessment devices, 
monitoring, measuring and assessment methods, and 
follow-up with the students shall be controlled. 


Control consists of top management or their delegates 
monitoring learning processes to ensure learning goals 
are being achieved and that corrective actions are taken 
when problems are detected. 


If a contract agreement requires further support for 
students after completion of their programme of studies, 
the educational organization shall indicate how such 
support would be given and monitored. 


The aptitude, knowledge, skills, and ability of new 
students shall be assessed to ensure that the education 
service can be provided at an appropriate level and at 
an appropriate pace. 


Advertising, course brochures, and other items 
produced by the educational organization shall state 
clearly how prior education, training, and experience 
are related to the proffered services. 


Records shall be established and kept to identify the 
actual education service delivered to students. 


7.5.2 Validation of Processes for Education Service 
Provision 


The educational organization shall validate any 
processes for education service provision where the 
resulting output cannot be verified by subsequent 


monitoring, measurement or assessment, and, as a 
consequence, deficiencies become apparent only after 
the education service is in use or the education service 
has been delivered. 


Validation shall demonstrate the ability of these 
processes to achieve planned results. 


The educational organization shall establish 
arrangements for these processes including, as applicable, 


a) 


defined criteria for review and approval of the 


processes, 

b) approval of equipment and qualification of 
personnel, 

c) use of specific methods and procedures, 

d) requirements for records (see 4.2.4), and 

e) revalidation. 


7.5.3 Identification and Traceability 


Where appropriate, the educational organization shall 
identify the education service by suitable means 
throughout service realization. 


The educational organization shall identify the 
education service status with respect to monitoring, 
measurement and assessment requirements throughout 
service realization. 


Identification and traceability of relevant information 
include, as necessary: curricula, course content unit 
codes, student identification records, student group 
schedules, text books/notes, laboratory equipment, and 
research contracts. 


Archival documents that show evidence of students’ 
academic status shall be consistent with the information 
required by the educational organization. 


Where traceability is a requirement, the educational 
organization shall control the unique identification of 
the education service and maintain records (see 4.2.4). 


7.5.4 Student Property 


The educational organization shall exercise care with 
student property while it is under the educational 
organization’s control or being used by the educational 
organization. The educational organization shall 
identify, verify, protect and safeguard student property 
provided for use or incorporation into the education 
service. If any student property is lost, damaged or 
otherwise found to be unsuitable for use, the educational 
organization shall report this to the student and maintain 
records (see 4.2.4). 


NOTE — Student property can include intellectual property 
and personal data. 


7.5.5 Preservation of Education Service 


The educational organization shall preserve the 


11 


IS 16533 : 2016 


education service, including comprehensive student 
information during internal processing and delivery in 
order to maintain conformity to requirements. As 
applicable, preservation shall include identification, 
handling, packaging, storage, and protection. 
Preservation shall also apply to the constituent parts of 
the education service. 


For resident students there is a special need for 
confidentiality of records relating to health, counselling, 
personal safety, lodging security, and food service, 
among others. 


7.6 Control of Monitoring and Measuring 
Equipment 


The educational organization shall determine the 
monitoring, measurement and assessment to be 
undertaken and the monitoring, measuring and 
assessing equipment and devices needed to provide 
evidence that the education service conforms to 
determined requirements. 


The educational organization shall establish processes 
to ensure that monitoring, measurement and assessment 
can be carried out and are carried out in a manner that 
is consistent with monitoring, measurement and 
assessment requirements. 


Where necessary to ensure valid results, measuring 
equipment and devices shall 


a) becalibrated or verified, or both, at specified 
intervals, or prior to use, against measurement 
standards traceable to Indian or national 
measurement standards; where no such 
standards exist, the basis used for calibration 
or verification shall be recorded (see 4.2.4); 


b) be adjusted or re-adjusted as necessary; 

c) have identification in order to determine its 
calibration status; 

d) be safeguarded from adjustments that would 
invalidate the measurement or assessment 
result; 

e) be protected from damage and deterioration 


during handling, maintenance and storage. 


In addition, the educational organization shall assess 
and maintain record of the validity of the previous 
measuring or assessing results when the equipment or 
devices are found not to conform to requirements. The 
educational organization shall take appropriate action 
on the equipment or device and any service affected. 


Records of the results of calibration and verification 
shall be maintained (see 4.2.4). 


When used in the monitoring, measurement and 
assessment of specified requirements, the ability of 
computer software to satisfy the intended application 


IS 16533 : 2016 


shall be confirmed. This shall be undertaken prior to 
initial use and reconfirmed as necessary. 


NOTE — Confirmation of the ability of computer software to 
satisfy the intended application would typically include its 
verification and configuration management to maintain its 
suitability for use. 


The educational organization shall establish valid tests 
or learning assessment tools. 


Monitoring, measurement and assessment shall be 
performed during service to assure conformity with the 
study plans, curriculum, and education programmes. 


These shall include student performance profiles, 
assessments of personnel records, written course 
assessments, observations with note whether instructors 
are following the plan and final examinations. 


When tests, assessment tools, or software are found to 
be invalid, a record shall be made of all actions taken 
to correct the invalidity. 


8 MEASUREMENT, 
IMPROVEMENT 


ANALYSIS AND 


8.1 General 


The educational organization shall plan and implement 
the monitoring, measurement, analysis and 
improvement processes needed 


a) to demonstrate conformity to education 
service quality requirements, 

b) to ensure conformity of the education 
management system, 

c) to assess the knowledge, skills imparted to the 
student, and 

d) to continually improve the effectiveness of the 


education management system. 


This shall include determination of applicable methods, 
including statistical techniques, and the extent of their 
use. 


Outcomes from monitoring, measurement and assessment 
shall be used to identify areas for improving the education 
management system and education processes. 


Outcomes shall be compared with students’ planned 
results. 
NOTE — The aim of educational measurement, analysis, review, 
and improvement is to guide processes toward the achievement 
of key planned results of strategic objectives. They can also 
improve the ability to anticipate and respond to rapid or 


unexpected changes. They can provide feedback in time to 
adjust the education service as needed. 


8.2 Monitoring and Measurement 
8.2.1 Student Satisfaction 


As one of the measurements of the performance of the 


12 


education management system, the educational 
organization shall monitor information relating to 
student perception as to whether the educational 
organization has met student requirements. The 
methods for obtaining and using this information shall 
be determined. 


NOTE — Monitoring student perception can include obtaining 
input from sources such as student satisfaction surveys, student 
data on delivered education service quality, user (key 
stakeholder) opinion surveys, and feedback from parent- 
teachers meetings/interactions. 


8.2.2 Internal Audit 


The educational organization shall conduct internal 
audits at planned intervals (atleast once in a year) to 
determine whether the education management system 


a) conforms to the planned arrangements (see 
7.1), to the requirements of this standard and 
to the education service quality requirements 
established by the educational organization, 


and 


b) 


An audit programme shall be planned, taking into 
consideration the status and importance of the processes 
and areas to be audited, as well as the results of previous 
audits. The audit criteria, scope, frequency and methods 
shall be defined. The selection of auditors and the 
conducting of audits shall ensure objectivity and 
impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit 
their own work. 


is effectively implemented and maintained. 


A documented procedure shall be established to define 
the responsibilities and requirements for planning and 
conducting audits, establishing records and reporting 
results. 


Records of the audits and their results shall be 
maintained (see 4.2.4). 


The personnel responsible for the area being audited 
shall ensure that any necessary corrections and 
corrective actions are taken without undue delay to 
eliminate detected non-conformities and their causes. 


Follow-up activities shall include the verification of 
the actions taken and the reporting of verification results 
(see 8.5.2). 


8.2.3 Monitoring and Measurement of Processes 


The educational organization shall apply suitable 
methods for monitoring and, where applicable, 
measurement of the education management system 
processes. These methods shall demonstrate the ability 
of the processes to achieve planned results. When 
planned results are not achieved, correction and 
corrective action shall be taken, as appropriate. 


NOTE — When determining suitable methods, it is advisable 


that the educational organization consider the type and extent 
of monitoring or measurement appropriate to each of its 
processes in relation to their impact on the conformity to 
education service quality requirements and on the effectiveness 
of the education management system. 


The educational organization shall measure the 
performance and effectiveness of the education service 
delivery. Measurement of core and supporting 
education processes shall be carried out at appropriate 
stages during the delivery process. 


Top management shall monitor the measured results to 
assure that performance levels are maintained and 
improved. 


The methods used to measure the performance and the 
effectiveness of the processes shall be documented and 
archived. 


8.2.4 Monitoring and Measurement of Education 
Service 


The educational organization shall monitor and 
measure the characteristics of the service to verify 
that education service quality requirements have been 
met. This shall be carried out at appropriate stages of 
the education service realisation process in accordance 
with planned arrangements (see 7.1). Evidence of 
conformity with the acceptance criteria shall be 
maintained. 


Records shall indicate the person(s) authorising the 
release of education service for delivery to the student 
(see 4.2.4). 


The release of education service and the delivery of 
education service to the student shall not proceed until 
the planned arrangements (see 7.1) have been 
satisfactorily completed, unless otherwise approved by 
a relevant authority. 


Performance measurement shall focus on student 
learning. This requires comprehensive monitoring of 
student assessment data, performance data, process 
performance, operational performance measurement, 
and any other relevant data. 


8.3 Control of Non-conforming Service 


The educational organization shall ensure that the 
service that does not conform to requirements is 
identified and controlled to prevent its unintended use 
or delivery. 


NOTE — Delivery of a service can include products that may 
be non-conforming. 


A documented procedure shall be established to identify 
education service as well as final outcomes that do not 
conform to established design, regulatory requirements, 
or organizational objectives and instructional design; 
as well as to define the controls and related 


13 


IS 16533 : 2016 


responsibilities and authorities for dealing with 
non-conforming education service. 


Monitoring shall be carried out at appropriate stages 
of the delivery of the education service to prevent 
its continued use or delivery in the non-conforming 
state. 


Where applicable, the organization shall deal with non- 
conforming education service by one or more of the 
following ways: 


a) by taking action to eliminate the detected non- 


conformity; 

b) by authorizing its use, release or acceptance 
appropriately by a relevant authority, 

c) by taking action to preclude its original 
intended use or application; 

d) by taking action appropriate to the effects, or 


potential effects, of the non-conformity when 
non-conforming education service is detected 
after delivery or use has started. 


When non-conforming education service is corrected, 
it shall be subject to re-verification to demonstrate 
conformity to the requirements. 


Records of the nature of non-conformities and any 
subsequent actions taken, including corrections 
undertaken, shall be maintained (see 4.2.4). 


8.3.1 Control of Non-conforming Performance 


Means shall be established by which individual student 
non-conforming performance is corrected in order to 
avoid the student’s abandonment of the education 
programme. Under no circumstances a student be 
considered a non-conformity. 


8.4 Analysis of Data 


The educational organization shall determine, collect 
and analyse appropriate data to demonstrate the 
suitability and effectiveness of the education 
management system and to evaluate where continual 
improvement of the effectiveness of the quality 
management system can be made. This shall include 
data generated as a result of monitoring, measurement 
and assessment, and from other relevant sources. 


The analysis of data shall provide information relating 
to 


a) student satisfaction (see 8.2.1), 

b) conformity to education service quality 
requirements (see 8.2.4), 

c) characteristics and trends of processes and 
services, including opportunities for 
preventive action (see 8.2.3 and 8.2.4), and 

d) suppliers/service providers (see 7.4). 


IS 16533 : 2016 


8.5 Improvement 
8.5.1 Continual Improvement 


The organization shall continually improve the 
effectiveness of the education management system 
through the use of the educational quality policy, 
educational quality objectives, audit results, analysis 
of data, corrective and preventive actions and 
management review. 


8.5.2 Corrective Action 


The educational organization shall take action to 
eliminate the causes of non-conformities in order to 
prevent recurrence. Corrective actions shall be 
appropriate to the effects of the non-conformities 
encountered. 


A documented procedure shall be established to define 
requirements for 


a) reviewing non-conformities (including student 
complaints); 

b) determining the causes of non-conformities, 

c) evaluating the need for action to ensure that 


non-conformities do not recur, 


14 


d) determining and implementing action needed, 

e) records of the results of action taken (see 
4.2.4), and 

f) reviewing the effectiveness of the corrective 
action taken. 


8.5.3 Preventive Action 


The organization shall take action to eliminate the 
causes of potential non-conformities in order to prevent 
their occurrence. Preventive actions shall be 
appropriate to the effects of the potential problems. 


A documented procedure shall be established to define 
requirements for 


a) determining potential non-conformities and 
their causes, 

b) evaluating the need for action to prevent 
occurrence of non-conformities, 

c) determining and implementing action needed, 

d) records of results of action taken (see 4.2.4), 
and 

e) reviewing the effectiveness of the preventive 


action taken. 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard can be used by internal and external parties to assess the educational organization’s ability to meet 
the requirements of students and other interested parties; applicable statutory and regulatory requirements; and 
the educational organization’s own requirements. 


The quality management principles stated in IS/ISO 9000 and IS/ISO 9004 have been considered applicable to 
this Indian Standard. Further, user may refer to IS/ISO 9001 for the concept of process approach in quality 
management system and its requirements for understanding and implementing the education management system. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 09 (0517). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


