( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

CABLED DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS FOR TELEVISION AND SOUND SIGNALSSPECIFICATION
PART 1 SAFETY REQUlREMENTS

UDC

621~397.743 : 614.8

o BIS 1995

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 NEW BAHADUR DELHJ

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

April 1995

Price Group 7

Radio Communications

Sectional Committee,

LTD 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. This standard ( Part 1 ) is a part of a series of Indian Standards on Cabled Distribution Systems for Television and Sound Signals. The other parts of the series which are under various stages of preparation are given below: Part Part Part Part Part 2 3 4 5 6 Electromagnetic compatibility for components and systems Active co-axial wide band distribution components Passive co-axial wideband distribution components Headend System performance requirements

This standard is intended to provide specifically for the safety of the system, personnel working on it, subscribers and subscriber's equipment. It deals only with safety aspects and is not intended to define a standard for the protection of equipment used in the system. While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC document 12G ( Sectt. ) 137, Cabled distribution systems for television and sound signals: Part 1 Safety requirement', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). For the purpose of deciding whet.her a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14231( Part 1 ) : 1995

Indian Standard

CABLEDDISTRIBUTION SYSTEMSFOR TELEVISIONANDSOUNDSTGNALSSPECIFICATION
PART 1 SCOPE 1.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) specifies with the safety requirements applicable to fixed sited systems and components primarily intended, for the reception, processing and distribution of sound signals, television signals and their associated data signals using all applicable transmission media. 1 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

remainder of the cabled distribution process the signals to be distributed. 3.5 Receiving Antenna

system,

to

A deiice with the proper electrical characteristics that intercepts desired signals in the atmosphere and transfers these to the remainder of the cabled distribution system. 3.6 Cabled Distribution and Sound Signals ) System ( for Television

1.2 It covers all types of systems such as Individual CATV-systems, MATV-systems, receiving systems and all types of equipment items installed in such system from the receiving antennas to the system outlets ( subscriber equipment i!lput ). 1.3 As far' as applicable it is also valid for mobile and temporarily installed systems, for example, caravans. 1.4 This standard equipment . 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 3.1 Community System Antenna the following CATV and teledoes not cover subscriber

The general overall term used to define CATVsystems, MATV-systems and individual receiving systems. 3.7 Feeder A transmission path forming part of a cabled distribution system. Such a path may consist of a metallic cable, optical fibre, waveguide, or any combination of them. By extension the term is also applied to paths containing one or more radio links. 3.8 Spur Feeder A feeder to which subscriber's system outlets are connected. 3.9 Amplifier A device to compensate 3.10 Splitter for attenuation. taps or looped

Television sound

A system designed to provide vision signals to communities.

3.2 Master Antenna Television MATV System A system designed to provide sion signals to households buildings. sound and televiin one or more

A device in which the signal power at the input port is divided equally or unequally between two or more output ports. 3.11 Subscriber's Tap a subscriber's feeder

A device for connecting to a spur feeder. 3.12 System Outlet

3.3 Individual Receiving System A system designed tb provide sound atid television signals to an individual household. 3.4 Headend Equipment which is connected between receiving antennas or other signal sources and the

A device for interconnecting feeder to a spur feeder. 3.13 Receiver Lead

a

subscriber's

A lead which connects the system outlet to the subscriber's equipment.

IS 14291 ( Part 3.14 Subscriber's

1) :1995
Feeder 3.24 Neutral Conductor ( Symbol N )

A feeder connecting a subscriber's tap to a system outlet or, where the latter is not used, directly to the subscribers' equipment. 3.15 Subscriber's Equipment receivers, Equipment as

A conductor connected to the neutral point of a system and capable of contributing to the transmission of electrical energy. 3.25 Equipotential A protective tial bonding. Bonding Conductor equipoten-

at the subscriber's premises such tuners, decoders, video recorders.

conductor

for ensuring

3.16 Transfer Point An interface between the cabled distribution network and the building's internal network, each of which may be separately owned. The transfer point may contain a voltage dependent device and/or a galvanic isolator. 3.17 Galvanic Isolator electrical range. isolation below a

3.26 Equipotential

Bonding

Electrical connection putting various exposedconductive-parts and extraneous-conductiveparts at a substantially equal potential. 3.27 Equipotential Bonding Bar A bar to which for ductive-parts, metal and telecommunication can be bonded. 3.28 Lightning example, extraneous-consheath of electrical power cables and other cables System ( LPS )

A device providing certain frequency

Protection

3.18 Surge Suppressor A device designed to limit the surge voltage between two parts within the space to be protected, such as a spark gap, surge diverter or semiconductor device. 3.19 Attenuation The attenuation of any system or equipment is the decibel ratio of the input power to the output power. 3.20 Earthing Terminal

The complete system used to protect a space against the effects of lightning. It consists of both external and internal lightning protection systems. 3.29 `Natural' Component of an LPS A component which performs a lightning protection function but is not installed specifically for that purpose. 3.30 Earth-Termination System That part of an external earthing system which 1s intended to conduct and disperse current in the earth. 3.31 Metal Installation Extended metal items which may form a path for lightning current such as pipe-work, staircases, elevator guide rails, ventilation, heating and conditioning ducts and interconnected reinforcing steel. 3.32 Safety Distance The minimum distance between two conductive parts within the space to be protected between which no dangerous sparking can occur. 3.33 Main Earthing Bonding Bar Terminal Equipotential

The connection point by means of which the earthing or grounding of a conducting part of an equipment is accomplished. 3.21 Earth Electrode

A conductive part or a group of conductive parts in intimate contact with and providing an electrical connection with earth. 3.22 Protective Conductor ( Symbol PE )

A conductor required by some measures for protection against electric shock for electrically connecting any of the following parts: exposed extraneous main earth earthed neutral. conductive conductive terminal parts parts

earthing electrode point

A terminal or bar provided for the connection of protective conductors, including equipotential bonding conductors and conductors for functional earthing if any, to the means of earthing. or artificial 4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

of the

source

3.23 Earthing

Conductor main

A protective conductor connecting the earthing terminal to the earth electrode.

The cabled distribution system shall be so designed, constructed and installed as to present no danger, either in normal use or under any single fault condition, to subscribers, personnel working on or externally inspecting 2

IS 14231 ( Part 1) : 1995 the system, or to any other person, particularly: against a) personal protection shock, b) personal protection against injury, and c) protection against fire.
NOTE -

providing electric physical

For service and operation conditions the above does not apply to trained, authorised personnel working on the equipment, who may be exposed to live parts of the equipment by the removal of protective covers.

4.1 Mechanical All parts of the system shall be so constructed that there is no danger of physical injury from contact with sharp edges or corners. 4.2 Access finger shall not make contact parts of the system which are accessible to the general public without first removing a protective cover by the use of a The standard test finger is defined tool. in IS 616: 1986.
with any test live

A standard

5 WEATHER

PROTECTION

All equipment and cables exposed to weather, especially corrosive atmosphere, adverse temperature or other adverse conditions shall be so constructed or protected as may be necessary to prevent danger arising from such exposure.

If, in conditions of sunshine falling on parabolic antennas, solar radiation is focussed near the feed end of the network of the parabolic reflector such that burning may occur, the equipment must be fitted with a warning notice in a clearly visible position. 6 EQUIPOTENTIAL BONDING AND EARTHING 6.1 General Requirements The cabled distribution system shall be designed and constructed with the requirements of IS 732 : 1989 so that no hazardous voltages can be present on the outer conductors of any cable or accessible metalwork of any equipment, including passive items. The requirements for the subscriber's outlet are specified in 10, the requirements for bonding and for lightning protection of antenna systems in 11. These bonding requirements are intended to protect only the cabled system and shall not be considered to provide protection against electric shock from electrical installations. Where cabled distribution systems are installed outdoor on the same poles as those of the electric supply, a common earthing may be used. 6.2 Equipotential Bonding Mechanisms 6.2.1 Metallic enclosures for mains supplied equipment, except on subscriber premises, shall be bonded. An example from bonding units within the enclosure is shown in Fig. 1.

r ------_---

---1

EQUIPOTENTIAL GONDING BAR---,

/--EQUIF'~&~~N;AL CONDUCTOR

L-EARTH

ELECTRODE

FIG. 1 EXAMPLE OF EQUIPOTENTIAL BONDING AND EARTHING A METAL ENCLOSURB

IS 14231( Part 1):1995 62.2 Where direct connection to an earthing system is not suitable because balancing currents are expected to flow in the outer conductor, for example, in extensive horizontally cabled distribution systems, special protection shall be provided. This protection shall be achieved, Fig. 2 either by: Mounting the equipment metallic enclosure; or as shown in within a nondifferences. the isolated section earthing system. outer shall conductors of each be connected to ari
may be liable to energy, and can be

NOTE-The galvanic isolator radiate or pick-up high frequency damaged by ovcrvoltages.

b) Fitting

a voltage dependent device to the system between the metallic enclosure and the local earth such that hazardous voltages shall be removed from the outer conductor and accessible metalwork of the system. shall be provided

6.2.4 The outer conductors of coaxial cables entering and/or leaving a building, shall be bonded directly to a common equipotential bonding bar. The subscriber feeder cables need not to Ge bonded if a galvanic isolator or fully isolated outlets ( see 10 ) or transfer points are used. Examples are shown in Fig. 3, 4 and 5. 6.2.5 Where bonding is not possible and to avold balancing currents between the cabled distribution system and the building installation a galvanic isolator shall be used. An example is shown in Fig. 5.
NOTE - The galvanic isolator radiate or pick LIP high frequency damaged by overvoltages. may be liable to energy and can be

A suitable warning notice inside the enclosure.

If the balancing currents in the conductors exceed the maximum current allowed by the manufacturer of the cable and/or the manufacturer of the cable connectors used in the syhtem, galvanic isolation shall be introduced as given in 6.2.3. 6.2.3' Where galvanic isolation is provided between sections of the network, to eliminate currents due to local potential balancing

6.2.6 Provision shall be made to maintain continuity of the outer conductor system while units are changed or removed. An example is shown in Fig. 6. 6.2.7 The equipotential bonding conductor connected to the main earthing terminal shall

/--

NON-METALLIC ENCLOSURE

VOLTAGE OEPENDENT PROTECTIVE DEVICE EOUI POTENTIP BONDING BAR _ EOUIPOTENTIAL BONDING CONDUCTOR

LEARTH

ELECTRODE

FIG. 2 EXAMPLEOF EQUIPOTBNTIAL BONDING AND INDIRECTLY EARTHING A METAL ENCLOSURE VIA A VOLTAGE DEPENDENT PROTECTIVE DEVICE( IN CASE OF BALANCING CURRENTS )

4

IS 14231 ( Part 1 ) : 1995 be mechanically stable and shall be of copper with a minimum cross-sectional area of 4 mm'. 6.2.8 Every connection of a protective conductor or an earthing conductor to an earthing terminal shall be readily accessible and soundly made by the use of crimps, clamps, weld or hard soldered joints. 6.2.9 All metallic enclosures, housings, mounting bays, racks and mains supplied equipment of metallic construction, shall be provided with an external earthing terminal as shown in Fig. 7 and 8 according to IS 616 : 1986.
NOTE - Line powered amplifiers, taps, and transfer points may also be fitted with terminals. splitters earthing

that the harmful effects of moisture, water, dust, etc, are prevented. Alternatively they shall be installed in an appropriate drip-proof, splashproof or water-tight enclosure so as to provide the appropriate degree of protection. 7.2 Coanection to the Mains Supply 7.2.1 The connection to the mains supply shall conform to the requirements of IS 616 : 1986. 7.2.2 The connection of a Class-11 equipment to the mains supply shall be only bipolar. The protective conductor, if any, of Class-II equipment shall not be connected to the mains protective conductor. 7.2.3 If the Class-II equipment is provided with a flexible power cable than either it shall be fitted with a bipolar plug, that is, without a contact to the protective conductor or, where the power system requires the presence on the plug of a third ( protective conductor ) pin to gain access to the supply, no connection shall be ma.de to that third pin. An example is shown in Fig. 8.

7 MAINS SUPPLIED 7.1 Equipment

EQUIPMENT distribution of Class-II

7.1.1 The devices used in a cabled system shall meet the requirement equipment as per IS 616 : 1986.

7.1.2 Devices installed outdoors and operated from the mains supply shall be SO constructed

EARTH

ELECTRODE

FIG. 3 EXAMPLE OF EQUIPOTBNTIAL BONDING AND EARTHING A BUILDING INSTALLATION ( UNDERGROUND CONNBCTION )

5

IS 14231 ( Part 1 ) : 1995
NOTE - If different potentials build up between rhe protective conductor and the equipotential bonding terminal, for example in older buildings, no balancing currents shall flow and produce excessive heat.

A true rms reading instrument determine this voltage. 8.2 Power from Subscriber Where back powering door equipment such converters, polarizers are incorporated, the following.

shall be used to

POWERING DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 8.1 Line Poweriog

8 NETWORK

OF THE CABLED

to a network or to outas preamplifiers, low noise in antenna installations., system shall comply with between the subsV ac rms used to

The line powering voltage between inner and outer conductors of the feeder cable shall not exceed 65 V rms. The following conditions shall be met: Line powering shall be confined to feeders only and shall not extend to the subscriber's cable. The line powering voltage shall be completely inaccessible to the public. The line powering voltage shall be accessible to authorized personnel only after removal of equipment covers by means of a tool.

8.2.1 The maximum voltage applied the inner and outer conductor of criber's feeder shall not exceed 24 or 34 V de. A true rms reading instrument shall be determine the ac voltage.

8.2.2 The equipment shall be so designed and constructed that no dangerous currents can flow under normal operating or single fault conditions. 8.2.3 The equipment providing the power shall", if that power is derived from a mains supply,

r

EXAMPLE OF COWJECTING TO CONTINUOUS METALLIC WATER PIPE OR HEATING PIPE

WALLMOUNTED SUBSCRl8ER

EQUIPOTENTIAL BCNDING CONOUCTOR-, PROTECilVE CONOUCl+Q n n

P

EQUIPOTENTIAL BONDING BAR--/ II

" Y//4.

\

EARTH

ELECTRODE

FIG. 4 EXAMPLE OF EQUIPOTBNTIAL BONDING AND EARTHING
A BUILDING INSTALLATION ( ABOVE GROUND CONNECTION )

6

IS 14231 (Part comply isolated ( see 10 shall be with clauses as specified in 7. If fully system outlets or transfer points ) are used, only Class-II equipment used to provide back-power.

1 ) : 1995

8.2.4 Repointing motors and de-icing devices are normally separately fed. Specific requirements and recommendations are not specified here. 9 PROTECTION AGAINST CONTACT PROXIMITY TO ELECTRIC POWER DlSTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
9.1 When parts of the outdoor

9.2 The distance between parts of the cabled system and uninsulated parts, including all supporting structures, of an electric power distribution system carrying voltages between 50 V and 1 000 V shall be at least 10 mm if indoors and 20 mm when installed outside. This distance may be less only if there is sufficient insulated material, for example, cable with insulating jacket, between the conductors of the two systems, thus guaranteeing that these conductors do not touch each other. For systems carrying voltages of more than 1 kV, the distances shall be larger unless sufficient insulation is provided to prevent arcing. Requirements and recommendations are under consideration. 10 SYSTEM OUTLETS POINTS AND TRANSFER

AND

antenna system are in proximity to electric power distribution system in open air with voltages up to 1 000 V the following requirements shall be met:

a) The horizontal

distance between antenna support structures or masts and electric power distribution systems shall not be less than 1 m; and

b) The distance between parts of the antenna

and electric power distribution systems shall not be less than 1 m. The swinging of the electric power cables shall not be taken into account.

The subscriber's equipment may be connected to the cabled distribution systems directly or by means of system outlets and/or transfer points. These devices provide the necessary safety protection between the subscriber's equipment and the cabled distribution system.

LEaR:ti

ELECTROCE

FIG. 5 EXAMPLEOF EQUIPOTBNTIAL BONDING A GALVANIC ISOLATED CABLE ENTERING A BUILDING ( UNDBRGROUNDCONNBCTION )

7

IS 14231 ( Part 1 ) : 1995
NOTE - Except in the case of fully isolated outlets ( 10.1.1 ), the achieved protection depends on equipotential bonding of the outer conductor of the subscriber's feeder. It must be pointed out that under certain combinations of fault conditions and the use of Class-I equipment, the outer conductor of the subscriber's feeder can act as a protective conductor of the electricity supply with the result that large fault currents may flow for a considerable period of time depending on the protection provided in the electrical distribution system.

10.1.1 Fully Isolated System Outlet

This type of outlet incorporates isolating component in series with both the inner and the outer conductors of the coaxial connectors. The isolating components may be either high voltage capacitors or double wound transformers.
NOTE - System outlets of this radiate or pick up high frequency 10.1.2 type are energy. liable to

Where subscriber outlets or transfer points are not used, protection shall be provided at the output of the subscriber's tap. Where safety protection is provided by means capacitors or transformers the of isolating complete device shall comply with the relevant requirements of IS 616 : 1986.
10.1 System Outlet

Semi-isolated System Outlet

There are four types of system outlets in common use providing varying degrees of protection against electric shock, but also more or less liable to radiate to pick-up high frequency energy.

This type of outlet incorporates an isolating component in series with the inner conductor only of the coaxial connector. If this outlet is shall be provided by used, the protection equipotential bonding of the outer conductor of the subscriber's feeder. In this case the dc resistance between the outer conductor of the connector and the nearest network equipotential bonding point shall be less than 5 ohm. The isolating component may be either a hi.gh capacitor or a voltage double wound transformer.

TRbNSFER POINT

L

EARTH

ELECTRODE

FIG.

6 EXAMPLE OF MAINTAINING
WHILE

EQIJIPOTENTIAL A UNIT IS REMOVED

BONDING

8

IS 14231 ( Part 1) : 1995 10.1.3 Non-isolated System Outlet with Protective Element

on elements incorporated. The same requirements as for the system outlet are applicable.
NOTE - F~llly isolated transfer points are liable radiate or pick up high frequency energy.

This type of outlet does not incorporate any series isolation. Protection shall be provided by equipotential bonding as in 10.1.2. A protective element to improve safety ( for example, an RF coil ) shall be connected between the inner and outer conductors of the coaxial connectors. The dc resistance of this protective element shall be less than 1 ohm. The dc resistance between the outer conductor of the connector/s and the nearest network equipotential point shall be less than 5 ohm. 10.1.4 Non-isolated System Outlet Without Protective Element

to

11 PROTECTION AGAINST ATMOSPHERIC OVERVOLTAGES AND ELIMINATION OF POTENTIAL DIFFERENCES

These protection requirements are intended to protect antenna systems, inc'uding satellite atmospheric overantennas against static voltages and lightning discharges. These protection requirements considered to provide protection and any other structures. shall not be for buildings

coaxial connector's only and does not contain any isolation component/s or protective element. This type of system outlet is used when back-powering from the subscriber's equipment is required. The protection shall be provided by equipotential bonding as in 10.1.2. 10.2 Transfer Point This device can also provide varying degrees of protection against electric shock, depending

7 his type of outlet incorporates

The following cases are excluded: - antenna systems external to the building which are located more than 2 m below the apex of the roof and less than 1.5 m from the building. - antenna systems enclosed within the building structure. Antennas shall not be installed on buildings having roofs covered with highly flammable materials ( for example, thatch, reedlike material and so on ).

EQUIPOTENTIAL BONDING CONDUCTOR

LEARTH

ELECTRODE

FIG.

7 EXAMPLE OF EXTERNAL EQUIPOTENTIAL BONDING 9

IS 14231 ( Part 1 ) : 1995 Antenna

cables and earthing conductors shall not be laid through areas used for the storage of easily ignitable materials such as hay, straw and such like substances or through areas in which explosive gases can develop or collect. AM sound broadcasting receiving antennas shall incorporate a protective device connected to a bonding conductor.
11.1 Protection of the Antenna System 11.1.1 Building Equipped with a Lightning Protec-

For individual receiving systems, or MATV systems confined to one building where, due to low lightning probability, local regulations allow, protection against lightning is not necessary but only recommended. 11.2 Earthing System and Bonding of the Antenna

11.2.1 Earthing and Bonding Mechanisms The mast and the outer conductors of the coaxial cables shall be connected to earth via earthing conductors using the shortest possible path. The formation of loops shall be avoided. The earthing conductors shall be installed straight and vertical such that they can provide the shortest, most direct path to the earthtermination system. 11.2.2 Earth Termination-System The earth termination system shall be provided by one of the following methods as shown in Fig. 9: - connection to the building's lightning protection system; to the building's earthing - connection system; - connection to a minimum of two horizontal electrodes of at least 5 m length

tion System (LPS) If the building is equipped with an LPS conforming to IS 2309 : 1989, the antenna mast, being a metal installation, shall be connected to the building's LPS, via the shortest possible path and using an earthing conductor as specified under 11.2. The outer conductors of all coaxial cables coming from the antennas shall be connected to the mast via an equipotential bonding copper conductor having a minimum cross-sectional area of 4 mm2 ( see Fig. 8 ). 11.1.2 Building not Equipped with an LPS If the building Iis not equipped with an LPS conforming to IS 2309 : 1989, mast and coaxial cables outer conductors shall be earthed as specified under 11.2.

HP01

EWIPO~ENTIAL BONDiNG BAR

TERMINAL

FIG. 8 EXAMPLE OF EQUIP;T;-W;~; P

BONDING ANTENNAS AND

10

IS 14231 ( Part 1 ) :. 1995 or a vertical or inclined electrode of at least 2.5 m buried at a depth of at least 0.5 m, not closer than 1 m to the walls. The minimum cross-sectional area of each electrode is 50 mm2 copper or 80 mm2 iron. `Natural' components such as interconnected Concrete reinforcing steel or other suitable underground metal structure, incorporated in the building foundation whose dimensions comply with the above mentioned limits, may also be employed. 11.2.3 Earthing Conductors A suitable earthing conductor is a single solid wire having a minimum cross-sectional area of not less than 16 mm' copper insulated or bare. or 25 mm2 insulated aluminium or 50 mm%iron. `Natural' components can given below ( see Fig. 9 ). be employed as a) Metal installations such as continuous metallic water supply pipes or continuous metallic heating pipes provided that: continuity between the electrical various parts is made durable; and their dimensions are at least equal to those specified for standard earthing conductors of the structure steel of the

b) The metal framework interconnected c) The structure

d) Facade elements, profiled rails and subconstructions of metal facades provided that: their
requirements

dimensions comply with the for down conductors and their thickness is not less than 0.5 mm; and

9A Conductor in Building Foundations

9B Building Liqhtning Protection System

9C Steel Rod

0

EARTHING

TERMINAL

OD Steel Strip

QE Structural

Steel Work

FIG. 9 EXAMPLES OF EARTHING MECHANISMS
11

IS 14231( Part 1 ) : 1995

-

their electrical continuity in a vertical direction is assured (joints shall be made secure by such means as brazing, welding, crimping, screwing or bolting ) the distance between the metal parts does not exceed 1 mm and the overlap between two elements is at least 100 ems.

stability of outdoor satellite antennas.

antenna

systems

including

All parts of the antenna system shall be so designed that they will withstand the maximum wind forces defined below, without breakage and none of the components shall be torn away. 12.2 Bending Moment For antenna systems with masts up to a maximum free length of 6 m, as shown in Fig. 10, the bending moment at the fixing point shall not exceed I 650 Nm. The windload of the mast should be at least one sixth of the free length.
NOTE - Where the length is greater than 6 m o: where it is anticipated that this bendin.g moment will be exceeded, or if other fixing methods are used. the services of a qualified person who can guarantee the safety of the structure and/or building. shall be employed.

The following are specifically excluded: a) protective earth and/or neutral conductors of the electricity supply, b) the outer conductor of any coaxial cable. 11.3 Overvoltage Protection Induction can introduce high voltage at transfer points, system outlets, at the head-end of the cabled distribution system, or at the input of subscriber's equipment. Protection may be achieved for example by equipotential bonding via surge suppressors. 12 MECHANICAL This standard STABILITY with the mechanical 12.1 General Requirements deals only

12.3 Wind Pressure Values For the purpose of establishing mast the following values may be used: loadings,

If antenna systems are established within 20 m of ground level, the value of p ( wind pressure )

Nxm

=Nm

Mm.

1650 Nm

FIG. ,I0 BENDING~MOMENT OF AN ANTENNAMAST

IS 14231 ( Part 1 ) : 1995

shall be assumed speed 36 m/s ).

to

be

800 N/ma

( wind

If antenna systems are established higher than 20 m above ground level, the value p ( wind pressure ) shall be assumed to be 1 100 n/ma ( wind speed 42 m/s ). The windload on the antenna shall be calculated as follows: W== c.p.A where W is the wind load in Newton, c is the load coefficient, p is the wind pressure in pascals ( N/m ), and A is the component The coefficient area. c to be used is 1.2.

The bending moment at the fixing point shall be calculated as follows: Mb = WI . a, + W, . a, + .-. . . . where Mb is the bending moment in Nm; w,, wz, ..- is the windload in N; and al, az, ._. is the mast length from the antenna to the fixing point in m.
12.4 Mast Construction

Where the mast is constructed from steel, the steel shall have a guaranteed extension limit and the maximum loading shall not exceed 90 percent of the extension limit so that the mast on being overloaded does not break but only buckles. The minimum wall thickness of the mast in the fastening area shall be 2 mm. 12.5 Data to be Published The antenna manufacturer shall publish pressure wind following data for p = 800 N/m? a) The wind load of the antennas, b) The maximum bending moment masts at the fixing.
wind NOTE - To convert the p = 800 N/m8 to p = 1 100 N/m' 1'37(1 100:800).

Loading due to snow and ice is not considered.
NOTE - Adverse environmental conditions may require that a higher or lower wind pressure value is assumed, for example: for a wind speed of 45 m/s ( 160 km/h ) the wind pressure'shall be 1 250 N/m2. for a wind speed of 56 m/s ( 200 km/h 1 the wind pressure shall be 1 900Nimz.

the of

of the
of is

pressure the factor

ANNEX

A

( Czause 2.1 )
LIST OF REFERRED IS No. INDIAN STANDARDS

Title Safety requirements for mains electronic operated and related apparatus for household and similar general use ( second revision ) ( reaffirmed 1991 )

616 : 1986

IS No. 732 : 1989 2309 : 1989

Title Electric installations in buildings ( third revision ) Code of practice for the protection of buildings and allied structures against lighting ( second revision )

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be I;eprodboed in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free&se, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot No. LTD 20 (1742).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional offices
:

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 1375 37 84 99, 37 85 61 37 86 26, 37 86 62 60 38 43 I 60 20 25 235 02 16, 235 04 42
I 235 15 19, 235 23 15

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDLGARH 160022

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

I 632 92 95, 632 78 58 632 78 91, 632 78 92

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurja, India

