NAT 1% 15 7317 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


тата th TROT th ATU eh AA Uh 
aeia Ат ч агот — Тї ават 


(480 чта ) 


Uniaxial Jacking Test Тог 
Deformation Modulus of Rock 
Mass — Code of Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM 5210 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH ИТТ, 4% [4691 - 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 6 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


In general rock mass is heterogeneous, anisotropic and discontinuous, and its mechanical behaviour is governed 
by the existence and orientation of discontinuities, such as, bedding planes, joints, fracture zones, and the degree 
of weathering, etc. These discontinuities may be clean or filled with fine grained material, rough or smooth, 
and may be continuous or discontinuous. As such, the mechanical properties of rock mass differ greatly from 
the laboratory test results carried out on small samples of intact rock. The parameters actually needed in design 
are the in-situ properties of rock mass and not that of intact rock. In designing and constructing engineering 
structures over or inside the rock mass, the main parameters of importance are its deformability, shear and other 
strength characteristics. Out of these three parameters, the dispersion in the test results of shear characteristics 
and the strength of a particular rock mass has been observed to be small as compared to the deformability values 
of the same. The deformation characteristics of in-situ rock is one such property which needs utmost care in its 
evaluation. It depends largely on the adopted technique of testing, the loaded area, the loading system, and the 
methodology by which the results are interpreted. 


Modulus of deformation is an essential parameter for the design of tunnels, underground chambers, mines and 
dam foundations. The deformability of the rock mass will govern the strain conditions that develop around an 
excavation during its initial changes. When designing a structure in or on a rock mass, it is important to know the 
deformability characteristics of the same for following two reasons: 


a) To assess expected displacements during excavation and relate these to subsequent monitoring to check 
stability; and 

b) To permit the correct design of any rock support measures that must be able to accommodate the expected 
deformation without failure. 


Deformation modulus of rock mass may be determined by bore hole jack test, uniaxial jacking test, pressure 
chamber test and radial jacking test, etc. In case of uniaxial jacking tests, the loading of a jointed rock mass has 
to be arranged in the direction conforming to design requirement. Alternatively, it may be determined in two 
perpendicular directions and the value in required direction computed according to normal practice. 


The results of bore hole jack tests may be used only as an index of rock mass deformability and there is strong 
dependence on jack-rock interaction and moreover the corrections are uncertain. Flat jack tests are severely 
limited by access problems, and only shallow rock in a disturbed state can be used to measure deformability 
adjacent to exposed surface and the results do not provide the deformability of the rock mass. Radial jacking tests 
and pressure chamber tests are better as they cause deformation of much larger volume of rock mass around the 
drift/tunnel and hence are most representative. But these tests are difficult to conduct and are very expensive. 


The main disadvantage of all the above methods except in the bore hole jack tests, is that the results are influenced 
by blast damage and stress relief and therefore controlled excavation methods are required. The bore hole jack 
tests have the advantage that large number of locations can be tested rapidly and hence the test is sometimes used 
without recognition of its limitations. On the other hand Uniaxial Jacking tests are easy to conduct, relatively 
cheaper, and are much simpler. This test determines how in-situ rock reacts to controlled loading and unloading 
cycles and provide data on deformation moduli, creep and rebound. The modulus of deformation of rock mass is 
lower than the elastic modulus of intact rock material as determined in the laboratory. 


This standard was originally published in 1974 and subsequently revised in 1993. The first revision provided 
a general discussion of the uniaxial jacking test procedures. It updated the information and explained in more 
details the procedures utilized to accomplish the test. It also gave recommended interpretation of the modulus of 
deformation for use in technical analysis. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 7317 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


UNIAXIAL JACKING TEST FOR DEFORMATION 
MODULUS OF ROCK MASS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the method for determination 
of modulus of deformation of rock mass by uniaxial 
loading technique in which pressures are exerted on 
two parallel flat rock faces on the two opposite sides 
of a section of a drift, gallery or tunnel by means of 
hydraulic jacks. The applied pressure and the resulting 
displacements are used for the determination of the 
modulus of deformation by the help of the appropriate 
elastic theory. The modulus of deformation is not a 
constant parameter, its value depends upon the stress 
level also. The choice of the design value for the 
in-situ modulus of deformation or elastic modulus thus 
becomes a matter of engineering judgement. 


1.2 The creep characteristics of the rock mass may be 
computed from the graphs of displacement versus time. 


1.3 The effects of anisotropy may be determined by 
applying the load in any desired direction. However, 
in jointed rocks, the test shall be conducted in the 
direction conforming to design requirement. 


2 SELECTION OF TEST SITE 


2.1 Prior to selecting a test site location, all available 
surface and sub-surface geological data of the 
exploratory drift shall be complied and analysed by the 
geologist. A three dimensional portrayal of these data 
shall also be prepared in plotted form. 


2.2 After detailed exploration, sufficient geological 
mapping, and reviewing all available information in the 
exploratory drifts, the zone of the influence of structure 
(dam, tunnel, under-ground openings, etc), may be 
divided into different lithological units and then sub- 
divided further into various structural zones. In each 
of these similar zones, a minimum of about four tests 
may be carried out. If large variations are found in the 
obtained results, additional confirmatory tests should 
be carried out to be able to choose design values for 
each zone. 


2.3 The test site shall be selected such that the geology 
at the test location is representative of the geology of 
the area loaded by the structure to be built. 


2.4 Testing in drifts, tunnels or any other under-ground 
openings is preferred for convenience. In the absence 
of such facility, the test may be located close to the 
sides of open excavations for foundation or abutments. 


2.5 After selecting the test site, the geologist shall 
prepare a three dimensional map showing the micro 
geology of the in-situ rock mass falling under the 
influence of test. The following information pertaining 
to the test location may preferably be collected and 
jointly recorded by a team of geologists and engineers: 


a) Rock quality designation (RQD); 

b) Point load strength index of the rock material; 

c) Number of joint sets, their dip and strike; 

d) Spacing and condition of joints; 

e) Ground water condition, dry/damp/wet/ dripping/ 
lowing; 

f) Rock mass rating (RMR) and rock mass 
quality (Q); 

g) Modulus of elasticity of rock material; 


h) Special features that is, presence of shear or fault 
zones, etc; 


j) Method adopted for excavation of the drift that is 
by controlled blasting; hand chiselled or by any 
other means; and 


k) Description of damages due to blasting. 
3 PREPARATION OF TEST SITE 


3.1 The size of the drift or gallery in which tests arc 
to be carried out shall be kept as small as required for 
testing, so as to reduce the number of packing plates or 
the size of the intervening truss placed across the tunnel. 
The size of the exploratory drift shall be such that the 
distance between the loaded area and a restraining 
tunnel surface shall be at least equal to the radius of the 
loaded area (R) so that any restraint would not affect 
the calculated moduli significantly, as shown in Fig. 1. 
In the absence of the exploratory drift, these tests can 
be conducted in open area. Excavation of trench can 
also be considered for testing on fresh rock. 


The standard size of the opening convenient for the 
test being about 1.8 m wide and 2.1 m height. The 


IS 7317 : 2020 


excavation of the drift shall be made in such a manner 
as to cause minimum disturbance of rock to be tested. 
Blasting shall not be allowed during final preparation 
of the test site. 


1.5 В min. 1.5R тїп. 


1A SITE CONDITION A (IDEALIZED) 


Е 
& 
~ 


OR min, 


SR min, 


1B SITE CONDITION B (IDEALIZED) 


Fic. 1 DISTANCE BETWEEN THE LOADED AREA AND THE 
RESTRAINING SURFACE 


3.2 After site selection, the area selected for testing shall 
he carefully prepared as quickly as possible, preferably 
within 15 days of the test site selection. In case of rocks 
being susceptible to loosening and weathering, tests 
should be conducted within thirty days of excavation 
of drift to obtain properties of fresh rock mass. 


3.2.1 All loose rock material shall be removed by using 
chipping hammers and drills. The final trimming of 
rock to provide two parallel, concentric and smooth 
rock faces, about 50 mm larger than the test plate 
shall be done by means of chisel and hammer. The 
areas shall be finally ground smooth. There shall be 
an understanding between the field engineers and test 
engineers on the importance of careful treatment of 
rock during all excavation phases. 


Both ends of prepared rock surface should be concentric 
and levelled for uniform load distribution. 


4 TEST SET-UP 


4.1 The test set up depends upon various conditions 
of testing, that is, whether the test is carried out in a 
small drift or in a wider tunnel or in an open trench, 
whether the test is carried out in a vertical or horizontal 
or inclined direction, and whether the resulting 
deformations are measured with respect to the bearing 
plate, or outside the loaded area or inside the rock mass 
along the centre line of the loaded surface. 


4.2 For some typical test set-ups Figs. 2, 3 and 4 may 
be referred. 


4.2.1 Figure 2 depicts the arrangement for vertical 
test set up in small drifts and galleries where the 
deformations are measured with respect to the bearing 
plates. 


4.2.2 Figure 3 shows a similar test set-up in a wider 
tunnel. However, for inclined tests, suitable supporting 
structures may be designed. 


4.2.3 Figure 4 indicates an inclined test set-up in a 
small drift where the deformations are measured inside 
the rock mass along the centre line of the loaded area. 


4.3 Set-Up for Narrow Drifts and Galleries 


4.3.1 The minimum size of the steel bearing plate shall 
be 25 mm thick and 600 mm diameter. The size of the 
plate to be used at a given test site shall however not 
be less than 3 to 4 times the average spacing of joint 
or crack pattern subject to the limitations of the testing 
capacity available. Two such circular or square rigid 
steel plates shall be placed in contact with the rock 
surface with an intervening layer of concrete or any 
other materials equivalent to modulus of rock mass. 
The maximum thickness of the intervening layer shall 
be about 5 cm. The test location shall be saturated with 
water to simulate seepage at site. The concrete or any 
other material shall be allowed to cure sufficiently to 
obtain adequate strength prior to commencement of test. 
The space between the steel plate and the intervening 
layer and between the steel plate and the packing plate 
may be filled with teflon sheet of sufficient thickness in 
order to have a uniform transfer of load. 


4.3.2 The loading apparatus shall be such that it is 
capable of applying simultaneous uniform pressures 
to two test areas on the opposite rock faces prepared. 
A calibrated hydraulic jack of capacity commensurate 
with the required stress or a minimum of 200 T and 
capable of maintaining the desired pressure to within 
2 percent of a selected value throughout the duration of 
the test shall be used for load application. The hydraulic 
pump system with necessary fittings, valves, gauges 


REACTION PAD 


30, 45 & 60 cm 
STEEL PLATES 


HYDRAULIC JACK 
200 T CAPACITY 


SUPPORT STAND 


DIAL 
GAUGE/LVDT 


30, 45 & 60 ст 0 
STEEL PLATES 


PUMP AND PRESSURE 
GAUGE (70 MPa) BOTTOM PAD 


1.8m 


Fic. 2 SETUP FOR UNIAXIAL JACKING TEST IN VERTICAL DIRECTION WITH STIFF PLATE 


CALIBRATED 
DIAL GAUGE a 
(1 div. 2.002 mm) HHH 
U U | 
" DATUM BAR FOR EN м 
| FIXING DIAL GAUGE PLACE 
О, САЦВВАТЕО 
нас (О резање | 
mee A 
Ko SEC 
CONCRETE PEDASTAL ELECTRICAL 
FOR HYDRAULIC PUMP RESISTANCE STRAIN 
GAUGE LOAD CELL 


Fic. 3 Set Up For UNIAXIAL JACKING EQUIPMENT FOR WIDER TUNNEL LOCATIONS 


3 


IS 7317 


: 2020 


IS 7317 : 2020 


PARTICLE BOARD 
PAD 


TUNNEL ROCK TOP PLATE 


SURFACE 


4 RESTRAINT 
COLUMNS 


TUNNEL DIA. 


N x 76 mm DIA CORE 
DRILL HOLE APPROX 
6 TIMES LOADING 


PREPARED DIAMETER 
1.5 TO 2 TIMES 
FLAT JACK DIAMETER 


DATA ACQUISTION 
SYSTEM 


4 SCREWS FOR SET-UP 
AND REMOVAL 


FLAT JACK 
1 м DIA APPROX 


MPBX MEASURING ANCHORS 
(5 OR MORE PER HOLE) 


MPBX SENSOR HEAD 


RUBBER SLEEVE OVER 
LEAD WIRES 


6.9 MPa 
HYDRAULIC PUMP 


NOTE - TIMBER PLATFORM FOR SUPPORT DURING 
ERECTION NOT SHOWN 


Fic. 4 Set-Up For UNIAXIAL JACKING EQUIPMENT IN DRAFTS WHERE DEFORMATIONS ARE 
MEASURED INSIDE THE Rock Mass 


and hoses shall also have sufficient pressure capacity 
and volume for applying the desired loads. Generally 
it shall be preferred to use two stage pump to cover 
lower and higher pressure ranges. steel packing plates 
of sufficient thickness or material of equivalent rigidity, 
shall be placed in between the hydraulic jack and the 
steel plates in contact with the rock faces. Two of the 
packing plates should be of special design and should 
be provided with four equally spaced holes through 
which micrometer dial gauges are attached to measure 
independently the displacement or deformation of 
rock at the top and the bottom. The final gap, if any, 
between the plates should be closed by moving the 
plunger forward by operating the pump. A small initial 
load, about 0.5 kg/cm? should be applied to remain 
for a minimum period of 24 h to allow for the setting 
of cement mortar or 6 h for setting of plaster of paris 
before starting the test. Before applying the initial 
load it should be ensured that all the packing plates 
are concentric with the plunger of the jack, and in turn 
concentric with the plates. 


4.3.3 The dial gauges or linear variable differential 
transformers (LVDT) capable of reading up to 
0.002 mm with a minimum travel of 25 mm should be 
set up to give deformations of the four corners of each 
bearing plate. By moving the brass screws, the gauges 
should be adjusted to show initial reading nearly three 
fourths of the entire range of travel of the gauge. 


Deformations of the two plates should be measured 
independently as the type and condition of the rock 
may be different at the two faces because of loosening 
or stress relief in the rock mass in the roof or sides of 
the drift. 


The dial gauge or LVDT should be supported on beam 
connecting two rigid stands located outside zone 
of influence of tests. The stand should be located at 
distance of 1 to 2 times the diameter of test plate. 


4.4 Set-Up for Wider Tunnel Locations 


The setup is shown in Fig. 3 and it is suitable for 
horizontal loading for locations in wider tunnels. In 


this case also the deflections of each face are measured 
separately with respect to independent datum located 
at a distance of about 3 to 4 times the size of the plate, 
along the axis of the tunnel. The deflection is recorded 
by the help of four dial gauges at one face. 


4.5 Set-Up for Drifts where the Deformations are 
Measured inside the Rock Mass 


The typical set up has been shown in Fig. 4. In this case, 
600 mm to | 000 mm diameter flat jacks shall be used 
in place of bearing plates at the two ends. In the set-up, 
the deformations shall be measured at the centre of the 
loaded area both at the surface and at different depths 
using multiple point extensometers located in central 
NX-76 mm diameter bore hole and with reference to a 
datum fixed at a depth of 6 times plate diameters. 


4.6 Set-Up for Open Foundation/Trench 


The typical set-up for conducting the tests in open trench 
is shown in Fig. 5. Similar arrangement can be adopted 
for tests in open area. Normal load can be applied by 
taking reaction from kentledge, anchored truss or any 


JE- n. а BS B 


IS 7317 : 2020 


dead weight arrangements. Set up for deformation 
measurements inside drift and open surface 1s similar. 


5 TEST PROCEDURE 


5.1 As far as possible, preference shall be given to 
the testing with flexible loading arrangement and 
deformation measurement inside rock mass as shown 
in Fig. 4. However, if it is not possible to deploy this 
test set up, the testing with stiff loading arrangement 
and deformation measurement on surface as shown in 
Figs. 2 or 3 may be used. 


5.2 After all components of the test set are installed, 
they shall be checked jointly by the field and test 
engineers. А final check of all mechanical, hydraulic 
and electronic components (if any) shall be made after 
the concrete pads are placed and again before the first 
load increment is applied. 


5.3 Test shall be conducted continually on a 24 h a day 
basis utilising load ranges and increments compatible 
with the particular design considerations. 


GRAVITY LOADING TO 
TAKE JACK REACTION 


STEEL PLATE 
STEEL GIRDERS 
— 
LOAD BEARING Г LOAD BEARING 
Ра WALL l^ МАШ 
EXTENSION PIPE 
HYDRAULIC 
DIAL GAUGE JACK 
DIAL GAUGE TEST PIT 
HYDRAULIC 
PUMP TEST 
% / PLATE 


ЈЕ 
E 60cm 


А 


АВОЧТ 200ст 


Fic. 5 Set-Up FOR UNIAXIAL TESTING IN OPEN FOUNDATION/TRENCH 


IS 7317 : 2020 


5.4 The test shall be started after allowing sufficient 
time for curing of concrete pads in both surfaces. The 
initial load applied shall be reduced to bare minimum 
to hold the steel plates in position, say about 0.5 kg/cm. 


5.5 Rock deformation shall be recorded at sufficient 
intervals and a minimum of six readings during the 
first hour of each load increment or decrement is 
recommended. 


5.6 The maximum load at which the test is to be 
conducted shall correspond to 1.2 to 1.5 time the 
anticipated maximum stress liable to be developed 
because of the proposed structure. Care shall be taken 
to check that the rock mass is not stressed beyond its 
strength. The test shall be conducted in a total number 
of five cycles. Each cycle shall consist of 20 percent of 
maximum test stress. In each cycle of loading, the load 
increments may be at least one fifth to one tenth of the 
test load involved in each cycle. The unloading, should 
be done similar to loading steps. The test being a cyclic 
loading test, the load shall be brought down to the initial 
load applied to hold the plates in position, each time 
before reloading for another cycle. Deflection given 
by dial gauges and the corresponding load (or stress) 
shall be noted. The dial gauge readings should be 
continued till it is less than one division over a period of 
30 min. Besides, the duration of each pressure increment 
may be determined by the creep characteristics of 


the rock mass. Plot of deformation versus time shall 
be prepared by conducting separate test. This plot is 
useful for studying the creep characteristics of the rock. 
In uniaxial jacking test the duration of load increment 
for each cycle shall be fixed up to 1 h in general and 
may be increased up to 5 h depending upon the rock 
mass condition. However, experience of the test party 
and critical examination of observations during the 
first pressure increment can be used to modify time 
requirements for successive increments. The results 
shall be plotted in the stress deformation diagram 
which forms the basis of interpretation for analysing 
the behaviour of the rock mass under imposed load 
and for determining the values of the deformation 
and elastic moduli, and the magnitude of irreversible 
deformations. 


5.7 After the test is completed, the installation 
procedure is reversed and the entire set up is retrieved 
for subsequent use. The concrete pads shall be removed 
so as not to create a safety hazard by having them fallen 
by the action of gravity at some later date. 


5.8 The data observed during the test may be plotted to 
give deformation versus stress, time and depth below 
the surface curves (see Figs. 6, 7 and 8) to calculate 
moduli of deformation/ elasticity at various stress 
levels, creep factors and the variation of moduli with 
respect to depth. 


6.0 


PRESSURE APPLIED, MPa 


DEFORMATION, mm 


Fic. 6 DEFORMATION VERSUS PRESSURE APPLIED 


6 


IS 7317 : 2020 


0.75 
E 
ul 
% 

m 6.9 MPa к 
Е 6.9 МРа O 
Е г | = 

ш ш 

о 

< 050 т 

c о 

5 < 

o а. 

e [7] 

< a 

= о 

о о 

E – 4.1 MPa t 

z | | 3 

a ш 

О 2 

ü 0.25 | 

а Ж 

~ M 

9 ‚ 2.8 MPa ж 

| 0 MPa 
71.4 MPa | 
| 0 МРа 
| + МРа 
0 | 1 
DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY DAY 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
TIME (DAYS) 
Fic. 7 Rock DEFORMATION AT SURFACE VERSUS TIME — UNIAXIAL JACKING TEST 
Rock Displacement, mm 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 
0.0 
1.0 
2.0 
E 
© 
o 3.0 
I 
= 
5 
ч 
о 
= 4.0 
5 
a 
Ф 
б 
5.0 
6.0 
Deepest Extensometer Anchor 
7.0 


Fic. 8 Еоск DEFORMATION VERSUS DEPTH-UNIAXIAL JACKING TEST WITH BOREHOLE EXTENSOMETERS 


IS 7317 : 2020 


5.9 The creep test as shown in Fig. 7 is essential for 
weak/soft rocks. 


5.10 The test duration mentioned in 5.3 and 5.5 are for 
creep tests. The dial gauge or LVDT reading at each 
increment can be taken when the deformations are 
stable. Generally, 2 min per increment are adequate. 
Maintain peak and zero (seating) pressure for 10 min 
for normal deformability test. 


6 INTERPRETATION OF THE TEST DATA 


6.1 Because rock mass is not truly an elastic material, 
there is considerable latitude available in selecting 
the type of modulus to be computed for the design 
purpose. All moduli are computed from elastic 
solution for rigid plate on semi-infinite homogeneous, 
isotropic and elastic medium, the only difference is the 
portion of the curve used by the designer to obtain the 
deformation and stress changes. In the cyclic loading 
tests, it is usually found that large deformation occur 
in the first loading cycle while the recovery of the 
strain on removal of the load is comparatively very 
small indicating a permanent set in the rock mass by 
closing of cracks and joints. The deformations in the 
2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th cycles of loading are used for 
calculating the deformation moduli at different stress 
levels. Similarly, the recovery in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 
5th cycles of unloading arc used for calculating the 
elastic moduli at the corresponding stress levels. For 
reporting the average deformation modulus and the 
elastic modulus, the values corresponding to the last 
cycle may be considered. 


6.2 The purpose of the uniaxial jacking test 15 to 
determine the extent to which the rock mass shall 
deform under externally applied loads. Care is thus 
needed in the interpretation of the results of the tests so 
that the settlement ofthe structure 1$ correctly estimated. 
Computations for the determination of modulus of 
deformation should include all deformations due to 
applied loads whether elastic or plastic and the creep 
effect and exclude any deformation on account of blast 
damage, surface preparation or any other loosening 
effect which is assumed equal to deformation in the 
first cycle resulting in consolidation of disturbed zone 
of rock mass. 


6.3 The effect of creep shall be taken care of while 
computing the deformation modulus. 


6.4 The evaluation of deformation modulus is based on 
rigid die-pressed into semi-infinite elastic medium. 


The modulus of deformation corresponding to test set 
up described in 4.3 and 4.4, for each cycle shall be 
calculated from the following formula: 


P(1-v?) 
БЕТТ 


where 

Е, = modulus of deformation; 

V — Poisson's ratio of the rock from the laboratory 
tests on representative rock. If its value has 
not been determined in the lab, it may be 
considered between 0.20 and 0.30. Its value 
for different rock types shall be assumed as 
0.20 for excellent rocks such as granite, etc, 
0.25 for gneiss, quartzites, etc. and 0.30 for 
mica schist, slates, etc; 

6 = deformation of the test slate in one loading 
cycle (б, Ref. Fig. 6); 

Р = total load on the test plate; and 

R= radius of test plate. 


Similarly, unloading modulus from unloading curve 
shall be calculated for each cycle using the above 
equation by taking 6 equal to recoverable deformation 
(5, see Fig. 6) of that cycle. Which is also called as 
elastic modulus (Е). 


6.5 For the test set up described in 4.5, the displacement 
at and point beneath the centre of a circular loaded area 
is expressed as follows: 


2р(1-у* 2 (1+у 
5_2Р\ гт: == ) z 
E, E, |А? eZ. 
where 
— displacement in the direction of loading in one 
cycle; 
Z= distance from loaded surface to the point 
where displacement is measured; 
р = stress at loaded surface; 
— radius of loaded area; 
у = Poisson's ratio of the rock; and 
Е = deformation modulus of rock mass. 


At the loaded surface, where value of ‘Z’ is zero, the 
above equation may be rewritten as: 


E, -2pR(1-v')/8 


But in the test set up in question, if the load shall be 
applied through a circular flat jack with a hole in the 
centre and therefore considering A, as inner radius 
and К, as outer radius of the flat jack the displacement 
expression becomes as: 


2 
ја i Г [бт -JR + |+ 
а 


2 1 1 | 


Е. |+? 2+7? 


| 


By putting the values of R,, R, and Z, the displacement 
at a particular point ‘1’ or ‘2’ may be expressed as: 


ô = p(K,)/ E, or ô, = p(K,)/E, 
Therefore, the modulus of deformation of the rock mass 


in the zone between depth Z, and Z, may be determined 
from the following equation: 


E, = p(K,-K,)/(6,-6,) 


6.6 Besides, creep factor shall also be calculated for 
each cycle by the following expression (see Fig. 6): 


Change in deformation at constant load (percent) = 


Creep of Cycle «100 


Deformation During Load Increase 


7 REPORTING OF THE RESULTS 
In addition to the information in 2.5, the report of the 
test should also include the following: 


a) Whether the test was conducted in a drift or on a 
rock surface in open; 


b) Location of the test site indicating three 
dimensional coordinates, drift number, chain age, 
etc; 


c) Extent of rock/loose burden above the test site; 


d) Whether the test was conducted on floor, or on 
roof or on side walls; 


e) Period elapsed between excavation of the site and 
testing; 


f) Direction of testing, that is, whether vertical, 
horizontal or inclined; 


g) Orientation of the rock mass stratification and the 
direction of loading during testing; 


h) A complete geological description of the rock 
mass with RMR and Q; 


j) In-situ stresses in the rock mass; 
k) Name of the testing agency; 


m) A description of the  uniaxial apparatus 
including the photos of the installed equipment, 
specifications, accuracy, sensitivity of all the 
pressure and deformation instruments; 


n) Tabulation of the observed data; 


p) Plots of stress Versus deformation, time Versus 
deformation and depth Versus deformation; 


q) Deformation and clastic moduli at different 
stresses levels; 


r) Creep factors at different stress levels; 
s) Any other relevant information; and 


t) A plot between £,/ E, and RMR will help in 
selecting design deformation modulus. 


IS 7317 : 2020 


8 | APPLICATION 
DEFORMATION 


OF MODULUS OF 


The designer should be careful in application of in-situ 
moduli of rock mass on the following points: 


a) Modulus of deformation (Е) for static analysis of 
foundation of dams, etc, corresponding to various 
stress levels in the rock foundation; 


b 


— 


Dynamic modulus for dynamic analysis of dams, 
etc, which may be taken equal to elastic modulus 
(E) corresponding to the maximum stress level of 
the test. This is recommended because dynamic 
deformation will be simulated more realistically 
by Е, than by E,; 

Elastic modulus (Е) for design of concrete lining 
in pressure tunnels and pen-stocks, etc, because 
internal water pressure leads to reduction of 
deviatoric stresses within the rock mass; 


с 


ме 


а) In practice, the in-situ rock mass lies under 
confining pressure due to depth, but the 
deformation modulus is measured with almost no 
confining pressure. Besides, in drifts the tests are 
performed in elastoplastic zone near the surface 
of the rock mass. Thus, in poor rock masses the 
increase in modulus of deformation with confining 
pressure and depth below ground surface becomes 
important and pronounced. However, it leads to a 
conservative design if borehole extensometers are 
not used; and 


е 


— 


In river valley projects, rock mass gets saturated 
in some areas after charging water conductor 
system/after filling of reservoir. The modulus 
of deformation and elastic modulus are reduced 
drastically specially in poor rocks with water 
sensitive minerals. Thus these moduli should 
be multiplied by suitable correction factors for 
saturation where tests are not done on saturated 
rock masses. 

NOTES 

1 The settlement of foundation of high dams especially in 
narrow valleys should be analysed by the 3-D finite element 
method (two dimensional analysis is found to give very 
conservative and unrealistic results). 

2 If the behaviour of the rock mass is plastic, non-linear should 


be performed. 


9 SAFETY ASPECTS DURING TESTING 


The following safety precautions should be observed 
during testing: 


a) Pressure lines should be free from air in order to 
avoid bursting of lines. 


b) Watch out carefully for failure of rock mass in 
punching shear at both ends. This may lead to 
collapse of assembly. 

c) Reaction pad from roof may get loose and fall 
while unloading as well as dismantling the 
equipment setup. 


IS 7317 : 2020 


d) Total deformation should not exceed deformation 
capabilities of flat jacks, normally this is 
approximately 3 percent of the diameter. 

е) Hydraulic jack should be used within the 
prescribed pressure and plunger range. 

f) The assembly should be checked for proper 
orientation throughout the testing work. 


10 


g) АП the persons working inside drift during site 
preparation and testing shall wear personal safety 
equipment like helmets, gumboot and torch light. 


h) The testing site should have proper lighting and 
dewatering arrangements 


АММЕХ А 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Engineering AG, India, Gurugram 
Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 
Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, New Delhi 
Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunneling 
Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


National Disaster Management Authority, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dn М. К. Samaputya (Chairman) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
Suri AKHIL КАЈ (Alternate) 


SHRI KripAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


Suri С. P. PATEL 
Suri Upay CHANDER (Alternate) 


DiRECTOR 
Suri Hari Dev (Alternate) 


Mp Rizwan ALI 
Dn S. A. Вике (Alternate) 


MzMBER (D&R) 
CHIEF ENGINEER, DrsiGN (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI Коознк Рамрт (Alternate) 


DR К. К. Сов. 
Dn J. К. Mounot (Alternate) 


Dr РАХКАЈ СОРТА 
Suri К. К. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Іт Сог PARIKSHIT MEHRA 
REPRESENTATIVE (Alternate) 


Dr ALTAF USMANI 
ӛнкі ЗАКАТ PAL (Alternate) 


Suri М. КАЛУ 
SHRI PRASANTA МІЅНКА (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr МАНЕЅН CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Dr MAHENDRA SINGH 
Dn Pritt MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI TRIBHUVAN SINGH 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH AGARWAL 
SHRI L. PRAKASH (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY (MITIGATION) 
Dr RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


11 


IS 7317 : 2020 


IS 7317 : 2020 


Organization 
National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 
Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 


National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 
RITES Ltd, Gurugram 
THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


In personal capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, 
Sector-49, Gurugram) 


In personal capacity (4-125, Prodhyogiki 
Apartment, Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri М. К. MATHUR 
SHRI IMRAN SAYEED (Alternate) 


Suri А. RAJAN BABU 
Suri G. Goprnat (Alternate) 


Suri М. К. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH Rawat (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
Suni Уплу DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PALLAB PAL 
Dn В. К. SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri Т. 5. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Dr MANOJ VERMAN 


Dr RAJBAL SINGH 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (Ступ. ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTATING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Dr Mano) Kumar RAJAK 
SciENTIST ‘О’ (Ступ. ENGINEERING), BIS 


12 


(Continued from second cover) 


This second revision of the standard incorporates modifications found necessary as a result of the experience 
gained with the use of the standard and to bring the standard in line with present good practices being followed in 
the country and abroad. The principal modifications in this revision are as follows: 


a) As this test is being used for evaluation of modulus of deformation of rock mass, the title of the code has 
been suitably amended by using the words ‘rock mass’ instead of ‘rock’. 

b) The test setup for uniaxial jacking test in vertical direction with stiff plate (see Fig. 2) has been improved. 

c) The test setup in open area/trench has been included. 


d) In the interpretation of test data, as compared to the Bouzinesq’s equation for a point load on infinite 
homogeneous isotropic and linearly elastic material in the last version, the evaluation of deformation 
modulus has been amended based on rigid die-pressed into semi-infinite elastic medium. 


e) Safety aspects to be followed during testing have also been included. 


In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A 


In reporting the result of a test or analysts, made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that 
of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (14043). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.Т.Т. Scheme УП М, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


