**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 9080-2-1 (1979) : Safety requirements in electro-heat 
installations, Part 2: Particular requirements for 
resistance heating equipment, Section 1: Protection in 
direct resistance heating installations [ETD 17: Industrial 
Electroheating Equipment] 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



£«> \\ i i^sttZfr^ss: 



^XYV*^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



l5:908DPart II /Sec I ) - If 79 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN 
ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART II PARTICULAR REQUJREMEN TS FOR 
8ES15TANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section I Protection in Direct Resistance 
Heating Installations 



LDC 62V365*3'005 ! 614'823 




<§) Copyright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MAMAS hkavan. 9 BAHADUR shah /ajar marg 

NEW llt.LHl J 10007 




T> 2 



)l» 1979 



IS : 9080 ( Part II/Sec 1 ) - 1979 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN 
ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART M PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section I Protection in Direct Resistance 
Heating Installations 

Industrial Electroheating Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDC 61 

Chairman Representing 

Shri S. K. Maz-umder The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Members 

Shri A. K. Biswas ( Alternate to 
Shri S. K. Mazumder ) 
Shri S. N. Agarwal Steel Furnace Association of India, New Delhi 

Shri B GaRUDachab Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri V. Seshadri ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K.Jain Graphite India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. K. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. N. Krishnan Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants ( India ) 

Ltd, Ranchi 
Shri J. C. Madan Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. T. Makhuani Westerwork Projects Ltd, Bombay 

Shri L. C. Chandi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P, K. Mtjkhopadhyay Heavy Machine Building Plant, Heavy Engineering 

Corporation, Ranchi 
Shri M. K.Nair Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry 

of Defence ), Calcutta 
Shri P. A. Patel Indian Furnace Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shrt M. PurandhaR ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Pyne National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. Mukhopadhyay { Alternate ) 
Shri A. L. R. Rao Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri R. M. Chandwani ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. R. Rao M. N. Dastur and Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri T. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Dr Ravindra Reddy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Secunderabad 

Shri M. Shankralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Shri R. V. Narayanan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1979 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 9080 ( Part II/Sec 1 ) - 1979 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri Y. P. Vatsa The General Electric Company of India Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. K. Nayar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Shri Dipak Dasde 
Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



IS : 9080 ( Part II/Sec 1 ) - 1979 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS IN 
ELECTRO-HEAT INSTALLATIONS 

PART II PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR 
RESISTANCE HEATING EQUIPMENT 

Section I Protection in Direct Resistance 
Heating Installations 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II/Sec I) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 25 January 1979, after the draft finalized by the 
Industrial Electroheating Equipment Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard forms Section 1 of Part II covering the requirements 
for protection in direct resistance heating installations. The other parts 
of this series are as follows: 

Part I General requirements 

Part II Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment 

Sec 2 Protection in indirect resistance heating installations 

Sec 3 Protection in potassium and sodium nitrate and nitrite 
bath furnaces 

Sec 4 Protection in installations used for drying varnishes and 
other similar products 

Part III Particular requirements for mains and medium frequency 
induction furnace installations 

Part IV Particular requirements for arc furnace installations 

0.3 In preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived 
from IEC Pub 519-2 ( 1975 ) 'Safety in electro-heat installations: Part II 
Particular requirements for resistance heating equipment 5 issued by 
International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS : 9080 ( Part II/$ec 1 ) - 1979 

the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 The particular requirements laid down is this standard apply to 
equipment for the direct resistance heating of a charge or of an enclosure 
surrounding the latter and should they not be covered by existing 
requirements, they apply among others to: 

a) salt-bath furnaces with electrodes; 

b) melting furnaces; 

c) equipment for direct heating of solids and of components ( such 
as rivets, wires, pipes, rolled billets ) with the exception of 
welding equipment; and 

d) furnaces with electrodes for glass and slag melting. 

Note — The present particular requirements do not apply to certain specific 
types of furnaces such as certain graphitizing furnaces and silicon carbide 
furnaces. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Electrodes — Elements which directly transfer electric current to 
the material to be heated. They are in contact with this material. 

2.2 Slag Melting Furnaces — Equipment in which the melting and 
heating-up of slag are carried out by heat generated by a direct flow of 
the alternating current in the bath between immersed electrodes; the 
heating can be started by means of an electric arc. 

2.3 Glass Melting Furnaces — Equipment in which the melting and 
heating-up of glass are carried out by heat generated by a direct flow of 
the alternating current in the bath between immersed electrodes. 

2.4 Salt-Bath Furnace with Electrodes — Equipment in which the 
heating of the charge is carried out by immersion of the latter in a liquid 
medium at working temperature, the heat being generated by a direct 
flow of the alternating current in the bath between electrodes. 



IS : 9080 ( Part II/Sec 1 ) - 1979 

2.5 Equipment for Direct Resistance Heating of Manufactured 
Components — Equipment in which the current passes through the 
material to be heated, for example, devices for heating rivets, machines 
for hot upsetting, equipment for heating wires, pipes and rods. 

2.6 Device for Starting Heating — Auxiliary device which, in the 
case of salt baths, permits the starting of the process of current flow 
between main electrodes. 

2.7 Contact Heads, Contact with Treated Component — Elements 
transferring the current to the material to be heated ( for example, 
contact rollers in direct heating equipment ). 

3, CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION DETAILS 

3.1 Voltage Values — In equipment which is not protected, in normal 
operation , against accidental direct contact — this being the general case — 
it is required that direct resistance heating equipment shall not be 
operated at rated voltages exceeding 50 V. The voltage energizing salt- 
bath furnaces with electrodes shall also be maintained below 50 V, 

3.2 Absorbed Power (Tolerance) — In the case of salt-bath furnaces, 
slag melting furnaces and glass melting furnaces, the variation of the 
bath resistivity is to be taken into account when selecting distribution 
equipment, protection devices and energizing conductors. 

3.3 Nameplates — For salt-bath furnaces with electrodes and equipment 
for direct heating of materials, supplied by a separate voltage source 
( transformer or generator ), the nameplate shall designate, in addition 
to the rated power of the equipment, the following values: 

a) Rated current; 

b) Rated voltage; 

c) Capacity of the power source and if the furnace is fed by a 
transformer, the primary and secondary voltages; and 

d) Working temperature. 

4. OPERATION 

4.1 Protection Against Accidental Contacts — Operating instructions 
shall state that during loading and unloading, heating elements of salt- 
bath furnaces with electrodes shall be handled only in the dead state 
(this is also valid for equipment operated at rated voltages below 50 V). 



IS: 9080 ( Part II/Sec 1 ) - 1979 

4.2 Other Protective Measures 

4.2.1 In equipment for the direct heating of materials and components, 
measures shall be taken to eliminate any hazards liable to be caused by 
sparking of particles in the vicinity of such equipment. 

4.2.2 The same is valid for salt-bath furnaces when auxiliary electrodes 
are used. 



