IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - 1970
( 2000 ) ) ( Reaffirmed Reaffirmed 1995

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SPECIAL FIRE FIGHTING APPLIANCES
PART I COMBINED FOAM AND COP CRASH TENDER 1997 ) ( Third Reprint MARCH

UDC

614.845.6

0 Copyright

1971

BUREAU
MANAK

OF IND'IAN STA-NDARDS
9 PaNIADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DEIJII 110002

RHAVAN.

Gr 7

May

1971

1s : 5896

(

Part I ) - 1930

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SPECIAL FIRE FIGHTING APPLIANCES
PART I COMBINED
Fire Fighting
Chairman LT-GEN MOTI SA~AR MdCrS SHRI A. B. ADVANI Sam R. S. SIJNDARAM Smu P. R. BRAWDAKY

FOAM AND COP CRASH TENDER
Sectional Committee, BDC 22

Representing Ministry of Home Affairs Municipal Corporation of Delhi ) Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur The Insurance Association of India, Bombay ) Air Foam Industries Ltd, New Delhi West Bengal Fire Services, Calcutta Home ( Police ) Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh Central Public Works Department

(

Altemats

SHBI P. K. BHARUCHA SHRI A. CHA~BHJI ( Altnnnk SHRI M. B. CH&KANKAR SHRI R. MEHTA ( Alkrnak ) SHJXI S. C. CHAXTERJEE SHRI P. ROY ( Al&m& ) DIBECTOR, FIRE SERVICE

FXECUTIVE ENGINEER(C DELHI CENTRAL CIRCLE No. 1$ I Bombay Fire Brigade, Bombay SERI S. F~EDILIS Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHBI P. N. GEoSH Sam A. N. AALUWALIA I Alkmak ) Avon Services ( Production & Agencies ) Private DR D. S. JAIBWAR Limited, New Delhi Kirloskar Brbs Ltd, Kirloskarvadi Snm S. R. KULKARNI Allen Richards 6 Co, Calcutta Sam J. P. MAJUMDEB SHBI A. K. MITRA ( Alkmak ) Red Comet ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. N. V. MANI National Safety Council, Bombay SHBI N. S. MANKIKEB Ministry of Home Affairs SHRI P. N. MEEROTEA SEIU R. S. GUFTA ( Alkmak ) Fire Service, Government of Tamil Nadu SHRI M. A. S. MOHAJIB SERI A. RAPHAEL ( Alkmak) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways) SHBI S. P. NAG Directorate General of Civil Aviation Sam S. M. NAGALINGAM Directorate General of Technical Development Sam K. RAMAKBISHNA RAO Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL B. N. S. RAO MAJ B. B. RAJPAL ( Alkmak ) Tosh Metal & Alloys Industries Pvt Ltd, Howrah SHRI H. R. SCOTT SERI A. L. GUPTA ( Alkmak )

B-UREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDA,RDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARQ

i

BHAVAN,

NEW `DELHI

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - -1970 ( Continued Jhm pagr 1 )
Representing Members Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun SHRI P. L.-SEBASTIN SRRI V. V. KIMMATKAR ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SERI G. C. SENAPATI SARI P. CBATTERJEE ( Alternate ) Newage Industries, Surendranagar SARI J. V. SHAH SHRI M. K. SHAH (Alternate ) SE;;~~ANSTJKHLAL HEMCHAND Zenith Fire Services, Bombay SHRI CHANDRAKANT M. SHAH ( Al&note ) SHRI VIRENDRAKUMAR S. SHAH Kooverji Devshi & Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. T. PANJWANI ( Alternate ) DGL Private Limited, New Delhi SBRI V. N. SHARMA SHRI F. E. BRAIN ( Alkrnak ) Directorate Genera1 of Supplies & Disposals SHRI C. R. SIRCAR Synthetics & Chemicals Limited, Bombay S&RI D. K. SIRKAR Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI I. SONDHI SHRI R. G. LYNN ( Altemab ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee SERI B. C. SRIVASTAVA SHRI J. P. KAUSHISH ( Alternate) Minimax Limited, Calcutta SHRI L. H. TRORNTON &RI G. K. SHAH1 ( Altcmate) Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI N. P. VARQHESE Atomic Energy Establishment, Trombay, Rombay SHRI S. G. VENQSARKAR Urban Development, Public Health and Housing SHRI B. V. WAQLE Department, Government of Maharashtra SHRI R. R. RAO ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ek-ojkio Member ) Sart~ R. NAQARAJAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI J. R. MEHTA Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

Codes of Practice
Convener lSERI R. S. GUPTA Members
SHRI A. B. ADVANI

Subcommittee,

BDC 22 : 4

Ministry of Home Affairs

Municipal Corporation of Delhi SERI R. S. SU~DARAM ( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. BHA~UC~A The Insurance Association of India, Bombay SERI M. B. CHAKANKAR Air Foam Industries, New Delhi Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SHRI P. CHATTERJEE SERI S. FREDILIS Bombay Fire Brigade, Bombay SHRI P. N. GHOSH Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI A. N. AHLUWAXIA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Home Affairs SHRI P. N. MEHROTRA SERI R. S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. M. NA~ALIN~AM Directorate Genera1 of Civil Aviation *Also alternate to Shri P. N. Mehrotra.

2

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - 1970

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATIO~N AND MAINTENANCE OF SPECIAL FIRE FIGHTING APPLIANCES
PART I COMBINED FOAM AND CO2 CRASH TENDER

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard -was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 26 October 1970, after the draft finalized by the Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Even which it adequately cance for Combined the best designed equipment will not serve the purpose for is intended unless it is correctly employed and operated and This fact assumes greater sign& and regularly maintained. equipment which is meant for special use or application. foam and CO1 crash tender is one such equipment.

0.3 There are several makes of combined foam and CO2 crash tenders, both imported and indigenous, in use at aerodromes in India. Whereas, the general principles for the selection, operation and maintenance of all The recommendations in this such appliances are the same, details vary. standard have been framed particularly for the combined foam and CO, crash tender made to IS : 951- 1969*. 0.4 Provisions of IS : 951- 1969* have not been discussed in this standard. It is, therefore, necessary to make a reference to that standard while using this. 0.5 ho fire fighting appliance can be operated without adequate manpower and extinguishing media. Recommendations for these have, therefore, also been included in this standard. 0.6 These recommendations take into account the recommendations of the International Civil Aviation Organization as far as possible, but are not These, however, cover most of the essential requirements. exhaustive. Any situation not covered by these recommendations may be dealt with according to normal fire service practice and procedures.
*Specification for combined foam and CO, crash tender (first rauision).

3

Is:!s96

(Part

I)-I!#70

0.7 This code of practice represents a standard of good practice and, there. 0.8 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 03 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express;? ;h;s" of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with : l. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. fore, takes -the form of recommendations.

1. SCOPE 1.1 Thii standard lays down the recommended practice and procedures for the selection, operation and maintenance of combined foam and CO, crash tender conforming to IS : 951 - 1969t.
2 SELECIXON

2.X The combined foam and CO, crash tender shall be provided at aerodroves, primarily for fighting fires in aircraft and petroleum, where foam is intended to be used as the principal lire extinguishing medium. also be used for fighting Class A fires ( ZCG IS:2190-1962: ) or for :kzE do-, as necessary, in addition to its primary function of fighting fires in aircraft and petroleum.
`NUTS 1 -The main purpose of providiug tl$ -type of appliauce at an aerodrome is to muda immediate attack on au aircmft fire possible in the event of-au accident, which includes all fues iu aircraft- whether as a result of crash or otherwise. It is, therefore, essentialthat it is not-diverted for fighting firesother than aircmft fires if an &craft emergeucy (see Appendix A ) is in existence at the time of such incident, unless appliaoces of this nature are available which ace iu excessof immediate requiremeuts. Narrc 2 -The amouut of carbon dioxide carried on this appliiuce is not adequate by itself to fight a huge aircraft or petroleum fire in the open. Its use is restricted-to extinguishiog small pocketa of fires after the maiu body of fire has been suppressed by foam and to fighting fireainside the fuselage, enginesor wiog spaceaof aircraft. NATE 3--These appliances are not suitable when the ambient temperature goes below the fkziug point of water dmiog auy part of the year. Large capacity and high discharge rate dry powder tenders are recommended for such aerodromex. These may, bowever, be used under exceptionalcircumstaucesat aerodromcs where the ambient temperaturedoer not fall below -5�C at any time of the year, provided a suitable anti-Ikeeze ir added to each r&i of water iu the crash teuder tank and radiator tauk. *Rules for rouodiug off numerical value ( raked ). t+ecikation for combined foam and CO, crash tender (fbrt r&s&m). *Code of @ce for sektion, installation and maintenanceof portable lkstdd 6re rppliaucea

4

Is:!i896(PartI)-1970 3. SCALE 3.1 Combined foam and CO, crash tenders shall be provided according to
the scale recommended aerodromes. in Appendix B for different categories of

4. HOUSING
4.1 Crash tenders shall be housed in properly designed fire stations at suitable locations at the aerodrome to ensure: a) adequate protection from the ravages of weather, b) adequate facilities for in-service maintenance, and c) speedy turn-out to any possible incident at the aerodrome or its immediate vicinity. 42 Crash tenders shall not be left standing in the open except for the duration of standbys (seeAppendix .4) or actual usage for drills or operational purposes.

5. MANPOWER
5.1 A crew of four or six trained men, according to service conditions, shall be provided to man each appliance. The crew shall Cbmprise ene officer-in-charge of the appliance, one tire operator (fireman), driver and two or four Sre operators (firemen). When no separate rescue tender is provided, necessary extra men may be provided for the crew of this appliance for rescue work. Norrs 1- Training should inclu$e complete familiiization with the applkmtits capabilities, operation and maint+tm rice, emer@mcy procedores, fire-fighting techniques and complete familiarization with the topography of the aerodrome and its vicinity, including all approach and~access routes.
NOTE Z-The strength of crew recommended in 5.1 i the normal complemat required to man the appliance efficientlyfor fire_fighting operatioos. In an emergarp, the applkxucecan be operated by reduced number of men, but its effeaivenas will he reduced. The recommended strengrhdoes not include the requirementsof manpower for rescue operations. 5.2 It shall beensured that the full crew recommended in 5.1 is available for instantaneous turn-out at all times when the appliance is required.

6. WATER

SUPPLY

6.1 Adequate water supply shall be provided to enable each crash tender to be operated for a continuous period of five minutes, without interrup tion, delivering its full rated output of foam. 5

IS : 5896( Part I ) - 1970 6.1.1 Additional water supply for the purpose of 6.1 shall be carried on large capacity water tenders conforming to the ` Indian Standard specification for water tender, type X, for fire brigade use ' (under prefiaration).
NOTE-Until the standard under preparation is published, subject to the agreement between the concerned parties. the matter shall be

6.1.2 Each water tender shall be manned by its full complement of crew who shall be available for instantaneous turn-out at all times when the water tender is required to augment the water supply on the crash tender.
6.2 Water supply for fighting fires in static risks, like the hangars, workshops, electric sub-stations, oil companies, depots, aircraft parked on aprons, airport terminal and other buildings, etc, shall be provided in the form of water stored in static tanks.

~6.2.1The static tanks shall be designed and sited to ensure that: a) the capacity
of each tank is adequate to allow simultaneous and continuous pumping by two fire appliances, each drawing 3200 l/min of water, for at least 30 min; arrangements for the initial filling and speedy replenishment of each tank, so as to ensure that an empty tank can be filled up in not more than 18 hours; or accident hazard to aircraft, surface vehicles and men; and

b) there are adequate

c) no tank forms an obstruction

4 no tank shall be more than 100 m away from the risk it is intended

For high fire risks, like oil companies' depots and to cover. hangars, the siting of static tanks should not be less than 50 m away from the risk to be covered.

6.3 In addition to the provision of additional water supply recommended in~6.1 and 6.2, an overhead reservoir shall be provided for quick filling of crash tender water tank. 6.3.1 The design of the overhead reservoir shall be as shown in Fig. 1.

6.3.2 The capacity of the overhead reservoir shall be adequate to provide at least two complete refills for all fire fighting appliances fitted with a water tank at the station.
6.3.3 The overhead reservoir shall be sited at a suitable location which shall keep running distance of vehicles requiring replenishment to the minimum and the reservoir itself shall not form an obstruction or accident hazard.
to achieve

NOTE - It may be necessary to build the overhead reservoirs at more
thisat large aerodromes.

than

one site

6

IS:5896 (Pari

I)-1970

FIG. 1

TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR QUICK REFILLING OF CRASH TENDER WATER TANK

6.3.4 There shall be adequate arrangements for the initial filling and speedy replenishment of each overhead reservoir and necessary approach road and hard-standing shall be provided to enable the heavy crash tender to draw water from it. 7.

ADDITIONAL

FOAM-COMPOUND

SUPPLY

7.1 Additional supplies of foam-compound, conforming to IS : 4989-1969* shall be provided for replenishing the foam-compound tank on the crash tender and arrangements shall be made for its speedy transport to the required site.
7.2 The total amount of additional foam-compound crash tender shall be adequate for two complete compound tank. provided for each refills of its foam-

*Specification for foam-compound for producing mechanical foam for fire fighting.

7

ist!B96

(put

I)-1970

8. SPARE COs CYLINDERS 8.1 one or more spare sets of COs cylinders, conforming to IS: 287%1967* fully charged with COt gas conforming to IS : 307-I 966t, shall be provided for each crash tender.
upon the facilities cylinders least two 9.

NOTE-The

number of spare sets to be provided for each crash tender will depend availability of recharging facilities for the cylinders. In cities where such are available, only one spare set per crash tender may su5ce. Where the are required to be tramported to a considerable distance for recharging at spare sets of cylinders per crash tender are recommended.

SPARE

PARTS

9.1 Adequate spare parts for the maintenance of the chassis, engine pump, foam producing and carbon dioxide equipment and radio-telephone shall be provided at each station. This is articularly necessary for stations where spare parts are not readily availa Ele. 10. ACCESS ROADS

19.1 For a foam and CO* crash tender to be effective in fire extinguishing and aiding rescue operations from a crashed aircraft, it should be able to reach the crash site as expeditiously as possible. This can be partly achieved by the judicious siting of the fire stations (see 4.1). Local topographical conditions at an aerodrome may, however, require means to ass@ in the fulfilment of this essential requirement. Suitable quick exits shall, therefore, be provided around the perimeter of the aerodrome far rescue and fire fighting vehicles and good approaches to access roads beyond the aerodrome boundary for, as far a distance as practicable, shall also be provided. 11. OPERATION 11.1 The foam and COa crash tender may be operated for any of the following: Production a> tender; of foam, taking water from the service tank of the crash

L

b) 4 4

Production of foam and delivery of foam-fog, taking water from the service tank of the crash tender; Delivery of water jets or water-fog, taking water from the service tank of the crash tender; Using the first-aid hose-reel only, taking water from the service tank of the crash tender;
for low carbon steel cylinders for the storage and transportation for carbon dioxide ( samadrsaisior ). ofhu.+

+gpeciiication Cable gases. tgpecificotion

8

ISsSS96 (Part

I)-1970

e) Continuing any of the operations (a) to (d), without interruption, taking water from the water tender; f) Production of foam, taking water from an open static supply; t g) Production of foam ti open static supply; &livery of foam-fog, taking water from an taking water from an open

h) Delivery of water jets or water-fog, static supply; j ) Filling the water tad

&f lhe crash tender;

k) Filling the foam-compound tank of the crash tender; and m) Discharging carbon dioxide gas for extinguishing small fires. The correct operation for each of the above is explained in 11.2 to 11.13. 11.2 General-The following shall be checked at the beginning of each tour of duty by the incoming crew: a) Water TankIt shall be kept full. It shall be kept full and the air-vent kept

b) Foam-Compound Tank clean.

c) Engine Radiator Tank and Auxiliary Tank for shall be kept full. Where Fitted -These d) Fuel Tank-It shall be kept full.

the Heat Exchanger,

e) Tyres-These shall be checked for correct inflation. The correct pressure given in the instruction manual for the chassis shall be painted on the outside of mudguards, above the tyres, in white paint, so as to ensure correct and ready means for checking. f) Oil Level in Engine Sumplevel on the dip stick. It shall be up to the mark for correct

g) Battery-Xt shall be -topped UP with distilled water and the specific gravity ~of the electrolyte shall be checked. Connections between the battery terminals and the electrical circuit shall be checked to ensure that these are tight. h) Carbon Dioxide Equipment- The carbon dioxide hose-reels shall be checked to ensure that these rotate freely and the hose is correctly wound. The pull-off handles in the driver's cabin shall be checked to ensure that these are not already pulled out. The connection at each carbon dioxide cylinder head shall be checked to ensure that it is correctly made and that the safety peg is out. 9

IS : 5896 ( Part I) -1970 j ) First-Aid Hose-Reel- The first-aid hose-reel shall be checked to ensure that it rotates freely and that the tubing is correctly The tubing shall be kept filled with water up to the wound. shut-off nozzle and the nozzle kept shut. k) Ancillary Equipment - It shall be checked for correctness of quantity and stowage. with the inventory lists

11.2.1 The engine shall be started to ensure that it is capable of starting instantaneously and shall be run up for five minutes at the beginning; of each tour of duty by the incoming crew. All lights, bells and fla&ng beacon shall also be checked at the same time.
NOTE-~IIt is desirable that the appliance is taken out on a road run alone taxi-wavs. apron, runway, etc, during the run&g up period and its brakes and run&i check& at the same time. Necessary precautions shall be taken while using the taxi-ways and/or the runway for this purpose and prior clearance of the a&drome control tower shall be sought for using these.

11.2.2 A test call shall be given to the fire station watch room and the aerodrome control tower over the radio-telephone to ensure that its transmission and reception are both clear. 11.2.3 The to the electric trickle charger on the appliance shall be kept connected mains when the appliance is parked in the appliance day.

11.2.4 While fighting an aircraft fire, the appliance shall be parked on the upwind side of the burning aircraft, that is, it shall be kept out of the way of the billowing smoke. The appliance shall, however, be sited as close to the aircraft on fire as possible. The exact location of the crash tender and position of foam jets, vis-a-vis the burning aircraft depend upon various factors, like the intensity of fire and extent of the fire-zone, the number and type of appliances available for fire fighting, etc. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate some of the ways in which this can be done. These are only representative and do not cover all situations.
NOTE-It is not the intention to go into the details of aircraft fire fighting techniques here, but siting of appliance and jets has an important bearing on the effectiveness of operations. Hence, it is included here.

11.2.5 In addition to the instructions for various operations given in 11.3 to 11.13, the following general instructions shall be borne in mind while running the engine or operating the pump:

When the engine has to be run stationary for Jong duration, either by itself or for pumping, the bonnet shall be opened to allow cool air to circulate round the cylinder block to assist cooling. In vehicles having forward driving control, all windows and doors of the driving cabin shall also be opened. The driver operator valves and building shall take all possible care while opening up pressure in the hand-line( s ). 10 the

IS:!5696 (Part I)-1976

rCRASH

TENDER

FIQ. 2 TYPICAL SKETCH SHOWING CORRECT PARKINGOF APPLIANCES IN RELATION TO BUFMINO AIRCRAFT(ONE FOAMANDCOa CRASHTENDER AND ONE WA'I;ER TENDER)

4

The monitor(s) shall be handled with due care even when no foam is passing through these, because a sudden discharge through the monitor may cause it to be thrown up and may result in injury to the operator. All pump and engine gauges shall be kept under constant watch and prompt action shall be taken to trace and/or rectify the fault if any gauge shows an unusual reading. The pump gland shall be examined from time to time and adjusted as required. Water tender shall always be connected to the crash tender when using water from the crash tender service tank. It can be disconnected later if not required.

4 4 f)

11.3 Production of Foam, Taking Water from the Service Tank to the Crash Tender -This operation may be necessitated when fighting fire in spilled fuel, oil companies' depot and/or aircraft, or when carrying out routine drills at the fire station. It may also be required 11

IS:!%96 (Port-I)-1970

FIG. 3 TYPICAL SKETCH SHOWING CORRECT PARKINGOF APPLIANCES IN RELATIONTO BURNING ATRCRAFT (Two FOAM AND CO, CRASH TENDERSAND Two WATER TENDERS) to cover the -fuel spillage near an aircraft with a blanket of foam with a view to prevent an outbreak of fire while normal operations are in progress. When fighting an aircraft or other fire, the appliance shall be parked according to the procedure given in 11.2.4 and the engine shall be kept running. When carrying out the drill, it may be parked as required. In any case, hand brake shall be applied to the appliance before commencing operations, unless it is necessary to move it-for the purpose of obtaining a more advantageous position for attacking the fire. The procedure given in 11.3.1 to 11.3.9 shall be followed for producing foam, in the order in which it is given.
NOTE -Foam

discharge

may also be commenced

as the appliance

draw into the

parking position.

11.3.1 While carrying out a wet drill with engine stopped, the engine shall be started. The engine shall be kept running during `hot' drills and when attending a fire (see 11.3). 11.3.2 The pump shall be engaged according to the instructions of fhe man&cturer. When the pump is engaged while the appliance is on the move, it shall be done at not more than 700 rev/min of the engine unless the manufacturer directs otherwise in the instruction manual. 12

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) -1920 11.3.3 The water tank-suction valve shall be opened and the foamcompound rate-of-flow selector valve set at the required position according to the number of deliveries in use.
NOTE 1 - If the appliance is fitted with an automatic foam-compound proportioning device, it may only be necessary to put the regulator in the ` ON ' position at the beginning of operations. NOTE 2 - In case of an aircraft fire, it is advisable to commence the attack with one or both monitor(s) so as to overwhelm the fire with a heavy discharge rate. The monitor(s) may be progressively closed down as the hand-lines are brought into operation for complete extinction of residual fires. The monitor(s) shall not, however, be effective when the crash tender cannot be taken within 25 to 30 m of the burning aircraft. In that case, only hand-lines shall be used. If the distance is beyond the reach of thesingle length of hose? which is kept connected between the delivery outlet and the foam making branch pope, more hoses shall be connected up. When this is necessary, only one line shall be got ready and working before attempting to lay out a second delivery line.

11.3.4 In case of the air blown foam system, the compressor shall be engaged whenever the monitor is to be used and disengaged when the monitor is not used or is no longer required. 11.3.5 A pressure of 0.7 MN/ma ( 7 kgf/cms ) shall be built up on the pump and shall be maintained at this level, as the delivery is opened up by manipulating the throttle. 11.3.6 The delivery monitor or hand-line, as the case may be, shall be opened and the foam applied to the fire or spillage as necessary. 11.3.7 While changing from monitor to sideline, the foam-compound rate-of- flow selector valve setting shall be suitably altered, unless the appliance is fitted with automatic foam proportioning device. 11.3.8 Where the fire situation requires the use of foam having greater adhesion, it may be obtained either by moving the foam-compound rate- of- flow selectcr valve to one setting higher than the one normally required, or, to a limited extent, by increasing the delivery pressure at the pump. 11.3.9 At close of operations, the used delivery hoses and foam making equipment, including all plumbing through which the water foamcompound solution flows during foam production, shall be thoroughly flushed out with clean water in accordance with the instructions on the `flushing out instruction plate' on the pump operating control panels. The foam-compound tank shall then be topped up, unless it is due for cleaning [see Table 1 and 13.4 ( a) 1. il.4 Production of Foam and Delivery of Foam-Fog, Taking Water from the Service Tank of the Crash Tender-This operation may be necessitated when it is necessary to cool down the wings or fuselage of a burning aircraft or similar overheated surfaces, in case of other 13

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - 1970 petroleum fires, simultaneously with the fire fighting operations The procedure single appliance, or while carrying out a wet drill. in 11.4.X to 11.4.4 shall be followed. by a given

11.4.1 The appliance shall be positioned as given in 11.2.4 and the instructions given in 11.3 to 11.3.6 shall be carried out for discharging foam through one monitor only. 11.4.2 Delivery hose shall be run out from one of the pump deliveries and the foam branch at its end shall be replaced by a fognozle, with or without applicator, as required. 11.4.3 changed monitor, UP* 11.4.4 At close of operations, shall be carried out. the instructions given in 11.3.9 and 13.4 (a) The foam-compound rate-of-flow selector valve setting shall be to one stage higher than the one required for operating a single and the hand-line having the fognozle at its end shall be opened

Il.5 Delivery of Water Jets or Water-Fog, Taking Water from the Service Tank of the Crash Tender -This operation may be necessitated for washing down spilled or burning fuel from under an aircraft, when such spillage is over a built up ground and there is no danger of the fuel wash causing a hazard of fire or explosion elsewhere, or for fighting Class `A' fires (see IS : 2 I90 - 1962* ) or for cooling down, or while carrying out a wet drill. The procedures given in 11.5.1 to 11.5.4 shall be followed. 11.5.1 The appliance shall be suitably positioned. fuel spillage under an aircraft, the instructions apply. 11.5.2 With the engine running, the pump shall be engaged according to the manufacturer's instructions. When the pump is engaged while the appliance is on the move, it shall be done at not more than 700 rev/min of the engine unless the manufacturer has stated otherwise in the instruction manual. 11.5.3 Necessary hose line( s) shall be laid out from the pump outlets and branch pipe(s), with required size of fognozles or fognozle shall be connected as necessary.
NOTE -The fognozle has the advantage that it can produce a straight jet or waterfog at the flick of a handle, but the size of jet cannot be changed.

In case of a burning given in 11.2.4 shall

11.5.4 The pump delivery outlets up adequate pressure at the pump. the size of nozzle( s) in use.

in use shall be opened after building The actual pressure will depend upon

*Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of first-aid fire appliances.

14

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - Z970

TABLE

I

WEEKLY

MAINTENANCE ROUTINE THE FIRE STATION (Clauses 11.3.9,

TO BE CARRIED

OUT

AT

13.2 nnd 13.3)

DAY or Monday

WEEK

DETAILS OB TASK a) All nipples, truss shafts, valve spindles, etc, shall be lubricated with grease gun, oil can or by hand as requxed b) Radio telephone shall be checked, tested and cleaned by a qualified technician

Tuesday

Foam production test shall be carried out, discharging foam through monitor and side lines for 15 seconds each. For the purpose of this test, the foam branches shall be fitted directly to the pump outlets. The flushing out operations and replenishment shall be carried out after the test in accordance with instructions given in 13.4 (a) a) All locker doors, hinges, cab doors, bonnet hinges and catches shall be lubricated using light machine oil b) Search and spot lights shall be checked for free movement and lubricated as necessary. Cables shall also be checked at the same time. Fire bells shall be checked for correct operation

Wednesday

Thursday

a) Delivery hoses shall be laid out for airing and all hoses shall be replaced with fresh hoses from the stock. After airing, hoses shall be cleaned, made up and kept in store

b)
Friday

Ladders shall be checked. light machine oil

Pawls and pulleys shall be lubricated with

4 b)

CC, hose reel tubing shall be spread out and examined for cuts and/or visual defects. It shall be rewound after applying french chalk to it PartiAll tyres shall be checked for correct inflation and cleaned. cular attention shall be paid to the presence of stones between the tyre treads and mud between the twin rear tyres

Saturday

a) First-aid hose reel tubing shall be checked and treated with french chalk as for CO, hose-reel tubing ( see Friday ) b) Engine shall be cleaned c) All hoses on the appliance shall he replaced with fresh hoses and the ones which are removed shall be tested. All defective hoses shall be repaired after drying and before being stowed away

Sunday

Weekly summaries shall be entered in the vehicle history hook and records shall he completed

IS : 5896 (Part I) - 1970 11.6 Using the First-Aid Hose-Reel only, Taking Water from the Service Tank of the Crash Tender -This operation may be necessitated when fighting Class `A' fires (see IS : 2190.l962* ) where indiscriminate use of water is likely to cause water damage or where the size It of fire is so small that it does not warrant the use of full sized jets. may also be useful for producing the desired effect on the public by getting a jet to work within a couple of seconds of the arrival of the crash tender at the scene of fire-particularly a building fire -and till the larger jets could be got to work. 11.6.1 The appliance shall be parked and instructions given in 11.5.2 shall be carried out. A pressure of 0.7 MN/m2 ( 7 kgf/cm2) shall The then be built up at the pump and shall be maintained at this level. required length of hose-reel tubing shall be pulled out, the hand controlled nozzle shall be opened and the jet directed at the fire. 11.7 Continuing Any of the Operations, Given in 11.3 to 11.6 yit-hout Interruption, Taking Water from the Water Tender-This operation may be necessitated in case of an aircraft crash fire away from the hangar or apron when it may be necessary to augment the water supply normally carried on the crash tender in order to ensure that the fire fighting operations could be prolonged without interruption or while carrying out a wet drill. It may also be employed in fighting Class `A' fires (see IS : 2 I gO-1962* ) if the utilization of static water supply is likely to be delayed. 11.7.1 The crash tender shall be operated in the normal manner ing to the applicable instructions given in 11.3 to 11.6. accord-

NOTE- In crash tenders fitted with heat exchanger, the by-pass to the heat exchanger shall be opened and when the crash tender is used for foam production, the heat exchanger circuit shall also be thoroughly flushed with clean water at the clo:e of operations.

11.7.2 Simultaneously, the water tender Type X conforming to ` Indian Standard specification for water tender, Type X, for fire brigade use' (under prejmmtion), shall be positioned close to it, say at approximately 25 m, and the hoses from the four pump deliveries of the water tender shall be connected to the four hydrant connections on the crash tender.
NOTE - Until the standard under preparation is published, sub_iect to the agreement between the concerned parties. the matter shall be

11.7.3 The water tender p"mp shall be operated, taking water from its service tank and the pump deliveries opened. The pressure at the water tender pump shall be adjusted to give adequate rate of discharge to maintain the water level in the crash tender tank constant, which may be read off the water tank contents gauge fitted to the crash tender.
*Code of practice appliances. for selection, installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire

16

IS:5896

(Part

I)-1970

11.8 Production of Foam, Taking Water from an Open Static Supply-This operation may be necessitated while fighting an aircraft fire in a hangar or on the apron, or while fighting fire in fuel spilled on an apron, or while fighting fire in the oil companies' depots at the aerodrome, when the fire fighting operations have to be prolonged beyond the capacity of the available appliance(s), or while carrying out a wet drill. 11.8.1 The crash tender shall be positioned at the static water supply and necessary lengths of suction hose connected up with the strainer attached to the last length. The suction hose shall be secured with a rope and its strainer and lowered into the water. 11.8.2 The pump shall be engaged and primed with the engine running in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
crash tenders fitted with heat exchanger! the by-pass to the heat exNOTE --In changer shall be opened as soon as the pump has primed and the heat exchanger circuit shall also be thoroughly flushed with clean water at the close of operations.

11.8.3 The foam-compound rate-of-flow selector valve shall be set at the required position according to the number of deliveries in use (see Notes 1 and 2 below 11.3.3). 11.8.4 The instructi0r.s given in 11.3.4 to 11.3.9 shall be carried out.

NOTE-When the crash tender has to be operated for long periods, it shall be necessary to replenish its foam-compound tank also. This may be done either by using the transfer pum'p ( see Il.12 ) or by pouring in the foam-compound through the filling orifice of the tank. Alternatively, the foam-compound mav be induced direct from the containers through the syphonic pick-up tube. 11.9 Production of Foam and Delivery of Foam-Fog, Taking Water from an Open Static Supply-This operation may be necessitated under circumstances similar to those given in 11.8, when it is necessary to cool down the wings or fuselage of a burning aircraft or similar overheated surfaces, in case of petroleum fires, simultaneously with the fire fighting operations by a single appliance.

11.9.1 The instructions given in 11.8.1 to 11.8.4 including notes below 11.8.2 and 11.8.4 shall be carried out, except that only one monitor shall be operated and foam-fog shall be produced as given in 11.4.2 and 11.4.3. 11.10 Delivery of Water Jets of Water-Fog, Taking Water from an Static Supply-This operation may be necessitated when under circumstances similar to those given in 11.5, the fire fighting operations have to be prolonged beyond the capacity of the available appliance(s).

Open

11.10.1 The instructions given in 11.8.1 and 11.8.2 shall be carried followed by instructions given in 11.2.4, 11.5.3 and 11.5.4. exchanger shall be opened as soon as the pump has primed. 17
NOTE In crash tenders fitted with heat exchanger, the by-pass to the

out
heat

IS : 5896 (Part I ) - 1970 11.11 Filling the Water Tank of the Crash Tender -The of the crash tender may be filled in two ways: a) from an open static and b) from the overhead water supply, using the crash (see Fig. 1). water tank tender pump;

reservoir

11.11.1 While filling up from an open static water supply, using the crash tender pump, the instructions given in 11.8.1 and 11.8.2 shall be carried out. 11.11.1.1 Necessary lengths of hose shall be connected pump delivery outlets and the hydrant filling connections tender. between the of the crash

11.11.1.2 The pump delivery outlets shall be opened and a pressure of not more than 0'05 MN/m2 (0.5 kgf/cm2) shall be maintained at the pump till water is seen coming out of the overflow pipes and/or the water tank contents gauge reads ` full `.
be internally pressurized while filling, shall be carefully followed.

NOTE -_Manufacturer's

special instructions, if any, to ensure that the tank shall not

11.11.2 While filling up from the overhead reservoir, the crash tender shall be driven to and positioned below the reservoir outlet in such a manner that the filling orifice of the crash tender tank is under the reservoir outlet. The crash tender water tank filler cap shall be opened, the canvas hose attached to the overhead reservoir outlet shall be put into The the filling orifice and the overhead reservoir delivery valve opened. valve shall be closed as soon as the tank is full, the filler cap on the crash tender tank tightened and the appliance driven away. 11.12 Filling the Foam-Compound Tank of the Crash Tender-The crash tender foam-compound tank may be filled in two ways: ~a) through b) through the foam-compound transfer pump, and the filling orifice of the tank.

1x.12.1 Filling up the foamrcompound tank through the transfer pump has the advantage that it does not cause the foam-compound to froth in the tank. This method should normally be adopted, unless it is necessary to fill the tank rapidly during an emergency. 11.12.1.1 For filling, the syphonic pick-up tube shall be connected to the inlet of the transfer pump and its rigid portion inserted into the foam-compound container. 11.12.1.2 The valve to permit filling of the foam-compound tank shall be opened and the transfer pump operated after ensuring that the filler cap of the tank is open. 18

IS : 5896 ( Part I) - 1970 11.12.1.3 Pumping shall be stopped as soon as the tank is full, the tank filler cap shall be closed tightly, the syphonic pick-up tube shall be disconnected from the transfer pump and the tank filler valve shall be closed. 11.12.1.4 The transfer pump and the syphonic pick-up thoroughly flushed with clean water before making up. 11.12.2 Filling up the foam-compound tank shall be resorted to only during the emergency. through tube shall be

the filling orifice

11.12.2.1 For filling, the filler cap of the tank shall be opened and, after ensuring that the strainer is in its position inside the filling orifice, foam-compound shall be poured in. 11.12.2.2 The filler cap shall be replaced when it is full. on the foam-compound tank

11.13 Discharging Carbon Dioxide Gas for Extinguishing Small Fires-This operation may be necessitated when it is necessary to knock out quickly the residual flamesresulting from an aircraft fire, or when it is necessary to fight a fire inside the fuselage of an aircraft when the portable extinguishers are not available or are inadequate, or for injecting carbon dioxide into the aircraft engine or wing on fire, or when carrying out live drills. 11.13.1 For fighting residual fires in the open or for fighting a fire inside the aircraft fuselage, adequate length of carbon dioxide hose-reel tubing, with the discharge horn attached, shall be pulled off the reel and the driver operator shall actuate two carbon dioxide cylinders, either by the 6 pull-offs' in the driving cabin or from the cylinder position. This shall be followed up by actuation of one cylinder at a time as and to the extent it is necessary. 11.13.1.1 continuously, The gas shall be applied as dictated by circumstances. to the fire in short bursts or

11.13.2 For injecting the carbon dioxide into the burning engine or wing of the aircraft, the discharge horn shall be replaced by the carbon dioxide extension applicator. 11.13.2.1 In case of an engine, the small horn on the applicator shall be removed by unscrewing and the `rose ' pressed against the carbon dioxide access panel on the engine. 11.13.2.2 In case of wings, a hole shall-be made into the skin covering of the wing and t&e carbon dioxide extension applicator horn placed over it to allow the gas to permeate into the wing spaces. The hole shall be made in the upper surface of the wing. 19

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - 1970 12. FAULTS 12.1 Mechanical Faults -If instructions carefully and regularly, there should be the fireground. However, minor defects driver-operator should be able to trace the given in 13 and 14 are followed no major mechanical defect on may sometimes occur and the fault and rectify it on the spot.

12.1.1 The driver-operator shall thoroughly study the electrical,' fuel and lubrication systems of the engine, with particular reference to the fault-tracing chart, normally given in the instruction manual, till he becomes fully conversant with these. 12.1.2 Mechanical engine to start. It essential that the instructions for the adequate practice competent person. fault may not always be the cause of failure of the may be due to faulty handling also. It is, therefore, driver-operator is fully familiar with the operating vehicle, as supplied by the manufacturer and is given in its driving and operation under supervision of a

12.2 Foam Making and Carbon Dioxide Equipment FaultsMaintenanceinstructions given in 13, if carried out scrupulously, should ensure a trouble-free service from the foam making and carbon dioxide equipment. Failure may in that case be due to human error in operation only, In case of failure, the following shall be checked: a) If there is no discharge reason may be: from the monitor(s) or side-line(s), the

l) pump not engaged; or 2) water tank-suction valve not open; or 3) in case of pumping from an open static supply, pump not primed; or 4) the delivery outlet control valve(s) for the monitor(s) or sideline(s), as the case may be, is (are) not open. Each of the above shall be checked in turn and the fault rectified. b) If foam does not form or it is of poor quality, the foam-compound rate-of-flow selector valve shall be checked. for correct setting. c) If carbon dioxide cylinder discharge head operating mechanism does not function, it may be due to non-removal of the safety peg, which shall be checked and removed, if necessary. d) If the removal of safety peg also does not bring any satisfactory results, it may be due to non-replacement of empty cylinder(s). e) If the carbon dioxide cylinders discharge head operating mechanism function satisfactorily and still no gas comes out of the discharge horn, it may be due to not opening of the carbon dioxide hose-reel main valve or the shut-off valve on the discharge horn. Both shall be checked, beginning at the discharge horn. 20

-

IS:5896 (Part I)-1970 pum itself is very reliable and shall give 12.3 Pump Faulta - Centrifugal trouble-free service throughout the e P ective life of the appliance., The difficulty may arise only in case of mechanical breakdown of the primemover or defect in primer, when taking water from an open static supply, or faulty operation. Almost all operational faults can be detected readily by keeping a careful watch on and correctly interpreting the variations in the reading of the pump gauges, that is, the pump pressure ~gauge and the In actual practice, there may bb innumerable minor compound gauge. faults which should not be difficult for a well trained driver-operator to trace and rectify himself. The interpretation of some commonly encountered variations -in the readings on the pump gauges is given in 12.3.1 to 12.3.4. 12.3.1 General ( A~plicabk to All Cases ) - The following variations in pump gauge readings may be encountered in all cases where water is pumped The remedy is self evident in each case: through hose lines. a) Sudden increase in the pressure gauge reading-This may be due to some obstruction in the delivery line, between the pump and the The driver-operator shall immediately reduce, pump branch. speed and investigate the cause, unless it can be directly observed that one or more monitor(s) and/or side-line(s) has (have) been shutdown. It may be due to any one of the following: 1) Kinks in the delivery hose; 3) Debris of collapsed wall, etc, ~fallen on hose; of hand controlled branch or changing the 4) Shutting-off discharge pattern of a hand controlled branch from jet to partial spray; 5) Shutting-off of the dividing breeching with control; and 6) While pumping from an open static supply, blockage of the
nozzle at the branch through the pump. by small stone which might have passed NOTE - Tf (6) is aupted to be the reason, the pump delivery must be shut down and pressure from the hose line relieved by disconnecting an intermediate ir of e thb coupli~~gr, before attempting to check or remove the stone, Failure to taE" precaution may result in serious injury to the person checking the defect.
b)

2)

Vehicle

standing

on the hose;

Sudden decrease in the pressure

gauge, ,reading-This

may

be due u

any one of the causes given below (before investigating, -the driver-operator shall try to maintain pump pressure by increasing the punip speed): 1) Bursting 2) Delivery

of any of the hoses in the delivery
hose couplings getting disconnected,

line,

21

B:5896 (Part I)-1970 3) Opening of a hand controlled branch or changing the discharge pattern of a hand controlled branch from partial spray to jet, and 4) Opening of a dividing breeching with control. c) Pressure gauge needle dropping to zero-This may be due to the water supply to the pump being cut off, as in the cases given below: 1) When taking water from the crash tender tank, the water in the tank may be exhausted; When taking water from a water tender, the water in the 2) water tender tank may be exhausted or the water tender may have stopped delivering water into the crash tender tank; and 3) When taking water from an open static water supply, the water at the source may be exhausted, or the water level may have gone down to below the suction strainer, or any of the faults given in 12.3.4 (a) for failure of pump priming may occur. 12.3.2 When Taking Water from the Service Tank of the Crash Tender-The pressure gauge may:

4 b) c) 4

show a sudden increase in pressure reading. For interpretation, see 12.3.1 (a); show a zero pressure reading. For interpretation, see 12.3.1 (b); show a zero pressure reading. For interpretation, see 12.3.1 (c); or show an erratic reading. This is due to the water in the service tank going down to a level where air is sucked into the pump through the water tank and is-an indication that the water in the tank is nearing exhaustion.
Water from a Water Tena'er-The

12.3.3 When Taking may:

pressure gauge For interpretation,

a) show a sudden increase in pressure reading. see 12.3.1 (a);

b) show a sudden decrease in pressure reading. For interpretation, see 12.3.1 (b); c) show a zero reading. For interpretation, see 12.3.1 (c) (2); or A d) show an erratic reading. For interpretation, see 12.3.2 (d). quick check shall be made with the driver-operator of the water tender when this happens and, if there is everything all right with the water tender, the crash tender pump may continue to be ooerated at reduced speed. 22

IS:5896 (PartI)-197@ 12.3.4 When Taking Water from an Open Static Supplycommon faults may be the following: Some of the

a) Failure of pump to primeThis may be due to either a leak or an obstruction on the suction side. The compound gauge shall indicate a zero reading in case of a leak and a high vacuum reading in case of an obstruction. When there is a zero reading on the compound gauge, the following shall be checked in the order in which each is given, 1) Suction strainerIt shall be submerged approximately 450 mm below the surface of the water. 2) Joints
between the suction hose and the pump inlet and between the suction hoses, where more than one length is r&d-These shall

3) 4) 5) 6)

be tight and the washers in female `couplings shall be intact and serviceable. Pump casing drain plug, or drain cock, zf Jitted-It shall be tightly closed. Pump delivery valvesThese shall be opened and then full closed. Heat exchanger by pass value - It shall be closed, Crash tender service tank-suction valve, when. the service tank is empty - It shall be closed.
tank is empg-

7) Foam-compound

It shall be closed.

rate-of--ow

selector valve, when the foam-compound

8) Shut-o$ cock on compound gauge connectionIt shah be open. Occasionally, a leak may develop in the connection(s) between the pressure and compound gauge and the pump. In that case, it shall be necessary to close down both shut-off cocks and work the pump by other indications, such as change of engine sound when the pump is primed, flow of a constant stream of water through the primer waste pipe, etc. 9) Where the primer is not fully automatic, *he priming valve may not shave been opened. 10) Incorrect engine speed in case of fully automatic primers. 11) Slow running of engine in case of exhaust ejector, induction and other primers requiring high speed operation. 12) Primer not engaged properly. 13) Leaking pump gland. 14) Air leak in suction hose. Change of suction hose, in which air leak is suspected, is the remedy because air leak in the suction hose cannot be detected or rectified on the spot. 23

1s:5896 (Part I)-1970

b)

When there is a high vacuum reading on the compound gauge, the following shall be checked in the order in which each is given: 1) Basket strainer, metal strainer and the strainer at the pump inlet. The basket/metal strainer shall not be bogged in mud and none of the strainers shall be checked; and 2) If the strainer(s) is (are) clean, the suction hose(s) shall be changed, because in that case the obstruction could be due to a fault in the internal lining or inner walls of the suction hose which collapses as soon as the primer is operated.

c) Sudden increase see 12.3.1 (a); d) Sudden decrease see 12.3.1 ( b);

in pressure in pressure

gauge .reading. gauge reading, to zero.

For

interpretation,

For interpretation, For interpretation, whilst

e) Pressure gauge reading see 12.3.1 (c) (3 ); or

dropping

f)

Increase in vacuum reading on the compound gauge working - it may be due to any of the following reasons:

1) Drop in the water level at the supply source because of pumping. This is no cause for anxiety, unless the supply is nearing exhaustion. 2) Increase in the rate of delivery of the pump. cause for anxiety. This is also no

3) Partial blocking of the strainer(s). If (1) and (2) are eliminated, the strainer(s) shall be withdrawn and cleaned before recommending pumping. At times, shaking the strainer by the rope~attached to it clears it of obstruction. g) Decrease in vacuum reading on the compound gauge whilst working - It may be due to any of the following causes: 1) Rise in the water level at the supply source because of the rate of its replenishment being more than the pump offtake; or 2) Decrease in the rate of delivery of the pump, when the rate of replenishment of the static supply remains unaltered. 11) Erratic reading on the pressure gaugeIt is an indication that air is being sucked in from the suction side through the Strainer. The suction strainer shall be checked and submerged at least 450 mm below the water level. j) Complete loss of vacuum on the compound gauge-It may be due to any of the faults mentioned in 12.3.4 (a ) for zero reading on the compund gauge. 24

IS:5096 (Part 13. MAINTENANCE

q-1970

13.1 Daily Routine --In addition to the general operating instructions given in 11.2 to 11.2.3, the appliance shall be cleaned thoroughly every day. The following tasks shall be carried out:

4

The following shall be cleaned and polished to a shine: 1) All painted parts. Soft rags or polishing cloth shall be used. Colourless wax polish shall be applied, if necessary; 2) All unpainted brass, using metal polish and soft rags; 3) All unpainted chromium plated parts, using soap and water and polishing cloth after drying; and 4) All unpainted steel, using kerosene oil and fine grade emery cloth and wiping clean with soft cotton rags.

b)
cl

All scratched paint shall be retouched shade of good quality paint.

as necessary with

correct

Chafed parts of wooden ladders shall be revarnished. Ail dull finished metal parts shall be burnished. All cutting edges of tools shall be sharpened gear shall be restowed correctly. as necessary and all to the shall

4 4

f > Delivery fd
h)

and suction hoses shall be maintained according instructions contained in relevant Indian Standards. Locker doors, hinges, locks, lids and covers on the appliance be checked for proper functioning.

All parts of body-work coming in contact with water shall be checked for signs of rust or corrosion and shall be cleaned and repainted as necessary. All plumbing shall be checked for leaks, and leaks rectified as It shall be ensured that all pipework is firmly sup necessary. ported. Standing on pipework or control rods and' linkage shall be avoided while working in pump compartment. CO2 cylinders and portable fire extinguishers shall be cleaned, polished and retouched with paint of appropriate shade as necessary. The CO* cylinders shall be checked to ensure that the cylinder discharge head sealing wire is not broken. The cyliuders shall be check-weighed and replaced as necessary, if the sealing wire is found broken. 25

j>

W All

TS: 5896 ( Part I ) - 1970
m) All drain cocks. monitor outlet valve, foam side-lines and pump foam-comfiound water tank - suction valve, outlet valves, rate-of-flow selector valve, first-aid and CO* hose-reel valves, pump gauge connections isolating cocks and all other lever and wheel type controls and cocks shall be checked to ensure that these are functioning properly and are in the closed position.

NOTE -In case of monitor( s ) operated on air-blown-Foam system only, the monitor outlet control valve( s ) shall be kept in the open position.

4

The auxiliary throttle on both side panels shall correct functioning after engaging the pump.

be checked

for

oil and P) Engine shall be cleaned with rags, using used lubricating kerosene oil mixture in equal parts. Care shall be taken not to disturb connections. q) The following shall be lubricated: 1) Centrifugal pump; and 2) Valve spindle, including pump outlet valves and linkages, auxiliary throttle. valves, all lever type

13.2 Weekly Routine - In addition to the general operating instructions given in 11.2 to 11.2.3 and the daily routine maintenance instructions given in 13.1, the tasks shown in Table 1 shall be carried out, as applicable, at the fire station, once a week. 13;3 Monthly Routine-The maintenance given in Table 2 shall be carried out at the fire station or at the ~workshop as stated in the table. These shall be in addition to the general operating instructions given in 11.2 to 11.4, daily routine maintenance tasks given in 13.1 and weekly routine maintenance tasks given in Table 1. 13.4 After Use - Immediately after returning from a fire and after using the crash tender for live drills or testing, the following instructions shall be carried out: a) After foam production: tank shall be drained out ; the foam-compound

1)

2) the

pump, foam-compound tank, all plumbing and fittings between the foam-compound tank and the pump, all hoses used for the foam discharge, foam monitor(s) if used, foam making branch(es) if used and heat exchanger circuit if used, shall be thoroughly flushed out, cleaned and dried. All used hoses shall be replenished with f&h hoses from the store ; radiator tank and the fuel tank shall Abe

3) the water tank,`the replenished ;

26

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - 1970

TABLE

2

MONTHLY MAINTENANCE ROUTINE TO BE CARRIED AT THE FIRE STATION OR WORKSHOP (Cluuse 13.3)

OUT

2.
(`1

TASK

WHERE TO BE CARRIED OUT

DETAILS

OE TASK

(2)

(3) Fire station

(4) Monthly output test of the pump shall be cartied out according to the instructions given in 14.1.2 (a) Once in six months the deep-lift test shall also be carried out in accordance with the instructions given in 14.1.2 (c) \`acuum test shall be carried out for the pump according to the instructions given in 14.1.2 (h) and for the suction hoses according to the instructions given in 14.1.3 Where air blown foam equipment is fitted, the air blower shall be cleaned and serviced The foam-compound tested and serviced transfer pump shall be

i)

Fire fighting equipment

All CO, cylinders shall be check-weighed. Once in six months, the CO, hose-reel tubing shall be tested against a hydraulic pressure of 7 MN/m* (70 kgf/cms). The first-aid hose-reel tubing shall be subjected to a pressure test of 1.05 MN/ma (10.5 kgf/cms) for 2) minutes ii) Body work Workshop All body bolts and screws shall be checked and tightened as necessary. At the same time, necessary repairs shall also be carried out All lockers shall be checked for signs of rust and corrosion and cleaned and repainted as necessary. All locker hinges and catches shall also be checked at the same time. All foam-compound pipe connections shall be opened, cleaned and refitted, making sure that all connections are correctly made and are tight.

27

lS:58!46 (Part I) -1970
4) the foam-compound tank~shall be refilled to full capacity; 5) lubricating oil level in the engine sump shrill be checked and topped up, if necessary ; 6) heat exchanger by-pass filter shall be cleaned when the heat exchanger has been used ; 7) in case of reciprocating primer, water in the primer sump shall be allowed to settle and then drained out if the primer has actually been used. The primer crank case shall always be kept topped up with lubricating oil ; and 8) in case of rotary primer, it shall be run for a short time to eject all water. It shall then be lubricated and turned by hand. b) After pumping water only: 1) the pump shall be thoroughly flushed with clean water and -all used hoses shall be flushed, cleaned and dried. Hoses shall be replenished with fresh hoses; 2) the water tank, the radiator tank and fuel tank shall be replenished ; 3) lubricating oil level in the sump shall be checked and topped up, if necessary ; 4) heat exchanger by-pass filter shall be cleaned when the heat exchanger has been used; 5) in case of reciprocating primer, water in the primer sump shall be allowed to settle and then drained out if the primer has actually been used. The sump of the primer shall always be kept topped up with lubricating oil ; and 6) in case of rotary primer, it shall be run for a short time to eject all water. It shall then be lubricated and turned by hand. c) After discharging carbon dioxide: 1) the radiator tank and fuel tank shall be replenished if the -appliance had gone out ; 2) lubricating oil level in the engine sump shall be checked and topped up as necessary if the appliance had gone otit ; and 3) used carbon dioxide cylinders shall be replaced with fully charged once after check-weighing the charged cylinders, and the cylinders shall be connected up to the cylinder head operating mechanism, both at the remote control and cylinder positions. The safety pegs shall be removed from each cylinder head after connections are completed. d) In all cases, the appliance, including the anc!illary equipment, shall be thoroughly cleaned and polished as necessary. 28

IS:5896(Part I)-1970 -14. TESTING 14.1Periodical tests of equipment fitted/carried on the foam and COs
crash tender shall be carried out as given in 14.1.1 to 14.1.4. 14.1.1 Ancillatg Equ$ment-Ancillary equipment shall be tested in accordance with the relevant Indian Standard. 14.1-2 Pump-The pump shall be subjected to the tests given below:

4

Moathlg OU+J test-The pump shall be operated for not less than 15 min from an open static water supply with a suction lift of 3 m. Three deliveries shall be used for discharging water, each through 30 m of rubber lined hose, conforming to IS:6361962*, and 25 mm nozzle, at a pressure of 0.6 MN/m0 ( 6 kgf/cm*). The branches shall be lashed if required. If the pump fails to sustain a pressure of O-6 MN/m8 ( 6 kgf/cm* ) for the full 15 min, the reason shall be investigated and rectified at the workshop. The pump gland shall be checked for excessive leakage, if necessary, at the same time.
NOTE - While adjusting the pump gland, care shall be taken to ensure that water does not cease to drip when the pump is working under pressure. It is advisable to make the adjustment with the pump w&king at a pressure of @7 MN/m* ( 7 kgf/cm* )_ A drip of 30 drops per minute shall be aHowed.

b)

zmxwn tit--This test shall be carried out immediately Months after the test given in 14.1.2 [a). The suction blank cap shall be tightened on the suction` inlet of the pump after ensuring that its washer is intact and serviceable. All blank caps fmm the pump delivery outlets shall be removed. With the compound gauge cock fully open, the primer shall be operated for 45 seconds or till a vacuum of 600 mm (Hg) is obtained, whichever is earlier. The priming shall then be stopped and the compound gauge needle watched. If it falls back to 250 mm (Hg) in less than one minute, it is an indication that an excessive leak is present and it shall be looked into. The excessive leak may be due to: 1) loose or defective pump glands, 2) leakage in the pump gauge connections, 3) leakage in the delivery outlet valves, or 4) leakage in the heat exchanger valve.

c) Six montMy a&p 1s test-This test shall be carried out once in six months in the same manner as given in 141.2 (a) except that only 1 x 25mm nozzle shall be used and the pump shall maintain a pressure of O-6 MN/m% (6 kgl/ ems) fcr 15 minutes with a suction lift of 7*Om.
*+cification for fire fighting base ( rubber lined, woven-jacketed ) (

rcuisrd).

29

IS-: 5896 ( Part I ) - 1970 14.1.3 Suction Hose -The suction hoses shall be tested immediately after the vacuum test given in 14.1.2 (b). If the pump performance is found satisfactory during the vacuum test, all lengths of suction hoses shall be connected to the pump and the blank cap tightened at the end of the last length. The vaccum test shall then be repeated. If excessive leak is detected, all lengths of suction shall be connected individually or together, either to a pump delivery or to a hydrant and subjected to an internal pressure of not more than 0.3 MN/m* ( 3 kgf/cm ). Any leak present will be visible by the water spurting out of the suction hose. 14.1.4 Carbon Dioxide Equipment-All carbon dioxide cylinders shall be weighed once a, month. If there is a loss of more than ten percent of the contents in any cylinder, it shall be replaced with a fully charged one. 14.1.4.1 Once in six months, the carbon dioxide hose-reel tubing shall be subjected to a hydraulic pressure test of 7 MN/m* ( 70 kgf/cm*) for 2* minutes.

APPENDIX

A

( Clauses 2.1 and 4.2 )
TYPES A-l. DETAILS A-l.1 Any of the emergencies given in A-1.1.1 to A-1.1.4 concerning aircraft may arise at an aerodrome during the course of operations. A-1.1.1 VisibiliQ of Weather Standby -This emergency shall be declared by the officer on duty inthe aerodrome control tower when it is unavoidable for an aircraft to land at the aerodrome under poor visibility or bad weather (heavy rain, gusty winds, storm, etc) conditions.
NOTE - `Poor visibility' means ~that the visibility has deteriorated that landing of aircraft may be difficult or difficult to observe. to sucn an extent

OF AIRCRAFT

EMERGENCY

A-1.1.2 Local Standby-The officer on duty in the aerodrome control tower shall declare this emergency when an incoming aircraft is known or suspected to have developed some defect but the trouble is not such as would normally involve any serious difficulty affecting a safe landing. 30

IS : 5896 ( Part I ) - I970
an aircraft coming into land at the A-1.1.3 Full E nergeny -Wien aerodrome is known or suspected to be in such trouble that there is danger of an accident, the officer on duty in the aerodrome control stower shall declare `full emergency'. A-1.1.4 Aircraft Accident -This craft on the ground and includes includes all accidents to or fires in airthose in parked aircraft.

APPENDIX ( czause 3.1 )
SCALE B-l. DETAILS OF CRASH

B
CATEGORY

TENDERS FOR EACH OF AERODROMES

OF SCALE

B-1.1 Aerodromes

are classified under eleven categories (Category I to Category XI), from the point of view of fire risk, according to the recommendations of the International Civil Aviation Organization. The number of crash tenders conforming to IS : 951- 1969* required for each category of aerodrome is given below: AERODROME CATEGORY I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX Xt NU~~BER OF CRASH TENDERS REQUIRED One One One Two Two Three Three Four Five Seven

El.2 For Category XI aerodromes, crash tenders made to the Indian Standard shall not be economical to use and larger capacity crash tenders shall have to be provided.
*Specification for combined foamand CO, crash tender (first revision). tit may be more economical to provide crash tenders of larger capacity than the ones covered by the Indian Standard for these aerodromes.

31

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Hsadquartsm: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 3375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,91 11 3239399 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 8-77 00 32

Central Laboratory: Regional Ottkss: Central `Eastern

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010

: ManakBhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 323 76 17 : l/l4 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 337 86 62
Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 603843

Northern : SC0 335336, Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 800113 23523 15 TWestern : Manakalaya, ES, Behind Mar01 Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), 832 92 95
MUMBAI 490093 Branch O#css: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 389001 Speenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangatore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kataikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 53l5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C. L.N. Gupta fvlarg. Nampatly Statlon RoadmHYDERABAD 500001 E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 1171418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208905 Seth Bhevan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 Pattiputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421, University PO. Pafayam. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM Inspscffon Ofticss (with Sale Point): Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 52 51 71 323635 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 403627 210141 8-28 88 01 8711996 541137 201083 -37 29 25 216876 23 89 23 262305 695034 621 17

l Saies Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, PO. Princep Street,
CALCUTTA 700072 @ales Offtoe is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 @ales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560902

271085 3096528 2223971

Printed at New lndla Prlntlng Press, Khurja, lndts

