NAT He IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Uthat SR deren! (UREA A) À 
FIRST AT ALA Oh TAN TTA 
utao Ar ugat 
art 2 Aerer ( UISET UNE Nee) ARE AN 
ata SAT AAT BH ARNES ATT ATT HAT 
( THT FRAT ) 


Methods of Laboratory Testing of 
Wood Preservatives against Fungi 
and Borers ( Powder Post Beetles ) 

Part 2 Determination of Threshold Values of Wood 


Preservatives against Borers ( Powder Post Beetles ) 
in Wood and Bamboo 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 71.100.50 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2021 Price Group 5 


Timber and Timber Stores Sectional Committee, CED 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Timber and Timber Stores Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1968 and covered the methods for the laboratory testing of wood preservatives 
against fungi. Details of preservatives, methods of preservative treatment of timber, etc, have been covered in 
IS 401 : 2001 ‘Preservation of timber — Code of practice (fourth revision)’. Based on the experience gained in the 
use of the standard, the first and second revision of the standard were brought out in 1993 and 2008, respectively. 


In 2008 revision, this standard was bifurcated into two parts. This Standard (Part 2) covers determination of 
threshold values of wood preservatives against borers (powder post beetles). The other part of the standard is: 


Part 1 Determination of threshold values of wood preservatives against fungi 
In this revision, the following major modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Scope of the standard has been extended to cover testing of bamboo in accordance with the standard, 
and the title of the standard has been accordingly modified. 


b 
c 


wm 


Principle of the test has been given in more elaborate manner. 


wm 


Preparation of test samples for adult release method has been updated with the inclusion of bamboo 
specimens. 


d 
e 


— 


Pattern of holes on test block in larval inoculation method has been explained. 


wa 


Three additional methods, that is spraying method, dipping method and pressure impregnation method 
have been introduced in the clause on treatment procedure. 


f) Type of test insect has been introduced for bamboo. 
g) New clause on exposure of test specimens to the insects has been added. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values’ ( revised ). 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF LABORATORY TESTING OF WOOD 
PRESERVATIVES AGAINST FUNGI AND BORERS 
( POWDER POST BEETLES ) 


PART 2 DETERMINATION OF THRESHOLD VALUES OF 
WOOD PRESERVATIVES AGAINST BORERS 
( POWDER POST BEETLES ) INWOOD AND BAMBOO 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) lays down the method for the 
laboratory testing of wood preservatives against 
borers (powder post beetles) by exposing the wood/ 
bamboo samples to both adult and larvae of test insects 
or keeping them along with material infested with 
powder post beetles in the laboratory. The test can also 
be employed to determine the natural durability of 
different species of wood/bamboo. 


2 METHOD OF TEST 


The method determines the toxicity of the surface 
applied with wood preservatives to the powder post 
beetles (Lyctus africanus/L. brunneus/Sinoxylon anale/ 
Minthea rugicollis for wood and Dinoderus minutus for 
bamboo). 


The method is applicable to the tar-oil, water-borne and 
organic solvent types of wood preservatives. It enables 
comparisons to be made between preservatives which 
belong to any one of the types, since it is not possible to 
ensure that one test will accurately take into account the 
different mechanisms by which various preservatives 
operate under service condition. 


3 PRINCIPLE 


3.1 The principle of this test is to determine whether 
attack takes place, and adults subsequently emerge 
from samples of susceptible wood or bamboo which 
have been treated with preservatives and exposed to 
the test insect for egg laying. Control test with wood/ 
bamboo blocks of similar types which have not been 
treated and those treated with the solvent only and 
exposed to test insects, adults or larvae, shall help in 
knowing the natural durability and also to compare with 
treated wood/bamboo for their efficacy to protect from 
beetle attack. The susceptibility of the wood/bamboo 
and efficacy of preservative is tested by releasing adults 
on to the test specimens and inoculating the larvae into 
the test blocks. In case of adult release experiment, four 


pairs of freshly emerged adult beetles are transferred 
to test blocks and the test gets concluded once 
100 percent mortality of the introduced adult beetles 
is observed. The larval transfer method involves the 
transfer of healthy larvae into the holes made on the 
test specimens and the test period gets concluded after 
70 percent of the larvae inoculated into the control test 
specimens have successfully emerged as adult beetles. 


3.2 Preparation of Test Samples 
3.2.1 Test Specimens for Adult Release Method 


The test samples shall be made from the timber of semul 
or rubber or mango and shall be of sizes 100 mm x 
40 mm x 12.5 mm. The test samples will have the 
long axis parallel to the grain of the wood and the wide 
face tangential to the growth rings. In case of bamboo, 
the specimens shall be 50 mm long cross-sections of 
test bamboo. These test samples shall then be open- 
piled and thoroughly dried in a well-ventilated room. 
These shall not be dried in a kiln or otherwise heated. 
Wood blocks which are clean, bright, free from knots 
and are of heartwood showing no abnormalities in 
structure or rate of growth and in bamboo free from any 
insect attack or sap stain shall be used. Each test sample 
shall be tested for starch content and those in which it is 
inadequate, shall be rejected (see Annex A). 


3.2.2 Test Specimens for Larval Transfer Method 


Specimens of size as specified in 3.2.1 with ten holes of 
2 to 3 mm diameter and 3 to 4 mm depth shall be drilled 
on wider side of each block in fixed pattern using a 
template. All holes drilled are smoothened with a round 
file to avoid damage to the larvae during inoculation 
(see Annex B). 


3.2.3 Before being treated in the preservative, the test 
samples shall be conditioned for two weeks at 25 °C to 
30 °C and 70 to 75 percent relative humidity to attain 
an equilibrium moisture content of approximately 
15 percent. The end grain of the blocks shall be sealed 
with paraffin wax or other suitable sealant before 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


treatment, in order to prevent undue penetration of the 
preservative through the ends. 


Untreated control blocks shall be selected and end- 
coated in a similar manner. The total number of samples 
required for each test shall be as follows: 


a) Atleast 6 numbers shall be treated in preservative, 
at each concentrations and method used; 


b) At least 6 numbers shall be treated with solvent 
only; and 


c) At least 6 numbers shall be untreated control 
samples. 


3.3 Treatment Procedure 


A series of dilutions of the preservative shall be 
prepared on a weight/weight basis. A minimum of 
six concentrations, arranged about the expected toxic 
limit, shall be used. In the case of a new preparation 
of which the approximate toxic limit is unknown, the 
concentration should be in a widely spaced geometric 
series in the first test and a more closely graded 
arithmetic series in subsequent tests. 


Three methods of treatment as follows may be carried 
out for the study and six test specimens shall be used 
for each method as follows: 


a) Spraying method — The treatment solution shall 
be sprayed over the test specimens uniformly. 


b) Dipping method — The test specimens shall be 
dipped in the treatment solution for 24 h. 


c) Pressure impregnation — The test specimen shall 
be treated with treatment solution for 15 min of 
vacuum and 60 min of 3.5 kgf/cm? pressure. 


If the preservative is soluble in water, freshly prepared 
aqueous solutions will be used. Preservatives that are 
insoluble in water shall be dissolved in a volatile liquid 
such as benzene or other suitable solvents which has 
been shown not to leave a residue toxic to the test 
insects. 


The test samples shall be weighed and then completely 
immersed in the solution for 24 h in dipping method, 
treatment with the most dilute solution being carried 
out first. A series of six control test samples shall be 
treated in a similar way in the solvent employed for 
dilution of the preservative. 


If the preservative is in the form of an oil-in-water 
emulsion, the control test pieces shall be treated in an 
oil-in-water emulsion which has the same composition 
as the preservative, except that the toxic ingredients are 
omitted. 


It is essential to follow the same procedure in detail in 
all tests as slight variation may influence greatly the 
amount of preservative retained. 


On removal from the treating fluid the surplus liquid 
shall be quickly shaken off the paraffin-coated ends 
blotted on absorbent paper and the blocks immediately 


reweighed. The amount of preservative taken up by the 
blocks shall be calculated from the rate of the liquid 
absorbed (weight after treatment minus the initial 
weight) and the concentration of the solution. The 
concentration of the preservative shall be expressed 
as kilogrammes per cubic metre of exposed wooden 
block. Six blocks per concentration shall be selected 
in which the weight of solution absorbed does not vary 
by more than 15 percent from the average absorption 
of the batch. The test samples shall then be dried, by 
passing air at a temperature of not higher than 30 °C 
over them, till all the control test samples treated in 
the solvent only, have returned approximately to their 
initial weight. 

All the test samples (including the six untreated 
control samples) shall then be stacked in open at room 
temperature for at least a month. 


3.4 Test Insects 


Adults of the powder post beetles, Lyctus africanus/L. 
brunneus/Sinoxylon anale/Minthia rugicollis for wood 
and Dinoderus minutus for bamboo, shall be used for 
the tests (see Annex C) and these shall be obtained from 
laboratory cultures maintained in the manner described 
in Annex D. 


For initiation of culture, beetles are obtained from 
naturally infested wood stored outside, which have 
to be brought and maintained in the laboratory. 
Untreated timber such as semul/mango/rubber/bahera/ 
dry tapiocca chips or bamboo, which serve as feeder 
with starch, shall be kept along with the infested sample 
for continuous multiplication of the beetles. 


3.5 Exposure of Test Specimens to the Insect 


3.5.1 Adult Release Method 


Four pairs of healthy and freshly emerged adults 
(male and female) of Lyctus africanus/L. brunneus/ 
Sinoxylon anale/Dinoderus minutus beetles 
shall be introduced into each test specimen 
(treated and untreated,without holes) placed in an 
aerated box maintained at a temperature of 25 + 1 °C 
and at 75 + 1 percent RH in B.O.D incubator. 
Observations on the longevity of the adults and powder 
formation in test blocks shall be made along with that 
of controls daily till the adults are dead and once in a 
week till the next generation emerges. 


3.5.2 Larval Transfer Method 


The test blocks with holes shall be stored singly in 
aerated containers. Six blocks per each concentration, 
six untreated control blocks and six treated with the 
solvent alone shall be exposed to same instar larvae of 
the test beetle. In each hole one healthy laboratory bred 
larva of the test beetle, free of mite infestation shall be 
inserted. Ten healthy larvae are introduced into each test 
specimen containing ten holes. Periodic observations 


shall be made to study the activity of the inserted larvae 
in the treated and control test specimens. The activity of 
the larvae shall be indicated by the presence of powder 
like dust thrown out and heaped above the holes (see 
Annex B). 


3.6 Examination of Test Sample 


The samples shall be stored until emergence of the 
first generation of adults from untreated control is in 
progress (6-8 months). After this has occurred, all the 
blocks shall be examined. Sample with no exit holes 
shall be finally split with an axe to ascertain whether 
live or dead larvae or tunnels are present. Final weight 
of the test samples shall be taken and the percent 
weight loss due to larva eating the test samples shall be 
calculated and reported in the results. 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


3.7 Evaluation and Reporting of Results 


The number of samples, treated and untreated, which 
contain exit holes shall be recorded, as well as the 
number of treated sample without exit holes in which 
live larvae are found. 


The threshold value (toxic limit) shall be expressed as 
the interval between the highest concentration at which 
the adult beetles emerged or live larvae are found at 
the end of test and the concentration next highest in 
the series in which no adults emerge and all larvae 
are dead. These concentrations shall be expressed as 
kilogram per cubic metre of wood. 


The concentration of treating solution found necessary 
to give these figures shall also be stated, as well as the 
diluents used and the interval between impregnation of 
treated samples and exposure to the infestation. 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 3.2.1 ) 
METHOD OF TESTING FOR STARCH CONTENT 


A-1 For the successful development of Lyctus africanus/ 
Sinoxylon anale/Minthea rugicollis/Dinoderus minutus 
larvae it is necessary that adequate quantity of starch be 
present in the wood. This can be assessed by a visual 
test as given below. 


A-1.1 Reagent 


A-1.1.1 Jodine Solution (0.5 percent) — Add 0.5 g of 
iodine to a solution of | g of potassium iodide crystals 
in 5 ml of water and dilute this solution to 100 ml water. 


A- 1.2 Procedure 


It should be ensured that the surface of the wood to 
be tested is smooth and clean. The solution shall be 
applied with a small paint-brush, preferably to an 
approximate radial surface, that is the narrow side of 
the block. After the lapse of a minute or so, starch grains 
which are stained blue-black, will be clearly visible 
under a binocular microscope. Only blocks containing 
abundant starch grains indicated by development of 
blue colour, are suitable for use. 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 3.2.2 and 3.5.2 ) 


LARVAL INOCULATION METHOD — TYPICAL PATTERN OF HOLES ON TEST BLOCK 
AND LARVAL ACTIVITY 


HOLE DIA 
2.03 mm 


Lyctus africanus Activity in Bamboo Specimens 


4 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


Dinoderus Activity in Bamboo Specimens 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 3.4.1 ) 
BIOLOGY OF THE POWDERPOST BEETLE Lyctus africanus 


C-1 Different species of powder post beetles display 
minor differences in appearance, habits and longevity. 
Lyctus africanus has a distinct head and the terminal 
segments on their antennae have a clubbed appearance. 
The larvae are cream coloured with brownish head and 
jaws and three pairs of small jointed leges; on hatching, 
they are about 0.3 mm long and C-shaped. 


C-1.1 The female adult of Lyctus africanus, after 
mating, seeks a suitable place for egg laying and bites 
the wood transversely, leaving a series of grooves 
(tasting marks) on the surface. The tasting marks may 
serve to determine whether the timber contains starch, 
the essential larval dietary requirement and they also 
expose wood pores for subsequent egg laying. Using 
her ovipositor the female lays into the open pores of the 
sapwood. Each female may lay a total of 70 eggs, with 
a usual limit of three eggs in any pore. The number of 
eggs laid is positively related to the number of tasting 
marks. Eggs are deposited at depths of 1.0 to 6.5 mm 
in the wood pores, preferentially from a transverse 
surface, but also through radial and tangential faces. 


C-1.2 Egg hatch after about 14 days and larvae feed on 
the starch in the sapwood until fully grown. Tunnels 


usually follow the grain of the wood and only the larval 
stage destroys the timber. The development period 
for larvae varies from 2 to 18 months depending on 
temperature, humidity and the supply of starch in the 
sapwood. Under adverse conditions the life cycle may 
take from 30-48 months or even longer. Fully grown 
larvae tunnel towards the wood surface and excavate 
small oval cells where pupation takes place. Two to 
three weeks later, mature beetles begin to emerge 
through the surface of infested timber, making a round 
hole (0.5 to 1 mm diameter) as each emerges. Small 
piles of frass associated with the emergence holes may 
collect on the surface of infested timber or fall nearby. 
Emerging adults push a small amount of frass out, but 
larvae living within the sapwood also cause frass to 
continue to fall from emergence holes and from cracks 
in the timber. Adult lyctines are sexually mature upon 
emergence. Copulation occurs soon afterwards, often 
crepuscularly or nocturnally rather than diurnally. Egg 
laying begins soon thereafter. Emergence holes expose 
pores into which eggs can be laid. Re-infestation of 
timber is common and may continue until the food 
resource is completely used up usually within 4-5 years 
of felling. 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 3.4.1 >) 
METHOD OF CULTURING POWDER POST BEETLES 


D-1 TEST ON WOOD SPECIES 


D-1.1 Culture of Lyctus africanus 


Culture of Lyctus africanus from egg to adult 
occupies | or 2 years under outdoor conditions in 
this country, the beetles emerge from June to August. 
This period may be reduced to 9 to 12 weeks at 
25 °C and 75 percent RH and a continuous supply of 
beetles thus can be obtained. Tapioca is converted into 
chips of 2 mm thickness, air dried and stored in glass 
bottles. For initiation of cultures, beetles are obtained 
from naturally infested sapwood stored in outdoor 
insectaries, either by collection from the surface of the 
wood or by means of a light trap. The naturally infested 
wood should be removed to outdoor conditions as soon 
as beetles have been obtained and the beetles should be 
introduced to clean glass bottles half filled with dried 
tapioca chips. Emergence begins 65 to 75 days after the 
original beetles were added, reaches a maximum after 
88 days and ends after approximately 120 days. Each 
jar may yield 500 to 700 beetles and by setting up 1 
jar per week, a weekly yield of 500 to 600 beetles can 
be obtained from 9 jars containing insects at different 
stages of development. 


D-1.2 When initiating new culture, beetles obtained 
from a number of vessels are randomized and from 
these 25 pairs are used. To avoid harmful effects of 
prolonged in-breeding it is advisable to initiate a new 
series of cultures annually with beetles obtained from 


infested wood stored in outdoor insectaries. There 
is no information on the comparative fertility or 
susceptibility to toxic substances of beetles collected 
from outdoor stocks or cultures. Precautions against 
mite infestation are necessary. 


D-2 RECOMMENDED PRECAUTIONS 
AGAINST MITE INFESTATIONS 


D-2.1 A two percent solution of beta-naphthol in 
97 percent ethanol is effective against mite. The glass 
containers and cambric covers used in the test should 
be dipped in this solution and the solvent allowed to 
evaporate completely before the introduction of beetles, 
since ethanol fumes are toxic to beetles. 


D-3 TEST ON BAMBOO SPECIES 


D-3.1 Culture of Dinoderus minutus 


The different species of bamboos collected from 
plantations/bamboo depots can be cut into small pieces 
(50 mm to 300 mm) dried to 20-30 percent moisture 
content and provided to adult Dinoderus minutus 
released into mesh boxes/glass bottles/cages. Also 
tapioca chips cut into 5 mm thickness and dried in sun 
shade can be used for rearing the beetles. Dinoderus 
minutus can be released on the dried chips kept inside 
culture bottles. The culture can be maintained at 
laboratory conditions to get sufficient stages of the 
insect pest for experiments 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Timber and Timber Stores Sectional Committee, CED 09 


Organization 
Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


All India Sports Goods Manufacturers Federation, 
Meerut 


Bamboo Society of India, Bengaluru 


Cane and Bamboo Technology Centre, Guwahati 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Ltd, Raipur 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Directorate of Standardization (Ministry of 
Defence), New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Plywood & Panel Industry, 
New Delhi 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


Himachal Pradesh Forest Corporation Ltd, Shimla 


Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, 
Dehradun 


Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training 
Institute, Bengaluru 


Institute of Wood Science & Technology, 
Bengaluru 


Karnataka State Forest Industries Corporation Ltd, 
Bengaluru 


Kerala Forest Research Institute, Thrissur 


Kutty Flush Doors & Furnitures Co Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 


Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Ltd, 
Bhopal 


Mazagon Dock Limited, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MOD (Army), New 
Delhi 

Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, New Delhi 


Naval Dockyard Mumbai, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Suri A. S. RAWAT (Chairman) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri V. P. HIREMATH 
Suri U. T. Arva (Alternate) 


SHRI NIPAN DEKA 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. SHARMA 
Suri B. K. Sinna (Alternate) 


Dr B. SINGH 
Dr MANORAMA Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. Gupta 
SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY BALDAWA 
SHRI ANTHONY FERNANEDES (Alternate) 


Dr SADHNA TRIPATHI 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
ExECITIVE DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR GENERAL 


Suri Upay D. NAGAMMANAVAR 
SHRI ANAND NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


Suri S. C. JosHI 
Dr S. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
REPRESENTATIVE (Alternate) 


Dr T. K. DHAMODARAN 
Dr E. M. MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SANKARA KRISHNAN 


SHRI A. S. JosHI 
SHRI ATUL JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri N. J. Gosavi 
Suri A. J. Das (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI RIVOO MAHENDRU 
Suri S. K. Misura (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR SINHA 


SHRI PRABHAKAR GANPAT MIRASHI 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


Organization 
Railway Board (Track Directorate), Ministry of 
Railways, New Delhi 
The Rubber Board, Kottayam 
Timber Importer Association, Kandla 


Uttar Pradesh Forest Development Corporation Ltd, 
Lucknow 


Uttarakhand Bamboo and Fibre Development 
Board, Dehradun 


WIMCO Limited, Rudrapur 
Wood Technology Association, Yamuna Nagar 


In personal capacity (606 B, I Block, 
III Stage UVCE Layout, WOC Road, 
Basaveshwaranagar, Bengaluru) 

In personal capacity (Hasiru Bhavana, 
Doresanipalya Forest Campus, Vinayakanagar 
Circle, J.P. Nagar, 5th Phase, Bengaluru) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI N. RAJAGOPAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr RAMESH CHANDRA DHIMAN 
Suri J. N. GANDHI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. JOLLY 
SHRI Manos Gwar! (Alternate) 


SHRI K. DAMODARAN 


Dr O. K. REMADEVI 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ Representing Director General ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Sectary 


SHRI PRADEEP SINGH SHEKHAWAT 
SCIENTIST °C’ (CiVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Timber Terminology, Conversion, Seasoning, Preservation, Grading and Testing Subcommittee, CED 9:1 
Organization Representative(s) 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 
ASCU ARCH Timber Protection Limited, Kolkata 


HEAD (Forest PRODUCTS) (Convener) 


Suri RAJIV AGARWAL 
SHRI TAPAN BHADURY (Alternate) 


Suri H. T. KAPADIA 
SHRI S. RANGARAJAN (Alternate) 


Borax Morarji Limited, Thane 


Chhatisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Ltd, Raipur Suri R. K. SHARMA 


Suri B. K. Smua (Alternate) 


SHRI B. SINGH 
Suri B. S. Rawat (Alternate) 


Suri L. C. RAM 
SHRI RAJ SHEKHAR SINGH (Alternate) 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


CSIR - North-East Institute of Science & DIRECTOR 
Technology, Jorhat 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) DR K. C. Gupta 


Ministry of Defence, Kanpur SHRI JITENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SAXENA 
SHRI VIJAY SHANKER (Alternate) 


Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Defence, 
New Delhi 


Organization 


Forest Department of Assam, Guwahati 


Forest Research Institute (Timber Mechanics 
Division), Dehradun 


Forest Research Institute (Forest Protect Division), 
Dehradun 


Forest Research Institute (Wood Anatomy 
Division), Dehradun 


Forest Research Institute (Systematic Botany 
Division), Dehradun 


Forest Research Institute (Wood Preservation 
Division), Dehradun 


Forest Research Institute (Wood Seasoning 
Division), Dehradun 


Forest Research Institute (Entomology Division), 
Dehradun 


Himachal Pradesh State Forest Corporation Ltd, 
Shimla 


Greenply Industries Ltd, Kolkata 


Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, 
Dehradun 


Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training 
Institute, Bengaluru 


Indian Rubber Wood Task Force, Malankara 
Building Kodimatha, Kottayam 


Institute of Wood Science & Technology, Bengaluru 


Karnataka State Forest Industries Corporation, 
Bengaluru 


Kutty Flush Doors & Furnitures (Pvt) Ltd, Chennai 


Kerala Forest Research Institute, Peechi 


Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Limited, 
Bhopal 


Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, New Delhi 


Office of Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) 
Ministry of Textile Govt. of India, New Delhi 


Paharpur Cooling Towers Limited, Kolkata 


Paramount Pst Consultants Pvt Ltd, Pune 
Rubber Research Institute of India, Kottayam 


Uttarakhand Forest Development Corporation Ltd, 
Dehradun 


Western India Plywoods Ltd, Kannur 


IS 4873 (Part 2) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


PROF CH CONSERVATOR OF FORESTS 


SHRI RAJESH BHANDARI 
Dr R. EZHUMALAI (Alternate) 


HEAD (PATHOLOGY DIVISION) 
Dr SHAILESH PANDEY (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) SANGEETA GUPTA 
Dr DHEERENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr Anup CHSANDRA 
Dr RANIJANA NEGI (Alternate) 


Dr SADHANA TRIPATHI 
SHRI AZMAL SAMANI (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. UPRETI 
SHRI SHAILENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Heap (ENTOMOLOGY DIVISION) 
Dr ArvIND Kumar (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri B. K. BHATIA 
Suri S. K. Konui (Alternate) 


Suri N. D. UDAY 
SHRI VIPIN CHAWLA (Alternate) 


Suri C. BHASKAR NAYAR 
Suri V. J. MatHew (Alternate) 


Dr S. R. SHUKLA 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
REPRESENTATIVE (A/ternate) 


SHRI K. SANKARAKRISHNAN 
Cot Y. G. KrisHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr T. K. DHAMODARAN 


SHRI A. S. JosHI 
SHRI ATUL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR SINHA 
Deputy DIRECTOR 


SHRI S. RAMASUNDAR 
SHRI ABHIJIT SAMUI (Alternate) 


SHRI SARANAG SAVALEKAR 
DIRECTOR 


Pr CH. CONSERVATOR OF FORESTS 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. MAYAN MOHAMED 
Dr K. RAGHUNATHAN (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 09 (15026). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


