NAT Alan IS 17142 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


HAA act HAT UT Yara 


Terminology on Coal Bed 
Methane 


ICS 75.020 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2019 Price Group 5 


Methods and Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee, 
MED 37 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Methods and 
Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


TERMINOLOGY ON COAL BED 
METHANE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 Coal Bed Methane (CBM) is an unconventional 
form of natural gas found in coal deposits or coal seams. 
CBM is formed during the process of coalification (that 
is, transformation of plant material into coal). 


1.2 Its extraction involves drilling down vertically and 
then horizontally in the coal seam. 


1.3 The gas is released in a controlled and safe manner 
by pumping out the water that occurs naturally in coal 
seams or cleats to reduce the underground pressure on 
the coal. 
NOTE — The referred standard is a compilation of similar 
definitions for terminology/ abbreviations as highlighted in 
1.1, 1.2 and 1.3, covering areas related to geology, reservoir, 
drilling and production processes. 


2 ABANDONMENT PRESSURE 


Lowest pressure at which commercial production 
cannot be maintained under present economic and 
technical conditions expressed by flowing bottom hole 
pressure (FBHP). 


3 ADSORPTION 


Enrichment of the absorptive gas at the external and 
accessible internal surfaces of a solid material (coal 
matrix). 


4 ADSORPTION ISOTHERM 

Relationship between the amount of gas adsorbed and 
equilibrium pressure of the gas at constant temperature. 
5 SORPTION TIME 

Time in hour or day taken for 63.2 percent of the total 
absorbed gas to desorb from the matrix. 

6 ADSORPTION SATURATION 


Ratio of measured gas content to the maximum 
adsorbed gas content in theory per unit mass of 
coal under particular CBM reservoir pressure and 
temperature conditions. 


6.1 Air Dried Basis 


Means of expressing an analytical result based on the 
condition in which a solid mineral fuel is in equilibrium 
with atmospheric humidity. 


6.2 Appraisal Well 


Well drilled after the gas has been discovered, in 
order to establish the limits of accumulation in terms 
of both the area extent and thickness of reservoir and 
the volume of hydrocarbons it contains, and to obtain 
fluid samples to investigate the distribution of fluid 
properties in the reservoir. 


6.3 Artificial Fracture 


Fracture created in coal seam through fracturing 
technology. 


6.4 Ash 


Residue obtained by incineration of a solid mineral fuel 
under specified conditions. 


6.5 Azimuth 


The azimuth of a directional well is the deviation from 
the true north measured in clockwise direction. 


7 BAILING 


Operation of coal fines or sand fishing from well bottom 
by a kind of bucket. 


7.1 Bore Hole 


Well drilled in the sub-surface with or without 
obtaining the cores of rock samples for the purpose of 
ascertaining any information. 


7.2 Cased Hole Completion 


A well completion method in which casing is run 
along the entire length of the CBM well, and cemented 
in such a way to make it effectively act as a control 
mechanism for safe production of desired CBM and as 
a barrier preventing the re-introduction of unwanted 
fluids, gases or solids into the well bore. 


7.3 Casing Pressure 


Pressure in a well that exists between the casing and 
tubing or the casing and drill pipe. 


7.4 Casing Programme 


A part of the well design which includes number of 
casing layers in the well, borehole diameter to be drilled 
for each casing, casing setting depth, diameter, grade, 
type, coupling, etc. of each casing string depending 
on the fracture pressure, pore pressure and type of 
formation fluids. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


7.5 Cavern Completion 


Well completion method to create a cave in target 
stratum after fall of coal seam into well bore through 
pressure inducing, hydraulic chambering, etc. methods. 


8 COAL BED METHANE (CBM) 


It means natural gas (mainly methane) contained in coal 
or bituminous lignite beds under reservoir condition 
and extracted from there during CBM operations. 


8.1 CBM Content 


Volume of hydrocarbon gas per unit mass of coal, 
usually expressed in cubic meter of gas per ton of coal 
under standard temperature and pressure (STP). 


8.2 CBM Development 


Exploitation of coal bed methane from coal seams 
through surface bore hole. 


8.3 CBM Drainage 


Technology process to eject water out from CBM 
production well by artificial lift method to realize CBM 
production. 


8.4 CBM Exploration 


Initial phase in coal bed methane operation that includes 
generation of a prospect or play or both, and drilling of 
an exploration well. 


8.5 CBM Field 


An area within the contract area consisting of a single 
CBM reservoir or multiple CBM reservoirs all grouped 
or related to the same individual geological structure 
or stratigraphic conditions (to include the maximum 
area of potential productivity in the contract area) in 
respect of which a potential commercial assessment 
has been declared, commercial assessment made and a 
development plan approved. 


8.6 CBM Geology 


8.6.1 Natural gas, predominantly methane (CH,), 
generated during coal formation and adsorbed in 
coal. Natural gas adsorbs to the surfaces of matrix 
pores within the coal and natural fractures or cleats as 
reservoir pressure increases. 


8.6.2 Production of natural gas from coal requires 
decreasing the pore pressure below the coal’s desorption 
pressure so that methane will desorb from surfaces, 
diffuse through the coal matrix and become free gas. 
Because the diffusivity and permeability of the coal 
matrix are ultralow, coal must have an extensive cleat 
system to ensure adequate permeability and flow of 
methane to well bores at economic production rates. 


8.6.3 Coal seams are typically saturated with water. 
Consequently, the coal must be dewatered for efficient 


gas production. Dewatering reduces the hydrostatic 
pressure and promotes gas desorption from coal. As 
dewatering progresses, gas production often increases 
at a rate governed by how quickly gas desorbs from coal, 
the permeability of cleat and the relative permeability 
of the gas-water system in the cleat. Eventually, the 
rate and amount of gas desorption decreases as the coal 
seam is depleted of its gas and production declines. 


8.6.4 Coal seams with no water (dry coal) have been 
discovered and commercially exploited. In these 
reservoirs, the adsorbed gas is held in place by free gas 
in the cleats. Consequently, gas production consists of 
both free gas from the cleat system and desorbed gas 
from the matrix. 


8.7 CBM Operations 


Exploration operations, development operations or 
production operations or any combination of two 
or more such operations including, but not limited 
to, construction, operation and maintenance of all 
necessary facilities, plugging and abandonment of 
wells, environmental protection, transportation, 
storage, sale or disposition of CBM to the delivery 
point, site restoration and all other incidental operations 
or activities as may be necessary. 


8.8 CBM Reservoir 


Coal seams and surrounding rock with hydrocarbon 
resources that can potentially be extracted for 
commercial purposes. 


8.9 CBM Resources 


Naturally occurring concentrations or reservoirs of 
coal bed methane in coal seams and surrounding rock 
in such forms and amounts that economic extraction is 
currently or potentially feasible. 


8.10 CBM Well Completion 

Technology to achieve connection between drilled coal 
bed methane well and target stratum of development. 
8.11 CBM Well Pattern 


Geometric arrangement mode of coal bed methane 
development well. 


9 CLAMP-OFF 


Processing measurement to decrease coal fines or 
bridge over. 


9.1 Cleat 


The vertical cleavage of coal seams. The main set 
of joints along which coal breaks when mined or, an 
orthogonal fracture set in coal seams that is generally 
oriented perpendicular to bedding. One fracture 
direction (face cleats) is typically more continuous than 
the other (butt cleats). 


9.2 Closure Pressure 


Construction pressure to make fracture closed after 
pump stops in fracturing. 


9.3 Cluster Wells 


Group of two or more wells drilled from one drilling 
pad. 


9.4 Coal 


A chemically complex, combustible solid principally 
composed of consolidated and chemically altered plant 
remains or, a readily combustible black or brownish- 
black rock whose composition, including inherent 
moisture, consists of more than 50 percent by weight 
and more than 70 percent by volume of carbonaceous 
material. It is formed from plant remains that have 
been compacted, hardened, chemically altered, and 
metamorphosed by heat and pressure over geologic 
time. 


9.5 Coal Bed (or Coal Seam) 


A distinct, laterally continuous body of coal that may 
consist of many litho types, is bounded above and 
below by inorganic facies, and often grades literally 
into carbonaceous shale. 


9.6 Coal Bed Gas 


Gas formed during the coalification process, adsorbed 
to the coal surface, and liberated by a decrease in 
reservoir pressure. The most abundant gas is methane 
but carbon dioxide, nitrogen and ethane are common. 


9.7 Coal Fines 


Initial or secondary created solid particles of coal rock 
entering from coal seams to the well bore with water or 
gas during coal bed methane production process. 


9.8 Coal Bed Following Drilling 

Drilling type following coal seams with dip more 
than 45°. 

9.8.1 Coal Rank 


Position of a coal in the coalification series from lignite 
coal (low rank) to anthracite (high rank), indicating 
maturity in terms of chemical and physical properties. 


9.8.2 Coal Seam Gas (CSG) 


Methane found in coal seams. It is formed during the 
coalification, the process that transforms plant material 
into coal. Also known as coal seam methane or coal 
bed methane. 


9.9 Coalification 


The process by which organic material is transformed 
chemically into coal through increasing heat and 
pressure with burial. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


9.10 Commercial Assessment 


An assessment made by the Contractor for the purpose 
of determining whether or not CBM accumulations 
in the contract area are commercially exploitable and 
whether or not commercial production is viable after 
consideration of all pertinent technical, financial and 
economic data and other relevant factors according to 
generally accepted modern CBM/oilfield and petroleum 
industry practices. 


9.11 Commercial Production 
Production of CBM from the contract area and delivery 


of the same at the relevant delivery point(s) under a 
programme of regular production and sale. 


10 CORE 


Cylinder coal rock sample obtained in the well by 
coring operation. 


10.1 Core Cutting 


Operation to cut a cylindrical sample of core (coal) 
from a designated depth interval during the process of 
drilling. 


10.2 Core Hole 


Borehole in which coring is carried out up to the final 
depth of the bore hole for the purpose of detailed study 
of various parameters of rock and also coal or lignite 
samples. 


10.3 Critical Desorption Pressure 


Pressure in which the gas begins to desorb from 
the coal matrix as the CBM reservoir pressure 
declines. 


10.4 Delivery Point 


The point at which CBM reaches the outlet flange of 
the delivery facility and different delivery points may 
be established for the purpose of sale. 


10.5 Desorption 


The process by which a coal sample that is retrieved 
from the sub-surface is degassed by subjecting it to 
low pressure for several weeks and capturing the 
liberated gas. 


10.6 Diffusion Coefficient 


Rate of gas diffusion through a material expressed 
in m?/s. Express flow ability of coal bed methane 
depending on concentration. 


10.7 Directional Well 


Well drilled at a predetermined angle and direction 
from a surface location to reach a target which is not 
located directly underneath the well head. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


10.8 Dry Ash-free Basis 


An analytical result based on a hypothetical condition 
in which the solid mineral fuel is considered to be free 
from both moisture and ash. 


10.9 Development Well 


Well drilled, deepened or completed after the date 
of approval of the development plan pursuant to 
development operations or production operations for 
the purpose of producing CBM, increasing production, 
sustaining production or accelerating extraction of 
CBM including production wells, de-watering wells, 
injection wells and dry wells. It will also include 
exploration wells and pilot assessment wells converted 
as development wells. 


11 DIRT BAND PARTING 


Layer of mineral matter lying parallel to the bedding 
plane in a seam of coal. 


11.1 Dog-leg Severity 


Dog-leg severity is a measure of the rate of change of 
direction of the well path, usually expressed in two- 
dimensional degrees per 30 m. 


12 DUAL POROSITY SYSTEM 


Rock characterized by primary porosity from original 
deposition and secondary porosity from some other 
mechanism viz. either cleat or fracture and in which 
all flow to the well effectively occurs in one porosity 
system, and most of the fluid is stored in the other. 


13 ELECTRIC SUBMERSIBLE PUMP (ESP) 


Electric motor driven and rodless pump sunk in liquid 
inside the well, such as centrifugal pump, screw pump, 
diaphragm pump, etc. 


13.1 Environmental Damage 


Soil erosion, removal of vegetation, destruction of wild 
life, pollution of ground water or surface water, land 
contamination, air pollution, noise pollution, bush fire, 
disruption to water supplies, natural drainage or natural 
flow of rivers or streams, damage to archaeological, 
paleontological and cultural sites and shall include 
any damage or injury to, or destruction of, soil or 
water in their physical aspects together with vegetation 
associated therewith, aquatic or terrestrial mammals, 
fish, avi-fauna or any plant or animal life. 


13.2 Exploration Operations 


Operations conducted in the contract area pursuant 
to this contract in searching for commercial CBM 
accumulation and shall include, but not limited to aerial, 
geological, geophysical, geochemical, paleontological, 
palynological, topographical and seismic surveys, 


analyses, studies and their interpretation, investigations 
relating to the sub-surface geology including structure 
test drilling, stratigraphic test drilling, drilling of pilot 
Wells for the purpose of assessment of CBM potential, 
carrying out other related activities such as surveying, 
drill-site preparation and all work necessarily 
connected with and conducted in connection with 
CBM exploration (including preparation of techno- 
economic pre-feasibility studies, market surveys and 
commitments, and full scale commercial development 
plan). 


13.3 Exploration Well 

A well drilled for the purpose of searching for potential 
assessment of CBM accumulation on any geological 
entity, be it of structural, stratigraphic or pressure 
nature. 

13.3.1 Field 

Coal bed methane field in respect of which a 
development plan has been duly approved. 

13.3.2 Flare 

Gas disposed off by burning in flares usually at the 
production sites or gas processing plants. 

13.4 Flowing Bottom Hole Pressure (FBHP) 

Fluid pressure at a certain depth of a deposit during 
process of production. 

13.5 Flowing Fluid Level (FFL) 

Distance from fluid level in annular space of casing 
pipe to wellhead during production( unit is metre). 
13.6 Fracture 

Natural fracture in a formation resulting from external 
stress, usually being associated with a displacement. 
13.7 Fracture Conductivity 

Ability to allow fluid to flow through fracture. Equal 
to product of fracture permeability and fracture width. 
13.8 Fracture Half-length (Radius of Fracture) 


Distance of extending of fracture through radial 
direction from well bore to coal reservoir after 
fracturing coal reservoirs. It is normally equal to length 
of horizontal fracture. 


13.9 Fracture Pressure 


It is the pressure in the well bore at which a formation 
will crack or, the critical pressure for formation 
breakdown in open hole. 


13.10 Fracture Pressure Gradient 


Pressure gradient at which a specific formation interval 
breaks to form fractures. 


13.11 Fracture Extension Pressure 


Pressure in fracture making, fracture opening and 
extending in fracturing. 


14 GAS CONTENT 


Volume of gas per unit mass of coal, usually expressed 
in cubic meter of gas per ton of coal under standard 
temperature and pressure (STP) conditions. Unit is m'/t 
or cm*/g. Standard temperature and pressure conditions 
are 10 0000 Pa and 0°C (273.15 K). 


14.1 Gas Locking 


Phenomenon of preventing liquid from going in or out 
of pump when much gas enter pump during working of 
deep-well pump. 


14.2 Gas Anchor 


Tools to separate gas and liquid on the underground 
tubing string, and reduce gas going to the pipeline. 


14.3 Gas-water Separator 
Equipment to separate water from produced gas. 


14.4 Geologic Carbon Sequestration (CO,) 


It is a method of securing carbon dioxide in deep 
geologic formations to prevent its release to the 
atmosphere and contribution to global change as a 
greenhouse gas. 


15 JET PUMP 


Pump in which a jet of fluid in rapid motion lifts a large 
quantity of another fluid by its impulse. 


15.1 Horizontal Displacement 


Horizontal distance from measured point on well track 
to well bore. 


15.2 Horizontal Fracture 


Fracture surface is parallel to the coal seam, normally 
caused when horizontal crustal stress is larger than 
vertical crustal stress. 


15.3 Horizontal Well 


Well whose hole deviation angle is near, equal or 
larger than 90° with bore hole entering target seam and 
extending to a length or, a well in which well bore is 
initially drilled on a vertical or directional plane and 
finally curved to become horizontal or near horizontal, 
in order to parallel a particular geological formation, 
which may include multiple horizontal or stacked 
laterals. 


15.4 Horizontally Staged Fracturing 


Technology to operate multi-stage fracturing to 
horizontal wells through separate layer (segment) 
fracturing technology. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


15.5 Hydraulic Fracturing 


Well stimulation method where a fracturing fluid is 
pumped into the coal seam at high pressure and flow rate 
resulting in fractures in the coal seam or, also referred 
to as hydro-fracking, hydro-fracturing and fracking. It 
is a well development process that involves injecting 
water under high pressure into a bedrock formation via 
the well. This is intended to increase the size and extent 
of existing bedrock fractures. 


15.6 Inclination (Deviation) Angle 

It is the deviation (measured in degree) from vertical 
direction of the well. 

15.7 Initial Reservoir Pressure (P) 

Initial gas pressure measured in a reservoir prior to the 
start of production. 

15.8 Injection Fall-off Test 


Method of determination of reservoir permeability 
based on measurement and analysis of pressure data 
gathered from a well under injection at a constant rate 
followed by shut-in. 


15.9 Inter-well Interference 


A point in common drainage area in the same coal seam 
where sum of pressure drop results in acceleration of 
gas desorption. 


16 LANGMUIR VOLUME (V,) 


Maximum adsorbed gas content per unit mass of 
coal at infinite pressure under particular temperature 
conditions. 

16.1 Langmuir Pressure (P,) 

Pressure at which half of the Langmuir volume 
exists within the coal under particular temperature 
conditions. 

16.2 Lease 

A petroleum mining lease granted for the purpose of 
exploitation of CBM issued under the rules. 

16.3 Lessee 


The contractor to whom a lease is issued under the rules 
for the purpose of carrying out CBM operations in the 
contract area. 


16.4 Liquid Column Height 


Distance from fluid level in annular space of casing 
pipe to the middle of reservoir during production (unit 
is metre). 


16.5 Liquid Producing Rate 


Liquid volume ejected out of well in unit time. The unit 
is m’/d. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


16.6 Log 


Systematic recording of data, such as a driller”s log, 
mud log, electrical well log or radioactivity log. 
Many different logs are run in wells to discern various 
characteristics of down-hole formation. 


17 MEASURED DEPTH (MD) 


Measured length of bore hole axis from rig rotary table 
surface to measure point in the well. 


17.1 Methane 


A colourless, odourless, inflammable gaseous 
hydrocarbon, the simplest of alkane series and the main 
constituent of natural gas or, a colourless, odourless 
gas, the simplest paraffin hydrocarbon, (CH,). It is the 
principal constituent of natural gas and is also found 
associated with crude oil. Methane is a greenhouse gas 
in the atmosphere because it absorbs long wavelength 
radiation from the earth’s surface. 


17.2 Methane Emission 


The volume of liberated methane released to the 
atmosphere. Methane used is not considered methane 
emitted. Methane emissions are calculated by 
subtracting the amount of methane used from the 
amount of methane liberated. 


17.3 Multi-lateral Horizontal Well 


Horizontal well with more horizontal well segments or 
with more branch horizontal well segments drilled in 
one horizontal well segment. 


18 NATURAL GAS 


Gas obtained from wells and consisting primarily of 
hydrocarbons and includes CBM but does not include 
helium occurring in association with such hydrocarbons. 


19 OPEN HOLE COMPLETION 


Well completion method when casing pipe lowered and 
cemented up to the top of coal bed methane producing 
layer. 


20 ORIGINAL CBM IN PLACE 


Volume of coal bed methane in a reservoir prior to 
production. 


21 PERMEABILITY 


A measure of the ability of a rock to permit fluids to be 
transmitted through it. It is controlled by pore size, pore 
throat geometry and pore connectivity. Permeability is 
typically reported in Darcy. 


22 PILOT ASSESSMENT WELL 


A well drilled for the purpose of determining the 
potential CBM accumulation in the contract area 


on geological entities in terms of thickness, lateral 
extent and gas content of coal seams upto a depth or 
stratigraphic level specified in the work programme. 


23 PRESSURE GRADIENT 


Pressure change with distance or, ratio of fluid pressure 
in the middle of the coal seam and reservoir depth or, 
rate of pressure change with respect to depth of coal 
bed methane reservoir in unit depth ( MPa/m). 


24 PRODUCTION CURVE 


Group of characteristic curves which describe 
production well drainage status including 
transformation curves indicate gas production versus 
time, water production versus time, fluid level versus 
time, casing pressure and flowing bottom hole pressure 
versus time, etc. 


24.1 Production System 


Combination of pump diameter, stroke, jig frequency, 
rotate speed, etc, parameters during coal bed methane 
production depending on production design. 


24.2 Production Operations 


All operations conducted for the purpose of producing 
CBM from contract area after the commencement of 
production from the contract area including, but not 
limited to, operation and maintenance of all necessary 
facilities. 


25 PROPPANT 


Solid particles filling and support fracture in fracturing 
technology. 

25.1 Proppant Volume Percentage 

Ratio of volume of proppant added accumulated 
volume of proppant to volume of used liquid when 
pumping proppant-carrying fluid. 

25.2 Prospecting Well or Wildcat Well 


Well drilled for the purpose of discovering a new field 
or reservoir in the new frontier. 


26 PUMP INSPECTION 


Generic terms of maintenance, operation to replace, 
deepen or lift setting depth of pump, change pump 
diameter, relieve coal fine block of pump, sand block, 
sucker rod broken, parts depreciation, etc. 


26.1 Pump Setting Depth 

Entering depth of standing valve of pump (unit is 
metre). 

26.2 Re-fracturing 


Fracture more than once on the same layer of the same 
well. 


26.3 Submergence 

Depth of pump sunk in the liquid to working fluid level 
when deep-well pump works (unit is metre). 

26.4 Vertical Fracture 

Fracture surface is perpendicular to the coal seam, 
normally caused when horizontal stress is smaller than 
vertical stress. 

26.5 Vertically Staged Fracturing 

Pointed fracture layer by layer (segment) after 
separating target layers (segment) through a method. 
26.6 Vitrinite 

One of the primary components of coal and most 
sedimentary kerogen. Vitrinite is a type of maceral, 
where ’macerals’ are organic components of coal 
analogous to the ’minerals’ of rocks. It is derived from 
the cell-wall material or woody tissue of plants. 

26.7 Wireline Coring 

Operation to obtain rock sample core drilled from 
stratum by wire line core barrel. 

26.8 Proximate Analysis 


Analysis of a solid mineral fuel reported in terms of 
moisture, volatile matter, ash and fixed carbon. 


27 RECOVERY FACTOR 


Ratio of recoverable amount of hydrocarbon and 
initially in place amount of methane. 
27.1 Reserve 


Portion of the demonstrated reserve base that 
is estimated to be recoverable at the time of 
determination. Derived by applying a recovery factor 
to that component of the identified resource designated 
as the demonstrated reserve base. 


27.2 Reservoir 

A naturally occurring accumulation of coal or lignite of 
any rank and/or quality which contains CBM. 

27.3 Rod Pump 


Kind of oil pump whose external working barrel 
connect to the bottom of tubing string, pump barrel and 
plunger connect to the bottom of rod, enter into well 
together, and insert the external working barrel. 

27.4 Royalty 


Astatutory payment payable to the state government(s). 


27.5 Screen Pipe Completion 


Well completion method of using screen liner in target 
zone. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


27.6 Seismic 


Exploration technique that can find structures and 
potential reservoir traps by reflecting sound waves 
from the rock strata. 


27.7 Site Restoration 


All activities required to return a site to its natural state 
or to render a site compatible with its intended after- 
use (to the extent reasonable) after cessation of CBM 
operations in relation thereto and shall include, where 
appropriate, proper abandonment of wells or other 
facilities, removal of equipment, structures and debris, 
establishment of compatible contours and drainage, 
replacement of top soil, vegetation, slope stabilisation, 
infilling of excavations or any other appropriate actions 
in the circumstances as per modern CBM/oilfields and 
petroleum industry practices. 


27.8 Shrinkage Contraction Co-efficient 


Decrease in volume of coal matrix after gas desorption 
expressed as a percentage of the initial volume. 


27.9 Skin Effect 


Change in permeability near well bore causing 
additional flow effect (pressure drawdown) caused 
due to drilling, well completion, work-over job or well 
stimulation. 


27.10 Static Fluid Level 


Distance from stable fluid level in annular space of 
casing pipe to well head when stop production is 
stopped(unit is metre). 


27.11 Stimulation 


Technology to improve initial fracture system of coal 
seam and to improve connection between coal seam 
fracture and well bore or other technology to improve 
production ability. 


27.12 Test Well 


An exploration well drilled for the purpose of carrying 
out different well tests to assess the CBM production 
potential of the coal or lignite seams. The well tests in 
such a well shall include but not limited to injection or 
fall-off tests, stress test, dewatering test for production 
testing or any other test as required for estimation of 
CBM and water production rates. 


27.13 True Vertical Depth (TVD) 


Vertical distance from measured point to Kelly bushing 
surface. 


27.14 Tubing Pump 


Kind of oil pump whose pump barrel connect to the 
bottom of tubing string, enter into well with pipeline. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


27.15 U-type Well 


Combination of a horizontal well and a vertical well 
with far end of the former connecting to the latter. 


27.16 V-type Well 


Combination of horizontal well(s) with far ends 
connecting to the same vertical well. 


28 VENTILATION AIR METHANE (VAM) 


28.1 Methane mixed with the ventilation air in the mine 
that is circulated in sufficient quantity to dilute methane 
to low concentrations for safety reasonsor, methane 
contained in the exhaust air of the ventilation system 
of a mine, which originated across the mine working 
and diluted to low concentrations by the circulation of 
outside air. 


28.2 Virgin CBM 


Methane produced from unmined or virgin coal seams 
using surface bore holes. 


28.3 Volatile Matter 


Loss in mass, corrected for moisture, when a solid 
mineral fuel is heated out of contact with air under 
specified conditions. 


29 WELL 


A bore hole or core hole made by drilling in the course 
of CBM operations, but does not include a seismic shot 
hole. 

29.1 Well Cementing 

Operation to inject cement into annular space between 
casing string and bore hole wall. 

29.2 Well Work-over 

Repair operation of production well which require 
pulling out/in tubing string. 

29.3 Zone Evaluation 


Screening of various zones to decide on one or more 
favourable zone through comprehensive geological 
research. 


IS 17142 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Methods and Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional 
Committee, MED 37 


Organization 


Oil and Natural Gas 


Atlas Copco Construction & Mining Sales, Pune 
(Atlas-Copco), Dapodi 


Bhel, Hyderabad 
Central Fuel Reasearch Institute (CFRI), Dhanbad 


Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 
(CMERI), Dhanbad 


Central Mine Planning And Design Institute Limited 
(CMPDI), Ranchi 


Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), Noida 

Essar Oil Limited , Mumbai 

Gail India Limited, New Delhi 

Great Eastern Energy Corporation Limited (GEECL), 
Gurugram 

Ism, Dhanbad (IIT-ISM) 

Neyveli Lignite Coporation (NLC) , Neyveli 


IIT, Madras 


In Personal Capacity 


In Personal Capacity 


Director General, Bis 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR SINGHAL (Chairman) 
Suri O. N. Gyan! (Alternate I) 
Suri A. K. Paswan (Alternate II) 
Ms VISHAKHA SINGH (Alternate Ill) 
SHRI KHALEQUZ ZAMAN (Alternate IV) 
SHRI SHAKEEL AHMED (Alternate V) 
SHRI S. MARANDI (Alternate VI) 


SHRI ANIMESH NANDY 


Suri D. Sarya Monan RAO 
DR ASHOK KUMAR SINGH 


Dr P. K. CHATERJEE 
Dr M. K. KARMAKAR (Alternate) 


DR AKHILESH SINGH 


SHRI SANJEEB GOSWAMI 
Suri T. ASHWINI Kumar (Alternate ) 


SHRI NILESH KAMAT 
SHRI ARUN SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri D. M. Rao 
Dr D. BURAGOHAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANOOP GUPTA 
SHRI PRIYARANJAN PATRA (Alternate) 


Pror M. JAWED 
Suri A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. ALAGAR 
Suri M. KrisHNAN (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS JAYANTI 
PROF PREETI AGHALAYAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR 
SHRI RUDRA PRATAP SINGH 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ & Hean (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SANDEEP KESHAV 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 37 (13292). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


