UAT ure IS 7212 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Ppi MURO e» avia 


( TEN FART ) 


Methods of Determination of Copper 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.060 


© BIS 2023 


UR AAG equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS UA, 9 sgg IE VHX HH, Ay facet - 110002 
A = MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 5 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Copper in micro and macro quantities is required to be determined in various products. Numerous methods are 
available for its determination in all ranges but a few have been found to be more convenient and suitable and 
these are now used in preference to others. For example, electrodeposition on a platinum gauze cathode is an 
excellent method but is time consuming. This is used for determining copper in macro quantities where large 
batch of samples can be simultaneously electrolyzed in a battery of electrolytic cells. It is also used where the 
volumetric iodide method cannot be employed due to any reason. The volumetric iodide method is a very rapid 
and convenient method for determining macro quantities of copper. For micro-analysis of copper, several organic 
reagents are used but more common reagent is the diethyldithiocarbamate, Biquinoline [2,2-biquinolyl or 2-(2- 
quinolyl)-quinoline] is also considered to be most suitable but its use is under investigation with the Committee. 


This standard was originally published in 1974. This standard is revised to update the reference clause and 
incorporate the instrumental test methods for the determination of copper. The editorial corrections have also been 
made, wherever required. 


This standard is intended to achieve uniformity of the method for the determination of copper prescribed in various 
Indian Standards. 


The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7212 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF COPPER 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes various test methods for the 
determination of copper in micro and macro 
quantities. Depending upon the sample in which 
copper is to be determined, any suitable test method 
as given in this Standard may be used. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute the provision of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 


IS 264:2005 Nitric acid — Specification 
(third revision) 


IS 266:1993 Sulphuric acid — Specification 
(third revision) 


IS 1070:1992 Reagent grade water — 
Specification (third revision) 


IS 2263 : 1979 Methods of preparation of 
indicator solutions (first 
revision) 


IS 2316:1990 Methods of preparation of 
standard solutions for 
colorimetric and volumetric 
analysis (second revision) 


IS 3025 (Part Methods of sampling and test 

2): 2019/ISO (physical and chemical) for 

11885 : 2007 water and wastewater: Part 2 
Determination of selected 
elements by inductively 
coupled plasma optical 
emission spectrometry (ICP- 
OES) (first revision) 


IS 3025 (Part Methods of sampling and test 

42) : 1992 (physical and chemical) for 
water and wastewater: Part 42 
Copper (first revision) 


IS No. Title 


IS 3025 (Part Methods of sampling and test 
65):2014/ISO (physical and chemical) for 


17294-2 : water and wastewater: Part 65 
2003 Application of  inductively 
coupled plasma mass 


spectrometry (icp-ms) — 
Determination of 62 elements 


IS 4161: 1967 Specification for  nessler 
cylinders 


3 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS1070) or demineralized water 
(demineralized through ion-exchange resin) shall be 
used in tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities that affect the results of the analysis. 


4 PREPARATION OF SOLUTION 


Before carrying out the analytical procedures, the 
copper in test samples has to be brought into 
solution. In most cases, attack by nitric acid is 
enough; occasionally sulphuric acid, fuming, has to 
follow this attack. In case of organic matter and 
biological samples attack by sulphuric acid and an 
oxidizing agent (usually hydrogen peroxide) is 
required but direct ashing by ignition can also be 
done. Highly siliceous samples may be opened up 
with hydrofluoric acid and sulphuric acid treatment 
or by fusion with pyrosulphate. In all cases, the 
whole of the copper comes into the acidic solution 
and insoluble residue, if any, can be filtered out. 
There is no volatile loss of copper in ashing, fusion 
or during fuming of sulphuric acid. The ashing is 
done at a temperature not exceeding 600 °C. 


5 ELECTROLYTIC DETERMINATION OF 
COPPER 
5.1 Outline of the Method 


Electrolysis is carried out in a weak acidic solution 
and copper deposited on a platinum gauze electrode 
is weighed. 


IS 7212 : 2023 


5.2 Apparatus 
5.2.1 Electrolytic Apparatus 


A suitable apparatus for electrolysis with or without 
agitation of the electrolyte. 


5.2.2 Electrodes 


Platinum gauze electrode having a surface area of 
about 1 cm?. 


5.3 Reagents 
5.3.1 Solvent-Acid Mixture 


Add 200 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid (see IS 
266) to 500 ml of water, then add 200 ml of 
concentrated nitric acid (see IS 264). 


5.32 Dilute Nitric Acid — 1:1 by Volume 


5.4 Procedure 


5.4.1 Weigh accurately the material containing 
between 0.1 to 0.3 g of copper and transfer to a 
beaker provided with a watch glass. Dissolve the 
material in the solvent-acid mixture. Generally 20 
ml of the mixture is required per gram of the sample. 
Add further 10 ml of the mixture. When the 
dissolution is complete, boil vigorously by adding a 
pinch of urea or sulphamic acid to drive off the 
nitrous fumes and cool. Wash the watch glass and 
sides of the beaker carefully. Dilute the contents to 
about 200 ml with water. 


5.4.2 Clean the electrodes by immersing in dilute 
nitric acid, followed by washings with water, 
immersing in absolute alcohol and finally drying at 
105 ?C for about 10 min. Weigh the cathode 
accurately and fit the electrodes in the electrolysis 
apparatus so that they are as near to the bottom of 
the beaker as possible. Cover the beaker with a pair 
of split watch glass and electrolyze for 18 h at 1.0 
ampere with a static electrolyte or for 2 h to 3 hat 4 
amperes with the agitation of the solution. At the end 
of this period wash the cover glass and sides of the 
beaker and continue the electrolysis for another 30 
min. This will increase the volume of the solution, 
thus immersing a little more portion of the cathode 
surface, and if no more copper is deposited on this 
freshly immersed surface, remove the cover glass 
and lower the beaker with the current still switched 
on, simultaneously washing the electrodes with a jet 
of water from a wash bottle. Switch off the current 
and remove the cathode, immerse it in absolute 
alcohol and dry at 105 ?C for 10 min. Weigh the 
cathode and calculate the increase in mass due to 
metallic copper. 


5.5 Calculation 


Copper (as Cu), percent by mass 


= M2-Mi 100 
— M 


where 


M» = mass in g of the cathode after electro 
deposition, 

M; = mass in g of the cathode before electro- 
deposition, and 

M = mass in g of the material taken for the test. 


NOTES 


1 All the copper should be removed from the solution 
but, as an additional safeguard, examine the 
electrolyte as follows: 


Add 20 ml of citric acid solution (30 percent, m/v) 
followed by ammonium hydroxide (18 N) until the 
solution is distinctly alkaline, then add 10 ml in 
excess, followed by 10 ml of sodium 
diethyldithiocarbamate (0.1 percent, m/v). If a brown 
colour is produced, extract with carbon tetrachloride, 
determine the copper approximately by calorimetric 
method by visual comparison (see 6) and add it to the 
above results. 


2 Any insoluble residue, after the initial acid treatment, 
should be filtered, ignited, fused with potassium 
pyrosulphate, the melt dissolved in water and added to 
the electrolyte before electrolysis. If lead is known to 
be present, it may be precipitated as sulphate in the 
solution of the sample, filtered, washed well with 
sulphuric acid (2 percent) and rejected. 


6 VOLUMETRIC IODIDE METHOD 
6.1 Outline of the Method 


This is a rapid method with high degree of 
accuracy but itis subject to interference by many 
other elements. Most of these interferences lead 
to very slight error only if proper pH is 
maintained at the time of titration. 


Cupric ions react with iodide ions in which 
cuprous iodide and equivalent amount of iodine 
are formed as per the reaction 


2Cu** + 4r = Cuzl2 + D2 


The liberated iodine is determined by titration 
against the standard thiosulphate solution. The 
reaction and the titration are best carried out at a pH 
of 3.5 to 4.0. At pH widely different from this, the 
results obtained are not accurate. 


6.2 Reagents 


6.2.1 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution —18 N 


6.2.2 Ammonium Bifluoride Solution — nearly 
saturated. Keep in polyethylene containers. 


6.2.3 Potassium lodide Solution — fifty percent 
(m/v), freshly prepared solution. 


6.2.4 Standard Sodium Thiosulphate Solution — 0.1 
N 


(see 55 of IS 2316) 


It should be replaced with (see IS 2263) IS 7212 : 2023 


6.2.5 Starch Solution 


Fresh, 0.5 percent (m/v) (see IS 2263) 
6.2.6 Copper Metal — Electrolytically Pure 


6.2.7 Urea — Solid 
6.2.8 Potassium Thiocyanate — Solid 


6.3 Procedure 


Make the solution of the material in nitric acid. If the 
material is insoluble in nitric acid, sulphuric acid 
may be also added. But, if hydrochloric acid is used, 
this reagent should be removed by evaporation with 
sulphuric acid before neutralization. Transfer a 
known aliquot of solution containing up to 0.3 g of 
copper in a 250 ml stoppered conical flask. Remove 
the stopper, evaporate the solution to about 2 ml or 
3 ml carefully, taking care that no part ofthe solution 
is evaporated to dryness. Dilute to about 50 ml. Add 
1 g of urea and boil for about a min with stopper on. 
Cool, add ammonium hydroxide drop by drop with 
swirling, until a permanent precipitate is formed and 
a faint smell of ammonia is noticed in the solution 
after keeping it for a min or two. (This precipitate is 
usually, though not always, brown due to ferric 
hydrated oxide; but the supernatant liquid is always, 
more or less, bluish or blue). Avoid adding too much 
excess of ammonia. Add ammonium bifluoride 
solution drop by drop with thorough mixing until the 
brown precipitate redissolves and any yellow of red 
tinge in the solution disappears. Add 1 ml more. 


Add about 4 ml to 6 ml of potassium iodide solution 
and mix with stopper on. Keep for 2-3 min 
(preferably in dark). Titrate the liberated iodine with 
standard thiosulphate solution until the iodine colour 
lightens, then add about 5 ml of starch solution and 
2 g - 3 g of potassium thiocyanate and continue the 
titration until the starch colour is discharged. Add 
about 2 ml of potassium iodide solution more and 
mix. If the starch colour reappears, continue the 
titration as above. Repeat until on addition of more 
potassium iodide; starch colour does not reappear. 


NOTES 


1 Starch solution contains two kinds of starch, one of which 
is present in major proportion and gives blue colour with 
iodine. The other type is present in minor proportion only 
and gives a red colour with iodine. The red colour is more 
stable than blue. On titration, the original colour, which is 
almost blue, gradually changes to violet and then to red as 
the less stable blue starch colour is progressively discharged 
by thiosulphate. At the end point, it is the red starch colour 
which disappears. 


2 The addition of solid urea and boiling for a min and 
cooling can be omitted if the sample solution is known to be 
free from nitric acid. 


6.4 Calculation 


Copper (as Cu), percent by mass 


6.354 
= — x VN 
M 
where 
V = volume in ml of standard sodium 


thiosulphate solution used in titration, 
N = normality of standard sodium thiosulphate 
solution, and 
M = mass in g of the material taken for the test. 


7 PHOTOMETRIC (COLORIMETRIC) METHOD 


7.1 Outline of the Method 


Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate by reaction in acid, 
neutral or alkaline solution, gives the copper salt by 
diethyldithiocarbamic acid which has a golden 
yellow colour. The complex is extracted with carbon 
tetrachloride and photometrically determined. By 
this treatment all interfering elements except 
bismuth are eliminated. 


7.2 Apparatus 


Photometer — Any suitable photoelectric 
colorimeter. 


7.3 Reagents 


7.3.1 Ammonium Citrate Solution — 40 Percent 


(m/v). 


7.3.2 Sodium Diethyldithiocarbamate Solution — 
0.1 percent (m/v). 


7.3.3 Standard Copper Solution 


Clean the surface of a copper wire with sand paper. 
Dissolve 1 000 g of pure copper in dilute nitric acid. 
Hear the solution nearly to dryness to drive off the 
acid. Add about 10 ml of water and heat again nearly 
to dryness. Take up the residue in water, add 25 ml 
of 1 N sulphuric acid and dilute to 1 000 ml. One 
millilitre of this solution contains 0.1 mg of copper 
(as Cu). Alternatively, dissolve 3.928 g of cupric 
sulphate (CuSO45H2O) in sufficient water 
containing 1 or 2 ml of concentrated. sulphuric acid 
and dilute to 1 000 ml. One millilitre of the solution 
contains 1.0 mg of copper (as Cu). 


7.3.4 Ammonium Hydroxide — 18 N 
7.3.5 Carbon Tetrachloride 


7.4 Procedure 


Prepare the solution of the sample as prescribed in 
the relevant material specification. Transfer an 
aliquot containing not more than 0.05 mg of copper 


IS 7212 : 2023 


to a 100 ml separating funnel. Add 2 ml of 
ammonium citrate solution and adjust the pH to 8.5 
with ammonium hydroxide. The presence of 
ammonium ions helps to deionize iron, if present, 
and to prevent rapid fading of developed colour. 


Add 10 ml of sodium diethyldithiocarbamate 
solution and develop the colour. Extract the 
coloured complex with 5 ml to 10 ml of carbon 
tetrachloride. Separate the carbon tetrachloride layer 
from aqueous layer and centrifuge for 5 min to 
separate the water droplets. Transfer the carbon 
tetrachloride solution to a photometric cell and 
measure its absorbance at the wavelength of 
maximum absorption, 440 nm relative to the reagent 
blank. Calculate the corrected absorbance by 
subtracting the reading obtained for the solution 
containing no copper. 


Transfer to a series of 100 ml separating funnels 
aliquots of standard copper solution corresponding 
to0g, 5g, 10g, 15 g, 20 g, 25 g of copper and 
proceed exactly as prescribed in 7.4.1. Plot a graph 
of corrected absorbance of solutions against their 
copper contents. 


NOTE — If bismuth is suspected, it has to be separated or 
otherwise accounted for. 


7.5 Calculation 


Calculate the corrected absorbance by subtracting 
the value obtained for the blank from that obtained 
for the test solution and read from the calibration 
curve the corresponding mass of copper. 


Copper (as Cu), percent by mass 
= x 100M 
M2 
where 


M, = mass in g of copper as determined in the 
given aliquot of the test solution, and 

M» = mass in g of the material present in the 
aliquot of the test solution. 


8 BIQUINOLINE METHOD 
8.1 Outline of the Method 


Copper reduced to cuprous state by hydroxylamine 
hydrochloride, reacts with 2, 2-biyuinoline solution 
in normal or isoamyl alcohol, to give a pinkish- 
violet colour in the organic liquid layer. This colour 
is stable and may be measured visually or 
spectrophotometrically over a wide range and is 
proportional to the amount of copper present. Best 
working pH range is between 5 to 6. Quantitative 
results can, however, be obtained if the copper 
content is limited to 50 ug. No other metal interferes. 


NOTE — This method is suitable for materials of low 
copper content and will need some modification depending 
on nature of material. Copper in iron ore, steel or special 
alloy steel cannot be determined unless iron is reduced with 


excess of sulphurous acid. Hydroxylamine hydrochloride 
will be inadequate for the purpose. Organic matter, if 
present should be burnt. 


8.2 Apparatus 
8.2.1 Nessler Cylinders — see IS 4161. 


8.2.2 Spectrophotometer — Visible range 400 to 
800 nm. 


8.3 Reagents 
8.3.1 Buffer Solution 


Dissolve 400 g of sodium acetate trihydrate, 20 g of 
hydroxylamine hydrochloride and 100 g of sodium 
tartrate in one litre of water. The pH of the buffer 
should be adjusted between 6 to 7. The buffer should 
be cleaned by shaking with 10 ml of biquinoline 
solution in a separating funnel of one litre capacity. 
If the organic liquid becomes pinkish violet it. 
should be removed and the process repeated till the 
organic liquid layer becomes perfectly colourless. 


8.3.2 Biquinoline Solution 


Dissolve 0.2 g of 2, 2”-biquinoline reagent in 800 ml 
to 900 ml of isoamyl alcohol by warming. Cool and 
make up to 1 litre with the same alcohol. Normal 
amyl alcohol can also be used in place of isoamyl 
alcohol. 


NOTE — No special storage precautions are necessary for 
the above reagents but it may be useful to keep them away 
from strong sunlight. The buffer may be kept in a 
refrigerator and biquinoline solution in amber coloured 
tightly stoppered bottle. 


8.3.3 Standard Copper Solution 
8.3.3.1 100 micrograms per ml 


Dissolve 0.200 g of copper sulphate (CuSO4.5H20) 
in 0.1 N hydrochloric acid and dilute to 500 ml with 
the acid. 


8.3.3.2 10 microgram per ml 


Transfer 10 ml of standard solution (a) to a 100 ml 
volumetric flask and dilute to 100 ml with 0.1 N 
hydrochloric acid. 


8.4 Procedure 
8.4.1 Visual 


Transfer to a number of Nessler cylinders aliquots of 
standard copper solution (see 8.3.3.2) corresponding 
to 0.0 ug, 0.2 ug, 0.5 ug, 1.0 ug, 2.0 ug, 3.0 ug, 
4.0 ug and 5 ug of copper. Add 10 ml of buffer 
solution and mix well. Then add 2 ml of biquinoline 
solution, tightly stopper and shake vigorously for 
2 min, allow the layers to separate. For 
semiquantitative analysis the colour obtained in the 
organic liquid layer, in case of test sample similarly 
treated, is visually compared against similar colour 
in case of standards and the value of the standard in 


which it most nearly matches, is taken to be the 
value for the test sample. 


The test sample will pass the limit test if the colour 
in the organic liquid layer, in case of test sample, is 
equal to or less than that in cast of standard solution, 


8.4.2 Spectrophotometrically 


Three extractions of copper solution with 10 ml 
biquinoline solution are required for complete 
extraction of copper. Biquinoline solution is added 
as 5 ml, 2.5 ml and 2.5 ml increments and shaking 
each time for 2 min. 


8.4.2.1 Decompose sample in a suitable manner and 
dissolve in dilute hydrochloric acid. Transfer aliquot 
of solution containing not more than 50 ug of copper 
to a separating funnel of 50 ml capacity. Add 10 ml 
of buffer solution. Check pH at about 6 (use narrow 
range pH paper or pH meter). Volume of solution 
should be between 15 ml to 20 ml. Shake with 
0.5 ml of biquinoline solution for 2 min. 


8.4.2.2 Allow the phases to separate and run the 
lower layer into another separating funnel, and 
extract with 2.5 ml of biquinoline solution. Take the 
lower layer into another separating funnel and again 
extract with 2.5 ml biquinoline solution. Combine 
the extracts, mix well, filter dry into 1 cm cell and 
measure absorbance at 545 nm against reagent blank 
with spectrophotometer. Take 0.0 ml, 1.0 ml, 2.0 ml, 
3.0 ml, 4.0 ml and 5 ml solution (see 8.3.3.2) in 
50 ml separating funnel. Add 10 ml buffer solution 
and proceed as above and draw calibration curve for 
the range 0 ug to 50 ug copper. Find out the copper 
content corresponding to the absorbance of the test 


IS 7212 : 2023 


solution. 


NOTE — The copper complex formed with 2,2’- 
biquinoline is not a strong complex. Ions that form strong 
complexes with copper, such as ammonium prevent the 
reaction of copper with 2,2'-biquinoline and therefore 
should not be present during the test. Inorganic material is 
present and organic compounds are extracted by isoamyl 
alcohol, their yellow colour will mask the colour of the 
copper biquinoline complex. If samples of high organic 
matter are ignited at 450 'C, interference from organic 
compounds can be prevented. 


9 DETERMINATION OF COPPER USING 
INDUCTIVELY COUPLED PLASMA 
OPTICAL EMISSION SPECTROMETRY 
(ICP-OES) METHOD 


Copper can be determined using Inductively 
Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry 
(ICP-OES) method as prescribed in IS 3025 (Part 2). 


10 DETERMINATION OF COPPER USING 
ATOMIC ABSORPTION METHOD (AAS) 
METHOD 


Copper can be determined using Atomic Absorption 
Method (AAS) method as prescribed in IS 3025 
(Part 42). 


11 DETERMINATION OF COPPER USING 
INDUCTIVELY COUPLED PLASMA MASS 
SPECTROMETRY (ICP-MS) 


Copper can also be determined using Inductively 
Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) 
method as prescribed in IS 3025 (Part 65). 


IS 7212 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


Organization 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 
Institute, Bhavnagar 


Alkali Mfrs Association of India, Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 


Consumer Voice, Delhi 


DGQA, New Delhi 


Hindalco, Mumbai 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 
Global Adsorbents Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Grasim Industries Ltd, Nagda 


Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd, Vadodara 


Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council (ICC) 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Industrial Carbon Pvt Ltd, Ankleshwar 


Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


Representative(s) 


DR KANNAN SRINIVASAN (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. DAS (Alternate) 


DR A. V. R. REDDY 
DR S. N. ACHARY (Alternate) 


DR RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 


SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 
SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


DR GURBACHAN SINGH 
SHRI B. S. TOMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESWAR KAPURI 
SHRI AJITH RAMACHANDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. V. V. R SARMA 
SHRI SANJAY DHANUKA 


SHRI ALOK SINGH 
SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. MAHIDA 
SHRI SHAILESH PATEL (Alternate) 


MS VRINDA RAJWADE 
SHRI SOJAN VARGHESE (Alternate) 


DR U. SHETKAR 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR PRAVEEN R. LIKHAR 
DR RAJENDER REDDY (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYAN ROHIT KUMAR 


DR ROHIT MISRA 
DR O. P. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. N. APARAJIT 


DR DARBHA SRINIVAS 
DR PARESH DHEPE (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


National Peroxide Ltd 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


National Test House (NR) 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tamil Nadu Petroproducts Limited, Chennai 
Tata Chemicals Ltd, Gujarat 

The Dharamsi Morarji Chemicals Co Ltd 
Vaibhav Analytical Services, Ahmedabad 


In Personal Capacity (5/4, Veer apt Sector 13, 
Rohini, Delhi 110085) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 7212 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR TRILOCHAN MISHRA 
SHRI DEVBRATA MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN KUMAR 
DR PRASHANT SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR JOY ANTHONY 


DR NAHAR SINGH 
DR S. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


MS RICHA KUNDRA 


DR KARTHIKEYAN 
MS ANNA BACKIAM (Alternate) 


DR (Ms) LAXMIRAWAT 
SHRI B. GOVINDAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVI MUTHUKRISHNAN 
SHRI NAJMUL HASAN KHAN 
SHRI MANDAR GAIKWAD 
SHRI GAURANG OZA 


SHRI D. K. JAIN 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR AND 
[REPRESENTING 


HEAD (CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT) 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SAGAR SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 01(18255). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


