mAT Are IS 14750 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


conte ferns sit fast tenia 
arent N fara aaa o sant 
Seas, Ta-Tara aan Atao 
al ttt atear 
(Ye FRAT ) 


Code of Practice for Installation, 
Maintenance and Observation of 
Seepage Measuring Devices for 
Concrete/Masonry and Earth/ 
Rockfill Dams 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 17.160; 93.160 


© BIS 2014 


RAs AA ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 FIRM AHL AM, as feeei-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


Price Group 4 


August 2014 


Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee, WRD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 2000; however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained since then as well as considering technological development 
in the field. The major changes in this revision are: 


a) Table 1 (discharge through contracted rectangular weirs) and Table 2 (discharge through 90° V-Notch 
weirs) has been excluded in this revision as discharge formula for standard contracted rectangular weir 
and 90° V-Notch weir has already been given. 

b) A new clause about weir plate has been included as 2.1.1. 


c) Paragraphs about weir contraction have been included in 2.1.3. 
The reference to the following Indian Standards on flow measurements will be useful: 


IS No. Title 
IS 9108 : 2013/ Hydrometry — Open channel flow measurement using thin plate weirs (first revision) 
1SO1438 : 2008 
IS 13083 : 1991/ Liquid flow measurement in open channels — Flat — V-weirs. 
ISO 4377 : 1990 


Water retaining structures cannot be constructed waterproof. It often happens that a minute quantity of water gets 
released through various means. This minute quantity of water or seepage through or around a concrete/masonry 
and earth/rockfill dams is an extremely valuable indicator of the condition and performance of the dam. The 
quantity of seepage is, normally, directly related to the level of water in the reservoir. Any sudden change in the 
quantity of seepage without apparent cause, such as a corresponding change in the reservoir levels or a heavy 
rainfall, could indicate a seepage problem. Similarly, when the seepage water becomes muddy or discoloured, 
contains increased quantities of sediment, or changes radically in chemical content, a likely serious seepage 
problem is indicated. Wet spots, moisture or seepage appearing at new or unplanned locations at the abutments or 
downstream of a concrete dam and on the downstream slope or below an embankment could also indicate a 
seepage problem. 


In order to reduce seepage and uplift pressure under the dam foundation, grout curtain is provided near the 
upstream (u/s) face for a considerable depth below the base of the concrete/masonry dam. This provides a 
comparatively watertight barrier to percolation from reservoir. A few metre downstream (d/s) of this grout curtain 
a drainage curtain is provided by drilling a line of holes from the foundation gallery and tunnels in the abutments 
to intercept any seepage that passes downstream of the grout curtain. Measurement of seepage d/s of the grout 
curtain provides a direct indication of the adequacy and effectiveness of the grout curtain, drainage curtain and 
functioning of the drain holes and helps to decide when and where remedial measures may be required. 


Observations of leakage from contraction joints (ungrouted), lift joints and cracks provide a means for judging 
the quality of workmanship as well as indicate the necessity for corrective measures to preserve the integrity of 
the structure. 


Since all the soil materials used for construction are pervious to varied degree, seepage takes place through earth 
dams and their foundations. The water seeping under pressure through the soil voids creates mechanical drag on 
the soil particles. When these forces exceed the resistive forces of the soil grains, the movement of grains may 
take place. Even a minor washing or removal of grains may lead to progressive decrease in resistance to seepage 
and culminate in the formation of cavities leading to ultimate collapse of the structure. It is therefore, important 
to keep down the seepage, not only to keep the water loss well within economic limits but also to take adequate 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 14750 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION, 
MAINTENANCE AND OBSERVATION OF SEEPAGE 
MEASURING DEVICES FOR CONCRETE/ 
MASONRY AND EARTH/ROCKFILL DAMS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard stipulates the provisions for installation, 
observation and maintenance of seepage measuring 
devices for concrete/masonry and earth/rockfill dams. 


2 SEEPAGE MEASURING DEVICES 


Seepage measuring devices are required to be installed 
to measure quantity of seepage through, around or 
under dams. Drain outlets are commonly used as 
seepage measurements points. The seepage water 
should be tested to determine its chemical composition 
because chemical changes may indicate progressive 
dissolution, decay or erosion in the dam body, 
foundation or abutment. The most common type of 
seepage measurement devices are weirs, flow meters 
and calibrated containers. 


2.1 Weirs 
2.1.1 Weir Plates 


Weir plates made up from stainless steel, aluminium 
or PVC may be used. The plates can vary in thickness 
from 2 mm for stainless steel to 12 mm for PVC. 


Weir plates that are thicker than 2 mm should be 
chamfered on the downstream side. The chamfer 
should be formed such that there is a maximum of 
2 mm edge on the horizontal section. The weir chamfer 
should be large enough to allow weir plates (and 
baffles) to be fitted and allow sufficient space for the 
measurement. For the system to perform correctly the 
weir plate should be leak free. 


2.1.2 General 


The weir is one of the oldest, simplest and most reliable 
types of devices used to measure the quantity of flow 
of water. If sufficient fall is present in the channel and 
the quantity of water to be measured is relatively small, 
the weir is a very suitable and economical measuring 
device. This is because the weir has a specific shape 
and size. Moreover, a specific discharge exists for a 
specific depth of water in the upstream pool with steady 


free flow condition. Weirs can be classified into two 
categories as below: 


a) Overflow structure weir; and 
b) Submerged orifice weir. 


The most common types of weirs under category (a) are 
rectangular, trapezoidal (Cipolletti) and V-notch weir. 
A submerged orifice weir, generally not in use, can be 
used where available head is low and the amount of 
floating debris is significant. The shape of the opening 
determines the type of the weir. For a rectangular or 
trapezoidal weir, the bottom edge of the opening is 
called the crest and the side edges are called sides or 
weir ends. The sheet of water leaving the weir crest is 
called the nappe. Weirs operate best when they 
discharge freely into the atmosphere. If the weir is 
submerged or partially submerged (tail water is high 
enough to obstruct free discharge into atmosphere), 
nonstandard negative pressure conditions are created 
affecting the rate of flow producing error in flow 
measurement. Thus actual flow may be greater than 
the computed one. Free flow condition is more 
desirable. In certain condition, the under-nappe air- 
space is artificially ventilated to maintain near 
atmospheric pressure. 


The following types of weirs are generally used: 


a) standard contracted rectangular weirs; 
b) standard suppressed rectangular weirs; 
c) standard Cipolletti weirs; and 

d) standard 90° V-Notch weirs. 


2.1.3 Standard Contracted Rectangular Weir 


When the distance from the ends or sides of the weir 
notch to the side of the pool is large enough to allow 
free flow of water with unconstrained lateral approach 
to the crest, the water will flow uniformly and relatively 
slowly towards the weir ends. As the water from the 
sides of the channel flows nearer to the notch, it 
accelerates and turns, making a curved flow path or 
contraction. When approach conditions from the weir 


IS 14750 : 2014 


pool allow complete contraction at the end and the 
bottom, the weir is called as contracted weir. 


When the distances from the sides of the weir notch to 
the sides of the weir pool are greater than two 
measurement heads, the water will flow relatively 
slowly along the bulkhead face toward the overflow 
opening. As the water from the sides of the channel 
flows nearer to the notch, it accelerates and has to turn 
to pass through the opening. Since the turning cannot 
occur instantaneously, a curved flow path or side 
contraction results in which the water springs free to 
form a jet narrower than the overflow opening width. 
This effect is also known as an end contraction. 


The term vertical contraction includes both crest 
contraction and drawdown at the weir plate. When 
approach conditions allow full contractions at the ends 
and at the bottom, the weir is a contracted weir. For 


full contraction, the ends of the weir should not be 
closer to the sides and bottom of the approach channel 
than a specified distance. If the specified distances are 
not met, then the weir is partially contracted. 


A standard contracted rectangular weir (see Fig.1) has 
its crest and sides far enough from the bottom and sides 
of the weir box or channel in which it is set. Thus a 
full contraction is developed. 


2.1.4 Standard Suppressed Rectangular Weir 


If a rectangular weir is placed in a channel such that 
sides of the channel acts as the ends of the weir that is 
there is no side contraction and the nappe has the same 
width as of channel, the weir is termed as suppressed 
rectangular weir. A standard suppressed rectangular 
weir (see Fig. 2) has its crest far enough from the 
bottom of the approach channel so that a full crest 


CREST LENGTH L 


| THIN METAL SHEET | 


Fic. 1 STANDARD CONTRACTED RECTANGULAR WEIR 


APPROACH 
CHANNEL 


CHANNEL 
SIDES 


BOTTOM OF 
APPROACH CHANNEL 


SECTION A-A 


Fic. 2 STANDARD SUPPRESSED RECTANGULAR WEIR 


2 


contraction is developed. Because the sides of the weir 
coincide with the sides of the approach channel no- 
lateral contraction is possible. In this weir, the sides of 
the approach channel should extend to downstream 
beyond the crest to prevent lateral expansion of the 


nappe. 
2.1.5 Standard Cipolletti (Trapezoidal) Weir 


The Cipolletti weir is a contracted trapezoidal weir in 
which each side of the notch has a slope of 1 horizontal 
to 4 vertical. It is named after its inventor Cesare 
Cipolletti, an Italian Engineer. The side slopes of 1 to 
4 are just sufficient to correct the end contractions of 
the nappe and that the flow is proportional to the length 
of the weir crest. It does not require corrections for 
end contractions. The weir has sharp crest and sharp 
sides, chamfered from the downstream side only. 
Standard Cipolletti Weir (see Fig. 3) has its crest and 
sides far enough from the bottom and sides, 
respectively, of the approach channel so that full 
contraction of the nappe occurs. The weir should not 
be used for heads less than 0.06 m nor for heads greater 
than one-third the crest length. 


2.1.6 Standard 90° V-Notch Weir 


The triangular or commonly known as V-Notch weir 
is an accurate flow measuring device particularly suited 
for small flows. With a low discharge the head over 
the crest of a rectangular weir is too small to be 
accurately measured. When the depth of water flowing 
over the rectangular weir is less than 5 cm triangular 
weir is preferred, because the discharge over a 
triangular weir increases more rapidly with the head 
than in the case of a horizontal rectangular weir. The 
weir generally used is the 90° V-notch weir shown in 
Fig. 4. However, 22.5° and 45° weirs can also be used 
for comparatively smaller flow/discharge. 


IS 14750 : 2014 


2.1.7 Design Considerations/Installation 
2.1.7.1 Standard contracted rectangular weir 


The following conditions are necessary to measure flow 
accurately with the standard contracted rectangular 
weir: 


a) The upstream face of the bulkhead, and the 
weir plate should be smooth and in vertical 
plane perpendicular to the axis of the channel. 

b) The entire crest should be horizontal, plane 
surface that forms a sharp right angle edge 
where it intersects the upstream face. The 
thickness of the crest, measured in the 
direction of flow, should be between 1 mm to 
2 mm. The thickness of the plate should be 
the same throughout. 

c) The upstream edge of the notch should be 
machined or filed perpendicular to the 
upstream face of the weir and should be free 
of burrs or scratches. Material of the weir 
should be hard enough and unscratchable by 
abrasive cloth or paper during cleaning. Knife 
edges are not desirable and should be avoided 
because they are difficult to maintain and do 
not allow the nappe to develop properly. 


d) The downstream edges of the notch should 
be chamfered if the plate is thicker than the 
prescribed crest width. This chamfer should 
be at an angle of 45° or more to the surface of 
the crest. 


e) The distance from the bottom of the approach 
channel to the crest should preferably be at 
least twice the depth of water above the crest, 
but not less than 0.3 m. 

f) The distance from the sides of the weir to the 
sides of the approach channel should 


CREST LENGTH L 


THIN METAL SHEET 


SLOPE 1:4 


Fic. 3 CIPOLLETTI WEIR 


IS 14750 : 2014 


g) 


h) 


)) 


15 TO 20H 


N 


Mk hahha Le he. 


S 


BULK HEAD 


BOTTOM OF 
APPROACH 


SECTION A-A 


Fic. 4 TypicAL DETAIL OF INSTALLATION OF SEEPAGE MEASUREMENT DEVICE (V-NoOTCH WEIR) 


preferably be at least twice the depth of water 
above the crest, but not less than 0.3 m. 


The overflow sheet should touch only the 
upstream edges of the crest and sides. 

The head on the weir should be taken as the 
difference in elevation between the crest and 
the water surface at a point upstream from 
the weir located at a distance of four times 
the maximum head on the crest. 

The cross-sectional area of the approach 
channel should be at least 8 times that of the 
nappe at the crest for a distance upstream from 
15 to 20 times and downstream preferably 
5 times the depth of the nappe. If the approach 
channel is smaller than that defined, the 
velocity of approach may be too high and the 


staff gauge reading too low. 


k) The depth of water flowing over the 
rectangular weir should not be less than about 
5 cm and not more than about two-thirds the 
crest width. 


2.1.7.2 Standard suppressed rectangular weir 


The conditions for accurate measurement with the 
standard suppressed rectangular weir (see Fig. 2) are 
identical with those of the standard contracted 
rectangular weir except the side contraction. In the 
suppressed weir, the sides of the approach channel 
should coincide with the sides of the weir and should 
extend downstream beyond the crest to prevent lateral 
expansion of the nappe. The vents may be placed on 
both sides of the weir box under the nappe to secure 


proper aeration beneath the nappe at the crest. 
2.1.7.3 Standard Cipolletti (trapezoidal) weir 


The sides of the weir incline outward at a slope of one 
horizontal to four vertical. The Cipolletti weir is a 
contracted weir, and should be installed accordingly. 
In this weir the end contraction are suppressed but the 
contractions are compensated by the outward slope of 
the weir sides. 


All conditions for accurate measurements stated for 
the standard contracted rectangular weir apply to the 
Cipolletti weir. The weir should not be used for heads 
less than 0.06 m nor for heads greater than one-third 
the crest length. 


2.1.7.4 Standard 90° V-notch weir 


The crest of the standard 90° V-Notch weir consists of 
a thin plate set on the sides of the notch which are 
inclined 45° from the vertical. This weir operates as a 
contracted weir, and all conditions for accuracy stated 
for the standard contracted rectangular weir apply. The 
distance from the sides of the weir to the sides of the 
channel should be at least twice the head on the weir. 
The minimum distance from the crest to the pool 
bottom should be measured from the vertex of the notch 
to the channel floor and should not be less than 0.3 m. 


Because the V-Notch weir has no crest length and due 
to its shape a small flow has greater head than that of 
other types of weirs. This is an advantage for small 
discharges because the nappe will spring free of the 
crest, whereas, it would cling to the crest of other types 
of weir and make the measurement worthless. The 45° 
and 22.5° weirs are even more accurate for smaller 
flows than the 90° V-Notch weirs. 


2.1.8 Selection of Weir Types 


Each of the weir has its own characteristics that make 
it suitable for particular operating condition. 
Experience shows that a rectangular suppressed weir 
or a 90° V-Notch weir provides the most accurate 
measurement than others. Usually the range of flows 
to be measured by a weir can be fairly well estimated 
in advance. With this range in mind, the following 
points may be considered while selecting the types of 
weir. 


The 90° V-Notch weir is preferred for measuring 
discharges between 15 litre per second to 30 litre per 
second. It can also work fairly well and is as accurate 
as other types of weirs for flow from 30 to 280 litre 
per second. For flows less than 15 litres/s, the 22.5° or 
45° V-notch weir is preferred. 


NOTE — For flow greater than 30 l/s, standard suppressed 
rectangular weir or standard contracted rectangular weir or 
standard Cipolletti weir may also be preferred depending upon 
the width of flow channel and depth of flow in the channel” 


IS 14750 : 2014 


2.1.9 Discharge Measurement 


The rate of flow or discharge in litres per second over 
the crest of a standard contracted rectangular weir, 
standard suppressed rectangular weir or standard 
Cipolletti weir is determined by the head H in cm. and 
by the crest length L in cm. The discharge of the 
standard 90° V-Notch weir is determined directly by 
the head on the bottom of the V-notch. As the stream 
passes over the weir, the top surface curves downward. 
This curved surface, or draw down, extends upstream 
a short distance from the weir notch. The head shall be 
measured at a point on the water surface in the weir 
pond beyond the effect of the draw down. This distance 
should be at least four times the maximum head on the 
weir, and the same gauge point should be used for lesser 
discharges. A staff gauge having a graduated scale with 
the zero placed at the same elevation as the weir crest 
is usually provided for the head measurements. The 
staff should be placed upstream of the draw down at a 
distance of 4 times the maximum weir head, and close 
enough to the bank for easy reading. 


After the head is determined, the rate of flow or 
discharge may be found from the formulas as described 
in the following paras. 


2.1.10 Discharge Formulae for Free Flow Condition 
2.1.10.1 Standard contracted rectangular weir 


The discharge through the standard contracted 
rectangular weirs may be computed by the Francis 
formula stated below: 


Q = 0.0184(L-2H) H” 


where 
Q = discharge, l/s; 
L = length of crest, cm; and 
H = head over the weir, cm. 


2.1.10.2 Standard suppressed rectangular weir 


Francis formula as given below is used for computing 
the discharge through standard suppressed rectangular 
weir. Velocity of approach is not considered. 


Q = 0.0184LH ” 


where 
Q = discharge, l/s; 
L = length of crest, cm; and 
H = head over the weir, cm. 


2.1.10.3 Standard cipolletti (trapezoidal) weir 


Cipolletti provided a formula for the reduced discharge 
caused by the end contractions. This is accomplished 


IS 14750 : 2014 


by sloping the sides of the weir sufficiently to overcome 
the effect of contraction. The formula for calculating 
the discharge through Cipolletti weir, in which the 
Francis coefficient is increased by 1 percent and 
neglecting the velocity of approach, is 


Q= 0.0186LH” 


where 
Q = discharge, l/s; 
L = length of crest, cm; and 
H = head over the weir, cm. 


2.1.10.4 Standard V-notch weir 


The V-Notch weir is commonly used to measure small 
and medium size streams. The advantage of the 
V-Notch weir is its ability to measure small flows 
accurately. The weir has both its sides sharp, chamfered 
from the downstream side only. The discharge through 
V- notch weir may be computed through following 
formula: 


Q = 0.0138 tan (0/2) H” 
where 


Q = discharge, l/s; 
H = head, cm; and 
© = V-notch angle in degree 
For Standard 90° V-notch, the discharge formula 


reduces to Q= 0.0138H” 


2.1.11 Maintenance 


For best operating conditions, the weir structure should 
be set in a straight reach of the channel and 
perpendicular to the line of flow. The weir crest shall 
be horizontal and the bulkhead plumb. 


The weir and weir pool should be maintained free of 
weeds and trash and the weir pool should be cleaned 
of sediment as it accumulates. 


The level of the crest should be checked periodically, 
and should also be checked with reference to the 
elevation of the zero of staff gauge. Inspection should 
also be made to determine whether there is any leakage 
around the weir and, if such leakage exists, necessary 
arrangements may be made to stop the leakage. 


Care should be taken to avoid damaging the weir notch 
itself. Small kinks and dents can reduce the accuracy 
of a good weir installation. Any nicks and dents that 
do occur should be carefully dressed with a fine-cut 
file or stone, storking only in the plane of the weir 
upstream faces, plane of the weir, crest or sides, or 
plane of the chamfers. Under no circumstances should 


the upstream corner of the notch be rounded or 
chamfered, nor should any attempt be made to remove 
completely an imperfection that would change the 
shape of the weir opening. Instead, only those portions 
of the metal that protrude above the normal surface 
should be removed. The entire stretch of the channel 
both downstream and upstream of the notch should be 
periodically cleared of weeds, mud, etc, in order to 
ensure that the flow is smooth and measurements are 
accurately done. 


2.2 Flow Meters 
2.2.1 General 


Many types of flow meters/velocity meters are 
available. Their method of operation varies from the 
pitot type principle to propeller type devices, acoustic 
flow meters and electro-magnetic current indicators. 
Most of these devices can be used for measuring flow 
in open channels. A relatively new device is the portable 
velocity meter, which can be used for measuring water 
velocity. 


2.2.2 Description of Device 


The portable velocity meter probe operates on 
electromagnetic principles. A conductor moving 
through a magnetic field will have an induced voltage. 
In the velocity meter a signal is generated and sent to 
an electromagnet within the probe, which creates a 
magnetic field. The conductor is the water into which 
the probe is immersed. 


As water flows through the magnetic field, a voltage is 
generated in the water in the vicinity of the electrodes 
which sense the voltage. The sensed voltage is then 
transmitted through the cable to the surface unit which 
amplifies and conditions the signal, and displays the 
results as a velocity measurement. The polarity and 
magnitude of this signal is directly proportional to the 
direction and velocity of the water. By knowing the 
channel dimensions and depth of flow, the quantity of 
flow can be computed. 


The device consists of a probe, extension rods and a 
surface read out unit. All these are connected by a cable. 
The unit is battery powered, light weight and easily 
portable. The device has accuracy within 5 percent at 
low flows of about 3 I/s and within one percent at higher 
flows of about 60 I/s. 


2.2.3 Installation of Devices 


No installation is required for the portable velocity 
meter. The velocity meter is lowered into the flowing 
water with the device switches set at “normal” and “on” 
and readings taken for the meter velocity. The 
observation should be taken by skilled staff. 


2.2.4 Monitoring Procedures 


The velocity meter is lowered into the flowing water. 
The water velocity is read directly from the meter. 


Open channel flow may be determined by measuring 
the velocity and computing the cross-sectional area of 
the channel to the depth of flow. Then the flow may be 
computed by multiplying the measured water velocity 
and the area of the channel. 


2.3 Calibrated Container Devices 


This method is generally used for relatively low flow 
condition and is most suitable for monitoring quantity 
of flow from drains. The method consists of collecting 
a known quantity of water in a calibrated container 
and measuring the amount of time required to do so. 
This method requires that the drain water be either 
flowing through a pipe with an exposed end or the 
channel with a vertical drop and an overhang. Such 
requirements are necessary so that the container can 
be placed in a position to collect the water. Calibrated 
containers may be of any size. Commonly used sizes 
are 1, 2, 5 or 10 litres in capacity for convenience of 
handling. When collecting the water, the container is 
held in a position so as to collect the total flow, and 
the time in seconds, required to fill the container is 
noted. 


IS 14750 : 2014 


Rate of flow can be computed as follows: 


Quantity of water collected, in litre 


Rate of flow = - : 
Time taken, in s 


3 SELECTION OF SEEPAGE MEASURING 
DEVICES 


3.1 Weir 


The weir is preferred if sufficient fall is present in the 
channel and the quantity of water to be measured is small. 
The weirs are located in the drainage gallery to measure 
the drain flow or internal seepage. These are also used to 
measure the overall seepage through the dam. 


3.2 Flow Meters 


The flow/velocity meters are preferred when the 
quantity of water to be measured is comparatively large. 
The device may be used in a straight reach of the open 
channel. The observations should be taken by skilled 
staff only. 


3.3 Calibrated Container Devices 


This method is preferred when the quantity of water to 
be measured is relatively very small. The device is used 
to measure the quantity of flow from drains. The device 
is particularly suitable for measuring the block-wise 
or reach-wise seepage from the dam. 


(Continued from second cover) 


control measures to ensure the safety of the dam against excessive uplift pressure, instability of downstream 
slope, piping through the embankment and/or foundation and erosion of material by migration into open joints in 
the foundation and abutments. The purpose of the dam may impose limitations on the quantity of seepage. Thus 
seepage has to be controlled either by flat slope, embankment zonation or by a system of drains. 


Besides the loss of water, the adverse effects of seepage may lead to migration of soil particles resulting in piping 
failure, and may also contribute to slope failure, or to progressive sloughing. Similarly, excessive pore pressures 
in the foundations may result in foundation blow out. 


Study of seepage and uplift also provide information about the overall state of the grouting, and sudden changes 
in the recorded trends indicate need for remedial measures in specific areas. Seepage measurements made at 
various locations in the foundations and abutment may indicate the need for increased drainage facilities at some 
other safe locations to relieve the dam areas of uplift, not caused by the reservoir, but by the underground seepage 
water. 


Results of chemical analysis of water samples collected from drainage holes provide information about the 
foundation material wash in the effluent. Presence of material wash could indicate need for appropriate remedial 
measures in the specific areas. 


Study of quantum of seepage, under varying reservoir level with the expected seepage, aids in assessing the 
influence of the geological formations below the dam and the reservoir. For arresting seepage through the body, 
around or under the dam proper arrangements may be made during construction stage itself. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 16 (0574). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


