1s 4410 ( Part 12 ) : 1993 w&T WFrT
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 12 DIVERSION WORKS

( First Revision )

UDC

001.4 : 627.81 : 627.80

Q BLS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 3 MARG

NEW DELHI Jury 1993

Terminology

Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee,

RVD 2

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, Terminology Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee Valley Division Council. after the draft finalized by the had been approved by the River

A large number of Indian Standards have already been printed covering various aspects of river valley projects and some more similar standards are in the process of formulation. These standards include technical terms, and precise definitions for these are required for avoiding ambiguity in their interpretation. To achieve this aim, the terminology relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee is bringing out Indian Standard Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects ( IS 4410 ), being published in parts. This part 12 contains definitions of terms relating to temporary diversion works. The revision of this standard was first published in 1973. The present revision of the standard has been taken up in the light of the experience gained during the last 20 years in the use of this standard. In this revision, additional terms have been added besides modifying some of the terms so as to bring them in line with latest technology. Some of the terms not concerning this subject have been transferred to the relevant parts.
the standards

In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among and practices prevailing in different countries. This has been met by deriving considerable assistance from ` Multilingual technical dictionary on irrigation and drainage `, published by International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage ( ICID ) and other sources.

IS 4410 ( Part 12 ) : 1993

Indian Standard

.

GLOSSARY OFTERMSRELATINGTO RIVER VALLEYPROJECTS
PART ( 12 DIVERSION WORKS

First Revision)
2.6 Backwater Curve The upstream longitudinal profile of the surface of water in a stream or a conduit from a point where such water surface is raised above its normal level by a diversion structure. 2.7 Baffle Piers/Baffle Blocks or Friction Blocks Ol&truction set in path of high velocity water flow constructed for the purpose of energy dissipation or for controlling the position of hydraulic jump in a stilling basin. 2.8 Barrage A structure built across a river, for diverting water into a canal or for providing a small storage pond. It comprises a series of gates for regula.ting the river flow and water level, while keeping the afflux during floods within, acctiptable limits. The structure may or may not have a raised sill. It is constructed to regulate the water-surface level and to divert the water flow from upstream of the gates. 2.9 Bed Sill A sill in a river or canal the crest over which is at or very close to the normal bed of the river or t.he canal. 2.10 Bay One of the main divisions of a diversion structure such as spillway, undersluice or regulator between two piers or a pier and abutment or a pier and a divide wall. 2.11 Blanket Relatively thin layer of material material of a different properties. 2.12 Breaching Section A low earth bund or dyke built acrossa saddle in the rim of the reservoir/different body of then dam, intended and designed to be washed out when the water reaches a predetermined' elevation it i$ also called fuse plug spillway or emergency spillway. 1 covering

1 SCOPE This standard ( Part 12 ) covers the definitions of terms relating to temporary diversion works. 2 GENERAL TERMS 2.1 Abutment a) It is a wall constructed by the side of the waterway of diversion structures to: 1) retain the backfill, 2) protect the banks from erosion, 3) support the load from superstructure, and 4) confine the flow to the desired waterway at the structure. b) The well defined bank on either side of` the river flow particularly in a deep gorge is called the abutment of a river. 2.2 A@lux The rise of water level above its orlginal level upstream of the diversion structure, in a channel or river. 2.3 Afflux Bund An embankment or dyke designed to ensure that the structure is not outflanked during flood flows. In some cases, it also acts as an embankment to prevent flooding to the country side due to an afflux. 2.4 Apron A protective layer of stone of concrete block or other material, extending out from a structure on or extending beyond the toe on the bed of a channel, or situated at some other location in the bed of a channel, laid in order to prevent erosion. 2.5 Aggradation of River Bed A general increase in the bed level of a rive] ever a sufficiently long length. This is caused. either due to increase in sediment load, decress:: in water discharge or reduction in the energy slope in a stream, which is otherwise in equilibrium.

IS 4410 ( Part 12 ) : 1993 2.13 Boulder Stage of River The reach of a river characterised by steep bed slope and a bed comprising a mixture of boulder, shingle, gravel and sand. 2.14 Caisson A chamber usually sunk by excavation within it for the purpose of gaining access under water to the desired foundation level. 2.15 Chute Pipe, flume or open lined channel surface flow. with a free 2.22 Concentration Factor

The factor by which the discharge per unit length of a barrage weir ( assuming uniform distribution ) is required to be increased for purposes of design, to allow for higher concentration of discharge in some parts of the structure. 2.23 Cut Offs A wall or diaphragm of concrete or steel, or a trench filled with impervious soil or a grout curtain extending into the foundation of a structure and providing a water tight anchor to the overlying structure. `Its purpose is the prevention or reduction of passage of water under the structure and foundation material or through the upper layers of the foundation material. 2.24 Differential Head The difference in water level between the upstream and downstream of a structure or the difference in water level on either side of a pier or divide wall. 2.25 Diversion Ratio The ratio of the diverted stream flow. flow to the normal Structure or

2 .I6 Contracted Weir A weir with its length less than the width of the approach channel, and which is used to give a greater head for relatively low discharges in wide channels. 2.17 Crest The line or area defining the top of a dyke embankment or weir. 2.18 Crib Dam A type of construction consisting of pieces of timber or other suitable material fixed together to form bays or cells called crib which are filled with stone or other suitable materials. 2.19 Closing Dyke A structure built across the branch channel of a river in order to stop or reduce the flow entering that channel or separate dead branch from the main channel. 2.20 Curtain Wall, Cut-Off Wall A wall-like structure, of masonry, plain or reinforced cement concrete or sheet pile, under the floor of a hydraulic structure with the object of: a) dividing the work into suitable compartments, to reduce the percolation of water b) through permeable strata, C>to minimize the likelihood of undermining of the foundation by increasing the path of percolation and reducing the exit gradient, as d) a safeguard against erosion and undermining of the structures by scour, e) to intercept permeable strata in the foundation and/or, and f) to increase the resistance of the structure against sliding. 2.21 Chute Blocks ,Cement concrete blocks provided at suitable spacing at the toe of the downstream glacis of a structure for moderating the energy dissipation. 2

2.26 Diversion Work or Diversion Head Works

A collective term for all works required on the river or channel to divert, control or regulate the water level or water supplies in the river/ channels or offtaking canals. 2.27 Divide Wall, Divide Groyne, Division Wall or Dividing Wall A wall or groyne constructed normally at right angles to the axis of the weir or barrage extending well beyond the main structure to separate the under sluice bays/river sluice bays and barrage or weir bays for facilitating regulation. 2.28 Design Flood Flood adopted for design purpose, which may be probable maximum flood or standard project flood or a flood corresponding to some adopted frequency of occurrence ( 50, 100, 200, 500 years, etc, ) depending on the standard of security to be provided. 2.29 Dewatering Lowering the water table to facilitate construction of the substructure in fairly dry condition and to prevent free flow of particles below the foundation. 2.30 Dominant Discharge A hypothetical constant discharge flowing through an alluvial river which will produce the same specific effect as is caused by a varying

IS 4410 ( Part 12 ) : 1993 discharge flowing through the channel over a period of years. The specific effect can be the channel width, meander pattern, sediment load, etc. 2.31 End Sill A vertical stepped, sloped or dentated wall, constructed at the downstream end of a stilling basin to help in dissipating residual energy and to reduce the length of the stilling basin. 2.32 Erosion The lowering and wearing away of the land surface by weathering and removal of material by the action of wind, water or waves. The term also includes the erosion of the bed or banks of a river or channel or associated structures. 2.33 Embayment A localized widening of a river or channel brought about artificially or naturally by recession or erosion of the bank. 2.34 Exit Gradient The hydraulic gradient at the point seepage streamlines emerge at the impervious apron. 2.35 Flank Walls Retaining wall in continuation both upstream and downstream. `2.36 Flared Wall Retaining wall with its profile gradually changing from one slope to another as required. Flared walls may be straight or curved. 2.37 Filter/Filter Bed of abutments where the end of an The curve indicating the various level/stages of the river for different values of discharge at a particular section. 2.44 Guide Bank A protective and training embankment constructed at the side of weir/barrage, etc, to guide the flow through the waterway provided in the structure. 2.45 Hydrograph A graph showing the variation of gauge/river stage, discharge velocity, sediment concentration or sediment discharge or some other feature of flowing water with respect to time at a given place. 2.46 Intake A structure to admit, control and regulate water supplies directly from source. Intakes may also be uncontrolled. 2.47 Hydraulic Gradient 2.41 Friction Block Staggered R.C.C. blocks provided basin for energy dissipation. 2.42 Glacis The sloping portion of the floor downstream of the crest. 2.?.:veGauge-Discharge upstream and in the stilling

Curve/Stage

Discharge

The slope of the line of piezometric head ( that is sum of the pressure and elevation heads ) at any point in the flow path. 2.48 Lining A protective covering ( over entire or portion of the perimeter ) of a water conductor system or reservoir to reduce seepage losses, to withstand pressure, to reduce and prevent erosion and improve conditions of flow. 2.49 Looseness Factor The ratio of the overall waterway of a weir/ barrage actually provided to the regime width of a river or channel at the design flood computed theoretically by using Lacey's theory. 2.50 Nappe A sheet of water overflowing a weir, fall, The nappe has upper and lower surfaces. 2.51 Pitching etc.

A layer or combination of layers of graded pervious materials designed and placed in such a manner as to provide drainage yet prevent the removal of soil particles by the seepage water, water currents or wave action. 2.38 Flexible Apron, Talus or Placed Riprap A protection at the downstream or upstream end of a weir, fall, etc, consisting of blocks of concrete or masonry or stones or stones in/wire crates ( gabions ). This is also referred to as a loose apron. 2.39 Free Board The vertical distance between a specified water surface and the top of the non overflow section of a structure or embankment. 2.40 Fish Ladder/Lock Device provided in the diversion structure facilitate the migration of fish from upstream downstream or vice versa. to to

A protective covering of material on the earthen surface slope ( side pitching ) and beds ( bed pitching ) of rivers or cannels. 3

IS 44PO ( Part 12 ) : 1993 2.52 Pier COZ;CK:Z OTmasonry structures constructed over the crest or floor of a structure supporting loads transmitted by the superstructure like bridge decking, gates and transmitted by the superstructure like bridge decking, gates and hoist operating mechanism. Sometimes loading piers are used on the downstream floor of a structure to counteract uplift pressure. 2.53 Pond Level The level of water immediately upstream of a structure required to facilitate withdrawal into the canal or fo:- any other purpose. 2.54 Riprap Broken stone dumped or placed on the surface and the slopes of embankments for protection against the action of flowing water, wave wash and heavy rain. 2.55 Revetment A protective surface of pitching, concrete blocks or matresses placed on the bottom or banks of a river to prevent or minimize erosion. 2.56 Retrogression/Degradation A general decrease in the bed level of the river or a channel over a sufficiently long length downstream of a structure. It may be caused by a decrease in sediment load, increase in discharge or increase in the energy slope. 2.57 River Sluices A set of sluices similar to the undersluices located in between the undersluices and spillway bays and separated from them by means of divide walls usually provided for still pond operation. 2.58 Seepage Movement of water through pores and interstices of unsaturated packed soil material into or out of a surface or subsurface body of water, such as river, canal, reservoir, etc. 2.59 Sill a) A structure built under water across deep pools of a river course for counteracting the tendency to excessive scour. b) A structure built at the outlet of a channel where certain minimum depth of flow is to be maintained in the channel, or a structure built at the head of a channel to prevent flow entering the channel until the main river stage reaches the crest of the structure. C) The invert of a gate or sluice opening. 4 2.60 Slope Protection concrete blocks, brush or other Riprap, material laid for protection of the sloping part of an embankment or levee to prevent erosion,. slipping or caving. 2.61 Sludging a) Flowing of mud, or b) The process of filling the crevices left in the dried clay of an embankment with sludge. 2.62 Staunching Wall A transverse wall projecting from an abutment into the embankment acting as cut off and to intercept seepage. 2.63 Stembank or Shank Embankment connecting a groyne head to the river bank or marginal bund. 2.64 Stilling Basin A short reach of paved channel to which a hydraulic jump, used for energy dissipation in hydraulic structures, is usually confined either partly or enttrely. 2.65 Stone Mesh A type of construction in which shingle, small boulders, or other form of stone, is held toge-. ther by a wrapping of wire mesh, to give a heavy but more or less flexible structure used in various forms as groynes, aprons, low weirs, etc. Rounded stone is usually preferable to increase flexibility. 2.66 Stone Reserve A quantity of stone kept as reserve on guide banks, spurs or groynes for emergency use to prevent deep scour occurring and endangering the safety of the structure. 2.67 Silt Excluder A device constructed for the purpose preventing entry of excess sediment. 2.68 Stoplogs Fabricated structural steel or wooden units or simple logs, planks, concrete slabs, etc, utilised for temporary closure of an opening for passage of water like anv bay of the barrage or regulator in order to faiilitate repairs of the gates and other components of the bay. 2.69 Toe Protection Loose stones wire crates or concrete blocks laid or dumped at the toe of an embankment, groyne, etc, or masonry or concrete wall built at the junction of the slope of pitching and the of

JS 4410 ( Part 12 ) : 1993

bed in channels or at extremities structures to counteract erosion. 2.70 Toe-Wall
A shallow

of hydraulic

wall constructed below the bed or floor level to provide footing for the slop:d pitching or the face of an embankment. A structure built along or connected to the bank of a river substantially along the direction of flow, for example, an extension to a flank wall, intended to direct fast flow from a sluice or spillway away from erodible banks of a river 01 canal. 2.72 Trash Rack

defined rives channel towards the canal head regulator, to scour the silt deposlted on the river bed in the pocket upstream of canal head regulator or to pass winter freshness and low floods without dropping the weir shutters. 2.74 Weep Holes Opening provided in walls, return walls, aprons. linings, foundations, etc, to permit dramage and reduce pressure. 2.75 Weir or Anicut An ungated barrier across a stream for the purpose of: a) measuring its discharge, b) raising, controlling and water level, and/or, c) diverting part or all the stream/river into a canal 2.76 Wing Walls Walls joining the abutment of a structure to earth dyke or the banks to retain and protect the earth fill behind and provide a longer path of percolation around the end of a structure or for improving the flow conditions upstream and downstream of the controlling section. or a river

2.71 Training Wall

or maintaining

the

in front of the entrance to intakes, dam outlets, etc, to prevent entry of floating materials, debris, ice, etc. The size of t.he screen opening depends upon the maximum size or debris, etc. required to be excluded. 2.73 Under Sluices The under sluices are bays in continuation of the weir with a crest at lower level on the same side as the canal to maintain a clear and well

A grid or screen made of steelbars. installed

water from the or conduit.

_^

_.-..__--.---

-

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau q Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurauce that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bnrean of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. RVD 2 ( 26 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31,331 13 75 Regional Offices a Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CAIAXTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 84 99, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 1 53 23 84 235 02 16, I 235 15 19, 632 92 95, I 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

t C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Weetern 1 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed

at New

India Printing

Press.

Khurja.lndla

