INATA Aah IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


т AIR TAT AT 9769 — 
ICLEI 


ATT 2 utteror 


(чест TQ ) 


Spring Loaded Safety Relief 
Valves — Specification 
Part 2 Testing 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.240 


© BIS 2023 


Urea AH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
er ee TR чач, 9 SEITE IE THK MT, 95 Тесей - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2023 Price Group 6 


Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard has been formulated to cater to the testing of safety relief valve test to establish its operability at 
specified pressure and temperature. 


This standard was originally issued in 1990. The present revision has been taken up with a view incorporating the 
modification found necessary as a result of experience gained in the use of this standard. Also, in this revision, 
the standard has been brought into latest style and format of Indian Standards, wherever applicable have been 
updated. BIS certification marking clause has been modified to align with the revised Bureau of Indian Act, 2016. 


This standard is being issued in two parts, Part 1 covers design and Part 2 testing. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compiled with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules Юг rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value shall be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
SPRING LOADED SAFETY RELIEF VALVES — SPECIFICATION 
PART 2 TESTING 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) covers the test to establish the 
operability of safety relief valves at specified 
pressure and temperature. 


2 PRESSURE TESTING AND INSPECTION 


The pressure testing shall comply with this standard 
and be carried out by the safety valve manufacturer 
prior to any painting. 


2.1 All pipes, connections and blanking devices, 
required for the test installation shall be capable of 
withstanding the test pressure. 


2.1.1 Any temporary welded on attachments utilized 
for the purpose of carrying out the tests, shall be 
carefully removed after the tests and the resulting 
weld scars shall be ground flush with, the parent 
material. After grinding, all such scars shall be 
inspected by magnetic particle or liquid penetrant 
techniques. 


2.1.2 All bourdon pressure gauges or other accepted 
pressure measuring devices fitted to test equipment 
shall be regularly tested and calibrated. The accuracy 
of the pressure gauge shall be + 0.25 percent. 


2.2 Medium of Testing 
2.2.1 Hydraulic or Pneumatic Testing for Strength 


a) Hydraulic testing is the preferred method in 
most of the applications; 


b) Pressure testing with air or other suitable 
gas (to be avoided unless absolutely 
required) shall be carried out in place of the 
standard body hydraulic test with the 
agreement of all parties involved only in 
the following cases: 


1) Valves of such design and construction 
that it is not practicable for them to be 
filled with liquid; and/or 

2) Valves that are to be used in service 
where even small traces of water 
cannot be tolerated. 


2.2.2 For Pressure Setting of the Valve 


a) Gas or vapour service valves are to be set 
using air steam or nitrogen as the test 
medium; and 


b) Liquid service valves may be set using 
water as the test medium. 


2.3 Safety Requirements 
2.3.1 Hydraulic Testing 


2.3.1.1 The safety valve bodies shall be properly 
vented to remove entrapped air. 


2.3.1.2 If material that is liable to failure by brittle 
fracture are incorporated into that part of the safety 
valve which is to be hydraulically tested then both 
the safety valve or part thereof and the testing 
medium shall be at a sufficient temperature to 
prevent the possibility of such failure. 


2.3.1.3 Water of suitable purity shall be normally 
used as the test medium. Where other testing media 
are used (subject to agreement between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer), additional 
precautions shall be considered, depending on the 
nature of the liquid. 


2.3.1.4 No valve or part thereof undergoing pressure 
testing shall be subjected to any form of shock 
loading, for example, hammers testing. Precautions 
shall be taken to ensure that test pressure is not 
exceeded. 


2.3.2 Pneumatic Testing 


No valve undergoing a pneumatic test shall be 
subjected to any form of shock loading, valves 
undergoing a pneumatic test should not be 
approached for close inspection until after the 
pressure raising has been completed. Precautions 
shall be taken to ensure that test pressure is not 
exceeded. 


2.3.2.1 The hazards involved in pneumatic pressure 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


testing shall be considered and adequate precautions 
taken as follows: 


a) Ifa major rupture of the valve should occur 
at some stage during the application of 
pressure, considerable energy will be 
released, hence no personnel should be in 
the immediate vicinity during pressure 
raising; and 

b) The risk of brittle failure under test 
conditions shall have been critically 
assessed at the design stage and the choice 
of materials for valves, which are to be 
pneumatically tested shall be such as to 
avoid the risk of brittle failure during test. 
This requires provision of an adequate 
margin between the transition temperature 
of all parts and the metal temperature 
during testing. If the gas pressure is 
reduced to the valve under test from high 
pressure storage, then temperature will fall. 


2.4 Test for Strength 
2.4.1 The body seat of safety valves shall be blanked 


off and a test pressure of times the maximum 
pressure for which the safety valve is designed shall 


be applied to that part of the valve on the discharge 
side of the seat. In case when a safety valve is to be 
subjected to a superimposed back pressure or valves 
on closed discharge systems then hydraulic test of 
times maximum back pressure on the valve shall be 
applied to those parts on the discharge side of the seat. 


2.5 Duration of the Pressure Test for Strength 


The test pressure shall be applied and maintained at 
the required pressure for a sufficient length of time 
to permit a visual examination to be made of 
surfaces and joints, but in any case, for not less than 
the times detailed in Table 1. For tests on the 
discharge side of the seat the testing time shall be 
based on the pressure specified in 2.4 and the 
discharge size. 


2.6 Adjustment of Safety Valve Cold Differential 
Test Pressure 


It is not permissible to adjust the cold differential test 
pressure of a safety valve using air, steam or 
nitrogen as the test medium, unless the safety valve 
has previously been subjected to the standard 
pressure testing and inspection. 


be applied only to the part of the body at the inlet SI No. Set Pressure Tolerance 
side of seat. (1) (2) (3) 
2.4.2 Safety valves to be installed with а free i) 0 Bar to 5 Bar + 0.14 Bar 
discharge or where the опу back pressure is build ii) Over 5 Bar + 3 percent 
up back pressure, do not require a hydraulic test to 
Table 1 Minimum Duration of Pressure Test for Strength 
(Clause 2.5) 
SI No. Nominal Valve Size (DN) Pressure Rating 
Д 
( \ 
Ор to and Over 40 Bar Over 64 Bar 
mm Including 40 Bar up to and Including 64 Bar 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Duration in min 
i) Up to and including 50 2 2 3 
ii) Over 50 up to and including 65 2 2 4 
iii) Over 65 up to and including 80 2 3 4 
iv) Over 80 up to and including 100 2 4 5 
v) Over 100 up to and including 125 2 4 6 
vi) Over 125 up to and including 150 2 5 7 
vii) Over 150 up to and including 200 3 5 9 
viii) Over 200 up to and including 250 3 6 11 
ix) Over 250 up to and including 300 4 7 13 
x) | Over 300 up to and including 350 4 8 15 
x1) Over 350 up to and including 400 4 9 17 
xii) Over 400 up to and including 450 4 9 19 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


SINo. Nominal Valve Size (DN) Pressure Rating 
J 
Г 1 
Up to and Over 40 Bar Over 64 Bar 
a Including 40 Bar up to and Including 64 Bar 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

xiii) Over 450 up to and including 500 5 10 22 

xiv) Over 500 up to and including 600 5 12 24 


NOTES 


1 Sizes larger than 600 mm shall have testing time pro-rata. 


2 1 bar = 10° Ра. 


2.7 Bellows Test 


A test shall be applied to the discharge side of those 
safety valves fitted with bellows to test the pressure 
tightness of the bellow and its joints. The bonnet 
vent, which shall be open, shall have a soapy water 
film placed across it and there shall be no visible 
leakage. The test shall be carried out using air or 
nitrogen at a pressure not less than the maximum 
specified back pressure. The duration of the test 
shall be as for the seat leakage test duration. 


3 SEAT LEAKAGE TEST 
3.1 Test Limitations 


The seat leakage tests shall be carried out subsequent 
to the cold differential test pressure adjustment and 
shall comply with the following: 


a) The leakage rate for the given type shall not 
exceed that given in Table 2, for valves 


with metal to metal seats, for cold 
differential test pressures not exceeding 
70 bar; and 


b) For cold differential test pressure greater 
than 70 bar the leakage rate specified in 
Table 2 shall be multiplied by the cold 
differential test pressure, in bar, divided by 
70. 


NOTE — Where resilient seats are incorporated in the 
seats or where greater tightness is required in the 
design the permissible leakage rate should be specified 
by the purchaser. 


3.2 Test Apparatus 


A blind plate is attached to the outlet connecting 
part, while the other parts except the outlet 
connecting part are completely closed. One end ofa 
pipe, 8 mm outside diameter and 6 mm bore, is 
attached to the blind plate and other end is held at a 


position 13 mm below water level. 


NOTE — A typical test apparatus for determining seat 
tightness of a closed bonnet safety valve is shown in Fig. 1. 


3.3 For a safety valve with an open bonnet or an 
exposed spring, the seat leakage test shall be 
conducted by placing a dam over the lower half of 
the outlet flange and flooding the valve body to 
submerge the seat faces. The leakage rate across the 
seat faces shall not exceed those specified. 


3.4 Test Procedure 


With the valve mounted vertically, as shown in 
Fig. 1, the leakage rate in bubbles per minute shall 
be determined with pressure at the safety relief valve 
inlet held at 90 percent of the set pressure 
immediately after popping, except for valves set at 
3.5 bar or below, in which case the pressure shall be 
held at 0.35 bar below the set pressure immediately 
after popping. 


3.5 Minimum Test Duration 


The test pressure shall be applied for a minimum of 
1 min for valves up to and including ОМ 50, 2 min 
for valves above DN 50 up to and including DN 100 
and 5 min for valves above DN 100. Air or nitrogen 
at approximately atmospheric temperature shall be 
used as the pressure medium. 


3.6 Permissible Leakage Rate 


The allowable leakage rate shall not exceed the 
values given in Table 2. 


4 PERFORMANCE TESTING 
Type testing of safety valves for operating and flow 


characteristics using steam, air, water or other gases 
or liquids of known characteristics. 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 2 Seat Leakage Rates 
(Clauses 3.1 and 3.6) 


SI No. Type Permissible Flow Area 


Seat Leakage Rates Bubbles of Air or Nitrogen per 


mm Minute at 90 percent of Cold Differential Test 
Pressure 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Balanced F and smaller 50 
bellows G and larger 30 
11) Conventional F and smaller 40 
G and larger 20 


4.1 General 


This clause applies to the types of safety valves as 
defined in Part 1 of this standard. 


4.1.1 Carrying Out of Tests 


The tests to determine the operating characteristics 
shall be in accordance with 4.2 and the tests to 
determine the flow characteristic shall be in 
accordance with 4.3. When these tests are carried out 
separately, the parts of the valve, which influence 
fluid flow, shall be complete and installed in the 
valve. 


4.1.2 Object of Tests 


To determine under specific operating conditions 
particular characteristics of the valves before 
opening, while discharging and at closing. The 
following characteristics shall be determined: 


a) Set pressure; 

b) Reseating pressure; 

c) Blowdown; 

d) Reproducibility of valve performance; 

e) Mechanical characteristics of the valves 
determined by seating or hearing such as: 
1) Ability to reseat satisfactorily; and 
2) Absence or presence of chatter, flutter, 

sticking and/or harmful vibration. 
f) Relieving pressure; and 
g) Lift at the appropriate over pressure. 


4.1.3 Procedure for Testing 


The purpose and manner of testing shall be such as 
to provide suitable data from which the operational 
and flow characteristics are determined. To this end 
the following information shall be supplied to the 
independent authority, and shall be approved before 
testing is undertaken: 


a) Full particulars of the valve to be tested and 
the range of valves and springs which they 
present; 


b) Proposed source, capacity, pressure, 
temperature and properties of the test 
fluids; and 


c) Details of the test including proposed 
instrumentation test and calibration 
procedure. 


4.1.4 Result Calculated from Test 


The theoretical flowing capacity is calculated as per 
standard formulae and using this value together with 
the actual flowing capacity at relieving pressure the 
coefficient of discharge of the safety valve is 
calculated. 


4.2 Tests to Determine Operating Characteristics 


4.2.1 Carrying Out of Tests 


The set pressure at which the operating 
characteristics are determined shall be the minimum 
set pressures for which the spring used is designed. 
Valves designed to discharge gases or vapours shall 
be tested using steam, air or other gas of known 
characteristics except that, valves for steam service 
should be tested on steam. Valves for liquid service 
shall be tested on water or liquids of known 
characteristics. The allowable tolerances or limits, as 
applicable, on these characteristics are as follows: 


a) Set pressure: below 5 bar + 14 bar 
:5 bar and above + 3 percent; 


b) Lift 5 percent of the average for a given 
size of valve; 


c) Limits of adjustable blowdown: 2.5 percent 
of set pressure minimum, 7 percent of set 
pressure maximum, except for valves 
having: 


1) Seat bore less than 15 mm when the 
maximum limit of blowdown shall be 
15 percent of set pressure; and 

2) For values of set pressure less than 
3 bar when the blowdown shall be a 
maximum of 0.3 bar; 


d) Limits for valves with non-adjustable blow 
down maximum 15 percent of set pressure; 
and 


e) Limits of blowdown for incompressible 
fluids. 


Maximum 20 percent of set pressure. For values of 
set pressure less than 3 bar, the blowdown shall be a 
maximum 0.6 bar. 


SEE NOTE 1 


CUP 


NOTES 


Фбтт HOLE IN CUP 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


4.2.2 Test Equipment 


The error of pressure measuring equipment used 
during the test shall be not more than 0.5 percent of 
full-scale reading, with the test pressure within the 
middle third of the instrument range. 


VALVE OUTLET 


7 
za 


13mm max. HEAD 


1 Opening covered with a suitable membrane to relieve pressure if valve should open during test. It is essential that the opening is 


securely sealed against leakage. 
2 When using this fixture all other outlets shall be sealed. 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL TEST RIG FOR DETERMINATION OF VALVE LEAKAGE RATES 


4.2.3 Valve Used in the Test Programme 


The safety valves tested shall be representative of 
the design, pressure and size range of valves for 
which operating characteristics are required. To be 
representative, the ratio of valve inlet to flow area 
and the ratio of flow area to valve outlet shall be 
taken into account. 


4.2.3.1 Tests shall be carried out on three sizes 
unless the size range contains not more than six 
sizes, when the number tested may be reduced to 
two. When the range is extended from a number less 
than seven to a number equal to or in excess of 
seven, then tests on three sizes of valves shall be 
carried out. 


4.2.3.2 When the range is extended so that 
previously tested safety valves are no longer 
representative of the range, further tests shall be 
required. 


4.2.4 Test Procedure 


The test shall be carried out using three significantly 
different springs for each size of valve. Where three 
test pressure are required from one valve size, it is 
permissible to test either one valve with three 
significantly different springs or three valves of the 
same size at three significantly different settings in 
order to comply with the requirements. 


4.2.4.1 Each test shall be carried out a minimum of 
three times in order to establish and confirm 
acceptable reproducibility of the performance. 


4.2.4.2 In the case of valves of special designs of 
which one size only at one pressure rating is being 
manufactured, test at that set pressure shall be 
carried out. 


4.2.4.3 In the case of valves, of which one size only 
at various pressure rating is being manufactured, 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


tests shall be carried out using four different springs, 
which shall cover the range of pressure for which the 
valve shall be used. 


4.3 Test to Determine Flow Characteristics 
4.3.1 Carrying Out of Test 


For safety valves designed to discharge gas/vapour, 
after operating characteristics have been 
satisfactorily established, it is acceptable to use 
steam, air, or other gas of known characteristics as 
the fluid for flow characteristics. 


4.3.1.1 When discharged quantities are being 
assessed using a fluid other than that used for the 
operating characteristics tests, the valve disk shall be 
mechanically held at the same lift as that obtained at 
the same over-pressure. 


4.3.1.2 It is not permissible to use steam, air or other 
gas for flow characteristics tests for a liquid safety 
valve or liquid for the flow characteristics tests of a 
gas/vapour valve. 


4.3.2 Valves Used in the Test Programme 


The safety valves tested shall be representative of 
the design, pressure and size range of valves for 
which flow characteristics are required. Tests shall 
be carried out on three sizes, unless the size range 
contains not more than six sizes, when it is 
permissible to reduce the number tested to two. 
When the range is extended from a number less than 
seven to a number equal to or in excess of seven, 
then tests on three sizes of valves shall be carried out. 


When the range is extended so that the previously 
tested safety valves are no longer representative of 
the range, further tests shall be carried out. 


4.3.3 Test Procedure 


4.3.3.1 On each of the valves to be tested as required, 
flow characteristics tests for determination of the 
coefficient of discharge shall be carried out at three 
different pressures. 


4.3.3.2 In all cases the size and pressure range shall 
be representative of the design range, within limits 
of the testing facility. 


4.3.3.3 In these cases where the size of the valve is 
greater than can be flow tested at the test facility, the 
independent authority shall, at its discretion subject 
to feasibility and opportunity, require one 
confirmatory flow test at the location of the 
installation and require the proper function of at least 
one valve of the design to be demonstrated by test. 
However, three geometrically similar models of 
different sizes may be used to determine the 


coefficient of discharge. The proper function of at 
least one valve of the design to be certified shall be 
demonstrated by test. 


4.3.3.4 A curve may be established for the 
coefficient of discharge versus valve lift at a given 
inlet pressure and where applicable the appropriate 
blowdown ring(s) position. Coefficients of 
discharge for intermediate positions of lift may be 
interpolated from this curve. Tests shall be 
conducted to establish the variation of the 
coefficient of discharge with inlet pressure and 
relevant blowdown ring(s) position. If no variation 
occurs, the curve may be used as described, 
however, if the variation is noted, tests shall be 
required by the independent authority to establish 
additional curves for these variables. 


4.3.4 Test Techniques 


The test techniques adopted shall be either of the 
following: 


a) The valve configuration shall be the same 
as that used during the test for operational 
characteristics, that is, the lift and if a 
blowdown ring(s) is fitted, its position shall 
be the one(s) established for the particular 
size and over-pressure during operating 
characteristic testing. Average values of the 
lift shall be used when the tolerances of 
4.2.1 have been met; and 


b) Instead of the above it is permissible to 
establish curves of capacity versus valve 
absolute inlet pressure as a function of lift 
and blowdown ring position. These curves 
may then be used to obtain the unique value 
desired based on the results of the 
operational testing. 


4.3.5 Tests on Valves of Special Design 


For the cases of valves of the special design of which 
one size only at various pressure ratings is being 
manufactured, tests shall be carried out at four 
different set pressures which shall cover the range of 
pressure for which the valve will be used or as 
determined by the limits of the test facility. The 
discharge capacities as determined by these four 
tests shall be plotted against the absolute inlet 
pressure, and a straight line drawn through these 
four points and zero-zero. If all points do not lie 
within + 5 percent of this line, additional testing 
shall be required by the independent authority until 
the line is established without ambiguity. For 
liquids, the capacities determined by the four tests 
shall be plotted on log-log paper against the 
differential (inlet pressure-back pressure) test 
pressure and a straight line drawn through these four 
points. 


4.3.6 Test Result 


In all methods described for flow characteristic 
testing, all results shall be + 5 percent of the average 
or additional testing shall be carried out until this 
criterion is met. 


4.3.7 Adjustment During Test 


No adjustment to the valve shall be made during the 
test. Following any change or deviation of the test 
conditions, a sufficient period of time shall be 
allowed to permit the rate of flow, temperature and 
pressure to reach stable conditions before readings 
are taken. 


4.3.8 Records and Test Results 


The test records shall include all observations, 
measurements (in SI units), instrument readings and 
instrument calibration records (if required) for the 
objective(s) of the test. Original test records shall 
remain in the custody of the test establishment, 
which conducted the test. Copies of all test records 
shall be furnished to each of the parties of the test. 
Corrections and corrected values shall be entered 
separately in the test record. 


4.3.9 Flow Test Equipment 


The test equipment shall be designed and operated 
in such a way that the actual test flowing capacity 
measurement shall be accurate to within + 2 percent. 


4.4 Certified Capacity of Valves 


4.4.1 The certified capacity of the valve shall be 
90 percent of the capacity determined by the test. For 
valves using the coefficient of discharge method, the 
certified capacity shall be 90 percent of the 
theoretical capacity times the coefficient of 
discharge. 


4.4.2 It should be noted that the coefficient of 
discharge method shall not be used to calculate the 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


capacity at a lower over-pressure than at which the 
test was carried out although it can be used to 
calculate the capacity at a higher over-pressure. 


4.5 Special Tests 


Vendor to perform any other special tests like NDT, 
chemical analysis, etc (other than indicated in this 
standard), as specified by the purchaser. 


5 APPEARANCE OF SAFETY VALVES 


The appearance of safety valves shall be in 
accordance with the following: 


a) Casting shall be smooth on both inside and 
outside faces and be free from harmful 
blowholes, flashes, and burning, and 
inclusion, cracks, laps, etc; 


b) Machine worked faces shall be free from 
harmful flaws, uneven finish, etc; 


c) Working surface of the valve disk with 
valve seat shall be free from blowholes and 
other flaws; 


d) Corners and edges without designation of 
dimension shall be properly rounded; and 


e) Each moving part shall be so assembled 
also be suitable for operation. 


6 MARKING 


6.1 Spring loaded safety valve shall be marked with 
manufacturer’s name or his recognized trade-mark, 
identification mark, and with any other information 
required by purchaser. 


6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


АММЕХ А 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 17 


Organization 
CSIR - Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Advance Valves Global, Noida 


Auma India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Blast Carboblocks Private Limited, Mumbai 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Chemtrols Industries Private Limited, New Delhi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


GMM Pfaudler Limited, Anand 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Rubber Manufacturers Research Association, 
Mumbai 


Indian Valve and Actuator Manufacturers 
Association (IVAMA), Coimbatore 


Kejriwal Casting Limited, Kolkata 

L&T Valves, Chennai 

Lathia Rubber Manufacture Company Private 
Limited, Mumbai 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Representative(s) 
DR MRITUNJAY KUMAR SHUKLA (Chairperson) 


SHRI PRANAY S. GARG 
SHRI CHANDRAKANT WADKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI YASHWANT M. JANNU 


SHRI Y. SRINIVASA RAO 
SHRI ABHISHEK KUMAR PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI DHAWAL SAXENA 
DR P. THOMAS 
SHRI SADASIVA MURTHY P. (Alternate I) 
SHRI AJITH KUMAR М. (Alternate II) 
SHRI P. KRISHNA KUMAR 


SHRI DUSHYANT SINGH 


SHRI TANOJ CHANDAN 
SHRI KUNAL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI HASMUKH K. PARMAR 
SHRI MRAGANG SHEAKHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DHIRAN PANCHAL 
SHRI SATVIK PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI KRISHANU GHOSH 
SHRIN. K. RAI (Alternate) 


SHRI KARAN AGRAWAL 


DR K. RAJ KUMAR 
DR DEBDIPTA BASU (Alternate) 


SHRI R. MURUGANANTHAM 
SHRI JAY DOSHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP KEJRIWAL 


SHRI ROHIT SHARMA 
SHRI SURIYANARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV S. LATHIA 


SHRI YOGENDRA KUMAR SINGH 
SHRI ARVIND BHUSHAN (Alternate) 


Organization 
Plastics Machinery Manufacturers Association of 
India (PMMAT), New Delhi 
Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 12992 (Part 2) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRINANDHA KUMART. 
SHRI PRADIP V ANWANI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR MISHRA 
SHRI RAJEEV RANJAN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIVNARAYAN PAREEK 
SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVINDRA GAUTAM SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms NEHA THAKUR 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in ог www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 17 (21869). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


