Wada AA IS 5121 : 2013 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2018) 


Ustert a ata tet ata — 
Gal wis 
( TE FRAT ) 


Piling and Other Deep 
Foundations — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.100; 93.020 


© BIS 2013 


qma AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 FIM AHL AP, as feeei-110002 
\el ie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2013 Price Group 4 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Construction 
Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been adopted by the Civil Engineering 
Divisional Council. 


Pile driving and well sinking are specialized jobs involving a lot of hazards which sometimes lead to accidents. 
It is necessary that certain safety rules are laid down for every phase of work involved and that these are meticulously 
followed by each member of the crew working on the jobs, not only for his own safety but also for the safety of 
his fellow workers and onlookers. This standard has, therefore, been formulated to lay down safety requirements 
for pile driving and for preparing deep foundations including well sinking. 


This standard was first formulated in 1969. This first revision has been brought out to incorporate the improvements 
based on the experience gained in use of the standard since the last version of the standard. In this revision, the 
following major modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Reference to provision of providing barricading around the working area has been included. 

b) Use of latest personal protective equipment and the terminologies connected therewith have been included. 
c) Requirement of need of formal training of crane driver and hoisting appliance operator, has been included. 
d) Requirement of automatic indicators for timely warning in case of hoisting appliances, has been included. 


e) Provision for maintaining record relating to all tools and tackles as connected with their safety, has been 
included. 


f) Provision relating to public safety while handling piles, has been included. 
g) References to Indian Standards have been updated. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5121 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


PILING AND OTHER DEEP FOUNDATIONS — 
CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the safety requirements for 
piling and other deep foundations as stated below: 


a) Safety measures while working with a piling 
rig; and 

b) Safety measures while preparing other deep 
foundations. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
2925 : 1984 Specification for industrial safety 
helmets (second revision) 
4138 : 1977 Safety code for working in 
compressed air (first revision) 
3 GENERAL 


3.1 All operations shall be carried out under the 
immediate charge of a properly qualified and 
competent foreman. The foreman shall also be 
responsible for the safety arrangements of the work. 


3.2 Barricading/fencing shall be provided, wherever 
necessary, around the working area or the watchmen 
provided to prevent onlookers from tresspassing into 
the construction sites. For work during night, lighting 
of at least 100 lux intensity shall be provided at the 
work site. 


3.3 The working area shall be investigated to ascertain 
the presence of any buried obstruction and actual 
position of all service lines passing through the work 
site shall be known before the work commences. 
Particular attention shall be given in case live electrical 
cables pass underground, which may interfere within 
the depth of the foundation. 


3.4 The safety provisions shall be brought to the notice 
of all concerned and matters needing special attention 
shall be displayed at a prominent place at the work spot. 


3.5 All necessary personal protective equipment like 
full body harnesses, safety helmets and safety shoes, 
as considered suitable, shall be kept available for the 
use of persons employed on the site and maintained in 
condition suitable for immediate use. 


3.6 A first-aid kit shall be maintained at the site near 
the place of work, to comply with the requirements 
and provisions for the work. 


3.7 Those engaged in mixing and stacking of cement 
bags or any other material injurious to human body 
shall be provided with protective wear suitable for the 
purpose. Welders engaged in the work of welding shall 
use welding goggles/shields, helmets and gloves. 


3.8 Every crane driver or hoisting appliance operator 
shall be competent to the satisfaction of the engineer- 
in-charge and no person under the age of 21 years 
should be in-charge of any hoisting machine including 
any scaffolding winch, or give signals to operator. 
Crane driver and hoisting appliance operator shall 
possess the knowledge of inherent risks involved in 
the operation of lifting appliances by undergoing a 
formal training at any institution of national importance 
acceptable to the employer and is medically examined 
periodically including in compliance to the requirement 
as may be specified in Building and other Construction 
Workers Rules. 


4 PILING RIG 


4.1 There are numerous types of piling rigs in piling 
work, depending on the need for the site conditions. 
While utilizing specialized rigs the instructions issued 
by the suppliers shall be kept in view. 


4.1.1 Pile drivers shall not be erected in dangerous 
proximity to electric conductors. 


4.1.2 If two pile drivers are erected at one place these 
shall be separated by a distance at least equal to the 
longest leg in either rig. 


4.2 The frame of any rig shall be structurally safe for 
all anticipated dead, live or wind loads. Whenever there 
is any doubt about the structural strength, suitable test 
shall be carried out by the foreman and the results of 
the test recorded. No pile-driving equipment shall be 
taken into use until it has been inspected and found to 
be safe. 


IS 5121 : 2013 


4.3 Pile drivers shall be firmly supported on heavy 
timber sills, concrete beds or other secure foundation. 
If necessary, to prevent danger, pile drivers shall be 
adequately guyed. 


When the rig is not in use, extra precautionary measures 
for stability, such as securing them with minimum four 
guys, shall be adopted to prevent any accidents due to 
wind, storm, gales and earthquake. 


4.4 Access to working platforms and the top pulley 
shall be provided by ladders. Working platforms shall 
be protected against the weather. 


In tall driven piling rigs or rigs of similar nature where 
a ladder is necessary for regular use, the ladder shall 
be securely fastened and extended for the full height 
of the rig. The ladder shall also be maintained in good 
condition at all times. 


4.5 Exposed gears, fly wheels, etc, shall be fully 
enclosed. Boilers, hoisting drums and brakes shall be 
kept in good condition and sheltered from weather, 
wherever possible. 


4.6 Pile driving equipment in use shall be inspected 
by a competent engineer at regular intervals not 
exceeding three months. Also a register shall be 
maintained at the site of work for recording the results 
of such inspections. Pile lines and pulley blocks shall 
be inspected by the foreman before the beginning of 
each shift for any excess wear or any other defect. 


Defective parts of pile drivers, such as sheaves, 
mechanism slings and hose shall be repaired by only 
competent person and duly inspected by foreman-in- 
charge of the rig and the results recorded in the register. 


No steam or air equipment shall be repaired while it is 
in operation or under pressure. 


Hoisting ropes on pile drivers shall be made of 
galvanized steel. 


4.7 All bolts and nuts which are likely to be loosened 
due to vibration during pile driving shall be checked 
regularly and tightened. 


4.8 Steam and air lines shall be controlled by easily 
accessible shut-off valves. These lines shall consist of 
armoured hose or its equivalent. The hose of steam 
and air hammers shall be securely lashed to the hammer 
so as to prevent it from whipping if a connection breaks. 
Couplings of sections of hose shall be additionally 
secured by ropes or chains. 


4.9 When not in use, the hammer shall be in dropped 
position and shall be held in place by a cleat, timber or 
any other suitable means. 


4.10 For every hoisting machine and for every chain 
ring hook, shackie, swivel and pulley block, used in 


hoisting or as means of suspension, the safe working 
loads shall be ascertained. In case of doubt actual 
testing shall be carried out and the working load shall 
be taken as half of the tested load. Every hoisting 
machine and all gears referred to above shall be plainly 
marked with the safe working load. In case of a hoisting 
machine having a variable safe working load, each safe 
working load together with the conditions under which 
it is applicable shall be clearly indicated. No part of 
any machine or any gear shall be loaded beyond the 
safe working load except for the purpose of testing. 


All hoisting appliances should be fitted with automatic 
safe load indicator, boom angle indicator, swing alarm, 
back horn, over lift boom alarm. A register shall be 
maintained containing a system of identification of all 
tools and tackles, their date of purchase, safe working 
load and date of examination by competent person. 
All loads shall have tag-lines attached in order to ensure 
that the load can be controlled at all times. 


4.11 Motor gearing, transmission, electrical wiring and 
other dangerous parts of hoisting appliances should be 
provided with efficient safeguards. Hoisting appliances 
shall be provided with such means as will reduce, to the 
minimum, the risk of accidental descent of the load and 
adequate precautions shall be taken to reduce to the 
minimum, the risk of any part of suspended load 
becoming accidentally displaced. When workers are 
employed on electrical installations which are already 
energized, insulating mats and wearing apparel, such as 
gloves, etc, as may be necessary, shall be provided. 
Sheaves on pile drivers shall be guarded so that workers 
may not be drawn into them. 


When loads have to be inclined, they shall be 
adequately counter-balanced and the tilting device shall 
be secured against slipping. 


4.12 Adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent a 
pile driver from overturning if a wheel breaks. 


4.13 Adequate precautions shall be taken by providing 
stirrups or by other effective means, to prevent the rope 
from coming out of the top pulley or wheel. 


4.14 Adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent 
the hammer from missing the pile. 


4.15 If necessary to prevent danger, long piles and 
heavy sheet piling should be secured against falling. 


4.16 Wherever steam boilers are used, the safety 
regulations of boiler shall be strictly followed and 
safety valves shall be adjusted to 0.07 N/mm? in excess 
of working pressure accurately. 


4.17 Where electricity is used as power for piling rig, 
only armoured cable conforming to the relevant Indian 
Standard shall be used and the cable shall be thoroughly 
waterproofed. 


5 OPERATION OF EQUIPMENT 


5.1 Workers employed in the vicinity of pile drivers 
shall wear helmets conforming to IS 2925. 


5.2 Piles shall be prepared at a distance at least equal 
to twice the length of the longest pile from the pile 
driver. 


5.3 Piles being hoisted in the rig should be so slung 
that they do not have to be swung round, and may not 
inadvertently, swing or whip round. A hand rope shall 
be fastened to a pile that is being hoisted to control its 
movement. While a pile is being guided into position 
in the leads, workers shall not put their hands or arms 
between the pile and the inside guide or on top of the 
pile, but shall use a rope for guiding. 


5.4 While a pile is being hoisted all workers not 
actually engaged in the operation shall keep at a 
distance which ensures safety. Piles shall not be slewed 
over public areas without stopping the pedestrians and 
road traffic first. 


5.5 Before a wood pile is hoisted into position it shall 
be provided with an iron ring or cap over the driving 
end to prevent brooming. 


5.6 When creosoted wood piles are being driven, 
adequate precautions shall be taken, such as the 
provision of personal protective equipment and barrier 
creams to prevent workers receiving eye or skin injuries 
from splashes of creosote. 


5.7 When piles are driven at an inclination to the 
vertical, if necessary to prevent danger, these should 
rest in a guide. 


5.8 No steam or air line shall be blown down until all 
workers are at a safe distance. 


6 FLOATING PILE DRIVERS 


6.1 When pile-drivers are working over water, a 
suitable boat shall be kept readily available at all times. 
All members of floating pile-driver crews shall be 
trained to handle boats and shall also know swimming. 


6.2 Floating pile drivers shall be provided with a 
whistle, siren, horn or other effective signaling 
equipment. 


6.3 Floating pile drivers shall be provided with 
adequate fire fighting equipment. 


6.4 The weight of machinery on a floating pile driver 
shall be so distributed that the deck of the installation 
is horizontal. Further, it shall be ensured that the 
floating craft is stable and safe under all working 
conditions. 


6.5 Steel pile-driver hulls shall be divided into 
watertight compartments, and the watertight 


IS 5121 : 2013 


compartments should be provided with siphons for the 
removal of water seepage. 


6.6 Deck hatches shall have firmly fastened covers 
that fit flush with the deck. Open hatches shall be 
adequately fenced or guarded. 


6.7 Fuel tanks below deck shall be vented to the outside 
and vents shall be provided with flame arrestors. For 
each fuel tank below deck there shall be an emergency 
shut-off valve on deck. 


6.8 Lighting fixtures below deck shall be explosion 
proof and flame proof. 


6.9 Sufficient sheaves shall be provided on deck to 
enable the pile driver to be safely manoeuvred in any 
direction and safely secured in position. 


6.10 The operator’s cabin shall afford an unrestricted 
view of the operations. 


7 SHEET PILING 


7.1 If necessary to prevent danger from wind or other 
sources, a hand rope shall be used to control the 
movement of steel sheet sections that are being 
transported. 


7.2 Workers who have to sit on a steel sheet section to 
interlock sheets shall be provided with stirrups or other 
devices to afford them a safe seat. Workers shall not 
stand or sit on sheet piling while it is being released 
from the slings, lowered or moved into position. 


7.3 Workers handling sheets should wear gloves. 


7.4 If necessary to prevent danger from displacement 
by the current, steel sheet sections shall be braced until 
they are firmly in position. If necessary to prevent 
danger from undercutting of the cofferdam by the 
current a substantial berm shall be installed upstream. 


7.5 Adequate pumping facilities shall be available at 
cofferdams to keep them clear of water. Also adequate 
means of escape, such as ladders and boats shall be 
provided at cofferdams for the protection of workers 
in case of flooding. 


7.6 Adequate supplies of life-saving equipment shall 
be provided for workers employed on cofferdams. 


7.7 When sheet sections are being removed, their 
movements shall be controlled by cables or other 
effective means. 


8 OTHER MEASURES WHILE WORKING 
WITH CAISSON FOUNDATION 


8.1 All holes which are left unattended shall be 
adequately and securely covered or shall have an 
effective barrier placed as close to the edge as is 
practicable. 


IS 5121 : 2013 


8.2 Before any person enters a hole, the ground surface 
next to the hole shall be cleaned and all loose soil, 
materials, loose tools, ropes, etc, removed. 


8.3 A person shall not remain in a hole for more than 
1h at a time and this time shall be suitably reduced 
depending on circumstances. 


8.4 Persons entering holes shall be lowered or raised 
in suitable skips or cages using properly constructed 
cranes and winches, shear legs or other devices suitable 
for the purpose. 


8.5 When working at night, flood lighting shall be 
provided for the working area. Hand lamps used for 
illuminating the bottom of the hole shall be of 
flameproof construction of not more than 24 V rating, 
when men are working in the hole. 


8.6 Detector lamp capable of indicating the presence 
of dangerous quantities of flammable gases and 
vapours or a serious oxygen deficiency or an excess 
of carbon dioxide shall be a part of the working gear, 
where poisonous gases may be present in the subsoil. 


8.7 Before first lowering men into a borehole suitable 
steps shall be taken to investigate the likely presence 
of poisonous gas in the subsoil of the site. 


9 ADDITIONAL MEASURES FOR CAISSON 
FOUNDATION 


9.1 Well sinking work shall be under the charge of 
engineers or supervisors who have adequate experience 
in the execution of such jobs and at least one such 
engineer/supervisor shall be present at site whenever 
work is in progress. 


9.2 Detailed information about the subsoil up to 
adequate depth below the proposed bottom of well 
foundations shall be collected so that the wells, 
including their steinings and cutting edges are designed 
suiting the conditions at site. This information will also 
assist in following safe well sinking procedures and in 
taking precautionary measures in time against 
appearance of sudden dangers, heavy sand blow and 
consequent subsidence of peripheral area. 


9.3 Prior geological study of terrain is recommended, 
particularly for rocky area and bed with boulder 
studded soil to enable determination of slope of rock, 
presence of fissures, etc, if any. Based on the 
information collected, precautionary measures against 
sudden tilt and shift in well shall be taken for the safety 
of workmen. 


If the study reveals presence of methane gas, approved 
type of methanometer shall be used to detect the 
presence of such gas. In case methane or any other 
hazardous gas is detected it shall be immediately 
reported to the employer and further work in regard to 


sinking of well shall be stopped. For further progressing 
of work at such sites all precautions necessary for 
working in gaseous mines shall be satisfied all the time 
in consultation with an expert competent to work in 
such mines. 


9.4 Whenever well sinking is to be carried out in 
compressed air, safety requirements laid down in IS 
4138 shall be followed. 


9.5 Whenever blasting is resorted to, it shall be done 
under water through electric detonators by remote control 
arrangements and all the detonators shall be connected in 
series to prevent the possibility of any misfire. 


9.6 Plant and equipment placed around a well for 
sinking shall be placed sufficiently far from the well 
to avoid chances of accident due to subsidence of 
ground on account of heavy sand blow or other causes. 


9.7 If a blow is expected when the diver is working, 
suitable provisions shall be kept ready for him to come 
up quickly in the event of a blow. It is suggested that 
an open grab is lowered to the bottom of excavations 
and the winches/crane engine kept running and ready 
for hoisting at any time. 


9.8 An air receiver with safety valve shall be attached 
to the compressor used for diving work. The air receiver 
shall be able to supply air for at least 30 min working. 


9.9 The signalman working with a diver shall be his 
own team mate as far as possible, and in any case there 
shall be complete understanding between the two about 
the signals code to be used. 


9.10 In deep water say over 30 m, divers shall not 
work for more than 30 min at a time. 


9.11 The divers shall give frequent signals about their 
safety. 


9.12 All diving equipment shall be frequently checked. 


9.13 When a well is loaded with heavy kentledge and 
a diver has to go down for inspection, it shall be only 
for a short duration say 10 min to 15 min. 


9.14 Divers carrying out excavation work using jack 
hammers, pickaxes, etc, shall not go under the cutting 
edge of the well curb. When a stage is reached that 
sudden downward movement of the well may be 
expected, the divers shall not stay under the steining 
thickness but will be provided with long enough tools 
for doing any work at this stage. 


10 PROTECTION TO NEIGHBOURING 
STRUCTURES AND UNDERGROUND 
SERVICES 


10.1 In driven piles, vibration is set up which may 
cause damage to adjoining structures or service lines 


depending on the nature of soil condition and the 
construction standard of such structures and service 
lines. Possible extent of all such damages shall be 
ascertained in advance and operation and mode of 
driving shall be planned with appropriate measures to 
ensure safety. 


10.2 Wherever in the vicinity of a site where bored or 
driven piling works are to be carried out there are old 
structures which are likely to be damaged, tell-tales 
shall be fixed on such structures to watch their 


IS 5121 : 2013 


behaviour and timely precautions taken against any 
undesirable effect. 


10.3 In case of bored piles or caisson, measures shall 
be taken to ensure, that there is no appreciable 
movement of soil mass into the borehole which may 
cause subsidence to any existing foundation in the close 
proximity. In wet holes where such possibilities are 
likely to be there the same shall be minimized by 
approved technique and the operation should be 
planned. 


IS 5121 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Creative Design Consultants & Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH & S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

M.N. Dastur & Company (P) Limited, 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army 
Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Railways, Govt of India, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and Research, Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Chattisgarh 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KRISHNAN (Chairman) 


Suri A. K. PATHAK 
SHRI ANUPAM VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
SHRI SANJAY SoN (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KR AGRAWAL 
Sar Panka Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri S. G. Dave 
SHRI AsAY SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
SHRI MANu AMITABH (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jan (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. DATTA 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI ANKuR Duere (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI JosE KURIAN 
Suri B. K. Smaa (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. BATRA 
Suri M. K. Gare (Alternate) 


SHRI JAIVEER SRIVASTAVAA 
SHRI RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHApHA (Alternate) 


Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr K. N. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. Namu 
Suri R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S.K. GUHA 
Kolkata SHRI GoBINDA PaL CHoupHury (Alternate) 


BRIG AMAR KRISHNA 
CoL SuniL Kumar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RAseEsH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. Duawan (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. NAHAR 
Suri P. C. Arya (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


Organization 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture (Deptt of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
Spectral Services Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C,Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (W-12/34, Western Avenue, Sainik Farm, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dairy 
Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 5121 : 2013 


Representative(s) 


Ms Bina BuDHWAR 
Suri ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS Sura (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPUL KUMAR 
SHRI JITENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAuL 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 
SHRI SANJAY Kausuik (Alternate) 


Lr Gen (Retp) Hart UNIYAL 
Suri O. P. Gok (Alternate) 


Dr VANITA AHUJA 
Suri R. P. LAHIRI 


Dr ANIL SAWHNEY 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri A. K. Saini, Scientist ‘G? & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


and 


SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Alert Group on Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction), CED 29/AG 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 
Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, ECC Group, Chennai 


School of Planning & Architecture (Dept of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324,Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dairy 
Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 
Suri H. S. PAsricHa 
Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri M. P. Namu 
SHRI M. NACHIAPPAN 


Dr V. K. PAuL 


SHRI Manos KUMAR MITTAL 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7775). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


