**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7190 (1974) : Methods of determination of bulk density of 
coke [PCD 7: Solid Mineral Fuels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



15:7190- 1974 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 



METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF 
BULK DENSITY OF COKE 



UDC 662-749"2:531'75 




© Co&righi 1974 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAK, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAKG 

NEW DELHI 1 1 0001 

Gil 

— Jun* 1974 




IS: 7190 -1974 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF 
BULK DENSITY OF COKE 



Solid Mineral Fuels Sectional Committee, GDC 14 



Chairman 
Dr A. Lahiri 

V ice-Chairman 
Shkt A. K. Moitra 
Members 



Representing 
Central Fuel Research Institute (CSIR), Dhanbad 

Central Fuel Research Institute (CSIR ), Dhanbad 



Shri A. Banerjee Coal Controller, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Bosk National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri K. M, Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Chief Mining Adviser, Rail- Ministry of Railways 
way Board, Dhanbad 
Joint Director, Mechani- 
cal Engineering ( Fuel ), 
Railway Board, New 
Delhi ( Alternate ) 



Dr A. N. Ghowdhurv 
Shri A. R. Das Gufta 
Shri J. K. Jain 
Shri R. R. Khanna 



Shri S. K. Mandal 

Shri S, N. Wazir {Alternate) 
Shri A. K. Mitra 

Shri U. N. Jha ( Alternate ) 

KRI S. K. MlJKHERJEE 



Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Bird & Co ( Pvt ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Coal Consumers* Association of India, Calcutta 

Joint Working Committee of Indian Mining 
Association; Indian Mining Federation; Indian 
Colliery Owners' Association; and Madhya 
Pradesh and Vidarbha Mining Association, 
Calcutta 

Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Coal Board, Calcutta 

Development 



Corporation Ltd, 



Shri K. G. Rangrez 



National Coal 

Ranchi 
Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Hyderabad 
Shri K. Seshagtri Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr C V. S. Ratnam Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd, Neyveli 

Shri N. Selvarajan (Alternate) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1974 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication i» protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 7190- 1974 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Shri B. C. Roy Ghatak 
Dr S. M. M. Safvi 
Dr M. Saha 

Shri S. B. Sarkar 
Shri D. Das Gupta, 
Deputy Director Genera) 



Representing 

The Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta 

The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Coke Oven Managers* Association ( Indian Section), 

Calcutta 
Institute of Fuels ( Indian Section), Calcutta 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Secretary 

Shri G. P. Saraawat 
Assistant Director (Chem), ISI 



Methods of Test for Solid Mineral Fuels Subcommittee, 
CDC 14:2 



Convener 
Shri B. K. MazumdaR 

Members 

Shri S. Bagchi 

Da A. N. Chowdhury 

ShriB. K. Ddtta 

Shri S. C. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Karpha 
Shri B. C. Mathur 
Dr M. Ranga Rao 
Shri S. B. Sarkar 



Central Fuel Research Institute (CSIR), Dhanbad 



Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ) , Dhanbad 
Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 
Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

National Test House, Calcutta 
Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 
Hindustan Steel Ltd (R&D), Ranchi 
Coal Board, Calcutta 



IS: 7190 -1974 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF 
BULK DENSITY OF COKE 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 18 January 1974, after the draft finalized by the Solid 
Mineral Fuels Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 Bulk density of coke is the mass of coke occupying a unit volume in 
a container and is expressed in terms of tonnes per cubic metre. This 
mass varies with the size of coke and the degree of compaction. Coke of 
larger sizes cannot be tested conveniently and accurately in a small 
container and it is possible to obtain only an approximate conversion 
factor by which the bulk density obtained in a small container may be 
correlated with the bulk density obtainable in a large container. 
Accordingly, in the case of coke having nominal upper size 150 mm 
( round aperture), a small container is used for determining bulk density, 
while in cases where the size is larger than 150 mm and where coke is 
to be used in large quantities, it becomes necessary to use a large 
container to get dependable figures. 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given 
to international co-ordination among the standards and practices 
prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to practices in 
the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from 
the following publications: 

ISO/R 567-1967 Determination of the bulk density of coke in a 
small container. International Organization for Standardization. 

ISO/R 1013-1969 Determination of bulk density of coke in a large 
container. International Organization for Standardization. 

Further, with a view to making the standard more comprehensive 
methods for determination of bulk density using a small as well as a 
large container, have been incorporated in this standard. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be 
rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 



IS:7190-1974 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes methods of determination of bulk density of 
coke in a small and a large container respectively. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2-1 A weighed container of known volume is filled with coke carefully to 
substantially prevent breakage. The upper surface of coke is levelled and 
the increase in mass is determined. 

2.2 Bulk density of coke up to 150 mm ( round aperture ) nominal upper 
size only, is to be determined in a small container. 

Note — The nominal upper size is that at which not more than 5 percent of coke 
is oversize. 

3. APPARATUS 

3.1 Small Container — A cubical container of 2 hi ( 0'200 m 3 ) capacity, 
of internal dimension 58'5 cm, of rigid construction and smooth 
inner surface^ and fitted with handles. 

3.2 Large Container — Such as a railway wagon or skip. The 
container shall have dimensions at least 3 X 2 X 1 in. 

3.3 Weighing Machine 

a) For Small Container — preferably of the platform type, of maximum 
capacity 300 kg and such that the weighing error does not 
exceed O'l percent of the maximum load or 250 g, whichevei 
is less. 

b) For Large Container — capable of weighing the container and its 
contents to an accuracy of 0"2 percent Or better. 

4. SAMPLE 

4.1 The sample shall be representative of the coke and more than 
sufficient in volume to carry out the determination in duplicate. 

4.2 In the preparation of the sample representative of the consignment 
of coke, the method prescribed in IS: 436 (Part II)-1965* shall be 
followed. 

5. PROCEDURE 

5.0 General — While filling coke into the container no jigging shall be 
resorted to. 



♦Methods of sampling of coal and coke: Part II Sampling of coke (revised). 



IS: 7190- 1974 

5.1 Method A ( Using A Small Container ) — Place the container on the 
weighing machine and note its mass. Charge the coke slowly into the 
container; the height of drop shall be as small as possible and in any case 
shall not exceed 25 cm. 

5.1.1 Having overfilled the container, slide a straight-edge across 
the top of the container, removing any piece of coke which obstructs the 
passage of the straight-edge. Weigh the charged container. 

5.1.2 Garry out a duplicate determination by repeating the procedure, 
using a second portion of the sample. 

5.2 Method B (Using A Large Container ) — Weigh the empty 
container. Calculate its internal volume (capacity) in cubic metres 
( m 8 ) to an accuracy of 1 percent. 

5.2.1 With the container on a level surface, carefully charge the coke 
into it until the whole surface of coke projects above the top of the 
container. Slide a straight-edge across the top of the container and 
remove any piece of coke which obstructs its passage. Weigh the 
charged container. 

5.2.2 Carry out a duplicate determination by repeating the procedure, 
using a subsequent wagon or skip of similar capacity. 

5.3 Separately carry out determination of total moisture content (M) of 
coke as prescribed in 6 of IS : 1350 ( Part I )-1969*. 

Note — When bulk density is reported without qualification, it is understood to be 
expressed on the' dry basis'. Where bulk density is to be reported on 'as 
received ', ' as sold * or on i wet basis', determination of total moisture content is 
not necessary. 

6. EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 

6.1 Bulk density of coke, on dry basis, expressed in tonnes per cubic 
metre, is calculated from the following formula: 

_mi — m 100- M 
Db ~ V X 100 

where 

m\ = mass in tonnes of the container charged with coke, 
m ■» mass in tonnes of the empty container, 

V = internal volume ( capacity ) of the container in cubic 

metres, and 
M = total moisture content of coke expressed as percentage. 

Note — Where bulk density is to be reported on ( as received', ' as sold' or on 
c wet basis \ the factor ( 100 — M )/100 shall be omitted from the above calculation. 



♦Methods of test for coal and coke: Part I Proximate analysis (first revision ). 

5 



IS: 7190- 1974 

6.1.1 Report the average of the results of duplicate determinations 
to 2 significant places of decimal. 

7. PRECISION 

7.1 The maximum acceptable difference between the results of duplicate 
determinations carried out at different times by the same operator, with 
the same apparatus, on samples from the same consignment of coke, shall 
not be more than 0*03t/rn 3 in the case of Method A and 0'01t/m 3 in the 
case of Method B. 



