Indian Standard AE 


TA “ET — MY Ml LET 
cant — aie 


Automotive Vehicles — Metallic 
Fuel Tanks — Specification 


ICS 43.040.60; 43.060.40 


© BIS 2014 


dia AM pd 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM “ad, 9 Fags AHL APT, ae feect-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2014 Price Group 3 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipment Sectional Committee, TED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards on fuel tanks. The other standards are: 


IS No. Title 
12056 : 1987 Recommendation for safety requirements for fuel tank assembly of automotive vehicles 
14681 : 1999 Automotive vehicles — Fuel tanks for two or three wheelers 


15547 : 2005 Automotive vehicles — Plastic fuel tank for four wheelers 
In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


ECE R 34 Uniform provisions concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to the prevention of fire 
risks 
EEC Directive Fuel tanks and rear underrun protection of motor vehicles and their trailers 
70/221/EEC 
AIS 095 Requirements for metallic fuel tanks of automotive vehicles 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16219 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — METALLIC FUEL 
TANKS — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard applies to metallic tanks intended for 
use with liquid fuel and fitted on vehicles of categories 
M, N and T as defined in IS 14272 : 2011 ‘Automotive 
vehicles — Types — Terminology ( first revision )’. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
12056 : 1987 Recommendations for safety 
requirements for fuel tank assembly 
of automotive vehicles 
14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 


Terminology ( first revision ) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Vehicle Type with Regard to Fuel Tanks — 
Vehicles which do not differ essentially in such respect 
as: 


a) The structure, shape, dimensions and 
materials of the tank(s); and 


b) In vehicles of category M1 the position of the 
tank(s) in the vehicle in so far as it has a 
negative effect on the requirements of 4.10. 


3.2 Occupant Compartment — The space for 
occupant accommodation bounded by the roof, floor, 
side walls, doors, outside glazing, front bulkhead and 
rear bulkhead. 


3.3 Tank — The metallic tank(s) designed to contain 
the liquid fuel, as defined in 3.5 used primarily for the 
propulsion of the vehicle excluding its accessories 
(filler pipe if it is a separate element), gauge, 
connections to the engine or to compensate interior 
excess pressure, etc. 


3.4 Capacity of the Tank — The tank capacity as 
specified by the manufacturer. 


3.5 Liquid Fuel — A fuel which is liquid in normal 
ambient conditions. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Tanks shall be so made as to be corrosion-resistant. 


4.2 Tanks shall satisfy, when equipped with all 
accessories, which are normally attached to them, the 
leakage tests carried out according to 5.1 at a relative 
internal pressure equal to double the working pressure, 
but in any event not less than an excess pressure above 
atmosphere of 0.3 bar. 


4.3 Any excess pressure or any pressure exceeding 
the working pressure shall be compensated 
automatically by suitable devices (vents, safety valves, 
etc). 


4.4 The vents shall be designed in such a way as to 
prevent any fire risk. In particular, any fuel which may 
leak when the tank(s) is (are) being filled shall not be 
able to fall on the exhaust system. It shall be channeled 
to the ground. 


4.5 The tank(s) shall not be situated in, or form, a surface 
(floor, wall, bulkhead) of the occupant compartment or 
any other compartment integral with it. 


4.6 A partition shall be provided to separate the 
occupant compartment from the tank(s). The partition 
may contain apertures (for example to accommodate 
cables) provided they are so arranged that fuel cannot 
flow freely from the tank(s) into the occupant 
compartment or any other compartment integral with 
it during normal conditions of use. 


4.7 Every tank shall be securely fixed and so placed 
as to ensure that any fuel leaking from the tank or its 
accessories will escape to the ground and not into the 
occupant compartment during normal conditions of 
use. 


4.8 The filler hole shall not be situated in the occupant 
compartment, in the luggage compartment or in the 
engine compartment. 


4.9 The fuel shall not escape through the tank cap or 
through the devices provided to compensate excess 
pressure during foreseeable course of operation of the 
vehicles. In the case of overturning of the vehicle, a 
drip may be tolerated provided that it does not exceed 
30 g/min; this requirement shall be verified during the 
test prescribed in 5.2. 


IS 16219 : 2014 


4.9.1 The fuel filler cap shall be fixed to the filler pipe. 
This requirement shall be deemed to be satisfied if 
provision is made to prevent excess evaporative 
emissions and fuel spillage caused by a missing fuel 
filler cap. This may be achieved using one of the 
following: 


a) An automatically opening and closing, non- 
removable fuel filler cap. 


b) Design features, which avoid excess 
evaporative emissions and fuel spillage in the 
case of a missing fuel filler cap. 


c) Any other provision which has the same 
effect. Examples may include, but are not 
limited to a tether filler cap, a chained filled 
cap or one utilizing the same locking key for 
the filler cap and for the vehicle’s ignition. In 
this case, the key shall be removable from the 
filler cap only in the locked condition. 
However, the use of tethered or chained filler 
cap by itself is not sufficient for vehicles other 
than those of Categories MI, N1 and M2 
derived from M1. 


4.9.2 The seal between the cap and the filler pipe shall 
be retained securely in place. The cap shall latch 
securely in place against the seal and filler pipe when 
closed. 


4.10 Tanks shall be installed in such a way as to be 
protected from the consequences of an impact to the 
front or the rear of the vehicle; there shall be no 
protruding parts, sharp edges, etc., near the tank. 


4.11 The fuel tank and the filler neck shall be designed 
and installed in the vehicles in such a way as to avoid 
any accumulation of static electricity charges on their 
entire surface. If necessary, they shall be discharged 
into the metallic structure of the chassis or any major 
metallic mass by means of a good conductor. 


5 TESTS 


5.1 Hydraulic Test 


5.1.1 The tank shall be subjected to a hydraulic internal 
pressure test, which shall be carried out on an isolated 
unit complete with all its accessories. The tank shall 
be completely filled with a non-flammable liquid 
(water, for example). After all communication with the 
outside has been cut off, the pressure shall be gradually 
increased, through the pipe connection through which 
fuel is fed to the engine, to a relative internal pressure 
equal to double the working pressure used and in any 
case not less than a gauge pressure of 0.3 bar, which 
shall be maintained for one minute. During this time 
the tank shell shall not crack or leak; however, it may 
be permanently deformed. 


5.1.2 Fuel tanks which have been demonstrated to 
comply with the requirements of 4.3 of IS 12056 shall 
be deemed to comply with the requirements of 5.1. 


5.2 Overturn Test 


5.2.1 The tank and all its accessories shall be mounted 
on to a test fixture in a manner corresponding to the 
mode of installation on the vehicle for which the tank 
is intended; this also applies to a system for the 
compensation of the interior excess pressure. 


5.2.2 The test fixture shall rotate about an axis lying 
parallel to the longitudinal vehicle axis. 


5.2.3 The test shall be carried out with the tank filled 
to 90 percent of its capacity and also 30 percent of its 
capacity with a non-flammable liquid having a density 
and a viscosity close to those of the fuel normally used 
(water may be accepted). 


5.2.4 The tank shall be turned from its installed 
position 90° to the right. The tank shall remain in this 
position, for at least 5 min. 


5.2.5 The tank shall then be turned 90° further in the 
same direction. The tank shall be held in this position, 
in which it is completely inverted, for at least another 
5 min. 


5.2.6 The tank shall be rotated back to its normal 
position. Testing liquid which has not flowed back 
from the venting system into the tank shall be drained 
and replenished, if necessary. 


5.2.7 The tank shall be rotated 90° in the opposite 
direction and left for at least 5 min in this position. 


5.2.8 The tank shall be rotated 90° further in the same 
direction. This completely inverted position shall be 
maintained for at least 5 min. Afterwards, the tank shall 
be rotated back to its normal position. 


6 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL 


6.1 The application for approval shall be accompanied 
with the information listed in Annex A. 


6.2 Two sets of fuel tanks and required accessories 
shall be offered to the test agency for checking 
compliance to this standard. 


7 CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 


For ensuring conformity of production one fuel tank 
shall be demonstrated to comply with the requirements 
of hydraulic test once in every two months. 


8 CRITERIA FOR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 


8.1 As existing approval for a liquid fuel tank system 
shall be deemed as being extendable to another system 
without evaluation if the change between the systems 


is limited to corrosion protection on the tank or its 
accessories is changed from one type to another. 


8.2 Fitment of the same fuel tank (with respect to 
structure, shape, dimensions and material of tank) on 
another vehicle or at another location on the same 
vehicle. However, these relocations shall not adversely 
affect the requirements of 4.10 on vehicles of 
category M1. 


9 MARKING 


9.1 The fuel tank shall be legibly and indelibly marked 
with the following: 


a) Manufacturer’s name or trade-mark; 


IS 16219 : 2014 


b) Batch No./ Lot No.; and 
c) Month and year of manufacture. 


9.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


9.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The detail of conditions under which the licence for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.1) 
INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY THE FUEL TANK MANUFACTURER 


A-1 Information to be furnished by the fuel tank 
manufacturer: 
a) Name and address of the fuel tank 
manufacturer; 
b) Type of fuel stored in the tank; 
c) Fuel tank capacity; 
d) Material of the tank; 
e) Detailed engineering drawing and technical 
specifications of the fuel tank with all 
connections and details of breathing/venting 


arrangement; and 
f) Working pressure of the tank. 


A-2 Information to be furnished by the vehicle 
manufacturer: 


a) Name and address of the vehicle manufacturer; 
b) Category of the vehicle(s) as per IS 14272; 
c) Vehicle model/Variants; and 


d) Sketch showing location and mounting of the 
fuel tank on the vehicle. 


IS 16219 : 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipment, Sectional Committee, TED 06 


Organization 
Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 
Asahi India Glass Ltd, Distt Rewari 
Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, New Delhi 
Autoliv IFB India Ltd, Bangalore 


Automotive Component Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Central Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institute (CFMTTD, 
P.O. Budni (M.P.) 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Vehicles), Ahmednagar 

Eicher Tractors, Pithampur 

Force Motors Ltd, Pune 


General Motors India Pvt Ltd, Halol 


ICAT, Manesar 
Institute of Road Traffic Education (IRTE), New Delhi 


Kum. Rajshree Parmar Memorial Foundation, Pune 


Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation, Mumbai 


Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nashik 


Mahindra Trucks and Buses Limited, Pune 


Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
Transport Commissioner Office, Mumbai 


Ordnance Factory Board, Vehicle Factory, Jabalpur 


Rane TRW Steering Systems Ltd, Singaperumal Koil 


Ruby Bus Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


MSME, Delhi 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers’ (SIAM), New Dehli 


Representative(s) 
Suri A. V. MANNIKAR (Chairman) 
SHRI Mirza ASIF BEG 


SHRI ALFRED NIXON MENDEZ 
Suri S. Arun (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (TECHNICAL) 


Suri V. RAGHU 
Suri S. RANGARAJAN (Alternate) 


Suri Upay HARITE 
SHRI JITENDER RANA (Alternate) 


Suri R. NARASIMHAN 
Suri A. V. KUMBHAR (Alternate) 


Suri D. P. SASTE 
Suri T. R. MAITRE (Alternate) 


Suri C. R. Loui 
Suri C. V. CHIMOTE (Alternate) 


JOINT CONTROLLER (QAD-B) 


Deputy CONTROLLER (QAD-B)] (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJINDER S. SACHDEVA 


SHRI VIMAL MULCHANDANI (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SHIVARAMAN 
Suri L. B. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI NEERAJ GUPTA 
SHRI RAJENDRA KHILE (Alternate) 


Suri S. KALIA 


Suri Rou BALUJA 
Suri G.C. KUKRETI (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDMAL M. PARMAR 


Suri S. P. JADHAV 
Suri Karate (Alternate) 


Suri B. BHAUMIK 
Suri Z.A. Musawar (Alternate) 


Suri K. NAGARAJU 
Suri V. G. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA MALHOTRA 
Suri DEEPAK PANDA (Alternate) 


Suri B. N. Das 
Suri R.K. JAISWAL (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (ROAD TRANSPORT) 
Suri P. B. JADHAV 


Suri P. K. ARORA 
Suri A. K. Maurya (Alternate) 


Suri B. AYYAPPAN 


Suri L. RADHAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri PANKAJ D. KAPASHI 
Suri V. M. Buise (Alternate) 


Suri K. L. Rao 
Suri K. K. Funpa (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
Suri Amit Kumar (Alternate) 


IS 16219 : 2014 


Organization Representative (s) 
Sutlej Motors Ltd, Jallandhar Suri K. S. WILKHU 
Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Ropar Suri S. R. AGRAHARI 


SHRI LAKHINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri Firoz KHAN (Alternate) 


Toyota Kirloskar Motors Ltd, Bangalore Suri SUDEEP DALVI 
Suri S. SAKTHIVELAN (Alternate) 


Tractor Manufacturers’ Association, New Delhi Suri T. C. GOPALAN 
Suri T. R. Kesavan (Alternate) 


Vehicles Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar SHRI D. PANDURENGAN 
SHRI S. RAMAKRISHNA (Alternate) 


Venkos & Compan, Patna Suri V. N. SHARMA 
SHRI SAIFUDDIN Hussain (Alternate) 
Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore SHRI KARTHIK SARMA 
Suri P. K. Hucar (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General Suri P. C. Josni, Scientist ‘F and Head (TED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri D. K. SINGLA 
Scientist ‘D’ (TED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 06(0904). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 2019 
TO 
IS 16219 : 2014 AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — METALLIC 
FUEL TANKS — SPECIFICATION 


[Page 2, clause 4.9.1 c)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘c) Any other provision which has the same effect. Examples may include, but 
are not limited to a tether filler cap, a chained filled cap or one utilizing the 
same locking key for the filler cap and for the vehicle’s ignition. In this case, the 
key shall be removable from the filler cap only in the locked condition. 
However, the use of tethered or chained filler cap by itself is not sufficient for 
vehicles other than those of categories M1 and N1. In case of M2 category of 
vehicles having fuel filler cover for accessing fuel cap, tethered or chained fuel 
cap is sufficient, provided, fuel filler cover has locking mechanism which can be 
opened either with key or with control located inside the vehicle.’ 


(Page 2, clause 7) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
“7 CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 


For ensuring conformity of production one fuel tank shall be demonstrated to 
comply with the requirements of hydraulic test once in every two years.” 


(Page 3, clause 9.1) — ‘Delete the clause and renumber 9.2 and 9.2.1 as 
9.1 and 9.1.1.’ 


(TED 06) nee eee 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


