( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 10845--1984

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR BAG, PILOT
CPDC 18

Travel Requisites Sectional Committee,
Chairman
DR D. K. GHOSH

Representing
Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay

Members
B. MAJUMDAR( Alternate to Dr D. K. Ghosh ) Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, SHRI_M. P. BAJPAI Kanpur Prof Moni Banerjee & Associates, Calcutta PROF MONI BANERJEE -Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SHRI A. T. BASAK New Delhi Arts & Prints Private Ltd. Calcutta SHRI DIPANKAR BASU Maharashtra Small Scale Industries Development SHRI R. S. BHAT Corporation Ltd, Bombay CAPTAIN A. C. BHATIA Naval Headquarters, New Delhi COMMANDER S. P. DUTT, IN ( Alternate ) Bengal Waterproof Ltd, Calcutta SHRI B. S. BHATNAGAR SHRI B. DUTTA ( Alternate ) SHRI MRINAL KANTI CHAKRABORTY West Bengal State Leather Industries Development Corporation Ltd, Calcutta SHRI BIKAS KUMAR DEY ( Afternate ) V.I.P. Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. CHAUDHURY SHRI S. L. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) Universal Luggage Mfg Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI SHASHIS. DASH SHRI E. KOTIAN ( Alternate ) The Premier Leather Crafts, Bombay SHRI C. A. FERENS SHRI J. C. FERENS( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI R. S. GHOSH New Delhi Export Promotion Council for Finished Leather SHRI JANE ALAM & Leather Manufacturers, Kanpur Air-India, Bombay SHRI R. J. KANAL SHRI K. V. BHAT ( Alternate ) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, New Delhi SHRI NAVIN MALHOTRA Indian Airlines, New Delhi SHRI U. N. MENON Polytechnic, Rayagada SHRI M. S. MOHANTY SHRI~B. P. DEVGOSWAMY ( Alternate )
SHRI

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1984
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10845 - 1984 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members DRR.PANDA
National

Representing
Engineering

Industries Ltd, Calcutta SHRI G. S. LAKHOTIA( Alternate ) SHRI T. K. PARTHASARTHY Central Leather Research Institute ( CSIR ), Madras SHRI K. RADHAKRISHNAN ( Alternate ) AIR CDRE K. RAJAN Ministry of Defence ( R C D ), New Delhi SHRI V. P. CHIRAYATH ( Alternate ) LT-COL C. M. RAMAKRISHNA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi MAJ R. M. SINGH ( Alternate ) SHRI D. H. SHAH Jeewanlal ( 1929 ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. H. SHAH ( Alternate ) DR A. S. SETHI, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs )

Secretary
SHRI J. P. MEHTA Deputy Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ), IS1

IS : 10845 - 1984

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

FOR BAG, PILOT

FOREWORD

was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the Travel Requisites Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council.

0.2 Pilot bags differ in design, shape, colour and size from one manufacIn view of the difficulties experienced by indentors in the turer to another. selection of proper quality of bags, essential requirements of such bags have been stipulated in the standard. Besides guiding the purchaser, this standard is also expected to serve as a guide to manufacturers to produce bags of a durable and acceptable quality.

0.3 This standard contains clauses which call for agreement between the purchaser and the supplier and which permit the purchaser to use his option for selection to suit his requirements. The relevant clauses are 5.2, 5.12, 6.1 and 9.1. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements, methods of test and sampling for pilot bag intended for the use of operating air crew.

2. NOMENCLATURE 2.1 The nomenclature
3. SHAPE

shall be as given in Fig. 1.

AND DIMENSIONS

3.1 The shape and dimensions of the pilot bag shall be as shown in Fig. 1.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

3

TCHES

__-II YJ

, f 1
i
I I

__i

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 1 BAG, PILOT 4. MATERIALS 4.1 Various components of the pilot bag shall be made from the materials specified in Table 1. The materials not specifically designated, shall be suitable for the purpose intended. 5. MANUFACTURE,
WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH

5.1 Pilot bag shall be made of four leather pieces.

5.2 Main body shall be made of minimum 1 mm thick leather. The colour of the bag shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. The finish of the leather shall be top grain, highly snuffed to remove imperfections. 5.3 Foundation material shall be minimum 2 mm thick.
4

IS:10845-1984
TABLE 1 MATERIALS FOR COMPONENTS OF PILOT BAG

( Clause 4.1 ) &.

*

COMPONENT(S)

MATERIAL (3) Vegetable, chrome or combination tanned cow, cowcalf or buffcalf leather Fibre board Cotton lining cloth or Rayon satin lining cloth or Nylon satin

CONFORMING To (4)

(1)
i)

(2)
Body and handle

ii) iii)

Foundation

material

Medium type of IS: 1658-1977* IS: 1535-1979t

Lining material

13:2136-1974:

13:2272-19638 -

iv)

Sewing thread

Cotton thread, 5/W or Linen thread or Spun polyester thread

-

v) vi)

Lock Rivets

Brass Steel or Aluminium ( solid or semisolid ) or g e r m a n silver for fibre hardboards ( second revision ).

*Specification

tSpecification for cotton lining cloth (first revision ). SSpecification for rayon satin lining cloth ( fivst revision ). gSpecification for nylon satin.

5.4Both sides and the double layer, up to the folding line, shall be of the same type of leather and shall be minimum 1 mm thick.
5.5 Lining for front and back portion of the inner side of the body of the bag shall be of the same colour as that of the outer leather.
5

IS : 10845- 1984
5.6 Two locks of size 26 x 32 mm made out of minimum O-5 mm thick brass sheet shall be positioned symmetrically as shown in Fig. 1. The locks shall be secured by metal prongs and backing steel plate.

5.7 The handle shall be of flexible rope design and shall be secured by rivets and backing steel plate as shown in Fig. 1. 5.8 The stitching shall be done with the single row of stitches of even tension. The stitches shall be strong and uniform with 6 to 8 stitches per 25 mm. The loose ends of the thread shall be trimmed. There shall be no uneven seam. 5.9 The adhesive IS : 4663-1968*. used in the manufacture of bag shall conform to

5.10 All steel components shall be electroplated chromium over nickel conforming to Grade 1 of IS: 1068-1968t and brass locks shall be electroplated chromium over nickel conforming to Grade 2 of IS : 4827-1968:. ~5.11 The bag shall be finished constructional defects. smooth without any sharp edges or

5.12 In respect of appearance, general workmanship and finish, the pilot bag shall conform to the sample previously approved by the purchaser. 6. SAMPLING 6.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, the procedure given in IS : 2500 ( Part 1 )-19735 shall be followed for sampling. The inspection level and sampling plan as given in 6.2 and 6.3 shall be followed. 6.2 The scale of sampling shall correspond to inspection level III given in Table 1 of IS : 2500 ( Part 1 )-I9733 for all the requirements specified in this standard. 6.3 The sampling plan shall correspond in Table 2 of IS : 2500 ( Part 1 )-19739.
*Specification tspecification (first revision ). $3pecification copper alloys. gspecification count of defects

to

AQL plans of 40 percent given

for permanent rubber-based adhesives for footwear industry. for electroplated coatings of nickel and chromium on iron and steel for electroplated coatings of nickel and chromium on copper and by

for sampling inspection (first revision ).

tables: Part I Inspection

by attributesand

6

IS : 10845 - 1984 7. TESTS 7.1 Handle Snatch Test -The

pilot bag shall be securely fixed in an inverted position on a rigid support, leaving the handle free for applying the load. The handle shall be suitably harnessed to distribute the load applied uniformly over the entire handle. A load of 100 N shall be applied suddenly to the handle and repeated 10 times.
7.1.1 The load may be applied either by means of spring balance or weights, suitably placed on a stirrup. After the test, the bag shall be examined. The handle shall not snap or loosen in its fittings during or after the test and shall remain in good shape. Test - The pilot bag with a total mass of 5 kg shall be allowed to vibrate vertically up and down with the help of the handle with an amplitude of 20 mm for 4 000 times. ?-he handle of the pilot bag shall not come out during or after the test and the bag shall remain in good shape. 7.2 Fatigue

7.3 Drop `Test - The pilot bag shall be filled with clothes or other suitable materials to the total mass of 10 kg. The bag shall then be locked with key and then dropped from a height of 1.5 m on a normal concrete floor or on steel plate having a minimum thickness of 4-5 mm on: (a) rear side, (b) top and bottom sides, and (c) front sides. The same bag shall be used for all these drops. The bag shall not be damage or get split land the contents shall not come out during or after the test. 8. MARKING 8.1 Each pilot bag shall be legibly and permanently following: a) Manufacturer's name or registered trade-mark, b) Lot No. or batch number.
8.1.1 The bag may also be marked with the ISI Certification

marked and

with the

Mark.

NOTE -The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by HI for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which .a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9. PACKING
9.1 The pilot bags shall be packed to ensure safe transportation. 7

They may also be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier.

