UDC

621.98-i 001'4

IS: 6652 (Part 3)-

1966

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO METAL FOR-MING MACHINES AND TOOLS
PART 3 METAL FORMING RELATING f TECHNOLOGY AND TO SHEET METAL OPERATIONS

First

Revision

/
technology and operations in

I. Scope -

Covers the definitions sheet metal working. 2. Definitions

of terms relating

to metal forming

A 2.1 Air Bending .- Bending operation in which work contacts the tools together at only three points, by press fitting, seaming,

2.2 Assembling - An operation of fastening curling, riveting, etc, in a press tool.

two or more parts

6 2.3 Beading reinforcement. Forming a narrow ridge in a sheet length which metal workpiece portion or part, commonly formed for

2.4 Bend Allowance - The along the neutral axis. 2.5 Bend Angle -

developed

of curved

between

its extremities

measured

An angle through in which

a bend is performed. forms an angle about a straight line axis on

2.6 Bending - An operation the workpiece itself. 2.7 Bevel 2.8 Blank 2.9 Blanking Difference A pre-cut Cutting

the workpiece

between

90" and bend angle of a flange. press operations. out of sheet or strip ingot or form desired stock, a damaging form with no

metal shape ready for subsequent closed contours or shapes

Cal-led blanks

either 2.10 Blister - A metal defect, originating treatment, such as over-heating or corrosion. - Squeezing the workpiece 2.11 Bottoming intentional change in thickness. 2.12 Bulging The process of circumferential

from blow holes in the

at the bottom expansion

of stroke to obtain of outer walls by sliding

of any hollow

shape/l surfaced the

or brightening 2.13 Burnishing - Polishing tool under pressure over the surface. 2.14 Burr - The defect blank or the hole. in a blanked/pierced

a metal surface component

or rolling of a rough

a smooth

in the form

edge around

C 2.15 Camber - Slight taper of a member or part as might appear looking at the edge of strip, or beam, usually, considered as a slight convexity over a considerable area. 2.16 Cannelure - A groove, especially a circular groove, around a cylindrical surface, groove around a bullet for lubricant or the groove into which cartridge case is crimped. plate

such as a

Adopted

5 August

1986

@ March 1987, IS1 I STANDARDS
BHAVAN, I

Gr 3

INDIAN
MANAK

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 6652 ( Part 3 ) - 1986 2.17 Canneluring
The rolling process in forming circular grooves around a cylindrical cause when surface. an effect pressure

2.18 Canning - A surface forming phenomena where internal stresses and strains such that it can be deflected by a finger pressure and return to its original position is removed.

2.19 Closed Bevel 2.20 Closing-in 2.21 Coil -

Bend with bend angle of over 90". Forming a closed end on a tabular closely part. wound to form a spiral ring.

A long sheet or strip

of material

operation, in which metal is forced to flow to fill the shape and 2.22 Coining - A squeezing profile of the dies usually done in a closed die. The term is also applied to other very severe and localized coldforming operations. temperature 2.23 Cold Working - Changing the shape of a metal piece below its recrystallization by forces which cause plastic flow without rupturing. In general the strength and h-ardness are increased by cold working while the ductility is reduced. 2.24 Compression it. 2.25 CUP 2.28 Cupping 2.27 Crimping Stress to which a part may be subjected closed which tends to squeeze or compress

Any hollow -

sheet metal or shell

at one end. usually done without a seam. along a sheet edges on cans, blank holding.

First operation A forming

in deep drawing

or ironing,

operation

used to set-down

or close-in

2.28 Curling ( a/so called False Wiring ) - Forming an edge or circular cross-section or along the end of a shell or tube, either inside or outside, for example, curled pots and pans. D 2.29 Debarring Process of removing burrs and smoothing edges.

drawing of deeply recessed parts from sheet material 2.30 Deep Drawing -The flow of the material, when the depth of the recess equals or exceeds the minimum 2.31 Die Marks 2.32 Dimpling The undesirable Localized indent marks appearing forming on a stamping due to defects

through plastic part-width. in die.

of sheet metal. of non-metallic by means of material like, hollow punch leather, paper, with knife like change in

out any shape 2.33 Dinking - Process of cutting rubber, etc, and light gauge soft metal like aluminium edges acting against a wooden or frbre block. 2.34 Dishing thickness. 2.35 Distortion Forming a large radiused concave

surface

in a part without

intentional

Any deviation

from a desired

contour

or shape. drawing process; can be it is drawn to a shell of surfaces profiled to control rolls or the dies it

2.38 Drawability - A measure of feasible expressed as a percentage of reduction maximum practical depth.

deformation of a blank during in diameter of a blank when on draw-ring section by or blank holder pulling through

2.37 Draw Bead - Narrow rib like projections flow of metal in press working. 2.38 Draw Bench Forming mounted on draw bench. Forming straight

2.39 Drawing - Process of producing firmly to prevent formation or wrinkles

a cup like form from a sheet metal with or without while the punch travel gives required shape.

holding

2.40 Ductility - That property or characteristic of a material which permits plastic working in tension without rupture as in drawing or stretching, and is measured in a general way by the elongation and reduction in area of a test piece when pulled in a t-ensile testing machine.

E
of ears 2.41 Earing - The formation of drawn shell resulting from directional of rolled metal. or scalloped differences edges in the form of waves around the top in the plastic working properties ( anisotropy )

2

IS : 6652 ( Part 3 ) - 1986
2.42 Ejecting Removing the part from press tool by mechanical or other means. resists deformation forces are removed. and

2.43 Elasticity -That property or characteristic of a material which thereby causes it to return to its original shape and size when deforming

2.44 Embossing - A process for producing relatively shallow sunken or raised designs in sheet material by means of male or female dies, theoretically with no change in thickness. Heavy embossing and coining are similar operation. F 2.45 Fine Blanking - Blanking design (such as incorporation square cut surface. with considerably of V-ring ) which small reduces tool clearances and with modified tool fracture and produces a clean, smooth, positioning narrow a piece or part on machine constant width

2.46 FixtureA tool or device for holding tool or other processing machine. 2.47 Nange - A projecting for stiffening or fastening. 2.46 Flanging 2.49 Flaring Forming Forming

and accurately

rim or edge of a part usually flanges around the periphery part.

and of approximate

of workpiece.

a flange

on a tubular

2.50 Flattening roller levelling 2.51 Fluting 2.52 Foldother. A

- Removing irregularities of metal surface by a variety of stock or diamond serration blocks or by restriking. Forming defect longitudinal in sheet recesses metal or in a cylindrical part part. when metal about

of methods,

rolling

and/or

a formed

layer

folds

one over the and

2.53 FormingAny change without ~metal removal.

in the shape of a metal piece brought G

by plastic

deformation

of grain formation in sheets. In the direction that the 2.54 Grain Formation in Sheets - Direction sheet or strip is rolled, the sheet will have greater tensile strength and ductility ~than those across the rolling direction. 2.55 Grooving Forming a depression on inside of a tubular H 2.56 Hemming - An operation which folds the edge of the part back on itself. may not be completely flattened to form a closed hem. 2.57 Hole Flanging a flat plate. Drawing out a flange or rim around The edge may or or in part.

a hole in the bottom or side of shell

2.56 Hot Working - Metal working operation at sufficiently high temperature above recrystallization In hot working recovery and recrystallization temperature to prevent distinct strain hardening. occur simultaneously along with deformation. I 2.59 /ndenting --Forming of recesses of depressions of appreciable size walls in the surface of any material by cold forging or embossing process. and ~with fairly square

2.60 /roning - Press operation of reducing the wall thickness of a shell while retaining thickness of bottom, and reducing the inside diameter by only a small amount. J 2.61 Joggle An offset ( usually with parallel surfaces L 2.62 Lancing ( Louvring ) -Slitting a detached slug. and forming a pocket shaped opening M 2.63 Malleability - That property compression without rupture. or characteristic of metal which permits plastic in a part without ) in the surface

the original

of a sheet or part.

producing

deformation

in

3

IS : 6652 ( Part 3 ) - 1986
N 2.64 Necking Reducing Continuous cuts. Forming Cutting the diameter cutting of a portion of length of a cylindrical reciprocating shell or tube. makes

2.65 Nibbling y numerous small 2.66 Noising 2.67 Notching -

of a sheet metal by a rapidly portion with shapes reduced diameters

punch which part.

a curved

at the end of tubular

out of various

from one or two edges of a strip, 0 but forming

blank or sheet. the workpiece in

2.68 Offsetting opposite direction 2.69 Open Bevel -

Two bending operations in one stroke of machine, such as to form offset shape. Bend with bend angle less than 90".

The grain structure of metal 2.70 Orange Peel - It is a type of defect seen on drawn components. changes due to stretch of metal and therefore, the original surface finish is lost and the surface Orange peel surfaces are observed on sheets having large looks like surface of an orange. grain sizes. 2.71 Over Bending - Bending compensate for spring back. metal more than P 2.72 Parting stamping. An operation usually performed to produce two or more parts from one common without that required in the finished piece so as to

2.73 Penetration - The depth to which a punch must sink below shear in order to effect complete rupture iS called penetration.

the surface

of a sheet

- Piercing of many holes, usually identical and arranged in regular pattern, in a 2.74 Perforating sheet, blank or previously formed Part. The holes are usually round but may be of any other shape. 2.75 Piercing - Cutting produced is scrap. 2.76 Planchet openings, such as holes or slots in stock, such that the slug or piece

A disc of metal with

edges milled

ready for coining.

operation in which plates or parts are given a dense, smooth 2.77 Planishing - A hammering surface finish by a rapid succession of blows delivered by highly polished dies or hammers of planishing hammer. The term is also used for a rolling operation in which sheet metal or plates are given a final surface finishing operation. 2.78 Plastic Flow without rupture. 2.79 Punching The phenomenon Shearing of a closed which takes place when in sheet metal. a certain amount of permanent set in metals a substance is deformed permanently

contour

2.80 Proof Stress - The stress required to produce which does not exhibit a specific yield point. R 2.81 Redrawing - Second and following deepened and reduced in cross-sectional 2.82 Reeding - The serrations the coining Operation. ( ridges

deep drawing dimensions. and grooves

operations ) around

in which

the cup like shells

are

edge of a coin formed

in the die in

in which compressive strains are introduced 2.83 Restriking - A sizing of light coining operation in the stamping to counteract or offset tensile strains Set up in previous operations, for example, restriking is used to counteract spring-back in bending operation. 2.84 Roll Bending 2.85 Roll Forming Curving Forming of sheets, a strip bars and sections section by means of rolls. by means of a set of driven rolls. around

into a straight

2.86 Rubber Pad Forming a contour of punch on die.

A forming process in which In this case either the punch S

rubber pad forms the workpiece or the die is replaced by rubber.

2.87 Scrap -

Pieces

of material

which

are not nx-mally 4

usable.

IS : 6652 ( Part 3 ) - 1986
2.88 Seam The fold or ridge formed The process of joining at the joining edge line of two pieces of sheet material. a seam, the reeding of a previously or

2.89 Seaming -

two edges of sheet material

to produce

2.90 Serrated - Having a toothed or notched serrated edge around the edge coin. 2.91 Shaving - A subsequent shearing cut edge is finished or smoothened. or cutting

like a saw edge, for example, by which the surface

operation

2.92 Sheet - Any material or piece of uniform thickness and of considerable length and breadth as compared to its thickness is called sheet or plate; such pieces under 6 mm in thickness are called sheets, and 6 mm thick and over are called plates. 2.93 Sizing - Secondary forming or squeezing or otherwise correct surfaces or their relations, operation required to square up, set down, flatten to produce specified dimensions and tolerances, to cut strips from sheet or to cut along

2.94 Slitting - Cutting or shearing along single lines either lines or given length or contour in a sheet or part, ~2.95 Slug a) Small pieces of material ( usually scrap ) which material. b) Slanks used for extrusion operations.

are produced

in piercing

holes

in sheet

.2.96 Spinning - A method of forming sheet metal or tubing into seamless hollow hemispheres or other circular shapes by a combination of rotation and force. 2.97 Spotting high spots. A process of finishing a punch or a die to match with

cylinders,

cones, of

the master

by removal

tends to return to its original shape or 2.98 Spring Pack - The extent of which metal naturally position after undergoing a forming operation because of elasticity. This is compensated for by over bending of or a secondary operation of restriking. in which 2.99 Squeezing - Operation contours of the die, the remaining direction of applied force. 2.100 Stamping a) A general b) To impress 2.101 Strain that body-. The term to dendte lettering deformation, part of the metal under compression plastically flows into metal is unconfined and flows generally at an angle to the

all press working. by pressure in size on to the surface or shape of a material. produced flow set by stress (strain up in ) in inside heat or change of a body

or designing

2.102 Strain Hardening cold working.

The hardening

of metal when

it is subjected

to plastic

force per unit 2.103 Stress - The internal a body by external applied force or forces. 2.104 Stress Cracking -Cracking treating or rapid cooling. 2.105 Stress Relieving stresses. Process of which part

area of the cross-section by retained primarily residual

of the body from of cold

stress

forming,

is applied

for the purpose

reducing over

residual

2.1Q6 Stretch Forming - Forming of sheet, bars and rolled or extruded of the required shape while the workpiece is held in tension.

sections

a form block a very tensile

process applied to sheet metal for producing 2.107 Stretch Levelling - A stretching flat surface with smooth finish. The ends of sheet are gripped between jaws, and uniform stresses are set up in the metal to produce slight plastic flow. 2.108 Stripping Process of removing workpiece T from punch to die.

in which the metal is elongated in compressjon 2.109 Tapering - A swaging or reducing operation for producing conical surfaces on tubular parts. in laying out 2.110 Template - A flat pattern or guide usually paper or sheet metal to be followed and fabricating a part of similar shape, contour or other characteristics. cutting or shearing operation on previously formed, drawn or 2.111 Trimming - A secondary forged parts in which the surplus metal or irregularoutline or edge is sheared off to form designed shape and size. 5

IS : 6652 ( Part 3) - 1986 2.112 Trimming Allowance Excess material beyond or outside necessary on account of variations or irregularities in material and off in a secondary or finishing operation. U 2.113 Ultimate Strength - The ultimate strength material can be subjected before or at rupture. of a material is the maximum stress to which the of a finished part which is This is trimmed processing.

W
2.114 Waviness A surface defect in a drawn part which looks like a waveon water. this form

2.115 Wiper Forming block is rotated relative

Method of curving to wiper block.

sections

and tubing

over a form block in which

2.116 Wiring - Formation of a bead along the edge of a sheet or around with a rod or wire inserted within the curl for stiffening the edge. 2.117 Work a) b) Any material, cessing, and parts or pieces that are :being processed travelled

the edge of a shell or tube

or handled by point

to or from of application

proof

Used in mechanics, it is force force in the dihection of force.

multiplied

by distance

2.118 Wrinkling - Formation takes place when unbalanced drawing operation.

of wavy condition or wrinkles on workpiece due to buckling circumferential compressive stresses are set up in the flange Y

which during

which

lowest stress to which a material 2.119 Yield Point -The strain increase without any appreciable or proportionate

or body increase

can be subjected, in stress,

and

at

*

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard was first published in 1973 to cater the needs of metal forming industry for standardization of terms used in connection with metal forming ~machines, processes, relating tools and their components in order to assist the correct interpretation of common terms used in this field. The committee responsible based upon experience gained some terms present revision, included. This standard been revised : forms Part'3 tools, for formulation of this standard decided to revise the same in implementing this standard over so many years. In the have been deleted and some additional terms have been of the glossary and relating to sheet metals. from : Engineers, of Metals, USA; and of terms. The following other two parts have also

Part 1 Metal forming Part 2 Metal forming tn preparing

machines

this standard

assistance

has been derived

Die Design

Handbook.

Ed 2. Society

of Manufacturing Society

Metal Handbook.

Vol 4. Forming.

American 6

USA,

Printed at New lndla Printing Press, Khurja. lndls

