**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



\\%\>*&&^^&s: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13203 : 1991 

^T^ffa" TPT^P ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR VERIFYING ACCURACY OF 
TAN DELTA MEASUREMENTS 



UDC621317374 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1991 Pri ce Group 1 



Power Capacitors Sectional Committee, ET 29 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Power Capacitors Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division 
Council. 

This method is not intended to provide a high precision verification of tan delta measurements. 
It should however be satisfactory for verification of tan delta of low-loss impregnated film capa- 
citors having tan delta values of the order of 0*000 2 and upwards to an accuracy of about 10 
percent or perhaps better if the stability and uniformity of the ambient temperature is closely 
controlled. 

It will be difficult to match exactly the temperatures of the test capacitor and the dummy and if 
these match to within, say, ±10 percent, it would be a reasonable procedure to take an average 
temperature rise tan delta calculation on the basis that the temperature rise is directly proportional 
to the wattage dissipated. This is a good approximation for small temperature. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from IEC report 996 ( 1989 ) — 
'Method for verifying accuracy of tan delta measurement' applicable to capacitors issued by 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. 



IS 13203 : 1»1 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR VERIFYING ACCURACY OF 
TAN DELTA MEASUREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides guidance on method 
for verifying the accuracy of tan delta (dielec- 
tric loss angle or power factor) measurement 
bridge. 

1.2 The accuracy of method verifying the tan 
delta measurement will depend on the similarity 
of the temperature profiles {see 5 ) and the 
accuracy of instruments used to monitor the test 
under voltage up to thermal equilibrium. 

2 TEST CAPACITOR 

In general any capacitor with power and voltage 
ratings in the range for which the accuracy of a 
tan delta measurement is to be evaluated can be 
used as a test capacitor. It is preferable to use 
a capacitor without discharge resistors and 
internal fuses, as the construction of the dummy 
capacitor can be simplified. 

3 DUMMY CAPACITOR 

3.1 A dummy capacitor is constructed using 
special elements of the same size as the elements 



in the standard capacitor. The foils of these 
special elements are shorted together and are 
connected at the ends to form resistive rather 
than capacitive elements. These resistive ele- 
ments are then connected in series. 

3.2 If the test capacitor contains discharge 
resistors and/or internal fuses, separate resistive 
components should be used in the dummy capa- 
citor to represent localized heating. All pieces 
of insulation and the containers should be the 
same as for the test capacitor. 

3.3 The capacitor containers should be painted 
with the same colour in order to avoid possible 
differences in emissivities of these respective 
containers due to dull or shiny areas. 

4. MEASUREMENTS 

4.1 Thermocouples should be placed on each of 
the container surfaces of the dummy capacitor 
to be used for the wattage loss comparison. At 
least three thermocouples should be evenly 
distributed on the large sides, with a total of at 
least 10 as shown in Fig. 1. 






® •© 






u 


® 
® 


u 






® 







Fig. 1 Location of Thermocouples 
1 



IS 13203:1991 



4.2 A thermal stability run should be made in a 
natural circulation ambient. Care should be 
taken lo ensure that the temperature of the 
surface to which test capacitor radiates equal 
those to which the dummy capacitor radiates. 

4.3 The accuracy of the wattage loss comparison 
will be improved by increasing the temperature 
rise, thus the thermal stability run should be 
made at a minimum of 144 percent rated output. 
The current through the dummy capacitor 
should be increased until the average container 
temperature of the dummy capacitor equals that 
of the test capacitor. If the container tempera- 
ture profile of the dummy capacitor differs from 
that of the test capacitor, the currents through 
the separate resistive components (elements, 
discharge resistors and internal fuses) of the 
dummy capacitor should be adjusted until the 



profiles are similar. Either a.c. or d.c. may be 
used to energize the dummy capacitor. 

5 VERIFICATION OF MEASUREMENT 
ACCURACY 

The ten delta of the test unit should be 
measured at the end of the thermal stability run 
while the capacitor is still energized or imme- 
diately after at the same voltage and frequency 
and before the dielectric temperature drops 
significantly. The watts dissipated by the test 
capacitor then be calculated from the tan delta 
measurement and be compared to the watts 
dissipated by the dummy capacitor. The accu- 
racy of this method of verifying the tan delta 
measurement will depend on the similarity of 
the temperature profiles and the accuracy of the 
instruments used to monitor the thermal 
stability run. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. ET 29 ( 3070 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIANjSTANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r 33] 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 2350216 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India 



