**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2076 (1981) : Unsupported Flexible Polyvinyl Chloride 
Sheeting [PCD 12: Plastics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 2076 -1981 
(Reaffirmed 2003) 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 

UNSUPPORTED FLEXIBLE POLYVINYL 

CHILORIDE SHEETING 



( First Revision ) 

Second Reprint AUGUST 2006 
( Including Amendment No 1 ) 



UDC 678.743.22—415 



© Copyright 1981 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BtiAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr7 October 1981 



IS : 2076 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

UNSUPPORTED FLEXIBLE POLYVINYL 

CHILORIDE SHEETING 



( First Revision ) 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCDC 12 

Chairman Representing 

Dr K. J. Balakrishna Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Members 

Shri K. K. Ganouli ( Alternate to 
DrK.J. Balakrishna) 
Dr P. G. Antony Indian Plastics Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. L. Birla ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Balasunder Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Tools, 

Madras 

Shri M. S. Francis ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. K. Bansrjeb Polyolefins Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr I. S. Bharadwaj Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri B. D. Chatter jee ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. J. Bhatt State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri D. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. T. Bhojwani Bright Brothers Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. H. Khan ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. G. Chuganee All India Plastics Manufacturers* Asiociation, 

Bombay 

Shri K. G. Hinoorani ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. K. Datta National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Ahluwali a ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Dhamija .Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri M. K. Unnikrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Dion Fernandes The Plastics & Linoleum Export Promotion 

Council, Bombay 

Shri K. Raiiani ( Alternate) 
Shri Chandrakant B. Garware Garware Synthetics Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri H. S. Suri ( Alternate ) 

(Continued on page 2 ) 



O Copyright 1981 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



ISt 2076 -1981 

( Continued fr$m page 1 ) 

Members kiprtstntUg 

Shri S. K. Jain Hoechst Dyci & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. A. T. Varohesb ( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr S. Kriihnamurtky Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri B. Naorsh Bhatt ( AlUtnaU ) 
Shri P. R. Malhan Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industrie!, 

New Delhi 

Shri S. R. Sinoh ( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr S. P. Manix Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Shri N. Krishanappa ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri R. C. Misra Bharat Heavy Electrical! Ltd, Bho'pal 

Shri A. K. Basu ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri S. Mitra Calico Chemicals ( Plastics and Fibres Division ), 

Bombay 

Dr B. R. C. Anand ( AlUrnaU) 
Shri M.S. Raiiamurthi Polychem Limited, Bombay 

Shri C. U. Khandhrria ( AUitnaU ) 
Shri S. Ramaswamy Chemicals and Plastic India Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. S. Gattahi ( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri O. P. Ratra ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri D. A. Rees The Metal Box Co of India Ltd, Calcutta; and 

Kosmek Plastics Manufacturing Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. R. Naraswhan The Metal Box Co of India Ltd, Calcutta 

( AlUrnaU ) 

Shri I. D. Amore ( AlUrnaU) Kosmek Plastics Manufacturing Ltd, Bombay 
Dr R. B. Roychouohury Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. H. Chickarmamb ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri R. Santhanam The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Shri D.Jain {AlUrnaU) 
Shri K. C. Seal National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Boss ( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr A. K. Sen Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri O. P. Gupta ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri P. P. Sharma Directorate General of Technical Development. 

New Delhi 

Shri N. K. Aooarwal ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri S. Subbiah Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 

Shri N. G. S. Iyer ( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr J. VAin Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Pune 

Dr S. P. Bhide ( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr S. P. Vohra Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri Y. V. Ckittal ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shri M. S. Saxbna, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Mtmbtr ) 



Director ( P & G ) 



SecrtUuy 

Shri S. C Kalra 

Deputy Director ( P * C ), ISI 



{CantwmdanpagtZX) 



IS : 2076 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

UNSUPPORTED FLEXIBLE POLYVINYL 

CHILORIDE SHEETING 



( First Revision ) 



0* FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 12 January 1981, after the draft finalized by the 
Plastics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Products Division Council. 

0.2 Unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting is manufactured from 
polymer of vinyl chloride or copolymer of which the major constituent is 
vinyl chloride. Such material should be suitably compounded with 
plasticizers, stabilizers and then converted into sheeting. 

0.3 In this revision the test for extensibility after heat ageing has been 
dropped since it was found to be unrealistic. 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following standards: 

ASTNfrD 1593-61 Standard specification for non-rigid vinyl chloride 
plastic sheeting. American Society for Testing and Materials. 

BS 1763 : 1967 Thin PVC sheeting (flexible, unsupported) metric 
units, British Standards Institution. 

BS 2739 : 19S6 Thick PVC sheeting (flexible, unsupported) metric 
units. British Standards Institution. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance witn 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( wnud ). 

3 



IS : 2076 - 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements, methods of sampling and test 
for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting. 

1 J This standard covers unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting, 
namely, for general purpose ( printed and unprinted ), laminated and 
unlaminated, plain and embossed. 

2. TYPES 

2.1 The material shall be of two types: 

Type 1 — Thin unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting, 
nominal thickness usually in the range of 07 to 0*25 mm; 
and 

Type 2 — Thick unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting, 
nominal thickness 0*26 to 100 mm. 

3. TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in IS : 2828-1964* 
shall apply. 

4. REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Appearance — The material of Types 1 and 2 when placed and carefully 
examined on flat illuminated surface, suitable for showing up defects shall 
be free from bubbles or blisters, creases of permanent nature, streaks, pin 
holes, particles of foreign matter, undispersed raw material and visual 
defects. Edges shall be smooth and free from cuts. Embossed sheeting 
shall have a design uniformly applied. Printed sheeting shall have the 
print-design uniformly applied. In addition the print shall be free from 
smudges, blotches and similar defects. The back of the sheeting shall be 
free from transferred print. 

4.1.1 The extent of the above defects permissible shall be as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 

4.2 Average Gravimetric Thickness and Difference from Nominal Thickness — 

The average gravimetric thickness of the material of Types 1 and 2 shall be 
determined in accordance with the method described in Appendix A. When 
measured according to the method described in A-l, the average gravimetric 
thickness shall not differ from the nominal thickness by more than 10 per- 
cent for unembossed and 12*5 percent for embossed material. When 

♦ Glossary of terms used in plastics industry. 



IS : 2076 - 1981 

measured according to the method described in A-2, the average gravimetric 
thickness shall not differ from the nominal thickness by more than 5 percent 
for unembossed and 7*5 percent for embossed material. 

4.3 Tensile Strength and Elongation at Break — When measured in accord- 
ance with the method described in Appendix B, the longitudinal and the 
transverse strength of material shall be not less than 140 kg/cm 1 for Type 1 
and 120 kg/cm a for Type 2. The longitudinal and transverse elongation at 
break shall be not less than 200 percent for Type 1 and ISO percent for 
Type 2. 

4.3.1 In case of deep embossing and stiff-feel material, the minimum 
elongation at break shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

4.4 Tear Strength — The tear strength of material of Types 1 and 2 shall be 
determined in accordance with the method described in Appendix C. When 
measured in accordance with the method described in C-l, the tear strength 
in the longitudinal and transverse directions for the material of Types 1 and 
2 shall be not less than 40 kg/cm thickness in each direction. In case of 
deep embossing, the minimum requirement of tear strength shall be 25 kg/cm. 
In case of tear strength outside the range of Elmondorf tear strength, 
method described in C-2 may be used. 

4.5 Colour Bleeding — There shall be no staining or marking of the control 
sample or the filter paper when the material of Types 1 and 2 is tested in 
accordance with the method described in Appendix D. 

4.6 Colour Fastness to Light — For determination of colour fastness to 
light of the material, either of the following tests may be used. 

4.6.1 Accelerated Fading Test — Appendix E-l. 

4.6.1 Colour Fastness to Daylight — Appendix E-2. 

Note — The material of Types 1 and 2, when tested as prescribed in E*l and E-2, 
shall be considered satisfactory when colour fastness of any test piece shall be rated 
not less than No* 5 of the Light Standard Patterns of plain dyed woollen fabrics as 
prescribed in IS: 686-1957*. Effect on printing shall be observed in case of printed 
material. 

4.6 J There are certain shades of which light fastness rating No. 5 
cannot be attained. In case where such shades are required, the light 
fastness rating shall be subject to agreement between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

4.7 Adhesion of Plies in Laminated Sheets— When tested as described in 
Appendix F, (he material of Types 1 and 2 shall show no separation of plies. 

'Methods for determination of colour fastness of textile materials to daylight* 



IS: 2076 -1981 

4.8 Dimensional Stability — When tested in accordance with the method 
described in Appendix G, the change in dimensions shall not exceed 
2 percent. 

4.9 Adhesion of Print for Printed Sheets — When examined as described in 
Appendix H, the number of cycles to remove either the printed pattern or 
any area of printed material shall be greater than five (10 strokes of abrading 
member). 

4.9.1 In case of metallic and white printing inks, adhesion of print shall 
be subject to agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 

4.10 Blocking Test — When tested in accordance with the method described 
in Appendix J, the material shall be readily separable into individual layers 
and shall not show blocking. 

4.11 Optional Requirements 

4.11.1 Retention of Embossed Surface for Embossed Sheets — The em- 
bossed surface shall not show appreciable loss of depth of design when 
tested as agreed to between the purchaser and supplier. 

4.11.2 Determination of Pin Holes — When tested in accordance with the 
method described in Appendix K, the tolerable number of pin holes per 
sq metre shall be subject to agreement between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

4.11.3 Resistance to Cold— The material shall withstand a bending test 
around 6 mm diameter steel mandrel without cracking after exposure of one 
hour at 0°C or lower temperature as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier. 

5. PACKING AND MARKING 

5.1 Packing — A roll of unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting 
complying with this standard may contain cuts. The cuts shall be signalled. 
The number of cuts and the minimum length of each piece shall be as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

5.1.1 Any consignment shall not have more than 25 percent material 
containing cuts. The material shall be securely packed so as to ensure 
safe transportation. 

5 J Marking 

5.2.1 Sheeting supplied in accordance with this Indian Standard shall 
bear a label giving the following information; 

a) Name and type of the material; 



IS : 2076 - 1981 

b) Name and/or trade mark of manufacturer; 

c) Nominal thickness, width, length and/or net mass, colour, 
printing , lamination and embossing details of sheeting; and 

d) Batch number and date of manufacture. 

5.2.2 It is recommended that further information as to the nature, 
properties and use of flexible PVC sheeting shall be made available to 
users. A suitable informative labelling is indicated in Appendix L. 

5.3 BIS Certification Marking 

The product may also be marked with Standard Mark. 

5.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. The details of conditions under which the licence for the use o( 
Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



6. STORAGE 

6.1 The roll of unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting complying 
with this standard shall be stored vertically on dry, clean, firm level ground 
and at recommended temperatures in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. The rolls shall be protected from dust, moisture, direct 
sunlight, corrosive and solvent fumes. 

7. SAMPLING 

7.1 For testing, a full width representative sample of sheeting, sufficient for 
carrying out tests shall be taken, marking the longitudinal direction on the 
sample. The sample shall be preserved, rolled on a core of adequate 
diameter, away from any other plastics material that may cause conta- 
mination. 

13 In any consignment all the rolls of unsupported flexible polyvinyl 
chloride sheeting of the same type, colour and finish shall be grouped 
together and each group shall constitute a lot (roll is normally about SO 
metre length of the sheeting). 

73 The conformity of the lot to the requirements of this specification shall 
be ascertained for each lot separately. The number of rolls to be selected 
at random for this purpose shall be in accordance with Table 1. 



IS 


: 2076-1981 














TABLE 1 


SCALE OF SAMPLING 










(C/<iiiw7.3) 








Lot Size 




No. 


OF ROLL! TO Bl 


Selected 




JV 






n 






Up to 100 
101 to 500 
501 and above 






1 

2 
3 





7.4 The rolls shall be selected at random and to ensure randomness of 
selection, the following procedure is recommended for use: 

Arrange all the rolls in the lot in a systematic manner and starting 

from any one, count them as 1, 2, , etc, up to r and so on, 

when r is the integral part of N/n (N being the lot size and n the 
number of rolls to be selected). Every rth roll thus counted shall be 
withdrawn till the requisite number of rolls is obtained. 

7.5 The lot shall be declared as conforming to specification for various 
characteristics referred in this specification if for each of the characteristics 
the test results on all the individual specimens are found to be within 
limits of the specification. 

7.6 If the specimens, taken from the sample, fail in one or more tests, 
each such test shall be repeated twice. For this purpose, two more samples 
shall be taken from the roll, and the specimens cut from each of them so 
that duplicate tests may be conducted in respect of each failure. If all the 
specimens pass the duplicate tests, the lot shall be declared conforming to 
the specification, otherwise not. 



APPENDIX A 

(Clause 4.2) 

DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE GRAVIMETRIC THICKNESS 
AND ITS DIFFERENCE FROM NOMINAL THICKNESS 

A-0. GENERAL 

A-0.1 The average gravimetric thickness and its difference from nominal 
thickness shall be determined by either of the two methods, method A and 
method B, described in A-l, and A-2 respectively, as agreed to between Ac 
purchaser and the supplier. 

8 



IS: 2076-1981 
A-l. METHOD A 

A-l.l Cut three samples, each about 1 000 to 2 500 mm* in area and weigh 
them in air. Take a non-absorbent thread or wire, and suspend the 
sample by the thread or wire, and weigh with the sample immersed under 
water maintained at 27 ± 2°C, then weigh only the thread or wire in water 
(the depth of immersion in water in the two weighings being exactly the 
same). Care shall be taken to see that no air bubbles adhere to the 
thread or wire or film while weighing under water. 

Note — All weighings shall be accurate to 1 percent of the mass. 

A-l.l. 1 Calculate the specific gravity (5) as below: 
Specific gravity ( S ) — 



A-(C-B) 

where 

A = mass in g of the test piece in air, 

C — mass in g of the test piece and the thread or wire in 
water, and 

B = mass in g of the thread or wire in water. 

The average of the three results expressed to the nearest 0*01 shall be taken 
as the specific gravity. 

A-1.2 Cut three test pieces, each having an area of 2 500 mm 2 and all of 
exactly the same length and width from positions approximately equally 
spaced across the width of the sample at two places about 1 m apart in 
longitudinal direction. Weigh the test pieces and calculate the average 
mass (A/). 

A-1.3 Calculation 

A-l.3.1 Calculate the average gravimetric thickness to the nearest 
0002 5 mm as below: 

Average gravimetric thickness ( mm ) «■ = — ? B 

o X L X Jj 

where 

M — average mass in g of the test piece, 
S « specific gravity as determined in A-l.1.1, 
L =» length in cm of the test piece, and 
B « width in cm of the test piece. . 

A-l.3.2 From the value of the average gravimetric thickness obtained 
in A-l.3.1, calculate the percent difference from the nominal thickness of 
the material. % 



IS: 2076 -1981 
A-2. METHOD B 

A-2.1 Procedure 

A-2.1.1 Determine the specific gravity of the material as prescribed 
in A-l.l and A-l.1.1. 

A-2.1.2 Cut a piece of the material about 10 m long. Measure accurately 
the length and the average width of the roll to 100 mm. Weigh the roll 
to 025 kg accurately. 

A-2.2 Calculation 

A-2. 2.1 Calculate the average gravimetric thickness to the nearest 
0002 5 mm as below: 

A . 4 . . , , v 100 x M 

Average gravimetric thickness ( mm ) = «= — z h 

o X L> X a 

where 

M = mass in g of the roll, 

S wm specific gravity of the material as determined in A-l.1.1, 
L =» length in m of the roll, and 
B = average width in mm of the roll. 

A-2.2.2 From the value of average gravimetric thickness obtained 
in A-2.2. 1, calculate the percent difference from the nominal thickness of 
the material. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 4.3 ) 

DETERMINATION OF TENSILE STRENGTH AND 
ELONGATION AT BREAK 

B-l. APPARATUS 

B-l.l Tensile Testing Machine — The tensile testing machine employed shall 
maintain a rate of movement of one grip which should be as constant as 
possible, the mean value of the speed of separation as 2S0 ± 10 percent mm 
per minute. The load scale shall be accurate to within 1 percent or 
01 kg whichever is greater. The load range shall be such that the breaking 
load of the test pieces falls between 15 percent to 85 percent of the maximum 
on the scale. 

Norm — It It recommended that the load scale be calibrated at least once every 
twelve months, using dead weights added successively. 

10 



£5:2076-1981 

ft-i PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 

B-S.1 Five test pieces shall be cut from the sample in the longitudinal 
direction and a further five in the transverse direction by punching the 
appropriate die using a single stroke of a press. The sample shall be 
supported on a slightly yielding material like leather, rubber or cardboard 
having a smooth surface, on a flat rigid base. The die used shall be in 
accordance with Fig. 1 A except when a wider test piece is needed to comply 
with load limitations given in B-l.l, the die shall be in accordance with 
Fig. IB. Reference lines marked on the test pieces as shown in the figures 
either with a marker or a glass pencil should be very fine. The average 
gravimetric thickness of the material as determined in Appendix A shall be 
taken as the thickness of the test piece. 

-REFERENCE 
LINES- 




1A 



380j) 




«F£RENC€ 
LINES 



A 



2B'40*01 # 
(H»0*005") 



^ 



50(2) — 
- 152(6) 



IB 

( Dimemions outside the parentheses are in millimetres) 

Fig. 1 Dies for Tbnsilb Strength Test Piece 

11 



IS: 2076 -1981 

R-3. PROCEDURE 

R-3.1 The test pieces shall be conditioned for 3 hours at a temperature of 
27 ± 2°C and clamped in the machine at their widened ends. They shall 
be extended at the rate of 250 ± 10 percent mm per minute and the load 
and elongation at the moment of break recorded. Test pieces breaking 
outside the reference lines shall be disregarded and the test repeated. 

B-4. CALCULATION AND REPORT 

B-4.1 Tensile Strength— The tensile strength shall be calculated in kg/cm* 
from the original area of cross section, calculated from the average gravi- 
metric thickness as determined in Appendix A and the width before 
elongation and the load required to break the test piece. The mean of five 
results shall be expressed for the longitudinal and transverse samples. 

B-4.2 Elongation at Break — Elongation at break shall be expressed as 
percentage of the original length between the reference lines. The mean 
of five results shall be expressed for the longitudinal and transverse 
samples. 

Note — If any specimen breaks within 10 mm of a line of contact of either of the 
jaws, record the result, but if it is found to have broken at a load less than 75 percent 
of the average of the remainder of the specimens, do not use it in calculating tensile 
strength, but test another specimen. 



APPENDIX C 

( Clause 4.4 ) 
DETERMINATION OF TEAR STRENGTH 

C-l. DETERMINATION OF TEAR STRENGTH ( Within the Range of 
Elmondorf Tear Strength Machine ) 

C-l.l Apparatus 

C-l.1.1 The test shall be carried out on an Elmondorf type tear testing 
machine. It shall be provided with a sharp blade capable of producing a 
well-defined slit in the specimen as described in C-l. 4.3. 

C-1.2 Preparation of Test Pieces 

C-l.2.1 The requisite number of test pieces shall be cut from the sample 
in each direction. Each test piece shall be 75 mm in length and 63 mm in 
width. For longitudinal tear strength determination, the test piece shall 

12 



IS: 2076-1981 

be cut with their width in the longitudinal direction of the sample and 
similarly for transverse tear strength determination, the test pieces shall be 
cut with their width in the transverse direction of the sample. The edges 
of the test pieces shall be free from any nicks and burrs. 

C-1.3 Conditioning 

C-l.3.1 All the test pieces shall be conditioned at 27 ± 2°C for not less 
than one hour before testing. 

C-1.4 Procedure 

C-l.4.1 Tests shall be carried out at 27 ± 2°C. 

C-l.4.2 Before making tests the zero setting and level of the machine 
shall be checked and if necessary adjusted in accordance with the machine 
manufacturers instructions. The test shall be carried out so that the tearing 
load falls between 20 percent and 80 percent of the maximum on the scale. 
To ensure this, a check test specimen from each direction of the sample 
shall be torn, the result being ignored for report purposes. If the tearing 
load of the single test piece falls outside the specified range of the scale* 
two or more test pieces superimposed but not bonded shall be tested at the 
same time. In that case, sufficient test pieces shall be cut from the sample 
to enable five groups of test pieces to be tested for each direction. 

C-l.4.3 The test piece made up of one or more individual test pieces 
shall be clamped between the jaws of the testing machine with its ( their ) 
upper edge(s) in the same plane as the top of the jaws. A sharp well-defined 
slit 20 mm in length shall then be made along the line bisecting the test 
piece along its longer side at right angles to the jaws, by means of the 
cutting blade fixed on the machine. The test piece shall then be subjected 
to the tear test by releasing the pendulum so that it acts on the test piece. 
The reading on the scale and the number of pieces used in a single test 
shall be recorded. 

C-1.5 Calculation and Report 

C-l.5.1 Calculation — Tear strength shall be calculated in terms of force 
in kilogram per centimetre thickness of the test piece, as given below: 

Tear strength ( kg/cm ) « «— TC 

where 

A m» force in kg, 

B m* number of test pieces comprising the test specimen, and 
C ■■ average gravimetric thickness of the sample as obtained 
in Appendix A. 

13 



18:2076*1981 

C-l.5.2 Report — The mean of the five results shall be reported for the 
longitudinal and transverse samples. 

C-2. DETERMINATION OF TEAR STRENGTH ( Outside Elmondorf 
Machine Range ) 

C-2.1 Apparatus 

C-2.1.1 Tensile Testing Machine — An autographic tensile testing machine 
shall be used with constant rate of jaw separation of 300 ± 30 mm per min. 
The load range of the testing machine shall be chosen to suit the particular 
sheet to be tested so that the tearing load measured falls between IS percent 
and 85 percent of the maximum on the scale. The load scale shall be 
accurate to within 1 percent or 01 kg whichever is greater. 

C-2.2 Preparation of Test Pieces — Three rectangular test pieces 200 x 
50 mm shall be cut from the sample, one from the centre and one from 
each of the longitudinal edges but not within 50 mm from the edge of the 
sample. The 200 mm length shall be parallel to the longitudinal direction 
of the sheeting. 

A single cut 75 mm long shall be made in the longitudinal axis of 
each test piece to form two 25 mm wide legs. 

C-2.3 Procedure — The test piece shall be conditioned for not less than 
1 hour at 27 -t 2°C before testing. The jaws of the tensile testing machine 
shall be set 75 mm apart, and if it is equipped with a rack and paws to 
arrest the downward swing of the pendulum, the paws shall be made inope- 
rative by securing them clear of the rack. An autographic chart shall be 
wrapped tightly around the recorder drum and slipped in position and the 
agreement between the dial and the chart readings of load shall be 
checked. 

The first test piece shall then be clamped squarely with one leg in the 
head-stock grip and the other in the traversing grip so that both leg lengths 
between the jaws are approximately equal, lite recorder pen shall then be 
placed in contact with the chart. The traversing grip shall be set in motion 
and a record of the load fluctuations as the tear proceeds for 75 mm shall 
be obtained. The other two test pieces shall be tested in the same way. 

The test shall be carried out at 27 ± 2°C. 

C-2.4 Calculation and Expression of Report — The trace obtained consists 
of a slow rise followed by an undulating plateau, until the sample is broken. 
The tear strength for the test piece shall be taken as the value of the hori- 
zontal median drawn through the plateau region. Each median value shall 

14 



IS: 2076- 1981 

be divided by the gravimetric thickness of the test piece to give tear strength 
in kilogram per centimetre thickness. The mean of the results obtained 
for the three test pieces shall be quoted in kg/cm as the longitudinal tear 
strength of the sample. If the tear is more than 5 mm away from the 
central line, the specimen shall be considered not tearable in that direction 
and the test shall be repeated with three test pieces cut in the transverse 
direction. 



APPENDIX D 

( Clause 4.5 ) 
TEST FOR COLOUR BLEEDING 

D-l. TEST PIECE 

D-l.l The test piece shall be 50 mm square. In cases where more than one 
colour/printing ink is present, as many test specimens as necessary to ensure 
that all colours/printing inks are tested shall be used. The test specimens 
shall be so placed during the test that all colours/printing inks are in good 
contact with clear control sample, when sandwiched. 

D-2. PROCEDURE 

D-2.1 Place the test piece on top of a 75 mm square control sample which 
shall be a clear transparent polyvinyl chloride sheeting of the following 
formulation: 

Polyvinyl chloride 100 parts by mass 

Di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate 666 „ „ „ 

Lead stearate 1*5 „ „ „ 

Cadmium stearate 15 „ „ „ 

The test piece shall be covered with a 75 mm filter paper ( Whatman 
No. 1 or equivalent ). The assembly thus obtained shall be sandwiched 
between two pieces of plate glass 75 mm square and 5 mm thick. A weight 
of approximately 50 g shall be placed on the top to ensure good contact 
and the combination shall be placed in an oven and heated for 72 hours 
at 50 ± 2°C. The control sample and filter paper shall then be removed 
and examined for stains. The clear control sample shall be examined, first 
over a white and then over a black background; white filter paper and 
photo-black cover paptr are suitable for this purpose. 

15 



18:2076-1981 

APPENDIX E 

(Clause 4.6) 

TEST FOR COLOUR FASTNESS TO LIGHT 

E-l. ACCELERATED FADING TEST 

E-l.l Apparatus 

E-l.1.1 Fadeometer — It shall consist of the following. 

E-l.l. 1.1 Source of light — A carbon arc composed of carbon elec- 
trodes and enclosed in a heat-resisting glass globe to produce a complete 
spectrum from 279 to 1 200 m/i. These should operate on a direct current 
of approximately 11 to 13A or on alternating current of 50 to 60 c/s and 
approximately 13 to 17A with 110 to 140 V across the arc. 

E-l. 1.1.2 The test specimens are vertically hung in test racks on the 
inner wall of a cylinder ( rotating or fixed type ), concentric with the arc. 
The distance of the test specimen shall be approximately 250 mm from the 
arc. No part of the specimen shall be more than 100 mm above or below 
the horizontal plane passing through the arc when it is fitted with new 
electrodes. 

E-l. 1.1.3 The air inside the chamber is humidified by placing water in a 
trough or water soaked cotton wicks in the chamber. A fan or blower unit 
keeps a flow of fresh air over the specimens and through the chamber. 

E-l.1.1.4 A black panel thermometer placed in a rack in the chamber 
shall not record a temperature more than 74°C. 

E-1.2 Procedure 

E-l.2.1 Place the specimen of suitable dimensions, cut at random from 
any portion, the sample along with sample No. 5 of the eight standard 
patterns of plain dyed woollen fabrics as prescribed in IS : 686-1957* at a 
distance of 250 mm from the carbon arc lamp of fadeometer. Protect half 
portion of test specimen and the standard woollen cloth No. 5 of the eight 
standard patterns during the test. Expose face side of the samples to the 
radiation. Maintain the temperature of the circulating air at about 54 e C 
during the test. The dyed wool standard No. 5 shall be examined often 
enough at suitable intervals till it shows a fading equivalent to grade 4 on 
geometric grey scale. After the exposure, the specimen shall be cooled for 
about an hour, and cleaned. The exposed portion shall be examined in a 
good light against a white background for fading of colour, as compared 
with the unexposed portion. 

•Method for determination of colour fastness of textile materials to daylight. 

16 



15:2076-1981 

E-l. TEST FOR COLOUR FASTNESS TO DAYLIGHT 

E-J.l Form of Test Specimen — The specimen may conveniently be a piece 
of sheet of approximate dimensions 130 mm in length and 50 mm in width. 

E-2 2 Number of Test Specimens — One specimen shall be used. More may 
be required for materials that are not of a uniform colour. 

E-2.3 Apparatus — The exposure case shall consist essentially of an open- 
bottomed box of approximate dimensions 900 mm in length, 600 mm in 
width and 50 mm in depth, covered with a framed lid of glass and contain- 
ing within it a removable rectangular rack (for carrying the test specimens 
and wool standards) resting upon a support made of wire mesh. 

The details of each of these components are as follows: 

a) Lid— The lid of the exposure case shall consist of a framed sheet 
of window glass 3 mm thick without cross supports, having a free 
area at least 880 mm long and 550 mm wide. When in position its 
lower surface shall be 25 mm from the upper surface of the rack; 
it shall be supported in the centre by the 25 mm distance piece 
described below. 

The lid shall fit snugly and symmetrically on to the case. 

b) Rack — The removable rectangular rack shall consist of five 
wooden battens attached to cross-members as shown in Fig. 2. The 
upper and lower batten shall be 64 mm and 38 mm wide respecti- 
vely and the three middle battens shall each be 90 mm wide. The 
battens shall be 12*5 mm thick, 50 mm apart and shall be arranged 
so that there is an air space 860 mm long and 50 mm wide between 
them. A small wooden piece 25 mm long shall be suitably placed 
on the upper face of the middle batten. 

A series of 50 mm wide wooden flaps shall be so hinged to 
each batten (except the 38 mm batten) that the lower 50 mm strip 
of each batten maybe covered. The hinges shall be so arranged 
that (a) when each flap is held parallel to the batten there shall be 
a space of 1*6 mm between flap and batten; and (b) when each 
flap is allowed to fall freely, its lower edge will rest upon the 
batten. 

The rack shall fit snugly into the exposure case. When in 
position the lower surface of the rack shall rest immediately on the 
upper surface of the wire mesh of the screen. 

c) Wire screen — The wire screen shall be carried by a removable 
rectangular frame incorporating two narrow cross supports, dividing 
the length of the frame into three equal sections. The wire screen, 
which shall be of 80 x 30 (180 micron) woven wire cloth complying 

17 



IS .3076 -1981 



with IS : 2405-1963* shall be fixed to the upper side of the frame 
so that an area 860 mm long and 560 mm wide of the screen is free 
from obstruction ( except for the cross supports ). The frame 
shall fit snugly into the exposure case. 



FRAME LEAVING A FREE 
AREA .OF 880x550 mm 



3 mm WINDOW GLASS 



12.8mm THICK 
BATTENS 



19mm OIA VENTILATING HOLES 
ON THIS SIDE OF CASE WITH 
CENTRES APPROX 76mm 
APART ANO 12.7mm ABOVE 
UPPER SURFACE OF 
BATTENS- 



DISTANCE PIECI 
25mm HIGH 



RACK (SHOWN 
WITHOUT FLAPS) 




180 MICRON 
MESH SCREEN 
(860x560) 



AU dimensions in millimetres. 

Bo. 2 Apparatus for Daylight Exposurb 



•Specification for wire cloth and perforated plates for industrial use. 

18 



IS: 2076 -1981 



The case shall be situated in the open and facing south. It shall be so 
supported on legs that its lower front edge is 760 mm from the ground. The 
lid, rack and screen shall all be inclined at 45° to the horizontal. The ex- 
posure case shall be so placed that no obstruction in an easterly, southerly 
or westerly direction shall subtend a vertical angle greater than 20° nor 
shall any in a northerly direction subtend a vertical angle greater than 70°. 

E-2.4 Procedure — Test specimens shall be fixed at the top and bottom on 
the rack so that the upper 50 mm are covered by the flap, the next 50 mm 
are freely exposed and the remaining 25 mm rests on the next lower batten. 
Each specimen shall be placed neither less than 6*4 mm from any other 
specimen nor within 6-4 mm of the end of the spaces between the battens, 
to permit free air circulation round the test specimen. 

The dyed wool standards shall be exposed on the same rack. They 
shall be fixed 6*4 mm apart in a support ( sec Fig. 3 ) so that 38 mm of each 
standard is covered by the flap, the next 25 mm is freely exposed and the 
remaining 12*7 mm rests on the lower edge of the support. 



HINGE 



TOP BATTEN 
65 v 860 




TEST SPECIMEN 
130 x 15 TO 50 



SECTION OF FLAP 
AND TEST SPECIMEN 
IN POSITION 




BATTEN 



SUPPORT FOR 

STANOARO 

PATTERNS 



All dimension! in millimetres. 

Fio. 3 Details Regarding Mounting of Specimens and 
Wool Standards 

The test specimen and the dyed wool standards so mounted shall be 
exposed to daylight for a sufficient time to cause Standard No. 4 of 
IS : 686-1957* to change colour so that the exposed portion of that standard 

•Methods for determination of colour fastness of textile materials to daylight. 

19 



IS: 2076- 1981 

shall have a contrast with the unexposed portion equal to Grade 4 on the 
Geometric Grey Scale. 

The dyed wool standard shall be examined often enough to ensure that 
the specified degree of colour change of Standard No. 4 is observed. The 
glass lid shall be kept clean during the test. 

After the prescribed exposure the specimen shall be removed from the 
rack, cleaned with soap complying with IS : 285-1974* and cold water, dried 
and examined indoors in good north light against a white background in 
comparison with the dyed wool standards. 

The colour fastness to daylight of the material under test shall be the 
number of the dyed wool standard that has changed colour to the same 
extent as the test specimen. 

E-2,5 Report — The report shall state: 

1. The colour fastness to daylight of the material 

2. The form and dimensions of the test specimen. 



APPENDIX F 

( Clause 4.7 ) 
TEST FOR ADHESION OF PLIES IN LAMINATED SHEETS 

F-l. REAGENTS 

F-l.l Ethyl Acetate ( see IS : 229-1972f ) 

F-2. PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 

F-2.1 Three circular test pieces of 12 mm diameter shall be cut from the 
sample with a sharp die, or using a template and a sharp knife or razor, 
one from the centre and one from near each edge. 

F-3. PROCEDURE 

F-3.1 The test pieces shall be completely immersed for 15 ± i minutes in 
ethyl acetate contained in a glass beaker and stirred by stirrer at about 60 
rev/min. The temperature shall be 27 ± 2°C. At the end of the 15 ± 1 
minutes period, the test pieces shall be withdrawn from the solvent and 
immediately examined for separation, either partial or complete, of the 

'Specification for laundry soap ( s$mnd mision )• 
tSpecjfication for ethyl acetate, 

20 



IS: 2076- 1981 

plies. After withdrawal of the test piece from the solvent, nothing further 
shall be done to initiate separation of plies. 

F-3.2 If any separation of any test piece is observed under the above 
conditions, the ply adhesion shall be regarded as unsatisfactory. 

APPENDIX G 

( Clause 4.8 ) 
DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL STABILITY 

G-l. PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 

G-l.l Three rectangular test pieces 250 x 6 mm shall be cut from the 
sample, one from the centre and one from within 75 mm of each of the 
longitudinal edges of the sample. The 250 mm length shall be parallel to 
the longitudinal direction of the sample. When the test pieces are taken 
from a roll, they shall be conditioned at 27 ± 2 C for three hours and then 
test carried out. The lengths of the test pieces shall be measured to the 
nearest 0*5 mm and recorded. Care shall be taken to ensure that the test 
piece remains flat and straight for the measurement of its length. A con- 
venient method of achieving this is to place the test piece in a rectangular 
groove approximately 300 mm long, 7 mm wide and 2 mm deep. The 
groove should be in a block of wood or other suitable material with a flat 
top surface. Length measurements may be made with a transparent rule 
suitably graduated which fits into the groove. 

G-2. PROCEDURE 

G-2.1 After measuring, the test pieces shall be immersed for a period of 
15 ± 1 minutes in a water-bath maintained at a temperature of 50 ± 2?C. 
A cage of metal gauge with feet to raise it above tne base of the vessel 
shall be used to keep the test pieces away from the sides and base of the 
vessel. On removal from the water, the test pieces shall be allowed to cool 
in air at 27 ± 2°C for at least 15 minutes. Care shall be taken to avoid 
stretching in handling the test pieces. The lengths of the test pieces shall 
then be measured to the nearest 0*5 mm and recorded. 

G-3. CALCULATION AND REPORT 

G-3.1 The change in length of each test piece shall be calculated as a 
percentage of the original length as follows: 

n * « , . . . % Initial length — final length ,^ 
Percentage change ( shrinkage ) — Initial length — x °° 

The greatest of the three percentage changes in length shall be repor- 
ted as the change in dimension of the sample at 50 # C. 

21 



13:2076-1981 

APPENDIX H 

(Clause 4.9) 
TEST FOR ADHESION OF PRINT 

H-l. APPARATUS 

H-l.l The apparatus shown in Fig. 4 shall consist of an abrading member 
•A* ( see H-1.2) and a means of clamping the test piece over a plate glass 
surface B in such a manner that the abrading member and the test pieces 
are capable of relative reciprocating motion in a straight line. The ampli- 
tude of reciprocation, that is, the stroke, shall be 100 mm and the apparatus 
shall be mechanically operated so that the rate of reciprocation shall be 
15 ± 2 cycles ( each of two stroke ) per minute. 




Fig. 4 Apparatus for Measuring Adhesion op Print 

H-1.2 Abrading Member — The abrading member 'A* shown in Fig. 5 shall 
consist of a brass peg and shall be suitably and firmly secured to the arm 
of the apparatus so that its centre line is at right angles to the surface of 
the glass plate. The arm of the apparatus shall be not less than 230 mm in 
length measured from the centre point of the abrading member to the 
pivot, and shall be loaded in such a manner that the brass peg exerts a load 
of I kg on the test piece. Means shall be provided for firmly securing a 
strip of the specified bleached fabric (see H-1.3 ) around the end of the 
brass peg, a screw clip having been found suitable for this purpose. Suita- 
ble grips C and D shall be provided to ensure that the test piece can be 
secured firmly across the plate glass surface. 

H-1.3 Bleached Cotton Fabric — The bleached cotton fabric shall cor- 
respond to variety No. 1 of IS : 177-1970*. Strips of the bleached fabric 
approximately SO mm long and 20 mm wide shall be cut with their length 
parallel to the warp direction. 

'Specification for cotton drills ( $*c*nd rtrisfon )• 

22 



IS: 2076 -1981 



LOCATING 
PIN 




-BLEACHED 
COTTON 
FABRIC 




16 (f ) 



( Dimensions outside the parentheses are in millimetres ) 

Fro. 5 Details op Abrading Member 'A* 



H-2. REAGENT 

H-J.1 Soap Solutloo — 0-5 percent ( m/v ) made from soap conforming to 
Grade 2 of IS : 285-1974*. 

H-3. PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 

HU3.1 Not less than three rectangular test pieces 250x50 mm shall be cut 
from the sample with their lengths parallel to the longitudinal direction of 
the sample. The test pieces shall be cut in such a manner that each 
contains a portion of the printed design in such a position that it will 
lie in the path of the abrading member. Where the printed pattern 
consists of a multi-col oured design, sufficient test pieces shall be prepared 
'Specification for laundry soap (ucttiraiiim ). 

23 



tS: 2076 -1981 

to enable three tests to be carried out on each colour combination of 
print. By suitable choice of position of test pieces, it is usually possible 
to have more than one print colour abraded during any particular test. 

H-4. PROCEDURE 

H-4.1 The test pieces shall be washed with soap and water, rinsed, and 
dried. They shall then be conditioned in the room in which the test 
is to be performed for at least 24 hours before testing and the temperature 
throughout this period shall be maintained at 27 ± 2°C. Each test 
piece shall be mounted in turn directly on the plate glass surface. No 
wrinkling of the test piece shall occur during the test, and it is permissible 
to stretch the test piece up to 20 percent in the direction of its length 
to avoid wrinkling. A strip of the bleached fabric shall then be secured 
to the brass peg. The ribbed side of the fabric shall be in contact with 
peg. The peg to which the fabric has been fitted shall be lowered on to 
the test piece. The test piece shall then be subjected to abrasion at the 
specified rate and the number of cycles required to produce visual damage 
to the print such as smudging, or removal of the printed pattern on any 
area of it shall be recorded. 

All the test pieces shall be tested in this way and the number of cycles 
required to remove either the printed pattern or any area of the printed 
material shall be greater than 5 ( 10 strokes ). 



APPENDIX J 

(Clause 4.10) 
BLOCKING TEST 

J-l. PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 

J-1.1 Six rectangular test pieces 125x75 mm shall be cut from the sample 
with minimum handling of test piece surfaces. Equal number of rectangular 
pieces of filter paper ( Whatman No. 1 orits equivalent) of 125 x 75 mm, 
and an equal number of approximately 100 x 75 x 2 mm glass plates 
shall be conditioned for two hours at 27 ± 2°C. 

After conditioning, the test pieces shall be assembled in a pile-like 
sandwich in the following order with 

1. Olass plate 4. Test piece face down 

2. Filter paper 5. Filter paper 
3* Test piece face up 6. Olass plate 

24 



IS: 2076- 1981 

the 75 mm edge of each item superimoosed and the test piece and paper 
consequently extending 25 mm beyond the glass plates at the other edge. 
This arrangement facilitates handling. 

The test shall always be carried back to back as the surface contact 
will be less if back to face contact is made. In the case of material having 
very heavy designs, they should be made smooth by heat and pressure and 
then tested for blocking test. 

J-2. PROCEDURE 

J-2.1 The assembled pile shall be loaded with 5 kg weight to give a 
pressure of 0*1 kg/cm* and placed in an air-circulating oven. The oven 
shall be maintained at 50 ± 2°C for 24 hours. After the period the 
weight shall be removed and the assembled pile taken out and kept at 
27 ± 2°C for at least two hours. ( The layers shall then be removed 
successively by application of a slow and uniform pull. ) 

A mass ( 50 g for unprinted, 100 g for printed ) shall be attached to 
the free end of the lower test specimen of each pair and allowed to rest 
freely on the horizontal plane surface. The free end of the upper 
specimen shall then be raised at a uniform rate of 25 ± 25 mm per 
second. Specimens are completely separated, and note shall be made as 
to whether or not, during this operation, the weight is raised out of 
contact with the plane horizontal surface. 

The surface of the specimens that have been in contact with one 
another shall be examined for visible signs of damage. The material shall 
be readily separable into individual layer and shall not show blocking. 



APPENDIX K 

(Clause 4.11.2) 

METHOD OF DETERMINING PIN HOLES 

K-l. TEST PIECE 

K-1.1 A 1 m length of the full width of the sheeting shall be taken. 

K-a. APPARATUS 

K-2.1 The following apparatus is required: 

A stretching frame which shall be capable of applying a 20 per- 
cent stretch in the longitudinal direction to the test piece across its 
full width and maintaining the sheeting smoothly supported in a 
horizontal plane. * 

25 



IS: 2076 -1981 

KnJ. MATERUL 

K-3.1 A 75 mm paint brush. 

K-3.2 White unglazed paper such as white sulphite paper approximately 
75 mm wider than the test piece. 

K-3 3 A suitable frame as shown in Fig. 6. 



OATUM 
LINES 




OETAILS OF STRETCHING 
DEVICE AT REAR OF 
HANDLE AS INDICATED 
BY ARROW 



Fio. 6 Frame for Dbtbrminino Pin Holes 
26 



18:2076-1981 

K-4. REAGENT 

K-4.1 A dye solution made up in the following proportions: 
025 percent wetting agent, 
(HO percent Rhodamine B, 
99-65 percent water. 

K-5. PROCEDURE 

K-5.1 The test piece shall be fitted in the stretching frame so that it 
rests smoothly and without creases on the surface of a sheet of unglazed 
paper oh which two parallel lines have been drawn at distance apart 
equal to 

L20 metres 

Width of test piece 

that is, to enclose an area of one square metre under 20 percent stretch. 
The sheeting shall then be subjected to a 20 percent linear stretch in the 
longitudinal direction. 

Approximately 50 ml of dye solution shall then be poured on the 
stretched sheeting and spread over the marked area by a continuous 
brushing action with strokes both parallel and perpendicular to the 
longitudinal direction for a period of 2 minutes. The sheeting shall then 
be carefully removed from the clamps and discarded. The number of 
pin holes in the sheeting appearing as coloured blotches on the recording 
paper shall be counted and reported as the number of pin holes per 
square metre. 



APPENDIX L 

(Clause 5.2 2) 

DETAILS OF INFORMATIVE LABELLING 

A label giving certain particulars about PVC sheeting shall be 
attached to each roll ( see 5*2.1 ). 

In addition, it is recommended that any other useful information 
should be made available by the manufacturers to users of PVC sheeting 
( see 5*2.2 ). 

Both of these objectives may be achieved by means of (1) a suitably 
worded label attachedto each roll of PVC sheeting containing information 
of interest to both fabricators and retailers of PVC sheeting, and (2) a 

27 



IS: 2076- 1981 

suitably worded leaflet to be made available to retailers for the information 
of home users of PVC sheeting. Examples of label and leaflet are 
given below: 

An example of an informative label — The following is recommended 
as suitable for use in informative labels to be attached to rolls of PVC 
sheeting. 

The information is laid out for a two-sided label. Where a stick- 
on label is used the same information may be provided on one face as 
desired. 

Front Face 



PVC SHEETING 

Name and/or trade mark of manufacturer 

Number of this Indian Standard and the type number of the sheeting 

Nominal thickness, width, length and/or net mass, colour, printing, 
lamination and embossing details of sheeting 

Date of manufacture 

TO FABRICATORS OF PVC SHEETING 

1. It is recommended that articles from PVC sheeting are made 
in accordance with the relevant Indian Standard specifications. 

2. It is recommended that an informative label or leaflet, setting 
out the points of interest to the user, is attached to aU articles 
made with PVC sheeting. 

Items suitable for one's produce can be selected from the TEN 
POINTS listed on page 29. 

TO RETAILERS OF PVC SHEETING 

Copies of a free leaflet for giving to each purchaser of PVC 

sheeting are available on request from ( manufacturer's 

name). 

This leaflet sets out the various points of interest to the home 
user of PVC sheeting. 

28 



IS : 2076 - 1981 

INFORMATIVE LABELLING 

The following ten points are useful about article(s) made with 
PVC sheeting conforming to this standard: 

1. It is made with PVC sheeting satisfying this Indian Standard. This 
sets an acceptable level of quality for the material. 

2. It sets a good standard of quality for the method of manufacture. 

3. It is mothproof and hygienic. It does not fray. 

4. It may be stored away wet without damage. 

5. It is not ordinarily harmed by grease or dirt. If it is coiled, wipe 
it with a damp cloth; if necessary, use soap and warm water and 
then rinse with cold water. 

6. It does not need boiling; this may be harmful. Also, dry cleaning 
materials should not be used on it. 

7. It never needs ironing. Creases fall out on hanging in a warm 
room. 

8. It should not be left too near a fire or radictor. ( Very hot 
saucepans, dishes straight from the oven, or irons, snould not 
be placed directly on it). 

9. It is not harmed by frost. It may temporarily stiffen a little in 
cold weather but it will soften at once on returning to normal 
temperature. 

10. It should not be left in contact with polished surface as some 
finishes may adhere to PVC material. 

The jfbllowing ten points are suitable for home users of PVC 
sheetings: 

1. PVC sheeting is a fabric having certain special properties. The 
grade sold with this leaflet has been made to satisfy Indian 
Standard. This sets an acceptable level of quality. 

2. PVC sheeting does not fray and may be cut in any direction. Also 
its level free edges do not need hemming, but these should be kept 
free from nicks. 

3. PVC sheeting may be sewn by hand or machine. As the material 
has no wave, however, stitches should be lightly tensioned and no 
closer than 8 to 10 per 2*5 cm, otherwise the thread may cut through 
the material. Tacking stitches should be avoided wherever 
possible, but 4f they are used a fine needle and fine thread are 

29 



IS: 2076 -1981 

preferable. Seams should preferably be arranged with and not 
across the direction of strain, and should be backed with tape 
or bias binding. 

4. PVC sheeting is waterproof; it may be stored away wet without 
damage. 

5. PVC sheeting is mothproof and hygienic. It is not ordinarily 
harmed by grease or ordinary dirt, which can only lie on its 
surface. If it is soiled, wipe it with a damp cloth; if necessary, 
use soap and warm water and then rinse with cold water. 

6. Boiling is quite unnecessary and may be harmful. Also dty- 
cleaning materials should not be used on PVC sheeting. 

7. Creases fall out on hanging in a warm room. PVC sheeting 
never needs ironing. 

8. PVC sheeting should not be left too near a fire or radiator. 
Very hot saucepans, dishes straight from the ovens, or irons 
should not be placed directly on it. 

9. PVC sheeting is not harmed by frost. It may stiffen a little in 
cold weather but it will soften at once on returning to normal 
temperature. 

10. It is advisable not to leave PVC sheeting in contact with polished 
surfaces as some finishes may adhere to this material. 



30 



IS: 2076- 1981 

{ Continued from page 2 ) 

Unsupported PVC Sheets Subcommittee, PCDC 12 : 5 

Convener Representing 

Shri Raman M. Patel The Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri J. M. Shroff ( Alternate to 
Shri Raman M. Patel ) 
Shri Arun Kumar Amartara Industries, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Ghattani Ghemplast, Madras 

Shri R. Kali das ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. H. Kajiji All India Plastics Manufacturers' Association, 

Bombay 
Shri S. S. Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Mitra Calico Chemicals Plastics and Fibres Division, 

Bombay 
Dr B. R. C. Anand ( Alternate) 
Shri Bharat Shah National Dress Manufacturing Co, Bombay 

Shri S. K. Varma Caprihans India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Z. S. Kajiji ( Alternate ) 



31 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarter*: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110Q02 

Telephones: 23230131 . 23233375, 23239402 Fax: 91+01 1 23234062, 23239399, 23239382 

E-mail: blsOvsnl.com website: http://www.bl8.orQ.in 



Central Laboratory: 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, SAHIBABD 201010 



Telephone 

2770032 



Regional Office*: 

Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 23237617 

•Eastern; 1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road Kankurgachi, KOLKATA 700054 23378662 

Northern: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, Chandigarh 1 60022 603843 

Southern: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 254 19 84 

Western: Manakalaya, E9, MIDC, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, 2832 92 95 
Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 



Branch office*: 

'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 
Peenya Industrial Area, 1" Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 
fcommercial-cum-office Complex, opp. Dushera Maidan, Arera Colony, 

Bittan Market, BMOPAL 462016 
62/63, Qanga Nagar. Unit VI, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 
5™ Floor, Kovai Towers, 44 Bala Sundaram Road, COIMBATORE 641018 
SCO 21, Sector 12, Faridabad 121007 
Savitri Complex , 116 Q.T. Road Qhaziabad 201001 
53/5 Ward No. 29, R.Q. Baraua Road 5 by-lane, Apurba Sinha Path 

GUWAHATI 781003 
5-8-56C L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYBERABAD 500001 
E-52, Chitranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 
1 17/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 
Sethi Bhavan; 2"* Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 

LUCKNOW 226001 
NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 
Mahavir Bhavan, First Floor, Ropar Road, NALAGARH 174101 
Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 
First Floor, Plot Nos 657-660, Market Yard, Gultkdi, PUNE 41 1037 
"Sahajanand House* 3* Floor, Bhaktinagar Circle, 80 Feet Road, 

RAJKOT 360002 
T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 
1st Floor, Udyog Bhavan, VUDA, Slrlpuram Junction, VISHAKHAPATNAM-03 



Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, Kolkata 700072 
Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 



5601348 
8394955 
24234 52 

2403139 
221 0141 
2292175 
2861498 
2541137 

23201084 
2373879 
2218774 
2215698 

2525171 
221451 
2262808 
4268659 
2378251 

2322104 
2712833 

22371085 
23096528 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 2002 

TO 

IS 2076 : 1981 SPECIFICATION FOR UNSUPPORTED 

FLEXIBLE POLYVINYL CHLORIDE SHEETING 

( First Revision ) 

( Page 7, clauses 6 and 6.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
6 CONDITIONING AND STORAGE 

6.1 Conditioning 

6.1.1 For all test purpose minimum time between manufacture and testing shall 
be 16 h, in order to remove stresses and attain dimensional stability. 

6.1.2 Sample shall be conditioned for 16 h minimum at standard atmosphere at a 
temperature of 27 ± 2°C and relative humidity 65 ± 5 percent before tests. 

6.1.3 Unless otherwise specified, testing shall be carried out at 27 + 2°C and 
relative humidity 65 ± 5 percent. 

6.1.4 For product test, the time between manufacture and testing shall not 
exceed six months. 

6.2 Storage 

The roll of unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting complying with this 
standard shall be stored vertically on dry, clean, firm level ground and at 
recommended temperatures in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
The rolls shall be protected from dust, moisture, direct sunlight, corrosive and 
solvent fumes.' 

( Page, 10, clause B-l.l, Note ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'NOTE — It is recommended that the load scale/load cell be suitably calibrated atleast once 
every twelve months/ 

( Page 18, clause E-2.3(c), line 1 ) — Substitute 4 IS 2405 (Part 1 ):199Q % for 
iS 2405: 1963'. 

(Page 18, footnote ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'"Industrial sieves: Part 1 Wire cloth sieves {first revision) ' 



1 



Amend NO. 1 to IS 2076 : 1981 

( Page 19, clause E-2.4, third para ) — Substitute 'IS 686 : 1985' for 
*IS 686 : 1957*' 

( Page 19, footnote ) — Insert "(first revision)' at the end. 



(PCD 12) 



PrinUd it Ptabhat Offset Ptoss, New Delhi-2 
2 



