( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Is:4954-1968

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NOISE ABATEMENT IN TOWN PLANNING
Functional Requirements in Buildings Sectional Committee, BDC 12
Chairman MAJ-GEN B. N. DAS Members ADDITIONAIDIRECTORSTANDARDS Railway Board (Ministry of Railways ) ( ARCHITECTURE ) DEPUTY DIRECZORSTANDARDS SHRr i ~;;~.zTURE ) ( Altcrnatc ) Ministry of Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation Directorate General of Observatories ( Ministry of DR U.' K: BOSE Tourism and Civil Aviation ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI N. K. D. C~OUDHURY Roorkee DR K. R. RAO ( Alternate) Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay SHRI S. V. DE~AI The Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SnRI?dAn E. S. GHUMAN SHRI J. M. BENJAMIN ( Altcmate \ , In personal capacity ( 32 Alipore Road, Delhi ) DR K. M. VON HEINZ All lndia Institute of Hygiene & Public Health SHRI,N. MAJUMDER ( Directorate General of Health Services ) SHRI A. V. RAO ( Alternate) SHR~J. V. MEHTP~ Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI S. K. GHOSH( Alfcrnafe ) M/s Voltas Limited, New Delhi SHRI 0. P. PURI National Building Organization ( Ministry of Works, SWRI RAB~NDER SINGH Housing & Supply ) SHRI P. C. SHAH (Alternate ) Central Public Works Department SHRI M. M. RANA Directzra;; General of Health Services ( Ministry of SHRIJ. D. SHASTRI Planning and Family Urban DeveloLment ) Institute of Town Planners ( India ), New Delhi SHRI. SAYED S.&AN SHRI 0. P. SHARMA ( Alternate) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI H. P. SINHA M/s Kanvinde & Rai, New Delhi SHRISHAUKAT RAI National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI I$. C. SRIVA~TAVA ( Continued on page 2 ) Representing Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters

INDIAN
MANAK

STA@NDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

`ls:4!&4-19611
(

continuedfmpcrgr 1)
MnnbtTS

ReprrJrrcriry
In personal capacity. ( 8 Pandit Pant New Delhi) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o#cio Member) Mart,

SHRIR. L. SIJRI
Smu R. NACAMJAN, Director ( Civ Eugg )

SHRI

V. K. GOONA ( Architecture ), IS1

Deputy

Director

Architectural Acoustics and Sound Insulation Subcommittee, BDC 12:5

conventr
SHRIR. L. Sum
M#d?tlS Sxtw J. M. BENJAMIN SHRI N. K. D. CHO~DHIJRY The Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay Cent;~raddmg Research Instuute ( CSI'R ), M/s Voltas Limited, New Delhi In ~;e~k.;apacity ( 8 Pundit Pant Marg,

SHRIK. L. GUPTA

D~K.R.R~o(Alrctnob)

SHRI C. V. YECNANARAYANAN ( Altmwt~ ) Syar N. J. NAIR

SWRIP. R. NARASIYHAN
DR M. PANCHOLY SHRI: B. J. RAYRAKHIANI
SHRI P. c. %iAH

India Radio (Ministry of Information & Broadcasting ) All India Radio (Ministry of Information & Broadcasting ) National, Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Ministry of Labour, Employment and Rebabilitation National Buildings Organization ( Ministry of Works, Housing & Supply )

All

Sum P. Cl. JAIN ( Altcmutc )

2

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NOISE ABATEMENT IN TOWN PLANNING
O.FOREWORD 0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution
On ' 12 December 1968, after the draft finalized by the Functional Requirements in Building Sectional Committee had been .approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 To prevent human life from the harmful effects of noise which continues to increase day by day, man shall continue his efforts to find ways and means for the abatement of noises which may be a cause of nuisance to an individual in particular or public in general. An individual may find himself helpless against the nuisance of noise, but with regard to the effect of noise as nuisance to the public, a planner assisted by an acoustical expert may really do a lot by reducing effectively the effect of noises on the community. There are certain noises which may be prevented by law and ordinances, like Motor Vehicles Acts and Factory Acts in force from place to place. For noises which fall outside the control of the above legislations, a town planner h&s to exercise his ingenuity to create conditions within the scope and means of his project to effectively meet the requirements of abatement of noises, 0.3 Good town planning practices segregate the major types of urban uses by designating appropriate locations for each of them, at the same time inter-relating these to each other to produce orderliness and smooth functioning. The residential areas are separated from the industrial and commercial zones by means of physical barriers, roads, railway lines, parks or green belts. It is difficult for a particular zone to function independently of the other and it is this aspect which necessitates the need to think of methods by which the noisy. zones may be located in the neighbourhood of the zones which need quiet, at the same time overcoming the hazards which the noise from one zone produces in the adjoining zone. 0.4 In residential areas, the occupants of dwellings are constantly exposed to noise. The most common sources of noise are due to various types of traffics, such as heavy vehicles, trains and automobiles. Even noise from air and sea transport may be a source of great nuisance and inconvenience. With the increase in industrial development, noise from the industry is ever on the increase. In case of localities where there are `no zonal regulations, the location of industrial buildings anywhere and everywhere in the community area may be a source of great nuisance from the noise point of view. It is with this object in view that this code is being prepared to lay down 3

IS:495411968
general principles for town planning schemes in order that a reasonable degree of quiet is `achieved for work and living in the ncighbourhood. 0.5 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in additiou to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 0.7 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been drawn from the following pubhcation: SURI (`R L ). Acoustics, design and practice ( Volume I ). 1966. Asia Publishing House, Bombay. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down basic principles to achieve optimum conditions of noise abatement in town.planning schemes. 2. SOURCES OF NOISE

2.1 Common sources of outdoor noise are the following: a) Traffic: i) Air traffic, ii) Rail traffic, iii) Road traffic, and iv) Sea shore and inland water traffic; b) Industries; and c) Other activities. 2.1.1 Trajk .Noise -Noise produced by traffic has always been a nuisance to the society. The intensity and nature of the traffic noise depends on various factors. The disturbance due to aircraft noise depends very much on the type of aircraft. A jet aircraft at take-off produces more noise than a propeller type and a heavy truck carrying loose luggage may have a greater nuisance value than a private car. In case of automobile traffic the condition of the road and the maintenance of the vehicles play an important part.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

4

IS:4!%4-1968
The noise produced by trains also depends upon the type of train (see Appendix A ) for typical values of train noise, the rails and their bending. As in the case of road, rail, and air traffic the noise produced by sea traffic is more at the harbour where the loading and unloading takes place. 2~2 Irehrsties - Noise is one of the by-products of industry. The nature and intensity of the noises depend on the type of industry. These noises are generally produced by rotating, reciprocating or any other machinery, or by high pressure, high velocity gases liquids or vapours involved in the / processes of industry. 2.3 Noises Due to Other Activities - These noises tinuous or intermittent, such as from temple and church or loudspeakers, hawkers and children playing, as a result life and activity. Noise levels of some noisy sources are are periodical, conbells, sirens, blaring of local community given in Table 1.

TABLE

1

NOISE

LEVELS

OF SOME

NOISY

SOURCES NOISE LEVEL dB

No.

SL
4

NOISY Souac~s/A~~~s
. Air `traffic: a) Jet, take-off, at about 300 m b) Propeller type, take-off, at 300 m

100-110 90-100 90-I 10 80-90 70-80 60-70 60-95

ii) iii) iv) v) vi)

Rail traffic ( at about 30 m ) Heavy road traffic ( highways ) Medium road traffic ( main streets ) Light road traffic (side streets) Indbstries

3. CONSIDERATIONS

FOR LAYOUT

AND

LOCATIONS

VARIOUS

ZONES

OF

3.1 General Considerations - Usually, the totin planning architect is primarily interested in the best utilization of land. But in this process, there are a number of factors ( smoke, odour, noise, etc.), which he may take into account. All these factors collectively help him to determine the zones which should be earmarked for residential, commercial and industrial pur. Most important of all these factors is the extent of annoyance and $?t@rbance caused to the community from various sources of noise. In detailed town planning, care is therefore required to be taken to segregate * noisy sources ( industries, railways, aerodromes, highway road traffic, etc ). Also, in order to ensure the requisite degree of quietness in certain specific buildings, suitable areas/locations need to be allocated for the purpose. ' 5

lst49!%-1999
These aspects need car&l consideration in the initial stages of planning a town. In this connection reference is invited to Table 2 giving acceptable noise levels that are required. d

TABLE

2

ACCEPTABLE

NOISE

LEVELS

c__-

AC~~PTABLJS OLITLKIOR NOISE LEVELS 1~ RFSDENTUL Aasas Location Noise level dR (A) 25-35 30-40 35-45 40-50 45-55
\

r----

ACCFZTABLE INDOOR NOISB LEVELS FOR VARIOW TYPES OF BIJILDIN~S

Sl No.

2. i) Radio

Location

Noise lez dR (A) 25-30 30-35 35-40 1 35-40 rooms, i 40-45 45-50

i) Rural ii) Suburban iii) Residential ( urban) iv) Urban ( residential and business ) v) City vi) Industrial area

& TV studio

ii) Music room iii) Hospitals, class room, auditoria iv) Apartments, homes Conference small offices hotels,

!,

50-60

v) Court rooms, private offices, libraries vi) Large public offices, banks, stores, etc vii) Restaurants

/
50-55

1 3.1.1 The comparative study of Tables 1 and 2 emphasizes the fact that 1 while planning a new township, care has to be taken to see that the various 3 zones are conveniently located from the noise point of view. As a general , classification, the following zones may be visualized: 5 Ofk? a) Quiet b) Zones of concentrated noise sources quite at times c) Zones of concentrated average noise sources d) Zones of high noise sources 5 e) Zones of extremely high noise sources 6 .
Noise level

<60

dBs

60-70 d@ 70-80 dBs 80-90 dBs >9OdBs . .

IS:4954-196S 3.2 Based on the above considerations, the locations of the various types of buildings are to be considered in detail as follows,: a) Location of aerodromes and air routes; b)' Location of railway stations, routing of railway track and arterial roads; c) Industrial areas.; d) Residential areas; and e) Community areas containing the following: 1) 2) 3) 4) Office buildings, courts and council chambers; Shopping ,centres; Hospitals and broadcast studios; Educational institutions, such as universities, colleges, and schools, libraries; national laboratories; 5) Entertainment centres, such as cinemas, theatres, clubs, stadiums, swimming pools, restaurants and parks; and 6) Places of worship, such as temples, mosques, churches. RJXOMMENDATIONS

4. BROAD

4.1 The question of boundary areas for different purposes is not so simple to tackle. Indeed, the problem is complex and involved. As a result the matter needs careful thought and study by the authorities concerned in consultations with the acoustical experts at the appropriate stage of urban and regional planning. However, broad outlines for the guidance of the town planners are given in 4.1.1 to 4.1X.8. 4.1.1 Location of Aerodromes and Air Routes

4.1.1.1 .New aerodromes - New aerodromes should be located sufficiently away from the city and adequate boundary area should be allocated for the purpose such that residential construction may come up only beyond that area. Considering the present day requirements of the angle of glide of jet aeroplanes, an area of 6 to 8 km square should be adequate. But to be on the safe side and to accommodate any future expansion programmes, it would be better to earmark an area of about 6 to 8 km square. It may not be forgotten that a city located even at a distance of say 16 km away from the aerodrome is also ex osed to noise. The noise level at such a distance may be lower than at P ocations nearer the airport but there will be disturbance in any case, especially in the night. Wheu establishing the routes for flying into and out of an airport, it is necessary to avoid flying over towns of thick population.

7

E6':4954-1968 4.1.1.2 Existing aerodromes expansion - One cannot do much where an existing small aerodrome located in the outskirts of the city had to be expanded to cater to the bigger and noisier aircraft. A township has automatically grown around it. At the same time the development of the city had of necessity to be pushed in that direction too. But this should be avoided in future and as far as possible, the planners should disallow residential areas, hospitals and schools to be laid out within a cert,ain area of the aerodrome. In case a township has grown and is well-established around an aerodrome, and if the noise levels due to the air traffic exceed the recommended maximum noise levels in the area, it is even worthwhile considering an alternative more distant location for the airfield.
4.1.2 Location of Railway Stations, Rail Tracks, Highways and Arterial Roads A comprehensive development plan of a city must take into account the layout of rail and road traffic. The location of the railway station, shunting yards, loco-sheds and the routing of rails have to be carefully worked out so that the noise produced in these areas cause least disturbance to the residential community and other similar areas requiring day and night quiet conditions. For the same reason, due attention should be paid to the location of bu,s and truck depots, as also freight transfer points. These are very important in minimizing transport activity and consequent reduction in noise in the commua+ area. The rail tracks, highway and arterial raeds should p&r&y be routed away from the residential and commercial areas. If the highway is to be connected to the residential areas, it is better to provide a ` link road ' and rout the highway through a ' by-pass `. However, if due to other considerations a rail head or line has to be located in or near a residential area or community centre, certain precautionary measures to abate the noise shall have to be taken. Three of the methods which may be adopted without much difficu!ty and expense are given in 4.1.2.1 to 4.1.2.3. Any or all of these methods may be used, depending upon the severity of the conditions. 4.1.2.1 Laying rails-roads in deep cut track - One method for reducing the noise from a track is to keep the track below the ground level. A typical arrangement is given in Fig. 4 in Appendix A. The track shown, has a depth of 3.5 m and walls sloping at 45" to the vertical. Results of measurements made in this track are shown in Fig. 1. It was noticed that the attenuation effect of the cutting is much more at the higher frequencies than that at the lower ones. Also, the attenuation effect is much less in the case of engine noise and whistle, because these sources are at a higher level than the track. 4.1.2.2 Inter-position of a solid barrier - Use of solid barrier is another method ( see Fig. 1 ). This may. be in the form of walls of different heights placed between the source and the community. Even the existence of buildings ( not used for human occupation ) between the rail track and the r-es& dential or commercial area in question would help inthe attenuation of noise.

8

l!3:49!54-1968~
The amount of noise reduction obtained depends on the distances betwee the source and the barrier, and between the receiving position and then barrier, the,height of the barrier and on the wavelength of the sound. BARRIER ,,rE R 1; ~`;CElVjG POSITION

FIG. 1

USE

OF SOLID

BARRIER

1f.D * R and if R > H, the noise reduction may be calculated formula, reduction ( dB ) = 10 log,, ( 20 W/ A R) where A = wavelength R = distance D = distance of sound, noise source and the barrier, barrier and the receiving and between between

from the

position.

In practice, the reduction achieved by such walls is never as much as predicted from the above formula. For guidance, a typical set of curves are given in Fig. 2 in Appendix A indicating the sound level reduction at 100 c/s for various wall heights and distances from the source. .4.1.2.3 Planting of trees and hedges on either side of the track or road - Belts of trees or shrubs may also be used as barriers of sound. It has been found that in dense evergreen woods ( average visibility 20 m ), the attenuation of sound is about 18 dB per 300 m at 500 c/s. This is due to absorption by the foliage on the one hand and multiple scattering on the other. Obviously, denser the barrier, greater is the attenuation. This method of noise reduction is comparatively less expensive and may be used with success, if there is not much of limitation of open land in the vicinity of the noise source.
NOTE - In addition to the above remedial measures, noise reduction at the source also may be adopted. Resilient mountings of the tracks and welded track for rail lines and smooth asphalted roads for the roadways, and better silencers for the engines help in the reduction of noise at the source.

4.1.3

Location of IndustriaE Areas

4.1.3.1 Normally, planners have, in the past, followed the practice of segregation in industrial zoning and to restrict certain areas for various types of manufacturing units. These areas have been arranged to be at different distances from the residential and commercial areas. This segregation may have been justified some years ago when the factories were put up in ugly ramshackle structures and caused nuisance in the form of smoke, odours, etc, and, of course, noise too. As a result, the planners allocated only such of the areas for industrial units which were not required 9

xs:g!e4-1968
his

for other purposes. This concept has since changed. Industry is now a part of communitjr life and is an asset to the city because it not only gives employment to the citizens, but also the industrial development helps to provide all the public services required by the community. As a result, modern industrial colonies with well-planned layouts and buildings are seen in many cities. It would not be correct to classify the industries only in terms of the usual ` light ' and ` heavy ' industries, `as such a classification does not indicate the performance characteristics frbm the noise point of view. An industrial unit classified as `light' may be .as noisy or noisier than another unit classified as ' heavy `. The classification may be based on the noise vibr@on produced by them. Their performance standard in this respect alone, should decide their zoning, The `boundary noise level need to be specified and the boundary earmarked accordingly. 4.1.3.2 Cases whe noise level exceed the limits - In' cases where the noise level exceeds the permissible limit, the planner has the following possible. alternatives to consider: a) To re-allocate the area for a zone where higher noise levels are permissible. This would mean that from the noise point of view, the residential areas are down-graded to commercial areas, which in turn are earmarked as industrial areas.
OY

b) To devalue the residential land which may lie within a certain boundary ( from the noise source ) where it reaches the permissible noise level. 4.1.3.3 Location of heavy and noisy industries - It is likely that some industrial units are either located much farther from the residential area or another industrial property intervenes between the two. In such a case, the particular industrial unit could obviously be permitted to emit more noise. In any case, really heavy and noisy industries, like ship-building, loco_ motive wol;kshops, structural steel and coach factories, etc, shall be located in specially reserved areas, as far away from the residential areas as possible. This should be done even if such location has some consequential adverse effect on th& economy of the town. We have to remember that the constant impulsive sounds emanating from these industries may prove extremely harmful to humaxi life by cabsing nervous breakdowns and insomnia. 4.1.3.4 Wind direction-Another salient factor which needs to be borne in mind for zoning various areas is the direction of wind. The noises travel in the direction of wind and if residential buildings are situited jn that direction, the uncomfortable effect on the community is obvious, particularly when in modern times, the industries work continuously in shifts around the clock. This experience is quite common in coastal towns where Some industries are located between the coast and the residential areas. 10

I

Is:4954-1968 4.1.4 Control of ihtid .NoisGin the Existing Cities-The controi of industrial noiselin the existing layout of the cities is undoubtedly difficult, as it would mean shifting of the various noise producing industrial/nonindustrial units to another area away from the residential and commercial community. But the question does need to be studied in order to plan their shift in stages, and for future, necessary restrictions should be imposed, by means of local regulations/legislations in order to prevent location of further industrial buildings and/or noise producing equipment in the"residential/ commercial areas. _. 4.1.5 Location of Resiahtial Areas - However, in addition to the general precaution to earmark a silent. zone for locating the residential area in a new township, certain other fundamental principles also shall have to be observed in working out the detailedplans of buildings inside the residential locality. 4.1.6 Layout in Proximity of Rail and Road Tra& - When residential/commercial buildingv have to be provided in proximity of the railway track or the main road, running along flat ground, it is necessary to set back the buildings by a suitable distance of at least 50-75 m. This distance shall need to be increased where the rail track is a part of the marshalling yard or is used for shunting day and night. In case the rail track or road is in a cutting, this distance could be reduced ( see Appendii A ). Similar would be the .case if other buildings or wall barriers intervene in between and help to screen the noise source. 4.1.7 Location of .Noisy, and QuietBuildings - Here we have to realise the practical conditions in the present-day busy life of a city or town. It would be well-nigh impossible to prevent some heavy automobile vehicles from passing through certain parts of the town, because they transport goods which are essential for the life of the local community. But if the layout of the roads and the freight transport points are suitably arranged, the adverse effect of such traffic could be minimized. Again, there are some buildings which may be called noisy because of their function and the essential human activity conducted therein. For example, buildings, such as stock exchanges, restaurants and mercantile offices should fall in this category. Buildings of this kind could be located on the main streets while hospitals, schools, dwellings, etc, could be laid out along the side streets. 4.1.8 Suitable Set Back of Buildings from Roads -- Noise levels on the side streets, which are not frequented by heavy traffic, would no doubt be less than that of the main streets but may still be within the objectionable limit. A certain amount of improvement may be effected by arranging to set back the buildings from the road by a suitable distance. The farther it is from `the,road, the better it will be, because the intensity of noise gets reduced with the increase in distance. % For the same reason, the accommodation should be laid out in a manner so as to be concentrated in the central part of the site rather than on the outer sides/edges of the site. 11

IS:4954-1968 4.1.9 Trees, Shrubs and Hedges ing the noise from the buildings.
Trees, shrubs and hedges help in screen-

4.1.10 Surfacing of Roads/Streets-The type of surfacing used affects the extent of noise emanating from the roads/streets. Hard metalled roads should be discouraged where animal drawn or conventional type of vehicles Asphalted road surfaces being soft are less with hard wheels are still in use. Even if the volume of traffic does not justify conducive to impact noises. the provision of separate graded routes, on the main roads, for fast moving traffic, slow traffic and for cycles, the facility does; have more than a safety significance. The noise sources being spread out, the build up of noises is minimized. 4.1.11 Location of Community Facilities - The community facilities need to be located nearer to the residential areas. But the individual units and their locations have to be examined on the basis of their particular requireSome of these units need day and night quiet conditions of a high ments. degree and do not produce any noise of their own. Others need noise quieting for certain periods only while during certain periods they act as noise sources. Based on the above requirements they may be classified as given * in 4.1.11.1 to 4.1.11.8. 4.1.11.1 Broadcasting television/Jilm studios - The standards of noise protection for such buildings and areas need to be very high. Broadcasting It is very necessary that a quiet studios need unusually quiet surroundings. locality is earmarked for the studio premises. Other precautions, such as off setting the building away from the road, confining the studio proper in the core of the building complex by arranging the technical areas and offices in the outer periphery, by adopting double wall constructions, isolating foundations and floating floors as required shall be adopted to in the planning stages itself. 4.1 .11.2 Commercial buildings - These buildings include offices, hostels, The degree of quiet required for these courts and council chambers, etc. But for-maximum efficiency and minimum interbuildings is not very high. ference from external noise sources, a suitable locality shall be chosen to Whatever be the location, here accommodate the above types of buildings. again, the main source of noise in urban areas is due to road traffic. The modern buildings of the above type now consist of multi-storeys and are arranged along the roads with a continuous facade. The rooms which face the roads and are on the lower floors are subjected to maximum noise level. Of course, comparatively less noise will reach similar rooms on the upper floors.. One method of reducing this noise is to off-set the building by a suitable distance from the road. The noise conditions would need further . improvement and the occupants could be ,given some relief by screening off A better method would be to arrange the noise coming from the windows. the layout so that all rooms requiring quiet con &tions are placed on` the 12 .'

IS:4!954-1968
In the worst conditions of noise, artificial quieter side of the site/building. ventilation may have to be resorted to and/or double doors and windows utilized to provide necessary sound insulation. 4.1.11 .S ,?%ucationaZ institutions - Universities, colleges, schools, libraries, national laboratories, etc, come under this category. It may be mentioned that these are buildings which require average quiet conditions but are also at the same time noise sources at certain times. In the first instance, efforts should be made to find a site which is situated in comparatively quiet environments at least the site should be away from the noisy roads, rail tracks, aerodromes etc, where there is no choice and these must be located in relatively noisy environment, due attention shall need to be paid to the Adequate open space should be left layout of the rooms and facilities. between the building and the roads/noise source. The rooms, shall be k arranged to be farther away from the noise source, while other unimportant rooms, like gymnasium may be laid out closer to it and in a manner so as to provide a noise shield to the class-rooms. 4.1 .11.4 Entertainment centres - Buildings, like. cinemas, theatres, clubs, swimming pools, etc, present very exactmg demands of noise reduction. But it may also be mentioned that these areas are inherently noise producing in nature during certain periods and hence may be planned away Other precautions as suggested in 4.1.6 `from the residential localities. to 4.1.10 shall be observed in the detailed layout of these buildings. buildings present problems 4.1.11.5 Hotels/restaurants/parks - These similar in principle to those of residential,flats but it is generally assumed that these buildings are quieter th.an residential flats as the occupants or users produce much lesser noise; only the occupancy is more. However, the considerations in the location and siting of the residential areas shall be applicable here also. 4.1.11.6 Places of worship and religious buildings - These are also to be located in a quiet place. The quiet conditions required are similar to those required for libraries and laboratories. In order to obviate the possibility of church bells or temple noises disturbing the neighbourhood, it is preferable that these buildings are located a little away from the residential areas. 4.1.11.7 Shopping centres and stadiums - SLopping centre is a noise area. Hen.ce these are required to be segregated from the So also the stadium. quieter areas. 4.1.11.8 Parks acd plqyjelds - Parks and playfields are essential for the society and are indispensable to neighbourhood units. Care should, therefore, be taken that the noise due to parks and playfields does not prove a source of inconvenience to the units which need quiet conditions. 13

I:4%4-196%

APPENDIX A ( Clauses 2.1.1 and4 1.6 )
A-l. GENERAL REDUCTION MEASURES FOR NOISES AT SO&l A-1.1 The above noise levels are extremely high for community areas and Suggested methods are given it is advisable to consider their reduction. below: a) Inicr-position of Solid Barrier - Thismaybeintheformofwallsof different heights placed between the source and the community as shown in Fig. 2. Even the existence of buildings ( not, of course, used for human occupation ) between the rail track and the residential/commercial area in question would help in the attenuation of noise.

b)

Planting of Trees and Hedges on Either Side of the TmcklRoud - In dense evergreen woods ( average visibility 20 m ), the attenuation of sound is about 18 dB per 300 m at 500 c/s. This is due to absorption by the foliage on the one hand and multiple scattering on the other, obviously, the denser such a barrier is, the greater will be the attenuation effected.

A-2. TRAIN NOISE LEVELS A-2.1 Typical noise levels are shown in Fig. 3. A-2.1.1 Track Noise Level - The following are given: 90 dB at 6 m . a) Freight trains ( 900 to 1200 m long ) 77 dB at 150 m running at 25 to 40 km/h 1 96 dB at 7.5 m b) Freight trains ( 900 to 1200 m long ) running at 65 km/h A-2.2 Engine Noise Level - The noise level under all operating conditions will be 97-105 dB at 15 m. A-2.3 Whistle Noise Level-The noise level will be 110 dB at 15 m. NOTE 1 - It has been noted by the investigators that while track noise increased by
6 dB for every doubling of speed, it decreased by 3 dB for every doubling of the distance. NOTE 2 - Similarly, engine noise decreased by 3 dB for every doubling of the distance, except within a distance of 15 m where this rate was 6 dB. NOTE 3 the distance. In the- case of whistle noise, the attenuation was 6 dB ior every doubling of

None 4 - Attenuation rate in the case of train and engine noise is attributed to line source of noise, as distinct from point source in the case of whistle noise.

A-2.4 Reduction of Train Noise Levels by Laying Rails in Detpht Track - A typical track with adepth of 3.5 m and walls sloping at 45" to the vertical is shown in Fig. 4. It was also noticed that the attenuation effect 14

60 DISTANCE

120

160

240

300 R,

FROM SOURCE, IN METRES

that noise reduction increases `with the height Or the Nun - It wilt be obremd burier. In molt of the cases, even with economical wall or barrier conatructio~, l Tbia ia true as long aa the wxucc noirc level rcductioo of 10 to 15 db is achicvai. remains 0x1the ground, typical cases being railway traina and automobiles.

FIG. 2

SOUND LEVEL REDUCTION AT 100 c/s FOR VARIOUS WALLHEIGHTS ANDDISTANCRSPROM~SOURCE

FREIGHT TRACK AT 65 km/h r ALL

NOISE'

WHISTLES TRACK AT 32 NOtSE km/h

3 DECIBLES PER /i;Z;UBLING OF DISTANCE -6 DECIBLES OOUBLING OF PER

DISTANCE

soI*

3

7-5

'

I

I

t

I

I

15

30

60

120

240

DtSTANCE

IN METRES

TRAINNOISE LEVELSOV~RALL SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS AS A FUNCTIOPU OF DISTANCEFROMTHETRACK 15

lS:19!54-1968
of the cutting is much more at the higher frequencies than at the lower ones. Also, the attenuation effect of the cutting is much less in the case of whistles .and engine noise, because of these sources being located at a higher levd and the track being visible above the 6 m cutting. As a result, the cutting is almost ineffective in these cases. -9m-c

30
OISTANCE

60

120 240

IN METRES

NOTE -The above figure shows measured overall sound pressure levels vs distance for track and engine noise in a cutting having the dimensions asshown. This track noise is compared with the calculated values of attenuation : (i) as would be read by the sound level meter ( dotted line ), and (ii) as would be heard by the ear ( dashed line ). Solid line shows the expected curve if there was no cut. FIG.

4

REDUCTION OF TRAIN NOISE LEVELS BY LAYING RAILS IN DEEP CUT TRACK

16

