IS3871 :1996
(Reaffirmed 2002)

Indian Standard TEXTILES FIBRE ROPES AND CORDAGE GLOSSARY OF TERMS (Second Revision .)

ICS 01.040.59;

59.080.50

Q BIS 1996

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHl 110002 August 1996 Price Group 7

Cordage Scc?ional Commit&q TX 09

FOREWORD . This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the, Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cordage Sectional Committee had ken approved by the Textile Division Council. This standard has been take& up for revision in the light of the experience gained since its publication in the year `1984 and is mainlybased on BS 3724 : 1991 `Glossary of terms relating to fibreropes and cordage'. Assistance has also been drawn from IS0 1968 : 1973 `Rope and cordage - Vocabulary'.

IS 3871 : 1996

Indian Standard TEXTILES FIBRE ROPES AND CORDAGE GLOSSARY OF TERMS ( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard prescribes definitions of terms relating to Bearing Point - Looped portion of a rope which passes around the standing part, or contacts the hook on a crane, or which connects with, and transmits the applied force, to another object when the rope is tensioned.

ropes and cordage made from natural and man-made fibres or filaments including the processes by which they are made. 2 DJ@lNlTIONS A Agricultural Wine - Twine used mainly for agricultural purposes. Albacore Line - A 3-strand line primarily intended for albacore fishing. The line is made of hemp, cotton or synthetic yarns. Aloe - Leaf fibre obtained from the Aloe plants (`Furcraca foetida' and `Furcraca gigantea willemettiana'), a native of Brazil, but cultivated on commercial scale in Mauritius and India.
Anchore Fall -Manila

Bedding Line -Hawser-laid line of 19 mm size made from hemp or jute yarn. One end of line is whipped and other is made into a loop. The overall length of line is about 4.5 m and is used for tying the beedings.
Bell Rope - Italian hemp rope fitted with a sally and used for the tolling of bells.

Binder Twine - Twine intended for agricultural use with reaper binders. Birdcage - Localised flaring out of strands due to untwisting of the rope. Blind-See `Sash Cord'.

rope used for hoisting anchor

to the deck. Angle of Lay -The angle of inclination formed by the strands with the axis of the rope. It may be expressed by its tangent (ratio of the product of diameter and n to the lay).
B Baler tie -Twine

Boat Fall -Manila rope or man-made fibre rope of 3- or 4-strand or S-strand with medium to hard lay; sometimes unkinkable, used in conjunction with a pair of devits or for lowering boat from ships' upper deck ( flexible steel wire ropes are also used ). Boat Lacing covers. 3-strand line used for securing boat

intended for agricultnral use with

baling machinexy. Baling Rope - Rope made from natural or synthetic fibre used for binding bales. Baling mine - 3-ply hemp twine usually of `2' twist used for tying bales or parcels. Base Yam -Yarn obtained from the manufacturer consisting of a wound package of parallel filaments on which subsequent twisting operations are performed. Beam - Cable-laid rope made out of superior quality hempof4mmdiameter. 1

Bolt Rope - A flexible 3-strand rope of which the length of lay is longer than that of ordinary rope. It is made from hemp, manila, sisal or man-made fibre used for edging suits, awnings, stage lashing, etc. Boom Lift - Manila or man-made fihre rope which passes through tackle blocks attached to the mast and boom. It is used to adjust the angle at which the boom is inclined from the mast and shall support the load applied to the full lines.
Bore Spring - Coir rope up to 6 10 mm in circumference used for mooring in rivers subject to bore tides. Box Twine 3-ply hemp twine used for general tying

purposes.

IS 3871 : 1996 Bull Rope a) b) A 3-strand manila or sisal hard-laid rope used for marine purposes; or Rope led from ring of a buoy to the nose of the bowspirit of sailing vessel or to the stem of a clipper bowed ship to prevent buoy from bumping the bows at slack water.

FIG. 1 BRAIDED CORD

ByI1and Calf Rope - 3-strand manila rope of hawser laid construction used for oil well drilling, and for marine salvage work. Butt Splice-See `Short Splice' C Cable - Abalanced rope structuie formed by twisting three or more ropes together. It is usually over 250 mm in circumference. Cabled Yam - limo or more folded yarns (or ahernatively folded and single yams) twisted together in one or more folding operations.
NOTE -In the rope-making and finishing industries, a cabled yarn is generally made of single filaments twisted together, each receiving an additional twist during the twisting operation, which is known as `Cabling".

Braided (or Plaited) Cord - Cord of braided construction. It may be with or without a central core ( see Fig. 1). Braided Rope - Rope formed by braiding or plaiting the strands together. as opposed to twisting them.
NOTE The terms `braiding' and `plaiting' are considered to be synonymous.

Breaking Cord - A flax cotton or man-made fibre cord of hawser-laid or braided construction used as a weak link to facilitate opening of parachutes at the time of release. Breaking Factor - The coefficient C, characterizing the quality level of the rope in so far as breaking load is concerned. It is given by the formula:

c, =g
where
R = breaking load in decanewtons or kilograms

Cable Laid Rope - A product consisting of several ropes cabled together in opposite direction to that of the constituent ropes (see Fig.2).

force; and
m = linear density, in kilotex (for net mass (g/m).

Breaking Load -The maximum force which the rope (or cordage) is able to support during the tensile breaking test. Breaking Length-Length of rope which can be freely supported vertically before breakage occurs due to its own mass. It is a simple concept to compare the merits of the two cordage items which may have different linear densities, or be made from differing materials. The breaking strength in mass unit is divided by mass per unit length to give an answer, usually in kilometers. Breaking Strength -See
NOTE-The term

FIG.2 CABLE-LAID (~-STRAND)

ROPE

`Breaking Load'.
srrength' may be applied

`breaking

equally in lieu of the terms `breaking load' or `breaking force as a definition, but it should be qualified by the use of the appropriate mass or force unit following the value which it indicates.

Calving Rope - Soft laid fibre rope used by veterinary surgeons and farmers for assisting the delivery of calves. Cantala - Cantala is the leaf fibre obtained from plant
Agava cantala.

Bricklayer's Line - 3-ply cotton or hemp line used by bricklayers, carpenters and masons for alignment purposes, 2

Cargo Net-Net czonstructed fromnaturalor man-made fibre rope for handling loose cargo and similar operations. The net is formed with loops or eyes for

IS 3871 : 1996

attachment to a lifting device.
Carpenter's Line -- See `Bricklayer's Line'.

by the shipping industry for mooring or general purposes.
Coir Yarn - Yarn spun from coir fibre and used for agricultural purposes or for rope making. It is usually 2-ply. Combined Rope - A rope, with or without a central core, consisting of several strands each of which is itself formed from a combination of natural fibre or synthetic fibre yarns and steel wires, the wires being either galvanised or ungalvanised as required by the customers. Combination Rope See `Spring Lay Rope'.

High quality hemp sewing thread used for binding the edges of carpets.
Carpet Thread Carpet Twine - A hemp, jute, flax or cotton twine used for joining together two or more pieces of carpet. Carrier - Platform on which a bobbin is mounted on the platform of a braiding machine, and which transports the bobbin during the generation of the braid. Cat Lines - Manila lines of 4-strands and not less than 32 mm diamter used around a drilling rig for hoisting tools, pipes, etc (also known as cat Head Lines). Cattle Rope 3 -strand soft laid rope used by farmers

for securing cattle.
Caving Rope - Man-made fibre rope of either hawser laid or plaited construction designed specifically to meet the requirements of spelaeologists. Chafing - Planing of the surface of a rope longitudinally as a result of scraping with a sharp or abrasive edge.

Cordage-Product independent of size, in which twisling, plaiting or braiding of any fibrous material produces a finished article, sensibly round in cross section, which is capable of sustaining loads. Core - A textile product (Yarn, strand small diameter rope, etc), placed generally along the axis of the rope and serving as a support for the strands.

Chalk Line - 3-ply cotton or hemp line used by builders for lining up brickwork, or by platers for setting out. The line is covered in chalk which is transferred to the brickwork or steel plating by plucking. mountaineering rope used for roping to each other two or more climbers for the purpose of safety.
Climbing Rope (Mountaineering) -A

Core Circumference - The size of a jute, manila, hemp or sisal or synthetic core used in the manufacture of fibre core for steel wire ropes.
Concluding Line - Low-twisted heavy manila yarn used as steps of Zacob's ladder.

Cord - Laid or plaited item of cordage, usually, but not necessarily, less than 4 mm in diameter.
Count -A

mmiber indicating the linear density ofyam. `Cattle Rope'.

A 3-strand hemp or cotton line originally used as a clothes line in naval vessels, now used for miscellaneous purposes.
Clothes Stop Line Coated Rope - A rope covered along its whole length with a product intended to improve its performance or to provide it with resistance to abrasion.

Cow Rope -See
Crab Line -

Manila, sisal or man-made fibre line, 3-strand, 4 mm diameter used in fishing.
- Manila or man-made fibre rope usually 56 m dia and above, used in well drilling in conjuction with drilling cable rendering spring or elasticity to the wire line. Crackers

Coated Rope - Rope covered along its entire length with a product intended to improve its performance or to provide it with resistance to abrasion. Cockle See `Hackle'. Rope used for fishing and various other

Cringle - Circular rigid metallic reinforcement used for support at the bearing points of ropes. Cutting - Making incisions tranversely or obliquely into cordage by contact with a sharp edge. Cut Splice - Conventional method ofjoining double braided ropes. It comprises splicing the ends of the first rope into the hody of the second, as for an eye splice, and then splicing the ends of the second rope into the body of the first, as shown in Fig. 3. It may also be used in eight strand plaited ropes, or in laid ropes to form a permanent eye in an otherwise 3

Cod Line purposes.

Coffin - It is a cotton cord up to 3 mm diameter used by undertakers. Coil - Arrangement of cordage in a circular layered formation, usually of a specified length. Coir Rope -

A rope made from coir fibre mainly used

IS 3871 : 1996

continuous length of rope (see Fig.3).

FE. 3 &-r

SPLICE

Cyclic Loading - Loading pattern where the applied force is not constant with respect to time. The upper and lower forces to which the article is subjected, and the frequency are fixed. D Deep Sea Lead Line-Plain or cable-laid untarred good quality hemp line of about 12 mm diameter. Diameter (of rope under tension) -The diameter of the circle circumscribed about the cross section of the rope, measured under a given tension and by an accepted method. It does not apply to g-strand plaited ropes. The nominal diameter of the rope is usually used as the reference value for a given product.

4A

Z-Lay or Right
Hand Lay

4B S-Lay or Left Hand Lay

FIG.4 DIJGCIION OF LAY

When the strands are laid in the left-hand direction the lay of rope is called S-lay (see Fig. 4B).
Dobby Cord - Cord mamrhacturedfrom flax, sunn hemp or cotton yarn, used in dobby looms by the textile mills.

Finishing a splice by separating the emergent strands into identical portions and binding (seizing) one half of one whole emergent strand to the adjacent half of the next emergent strand, and so on around the rope as shown in Fig. 5. This term does not apply to tapered splices.
Dogging -

A rope of which all the components (yarns, group of yams, strands) have been treated with a so-called impregnating product intended to confer special characteristics on the rope.
Dipped Rope Dkction

DORI - An Indian term for cords used for making tents and other general purposes.
Dolley -See

`Sally'.

direction in which the strands are laid to form a rope. Strands are laid either in the right hand direction or inthe left-hand direction. When the strands are laid in the right-hand direction, the lay .of rope is called Z-lay (see Fig. 4A).
of Lay (Dimction of Twist) -The

Rope in which a number of strands are plaited to form a core, and around which are plaited further strands to form a sheath. The core lies coaxially within the sheath.
Double Braided Rope Dutch `Wine 2-ply hemp twine used mainly for book

binding.

Fki. 5 LXEGIN~ ( ~-STRAND ROPE )
4

IS 3871: 1996 E Eight Strand Plaited Rope - A rope of which the strands are generally plaited in pairs, and manily used for marine purposes. Elongation - Increase in length produced by a tensile stress.
NOTE This property length. is usually expressed as a percentage of the original

Filament -A length.

fibre (generally man-made) of indifinite

Fisherman's Cord -Manila or man-made fibre cord, 9-strand cable-laid or 8-strand plaited, tarred or tmtarred used mainly in large diameter as anchor lines, specially in fishing of the grand banks. Fishing Line -Tightly laid hemp, cotton or manmade ~ fibre 3-strand line used for commercial fishing. Flat Filament - A relatively narrow continuous strip, obtained by cutting or splitting of a material suitable for textile use, the thickness of which is slight in relation to the width. In rope making, the filament can be used flat or twisted. Flemish Eye - Eye made in the end of a laid rope by unlaying one or more strands and forming the eye with the remaining material. The unlaid strands are then worked into the eye in the opposite direction to those initially used to form the eye, and the splice is formed in Short splice /

End - Single base yarn or roping yarn which is wound parallel to similar yams on to a bobbin prior to braiding. End Fitting-Fitting (For example, a hook, link or ring) to which the rope is connected permanently by splicing, and which forms part of the load-bearing connection between the load and the lifting or supporting device. Endless Sling - Length of rope formed into a sling by having its ends joined together by a short splice, as shown in Fig. 6.

FIG.6 ENDLESSSLING Europe Wine - Twine made of 4-ply flax yarn used for the usual manner, as shown in Fig. 7. sealing milk cans in the dairy farms and also for hand stitching for palliasses. This term is popular in the military dairy farms. F Factor of Safety - The factor by which the breaking load of the rope is divided to determine its safe working load. Fag End - Untwisted end of a cordage. Fancy Line purposes. Braided cord used for decorative Foregoer-See
FIG. 7 FLEMISH EYE `Fore Line'.

Fathom - A unit of linear measurement equal to 6 ft and abbreviated as `fm'. Fender Lanyard - A 3-strand ala or sisal rope, usually of 76 to 90 mm circumference used for lashing fenders (a protection for a ship's side against piers, etc, cotisting of a bundle of rope, etc) to the rail. 5

Fore Hand Line - A 3-strandhemp or man-made fibre rope used in whale catching for connecting the fore line to the whale line. Fore Line - A short length of 3 -strand hemp or manmade fibre rope used in whale catching. It connects the harpoon to the fore hand line.

ES 3871 : 1996 Forelooper Forerunner-See See `Fore Line'.

`Fore Line'.

laid into itself to produce the appearance of a ring of rope with no significant variation in diameter, as shown in Fig. 8.

FIG.8 GROMMETI Furring -

Development of a fur or pile on the surface of a rope, particularly a man-made fibre rope, and especially those made from multifilament, shortly after the rope has been placed into service. Furring is a normal indicator of fair wear and tear, and is not normally considered to be detrimental. G
Gantliue - 3-strand rope used over a single sheave for raising or lowering objects. Garden Reel Line - A cord treated with preservative and supplied in reel form for use in horticulture. Garden Wine in horticulture. Gasketting -

Guide - BGded or laid natural or man-made fibre line which is knotted in a particular manner to indicate a direction. For example the way back to safety. Guy Line 1) Of rescue work plaited cord made from hemp or polyester tibre which is used by fire-authorities in conjunction with lowering line as a study guide to the main line. 2) Of tents line used to support a tent or amast.

Weather resistant twine, mainly used
1) Manila, sisal or man-made fibre 3strand rope used to hold or steady some object such as a pole or mast. 2) A 3-strand manila rope used in the shipping industry with derricks guy tackle. H Halter Rope Soft lard rope used by farmers for se-

of hemp, jute or hard fibre twisted together either tarred or untarred used for legging of steam pipes. Gag Rope - (sometimes termed `gob rope') Secondary rope used in towing in harbours and narrow waters. It braces the towing rope to the centre line of the tug at the after end.when being pulled stern first by the vessel which it is assisting.
Grab Line - A line beclcetted round the outside of life boats just below the gunwale, forming loops, to which men in the water can cling on

Several yam

curinganimals. Halyard or sails. Laid or braided rope used for hoisting tlags

Hambn, Line 1. Of Endless Mooring Assemblies Endless mooring assembly made from large sized ropes, usually with splices in each leg at mid span.

Small 3 -ply tarred or white line used for lashings and &zings.

2. Of Endless Long-spliced Assemblies - End less rope assembiy made by long splicing so that no significant variations of diameter in the grommet areobservable. 3. Of
Endless Assemblies Made From a Continuous Length - Endless rope assemblies madetmmacontimrous length of single strand

Hammer Line -Rope made out of finest grade manila fibre, 4 strands, hard laid with a graph&d core and having diameter 48 to 62 mm, used for pile driver hammer. Hand Lead Line - Line used for taking soundings in shallow waters. Hangman's Rope 4-strand Italian hemp rope ofspecial constmction used for administering capital punish-

IS 3871 : 1996
Hard Eye - Eye spliced into the rope which contains within it a rigid thimble or similar reinforcement. Hard Fibres - Fibres obtained from the leaves or leaf stalks of various monocotyledonous plants, for example sisal and abaca. Hard Laid Rope - Rope in which the length of lay of the strands and/or of the rope is shorter than usual, resulting in a stiffer and less flexible rope. Hank -

rope caused by the removal of kinks by pulling them out of the rope by force, causing a corkscrew deformation of the strands themselves.
Horseline - 3 -strand hawser laid manila rope used for towing barges on canals by horses. Houseline - A flexible twine consisting of three twisted yarns, twisted together, each having a linear density of about 2.5 kilotex, usually tarred, and used for tying.

Loose coil of specified length.

I
Indicator Line - 3ply Italian hemp or flax line used for rotating the engine indicator during the determination of indicator diagrams on slow running reciprocating engines or compressors. Identification Yarn - Usually coloured yarn used for identification of quality of the rope. Interstrand Powdering - Accumulation of powder in the centre of a rope as the result of fair wear and tear, . and of the flexure of the rope. It may be observed by unlaying the rope gently. J Junk Condemned

Harpoon Line - A line attached to the harpoon used for catching whales or big fish. (See a/so Whale Line'). Harvesting mine See `Agricultural Twine'.

Hawser - A rope generally of a diameter of more than 40 mm mainly used for the mooring of ships.

Rope of 3 strands where the strands are twisted to form helices around the central axis. It is generally of Z-lay (see Fig. 9).

Hawser Laid Rope -

cordage of sizes 102 mm and
K

above.

Kenaf is a bast fibre obtained from Hibiscus species. The plant yields a fibre comparable to jute. It is produced in India, USSR Brazil, United States and Thailand.

Kenaf -

Fro. 9
Hayband -

HAWSER-LAID

(

~-STRAND ) ROPE

See `Agricultural Twine'. See ` Agricuhural Twine'.

Hay Baler Twine Hay Twine Headfast -

See `Baler Twine'. Soft laid rope of 9-strand cable laid

Kernmantel - Braided polyamide (nylon) climbing rope comprising of a braided sheath enclosing either a braided core, or a core composed of parallel yarns. The core is made from a medium tenacity material whilst the sheath is produced from normal high tenacity libre. The resulting rope has a very high extension and energy absorption under load so that the falling climber is arrested at as low a deceleration as is possible, thus minimizing injury.
NOTE The name is derived from the German `sheath'. `Kern' meaning `core', and `Mantel meaning

construction.
Heald Cord -See Heaving Line Henequen `D&by Cord'. Rope or line for throwing across an

Kickling -Winding

au old rope around a heavy rope

to protect it from chafing.
Kink - Loop which forms in the rope as a result of excess turn being concentrated in a specific section within the length. It is generally due to over twisting or winding the cordage against the lay. Knit&s The strands of two ropes twisted together.

open space to haul in a larger rope. Henequen is the leaffibre obtained from the plant .4guvefourcroydes and is cultivated mainly in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico. Eockle (Ho&Ii@
-

Deformation of strands in a laid 7

IS 3871 : 1996 Knot Rope - A rope or cable generally consisting of long-fibred hemp (with the exclusion of tow) and having along its whole length a succession of single knots, regularly spaced. L Laid Rope -Rope in which 3 or more strands are twisted to form helices around the central axis. Lanyard - Braided or cable-laid cord of sizes varying from 13 to 19 mm used for holding knife, whistle, pistol, etc. The cord is made from cotton or worsted yarn, but mainly from cotton yam. Lashing - A 3-strand, soft laid rope, used for securing Fargo in transit or for tying up or for securing any object. The rope is made from sisal, hemp, jute, cotton or man-made fibre yarn. Lashing Rope - A rope intended for joining together two or more objects such as a scaffolding at the points of interse$ion. The rope is also used for securing loads to a firm base, for example, the load on a lorry or deck of a vessel, etc. Lay - The length of one complete turn or between two successive piaitin points of the same strand, measured parallel to the axis of the rope. The lay is expressed in millimetres (see Fig. 10). Laying - Twisting of strands to form a rope. (See also `Direction of Lay').
Lea
10B Length of Lay for 8-Strand Rope Plaited

4

PITCH -_c

10A Pitch of Rope

7
ONE

LAY

1
FIG. 10 LAYAND~TCHOFROPE

CROSS SECTION

a>The unit of count system used mainly for flax.
Sometimes used for manila and sisal also (lb/3OOyd). 2.

b) Length of cotton yarn measuring 120 yd
(l09.6m)woundin80roundswithawrapreelof 1.5 yd (1.370 m) circumference Lead Line - A dressed hemp line of S-lay (cable-laid) used for taking depth soundings. Left Hand Lay - See `Direction of Lay'. Leg - Component load bearing part of rope in an assembly where the total load is sustained by a number of such parts. Len@ of Lay -See Llle Line 1. Of Marine Work- Ahighquallity ropeused for supporting a breeches buoy in rescue operation.
8

Of Other Rescue Work - Line connecting a workman with a safety crew so that he may be rescued in the event of his being overcome, for example, by fumes.

Line - Laid, cabled, twisted, or plaited cord having a diameter of less than 4 mm. (See also `Rope'). Linear Density - The mass per unit length. For ropes, the linear density is generally expressed in kilotex (mass inkilograms per10OOm,ormassingramspermetre). It is measured under a tension defined for each type of rope. Lizard - A rope with several ring or thimbles spliced into it. Lobster Mar Line - 2-ply manila twine usually tarred used for making lobster creels. Log Line - Plaited line mainly used on ships for recording speed.

`Pitch (or lay)`.

IS 3871: 1996 LongSplice-Joiningoftworopesofsimilarsize without the increase in section associated with short splicing as shown in Fig. 11. It is carried out by unlaying a strand from one rope and laying into the space thus formed, a strand from the other rope. The ends of the strands are knotted into the rope, and are staggered along the lengths of the ropes with a distance of at least 20 rope lays between them ( see Fig. 11). Marling-&e `Marline'. `Bricklayer's Line'

Mason's Line-See Mesta -See

`Kenaf' .

Messenger - Light rope secured to a larger rope to transfer it, for example, from ship to shore. Mooring Rope - A synthetic or hard fibre rope used for tying the vessels to the moorings. Motty - A 3-ply low quality hemp cord, tarred used for attaching tokens to trucks in coal mines.

Fro. 11 LONGSPLICE ( PRIOR TO FINAL TYING AND TUCKING OF Sm) Lowering Line - 3-strand or braided (often double braided) rope which is used by firemen and others in rescue operations. M Mackerel Line mackerel fishing. 3-strand line used primarily for

Mountaineering Ropes - A rope made from highest grades of natural fibres or man-made textile fibres of high breaking energy. Mullet Line - 2- or 3-strand line used primarily for making mullet nets. Multileg Sling - Sling comprising a number of legs, the ends of which are joined to a common ring or link by splicing, preferably utilizing thimbles. In use, the ring or link is placed on the hook of the lifting device, and the legs are cormected to, and support, the load. The lower ends of the legs are formed into eye by splicing, and may be attached to suitable end fittings. Each leg should be made of the same material, and the legs are usually, but not necessarily, of the same size of rope, and of the same length. N Netting Wine - Twine used for making fishing nets, sports nets, and garden nets.

Main Core - Hard laid rope used in the centre of steel wire ropes to support the strands. Maquay See `Cantala'. Marline - A flexible twine consisting of two twisted yarns, twisted together, each having a linear density of about 2.5 Kilotex, usually tarred, and used for tying. Marrying - That part of the operation in producing a butt splice in laid ropes where the unlaid strands of one rope are laid in between the unlaid strands of the second rope as shown in Fig. 12.

FIG.`~~MARRYING (~-STRAND ROPE) Mattress Twine - Italian hemp or flax twine used in tire manufacture of mattresses. Mode Factor - Factor which takes into account the geometry of an assembly, the multiplicity of parts, and empirically determined constants. Mop Levine - 5-ply hemp or tlax tine manuthctnreof mop heads. used in the Nomina;LCvryingCapa&y-Maximwnmasswhicha 9 Nettlestuff - A hemp twine used in the Navy for making hammock clews. New Zealaud Flax See `Phormium'.

NewZeabudIGup-se`-.

Ls 3871 : 1996

single part of splice rope is permitted to sustain in straight tension. 0
Ordinary Lay - Laid rope in which the direction of twist in the roping yarn, and the finished rope are the same, and where the direction of lay of the strand is in the opposite direction. P Packing tiine -

Buoyant line attached to a floating mooring assembly at an offshore location which permits the mooring assembly to be drawn on board the vessel without the need for mooring boats.
Pilot Lead Line -

Pick-up Line -

A line used by the river survey department for taking depth soundings. The line is made from jute or glax yam. ( See also `Lead Line' ). Piping - Polished hemp, cotton, jute cord used for bedding in upholstery.
Pitch (of Rope) -See `Lay'.

Twine used for packaging purposes. rope for small boats.

Painter -Mooring

Parachute Cord -A braided cord with or without central core made from nylon or cotton used as rigging lines in parachutes. Parcelling

Plait Pitch - Longiiudinal distance along the axis of the rope from a point on the crown of one plait to the corresponding point one plait along, as shown in Fig. 14. Plaited Cord -

Cord of plaited construction. ( See also

`Braided Cord ). 1. Of Binding a Rope - Binding a rope with strips of fabric each turn overlapping that preceding it by half the width of the strip, as shown in Fig. 13. 2. Of Winding- Winding a smaller item of cord age on to a main member in a spiral formation such that each turn touches the two adjacent turns on either side.
NOTE The terms `braiding' and `plaiting' are considered to by synonymous.

Plumb Line -See Plucking -Form

`Bricklayer's Line'.

of damage where a loop or a series of loops are raised in the surface or surfaces of the strand or strands of a rope by contact with a pointed object. Phrcking may also result in the raising ofloops from the plaits of braided cordage by similar means. spunyam I

SHNtNGANDWoRMING FIG.13 PARCELUNG,
Personal Line -

Braided or lard natural or man-made fibre line which is connected to an anchorage and paid out as required. The line is knotted in a particular mammr to indicate the way back to safety.
Phormium - Fibre obtained from the leaves of the phormiumplant (Phormium tenaxforst).

fibrous entity which may be complete in itself (for example, single ply) or which may be a componentinamorecomplexcordageitem(forexample 3-QfY yarn). PointLineAsmallsize3-strandmanilaorsisalline used for &zings, lashings, etc.

Ply -Twisted

10

IS 3871 : 1996 Ratline - 3-strand tarred rope used horizontally tween the shrouds of a vessel to form a ladder. be-

Realization Factor - A factor for the calculation ofthe breaking load of a rope on the basis of the breaking load of its constituent parts. Reduction Factor - Factor used to derive the nominal carrying capacity of a single part of spliced rope from the minimum breaking load of the unspliced rope. It takes account of the increasing susceptibility to mechanical damage with decreasing rope diameter and also the loss in strength due to spiicing. Rescue Line 3-strand hawser laid, or S-strand or 16-plaited man-made fibre rope used for rescue work. Rifle Line Braided man-made fibre line fired between ships at sea to enable a larger rope to be nassed between them. Right Hand Lay-See `Direction of Lay'

-T
--L
I pitcn I

One plait

Rocket Line - Unkinkable Italian hemp or man-made fibre line attached to a rocket for sea rescue work. Rope - A textile product not less than 4 mm diameter, generally consisting of three or four strands cabled or plaited together, with or without a core. l-strand cabled ropes are usually without a core: 4 -strand cabled ropes usually have a central core. Rope Gauge -An instrument used for measuring the circumference and diameter of the rope (see Fig 14). Roping Twine - 3-ply hemp or flax untreated twine used for whipping medium sized rope ends, and for sewing rope to canvas. Roping Yarn -Yam Rounding 102 mm. from which a strand is produced.

Power Transmission Rope - A 3- or 4-strand rope, usually made cotton and sometimes of manila or sisal yarq used on pulleys attached to shafts for transmission of power.

of

Primary Rope-Anyoneofthe3 hawser-laid(3-strand) rope, all the three of which, when twisted together, form a cable laid rope. Primary Strand - Strand which forms part of any of the ropes used as the secondary strands of a cable laid rope. Primary Yam - Two or more base yarns twisted together, and on which subsequent twisting operations have to be performed. Pull-through Line, or Pull-through Cord - 6-strand hemp or man-made fibre line used in cord cleaning the boresof rifles.

Condemned cordage or sizes less than

page-_n~perunitmassoflinearmaterialthat is, the inverse of linear density.
NOi`E Linear density and runnage are usually expressed in the following units: Yarns-tex or metresikilogram; Cords-ktex or kilometresikilogram; Ropes-gramsimetre, or kilograms/l 00 metres, apd kilograms/220 metres. s

Q Quilting Twine - 2- or 3- ply Italian hemp twine used
for upholstery and bedding R Rappe&gRope (Mormtaineerin@- A mountaineering rope nsed by climbers to come down from steep and vertical pitches. 11

Safety Factor -See

`Factor of Safety'.

Safe Working Load - The maximum load t'J which rope may be subjected; it is a function of the fixed safety factor.

IS 3871 : 1996 Safety Line High quality rope used for safety purposes by personnel engaged in dangerous work. See also `life line'. Seine Net Rope - Rope which connects the fishing vessel and the net during seine fishing operations. Seine Twine -

Safety Net - Net made from the highest quality natural or man-made fibre materials used for safety purposes by personnel working at a height.
Salt Content - Total chloride content, expressed in terms of common salt (sodium chloride) found in the fibre.
NOTE natural Testing for this purpos ;s normally confined to

3-ply twine used in the construction of seine fishing nets. Seizing - Winding, under tension, a smaller item of cordage onto a main member in a spiral formation such that each turn touches the two adjacent turns on either side of it
Selvagee -

Skein of rope with another rope wound

around it. Sennit (or Sinnet) - Braided rope of various kinds.

fibres to be used for the cores of steel wire ropes.

Sally -

Fringed lower end of a bull rope.
-

Sansevieria

Leaf fibre from the perennial plant Sansevieria and is grown in Arabia, India, Ceylon anu Africa.

Serving - Binding a splice or a length of rope with close turns usually. but not necessarily, of spun yarn or marline. The rope is usuaily wormed and parcelled before serving, as shown in Fig. 13. Wooden implement for applying a serving to a rope as shown in Fig. 13. It has a score in the head to fit the rope, and a wooden handle.
Serving Mallet Shopping Levine See `Packing Twine'.

Sash Cord - Braided or plaited cord used on sash windows in buildings. Scrambling Net -Net made from natural or man-made fibre used on the side of a vessel to assist in rescue work and boarding operations. Sealing Twine 2-ply Italian hemp or flax twine used

in conjunction with lead seals for security purposes. Seaming Twine - Z-ply hemp twine chiefly used for sewing canvas and other heavy fabrics.
Secondary Strand -

Short Splice - Conventional method of joining by splicing two g-strand plaited or laid ropes. Short splicing comprises marrying the strands, and tucking the strands of one rope into the body ofrhe other, and vice versa, as shown in Fig. 6.

Rope forming one of the strands

of a cable laid rope.

Shroud-Laid Rope - 4-strand rope with or without a core, with the strands twisted to form a helix around the central axis (see Fig. 16).

FIG.15 ROPEGAUGE
12

Is 3871: 1996 Sounding Line-See

`Lead Line'.

Splicing - Method of joining a rope to itself, to another rope, or of producing an eye in its end or ends by interweaving the strands to give a positive and secure join which retains a high proportion of the original strength of the rope.

A combined rope made out of coir or manmade fibre up to 192 mm diamter used for towing purposes.
Springs made with 6 strands over a main core, each strand of which has alternating wire and fibre components laid over a fibre core. Square Rope - It is made up of 8 strands, being laid 2 over and 2 under with 4 strands of right-hand and 4 strands cf left-hand twist. The rope is highly flexible and practically unkinkable and is normally made of manila, sisal or man-made fibers. See Fig. 19. St Helena Hemp -See Spring Lay Rope -Rope

FIG.16 SHROUD-LAID (~-STRAND ) ROPE
Signal Halyard See `Halyard'.

Single Sling - Length of rope formed into a sling by having an eye spliced at each end of it, as shown in Fig. 17.

`Phormimn'.

FIG.17 SINGLESLING
Sinnet See `Semrit'.

Size of Rope - Circumference of rope (mm or in).
Skein -

Loose coil of indeterminate length, but usually of known weight.
S-Lay -See

`Direction of Lay'.

Sling - Cordage article designed for the purpose of raising, lowering, or suspending loads. Sling Rope Small Stuff Spliced to form an endless loop.

All cordage of sizes less than 13 mm.

Soft Eye - Eye made by forming the end of the rope into a loop, and splicing the ends back into the standing part as shown in Fig. 18.

Soft Laid Rope - Rope in which the length of lay of the strands and/or of the rope is longer than usual, resulting in a more flexible rope which is more easily deformed. Fibres obtained from the outer part of the stems of various dicotyledonous plants, for example, jute, flax, hemp, etc.
Soft Fibres w

..~

____

1

internal measureme

`nt

FIG. 18 Soa EYE 13

IS 3871 : 1996

material by its linear density to produce a value for the tenacity of the material in N/tex.
Tensile Stress - Stress applied to stretch an article. It is calculated by dividing the applied force by the original cross sectional area.
NOTE Considerations of tensile stress are rarely encountered in cordage design because of complexity of determining the cross sectional area either of the stressed cordage. or of reduction in cross sectional area when that cordage is strained.

FIG. 10

SQIJAREROPE

Standing Part - That part of rope which when under load, is clear of the load or the support. Strand A product obtained by joining and twisting

Tension for Measurement - The force applied to the rope at the moment of measurement of its main characteristics (linear density or net mass per meter, diameter).

The tension is defined for each type and dimensions of rope.
Thatching Twine - Treated manila twine used for securing the reeds when thatching roofs. Thimble - Rigid, shaped component for insertion into an eye for the purpose of protecting the eye from contact damage, as showr: In Fig. 20.

together several yarns or groups of yarns twisted together.
Strand Core - Core used in the centre of strands in the manufacture of steel wire ropes. Strop -See

`Single Sling'

Rope used to maintain tension on a moving rope when it is transferred from a mooring winch or capstan to the bitts of a vessel. Stopper Rope Strap -SW SUTLI -

-Sling'. An Indian term for twine used for packing

purposes.
Sunn Hemp - It is a bast fibre obtained from the plant Crotalaria juncea, cultivated in India, Ceylon and

Pakistan. It is also known as Benaras or Bengal hemp according to the name of the trading centre.
T Tapered Rope - Rope with strain-bearing part thicker than the rest of the rope.
FIG.

Tapered Splice -

Short splice in wtuch the material Thimbled Eye - Eye spliced into a rope which contains a thimble within it. Thread - Slender cord made from two or more yarns twisted together.

20

THIMBLE ( HEAT(T-SHAPED )

composing the strands is reduced progressively as the splice is made.
Cord - 3-ply maniia or sisal cord, hard laid in the `S' direction, used injute spinning frames as tension aids for bobbins. Temperband Tent Line -

l-strand iine used for tent lines.

Tenacity - Expreswon of stress reiated to mass, rather than the more usual relationship to cross-sectional area. It is deternuned by dlvldmg the breaking strength of the

twist two or more components about each other to form a helix around the axis of the resulting laid item, which may be a strand or a rope.
To Lay -To Tracing Line curtains. 3-strand line used for lacing up tent

14

IS 3871 : 1996

Braided or twisted cordage used in the manufacture of trawl nets.
Tubed Twine - Twine encased in a plastic covering, generally used as a domestic clothes line.

Trawl Twine -

V Variable LoadingLoading pattern where the applied force is not constant with respect to time. The upper and lower forces to which the article is subjected vary in magnitude and the periods, over which the force is applied, may also vary.

Penetration of all the strands beneath the correct strands of the standing part in a splice. Splices are defined by their number of tucks. For example a 3 tuck splice has all the strands ofthe rope tucked three times along the standing part of the rope to form an eye. The butt spliced equivalent has all the strands of one rope tucked into the standing part of the other and vice versa, so that there is a total of six tucks.
Tufting Twine -See

Tuck -

W
Water Laid Rope See `Cable-Laid Rope'.

Well Drilling Cable -

High quality cable laid manila rope used for oil well drilling.
`Well Drilling Cable'.

Well Drilling Rope -See Whale Line -

`Mattress Twine'.

Twine - Product consisting of one or more -yams twisted or wound to form a structure of continuous length.

A 3-strand hemp or man-made fibre line used for catching whales by harpoon. The line is made from hemp or man-made fibre yarn. (See also `Harpoon Line'),
Whipcord Whipping -

-

A twine composed of a single yam is known as `monofilament' of `simple yarn'. twisted twine is composed of two or more yams twisted together.

A 3-strand cord made from jute, flax or hemp yams. It is used for fishing. Securing a loose end of a rope by means of a twine. This prevents the rope from unlaying.

-A

White Rope - Untarred cordage. Whiting Line - A 3-strand light weight line with soft lay used when fishing for whiting and for other purposes. The line is made from hemp or flax yarn.
Work Line -Hemp

- A cabled twine is composed of two or more yarns cabled together.
U Upholsterer's `pwine - 3-ply Italian hemp or flax twine used in upholstery and bedding.

line, tarred, 3,6,9 and 12 strands and of 5,6 and 8 mm diameter used for worming in marine rigging.

Unkinkable Lay - Lay in which the direction of twist of the yarn and the strand are the same, and where the lay of the finished rope is in the opposite direction. This eliminates the tendency of the rope to kink. Material which may be added to the polymer used for the extrusion of man-made fibre to improve of the fibres to the resistance photodegradation.
W Inhibitor See `UVadditive' UV Additive -

Wrecking - Rope made out of manila or man-made fibre usually 80 mm diameter used for marine salvedge operation. Working Load Limit Worming -

The maximum mass which a sling or sling assembly is permitted to lift in use. Binding spun yarn or other small cords into the hollows ( grooves ) between the strands of a laid rope to produce a smoother surface, as shown in Fig. 13. z
`Z' Lay See `Direction of Lay'.

15

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian SfandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. TX 09 ( 0037 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841 337 84 99, 337 85 61 337 86 26, 337 86 62 60 38 43 I 60 20 25 23502 16,2350442 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 83 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. HYDERABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. FARIDABAD. COIMB ATORE. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. LUCKNOW. KANPUR. JAIPUR.

Prmtcd at New India PrintingPress,

Khuja. Indm

