UDC 001.4 : 621.869

1$:10453(Part2)-1985
(Reaffirmed 2004)

Indian

Standard

GCOSSARY OF TERMS FOR BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT
PART 2 STACKING, LOADING AND RECLAIMING EQGIPMENT

1. SmPo-Cover equipment. 1. Terminology

the definitions

of terms used in connection

with

stacking,

loading and reclaiming

2.1 Adaptor Plate -A
Iroper alignment

fabricated machined of pulleys or wheels.

plate

on which

pillow

blocks,

etc,

are mounted for

2.2 Agitation -

A phenomenon of stirring the cross-sectional surface of the pile of loose bulk naterial by means of harrow spikes or rods in order that the agitated particles of the pile fall down to the root of pile for reclaiming operation.

2.3 Agitator-Set of spikes or rods fixed/attached pile surface. See also `agitation'. 2.4 Alignment -

to the face of harrow

structures

for agitating the

A condition in which the partMar parts or components of the machine said to be accurately assembled in line with defined tolerances for designed operation.

2.5 Allowable Stress -The permiss'ible operating stress determined by the application of a suitable Allowable stress will be reduced for shock loads and other safety factor to the ultimate strength. adverse operating conditions.
2.6 Ambient Temperature -The equipment. surrounding normal atmospheric temperature at the location of the

An anemometer mounted on top 01 2.7 Anemometer-An appliance for indicating wind velocities. the machine is used for sensing critical wind velocities and for sending audio/visual control signal foi manual/automatic shut down of entire machine operation. 2.8 Annular Ring Chute -A backing plate in the form of circular rim to hold the material bucket carries the material to the area of discharge in case of cell-less bucket wheel. 2.9 Apex of Harrow-Top point of a triangular shaped harrow. under certain conditior till tht

2.10 Arching - The bridging of material between sides of chute or hopper and consequently flow of material ceases.

2.11 Arrangement
arrangement

of Gantry Support Bracket for portal gantry.

Supporting

bracket

tiith

ball and

socket swivellinj

2.12 Articulated Counterbalance Boom - A combined
imparts generally different but balanced articulated

mechanism of boom and movement of the two. complete

counterweight

tha

2.13 Assembly of Head Pulley - A terminal
block, shaft, adopter plates, etc.

pulley at head with

outfits, namely,

pillow

Adopted 1 March 1985

I INDIAPI MANAK

0

February 1980, ISI

I

Gr 10

STANDARDS INSTITUTION BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.14
trailer

Attachmentor chain

A part assembled is moved.

to trolley,

trailer

or chain

with

whose

connection

the trolley,

2.15

Automatic Conveyor Scale ( first revision )`. Automatic Despatch Control-

See IS : 4240-1984

`Glossary

of

conveyor

terms

and

definition

2.16

See IS : 4240-I

984.

2.17

Automatic Digging Method - An automatic controlled method by which programmed adjustment of slewing speed in term of Cos 4 law; programmed advanced step-distance of traverse for setting the slice depth; limiting of slewing angle while digging and when proceeding to the next cut minimizing all setting up and adjustment times while keeping and reversal of slewing direction; within permissible acceleration and decelaration values can be achieved. 2.18 Automatic LubricatorSee IS : 4240-1984 (see ~a/so 2.106).

2.19

Automatic Rail Clamp -A mechanical clamping device operated electrically or hydroelectrically to grip the track rail for preventing any shifting of rail mounted equipment in nonoperating condition. 2.20 Automatic Sampler See IS : 4240-l 984. can be controlled efficiency by using

2.21

Automation - An unmanned automatic operation by which all operations centrally, by elimination of human error, damage and mistake achieving maximum electric devices, etc.

2.22 Back Stop - A mechanical device to prevent reversal of loaded tripper under action of gravity when forward travel isinterrupted.

belt on stack

or

conveyor

or

2.23 Raffle - A device placed across the belt at head end of boom conveyor -to deflect the stream of bulk material discharged from buckets of digging wheel towards the tail end of boom in case of reclaiming operation. This

stacking 2.24
2.25

operation

device is actuated

to pass out the material

with

electromechanical

for stock piling.

actuator

which

lifts

the

baffle

in case of

Baffle Plate-The

cross plate used in baffle See 2.23. Lifting

is termed as baffle

plate.

Baffle Plate Liftable -

2.26

Baffle Plate Actuation -

the baffle plate by electromechanical

actuators. or trolley

2.27 Balanced Drive - A drive so designed traverse of the machine may be synchronized

that two or more such drives on carriage to pull predetermined shares of load. structure and holding

2.28

Bale - Metal ties under tension connected to counterweight lever boom by other end to keep the boom in suspension. Bale Suspension See 2.28.

the

canti-

2.29

2.30 Ball Bearing Slewing Ring - A circular rim fitted with one or more rows of ball bearings ~with or without gear teeth along the periphery of the rim. With the virtue of construction one half could be mounted on fixed structure of the machine with other~half attached to the -part of structure subject to slewing motion.

2.31
bridge

BarrelFitted with staggered type rotary blending/reclaiming

buckets constitutes equipment.

the rotary

and main reclaiming

element

in a

2.32 Barrel Type Reclaimer-A-mobile machine comprising essentially of a long hollow barrel having buckets arranged on the periphery of a barrel in a staggered fashion with reclaiming operation covering the entire width of stockpile through a cross conveyor mounted on the machine. 2.33 Base Portion Base construction of plate work of a cone gantry 2 or central column.

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.34 Bed Blending - Number of different raw into one raw material with required characteristics 2.35 Benching Operation with constant slice height. In this operation materials of varying for the process. of material quality can be homogenized

reclaiming

takes place along

the pile length

2.36 Bifurcated Chute -A chute separating into two branches and with deflector plate or flopper deliver the material to either or both the branches. Thus it can be used to bypass the material and also used to transfer the material on either or both the boom conveyors of stacker machine to make the stock pile. 2.37 Blending Efficiency -The ratio of mean standard deviation of material properties of input flow to the pile and mean standard deviation of material properties of output material properties of output material flow from the pile in a bed blending system. It shall be given as a ratio. 2.38 Block Operation -In this operation reclaimation is conducted across the pile cross-section with variable sloving speed of boom and by preset advancing (advanced steps) and reversing the machine. The entire cross-section of pile is thus cut in preset numbers of layers by boom luffing. 2.39 Bogie -The box construction of plate work to hold one or more track position and also supporting the carriage and main structure of the machine. 2.40 2.41 Bogie Assembly Bogie for Portal-The Bogie fitted with traverse wheels and necessary traversing wheels in

attachments. radial blending machine.

bogie supporting

the portal of stacker bridgefor

pivot or hinge 2.42 Bolster - A pad or support plate incorporating of stacker or boom conveyor to permit vertical and/or horizontal unit.

features for tail end anchorage rotation/movement for anchored

or overhanging structure that supports or contains the component 2.43 Boom - A cantilevered In case parts of conveyor. It may be fixed, hinged or pivoted at tail end on the machine structure. of boom type reclaimer bucket wheels with its drive assembly is mounted on free end or head end of such cantilevered structure and is capable of luffing and slewing. 2.44 Boom Cantilever-The overhanging portion of boom beyond the hinges or pivot of machine point. and

The horizontal distance between the 2.45 Boom Centresdigging wheel and may also be referred to as boom radius. 2.46 Boom Conveyor -A termed as boom conveyor. conveyor for stockpiling

centre

or turntable

or reclaiming

-operation

mounted

on

boom is

2.47 Boom Conveyor Drive - Boom conveyor drive is generally fixed at tail end or in some cases at electric motor, reduction unit coupling, intermediate location at return belt side. Drive is through brake, etc. 2.48 2.49 Boom Head End -The Boom Hinge farthest terminal point of the boom from the machine centre. action.

A type of support

of the boom at tail end to permit the boom for luffing

from the centre 2.50 Boom Radius - The radius generated pulley or centre of bucket wheel is referred to as the slewing be the same as the boom length. 2.51 Boom Slewing of which is mounted 2.52

of the machine to the tip of discharge boom radius which may not necessarily

Type Reclaimer - The reclaimer machine with the digging wheel for reclaiming operation. A box or latticed The terminal point construction of boom

slewing

boom at the head end

Boom Structure Tail @?d-

for the purpose of a boom. resting near or at the centre of the machine or

f,5;a;y:m urn ,

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.54 Bracing - Diagonal or horizontal of the structure is termed as bracing. 2.55 Brake Drum Coupling-A coupling member t? stabilize the vertical or horizontal running member

with

drum flange

to suit the brake shoe grip. to completely stop the unit on which

2.56 Braking Time the brake is applied.

Time required

`in course of deceleration

2.57 Bridge -The adequately designed structures in the form of box or latticed frame spanning across the stockpile with both ends supported on traversing carriage or trucks or with one end supported on traversing truck and~other on fixed central column with slewing ring assembly. On such structure are mounted the reclaiming elements, namely, bucket wheel carriage with harrow structure or chain scraper with harrow structures and harrow wagons all to reclaim the materials in transverse direction of the stockpile. 2.58 Bridge ConveyorThe conveyor mounted on the bridge across the reclaimed material and carry in a direction transverse to the length 07 the material on to a fixed and ground based reclaim conveyor. 2.59 2.60 Bridge Girders Bridge Supporting Sides of the bridge Section -The of either plate or latticed supporting stockpile pile and to receive discharge the the

construction. the ends of the bridge.

part of structure

2.61 Bridge Type Bucket Wheel Reclaimer - In such reclaimer rotary bucket wheel together with or without rake bucket wheel either one -number or two numbers are mounted on the carriage in turn Bucket wheel while rotating and traversing with mounted on a heavy bridge across the stockpile. the help of the carriage across the pile reclaim the material at the foot of pile brought down by the rake agitating the pile surface. In such machine the chain cover fitted with scrapin~g blades i 2.62 Bridge Type Scraper-Reclaimeris mounted across the span of pile to reclaim the material through scraping at bottom or foot of the pile. The material for scraping is brought down to the foot of pile by harrow mounted on the same bridge. 2.63 Bucket - Fabricated container mounted on digging wheel, barrel/drum respective reclaimers, constitute a vital digging element in such reclaimers. The frontal 2.64 Bucket Lipmaterial while digging. 2.65 Bucket Side edge of bucket generally made of tough or scraper chain of fhe

material

to confront

the

Sides of bucket in contact

with

material

pressure while

in digging

operation.

2.66 Bucket Side Pressure - In digging operation sides of the bucket coming against the materials This side pressure of the pile undergo certain pressure which resist the slewing motion of the boom. has to be overcome by the slewing drive unit. 2.67 Bucket Support WheelSee 2.70. lip to pierce or loosen

2.68 Bucket Tooth -Tooth made of hardened material is fitted on the bucket the materials to be dug in the operation of reclaiming or excavating.

2.69 Bucket VolumeWater level capacity of materials content in terms of volume or geometrical volume of bucket is referred to as bucket volume. With the ring volume added to the geometrical volume of bucket is termed as nominal volume of bucket. 2.70 Bucket Wheelequal spacings along A circular shaped sturdy frame having required number of buckets outer periphery, constitutes a main element for digging operation. fitted at

2.71 Bucket Wheel Drive - Bucket wheel is hydraulic or electric hydraulic pump motor/electric motor, reduction utiit, fluid coupling, shafts, etc,

driven. Drive unit, consists of un~iversal coupling with propellt+y

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.72 Bucket Wheel Excavator - A mobile equipment mounted generally on crawler tracks and having bucket wheel mounted. on luffing and slewable boom for excavating hard soil or consolidated material. 2.73 Bucket Wheel ReclaimerA mobile equipment having bucket wheel mounted on boom or bridge carriage as a main element for reclaiming bulk materials from stock pile. See a/so `Rail mounted bucket wheel bocm reclaimer' and `Rotary bucket wheel reclaimer'. 2.74
other

Bucket-Wheel end the-drive

Shaft-The shaft on one end of wh~ich is mounted the bucket wheel and on unit and itself supported on two pillow blocks across the boom at its head end. fitted on the front or rear end of mobile equipment to absorb the

2.75 Buffer-A cushion-device shock load in case of collision. 2.76 Buffering the continuous

-This function providing sufficient reserve of blended raw materials to guarantee operation of the processing plant under all normal circumstances.

2.77 Buffer Stand - A vertical stand fitted with cushion pad with spring or wood on any resilient material, generally erected/fixed at the end of track against which the buffer fitted on mobile equipment collide and set the equipment at dead rest without much Jerk. 2.78 BypassA phenomenon to divert the incoming material from the normal direction of the flow

keeping the operation of the machine for which the material was brought in abeyance.

2.79

Bypass Arrangement

-

Coordinated

assembly to bypass the incoming

material.

2.80 Bypass Chute desired direction. 2.81
the

The chute by means of which the incoming material is diverted or bypassed to

cabin

Cabin Adjustment Actuator - An electro-mechanical device or hydraulic device -which adjust position always in horizontal position, irrespective of the boom position while luffing. stacker or machine alike from a cabin

2.82 Cabin Controls - Means of operating the reclaimer, mounted on the machine at most servelient point. 2.83

stabilized

Cabin Stabilization -The method by which the operator's cabin mounted in horizontal plans irrespective Of pOSitiOn in luffing operation.

on boom is kept

2.34 Cab/e cable. 2.85
wound

Power supply to the mobile machine is usually effected via a cable reel with a trailling

Cable Reel Drum - Cable reel drum is used to take the power supply or control cables by being or unwound on it, for feeding power and control supply to the mobile machine/equipment. Cab/e Winder A drum on which the multi-core cable is coiled. It may be arranged The current is transferred to the cable throuyh slip ring.
box cars.

2.86

with

fixed or swivel mounting.

2.87 2.88

Car Loader Carriage -A

Portable or hinged type of conveyor for loading bulk materials into

structures,

sturdy fabricated frame intended to support all equipmenT such as s(ewing In case of bridge type bucket wheel reclaimer, it supports the digging wheel, rake, etc, and is driven at preset traverse speed.
boom, etc.

2.89 CCR Drive speed.

The driving unit for control cable reel to wind and

unwind

the

cable at preset

2.90 Ce//-less Type Bucket WheelIn such bucket wheel the buckets are mounted on the outer ring of the wheel body. The buckets have open bottom towards the ring cavity and covered by annular ring chute or back plate attached circumferentially up to the discharge point of the material from bucket wheel. 2.91 Ce// Type Bucket Wheel -The bucket wheel in which cell-shaped buckets extending right to the In such bucket wheel height available is not sufficient to transfer centre of the wheel are mounted. the material sideways on to the boom conveyor.

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.92 Central Column -The stationary circular Sower of plate construction at the centre of circular/ done end of stacker and reclaimer bridges are mounted on radial track of radial blending system. the tower and-also the feed conveyor's discharge end mounted on top of this column. 2.93 Central HopperA hopper along the material by scraper conveyor and discharging periphery of central column to receive the reclaimed the same onto underground reclaim -conveyor.

2.94 Centralized Lubrication -A method of lubrication where the lubricant of grease barrel, pump, etc, are placed at convenient point of the machine and lubrication is done for all the adjoining and even farthest points from single such source of lubrication. 2.95 Chevron - A pattern triangular cross-section. of making homogeneous and thin layered preblending pile generally of

2.96 Chevron Pi/e -The stockpile where the fine and even grain size bulk material numbers of individual layers along the pile length in the form of triangular pile.

is stacked

in

2.97 Chevron Stacking -The method of stacking where the material is dumped in large layers with a The stacker, with the boom in a low position and the discharge stacker travelling along the pile. For point above the middle of pile travels to and fro on the runway between two defined limits, every next higher pile the boom is raised to designed height and pile is made by travelling the stacker along the pile. 2.98 Chute by gravity. A fabricated through encloser through which bulk materials are guided and lowered

2.99 Chute Through Turntable opening of slewing bearing and receives the reclaimed materials belt resting on impact carriage.

The chute which is mounted on turntable, passes through central extends downard up to impact section or impact carriage. This from tail discharge of boom belt and transfers the same onto ward

2.100 Circular Pre-B/ending - A system where reclaimed radially for process plant.

raw

materials

of different

quality

are stockpiled

and

2.101 Circular Rail Track - The track of rail laid with reference to fixed centre and radius to form a Such track is used for making circular stockpile by radial stacker and pile being reclaimed circle. by radial reclaimer. 2.102 Circular Stockpile - A stock pile made along a radial track or in a circular travelling along a radial track or by a boom stacker rotating about a central column. 2.103 Circular Roller Ring-A column, permits the rotational circular ring fitted with set of rollers and mounted movement for stacker unit in radial blending system. form by stacker

on thz

central

2.104 Circumferentially Covered Back Plate .- The arc shaped plate fixed the discharge point to hold the reclaimed material inside the bucket. 2.105 C/evismachine. Rear or bottom end of hydraulic cylinder which is connected

to the bucket

wheel

up to

with

the structure

of the

2.106 Codra LubricatorAn automatic device of lubrication which is mounted on the bridge and lubricates the scraper chain rollers at preset intervals passing through it. 2.107 Composing - This is the function of bed blending system consisting number of raw materials with different chemical and/or physical characteristics tions that a ~ccmplcted pile represents the required composition. 2.108 Counter Cabin - A cabin equipped see a/so term `Cabin control'. 2.109 Control Cab/e Reel Drum -A supply to control the machine. cable with electrical controllers to control

reclaimer

of the integration of in such weight propor-

the

entire

machine,

reel drum

which

permits

the cable

~to be laid

for power

2.110 Counter WeightPredetermined weight used to balance pr harrowlrack or any such structure or part of a machine,

tht, cantilevered

or oyerhaung

boon!

6

IS:10463(
2.111 Counterweight Arm - The horizontal centre of machine for optimum stabilization 2.112 which Counterweight Leg - The projected the counterweight rests. distance at which of machine, structure from vertical centre

Part2)-1985
acts from

of counterweight

rest of superstructure

at the edge of

2.113 Counterweighted Take-up - A take-up mechanism or device where automatically by the potential energy in predetermined weight. 2.114 Coupler-A linkage device which connects trailer or trolley order that the former may move along with the later. 2.115 Coupler Link A link designed for the connection of coupler. to the

the

adjustment

is made

main

driven

machine

in

2.116 Cover Belt (See Fig. `t ) -A set of belt covered on the stream of reclaimed hook conveyor with pressed idler roller over it to prevent rolling back of reclaimed

material on steep materials.

ENLARGED SECTION
FIG. 1 COVER BELT ( Illustration only)

XX

2.117 CrawlerA set of sturdy exclaimeror excavator machine. 2.118 Crawler and drive unit. Assembly -

roller chain track to support

and

propel the boom

type reclaimer

or

A crawler

track with

complete

set of chain,

track rollers,

wheels,

frames

2.119 Crawler Chain - One of a pair of roller chains used to support and propel the machine mounted on such track - the upper surface providing a track to carry the wheel of the machine and lower surface providing the continuous ground. 2.120 Cra w/er Mounted A machine mounted on the crawler chain.

2.121 Crawler Mounted Bucket Wheel Reclaimer - A reclaimer having superstructure with bucket wheel on its boom head end capable of sl-ewing and luffing and mounted on crawler tracks each Controlled and powered from the superstructures. consisting of a series of shoes and links. having a superstructure capable of &wing and 2.122 Crawler Mounted Excavator - An excavator luffing and mounted on crawler tracks each consisting of a series of shoes and links. Controlled and powered from the superstructure. 7

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.123 Crawler Mounted Scraper - A chain scraper having a superstructure and capable of reclahning material by luffing and mounted on crawler track for mobility and changing direction. 2.124 Crawler Steering Arrangement change the direction. Part assembly of crawler which permit the crawler track to

2.125 Crawler Track - The pair of roller chains to support and propel the machine providing a track to carry wheels and lower surface providing continuous ground. 2.126 Crawler Truck -The attached. frame of track laying type to which the track

with

upper

surface

rollers

and

idlers are

2.127 CRD TrolleyThe trolley mounted supports the control reeling drum to supply cum-reclaimer. 2.128 Cutter Speed-The collect the sample. 2.129 Cutting Depth -

on track wheels and attached with the main machine power for the main machine, such as stacker and stacker-

speed of a sample cutter

passing through

the main

stream

of material

to

The depth specially

of sickle shaped slice cut of material designed front lip or edge of bucket

in digging confronting

operation. the material in

2.130 Cutting Edge -The digging operation.

2.131 Cutting Force - Force to over come the cutting resistance acting normal to bucket lip and This is the product of cutting resistance tangential to lip circle of bucket wheel in digging operation. of material and total cutting length of the slice. 2.132 Cutting Length ( See Fig. 2) -Total scorps the material slice while digging. 2.133 Cutting Power The power required effective length of that part of a bucket edge which

to overcome

digging

force for slice cut of material. wheel in combination

2.134 Cutting ProfilsThe shape of slice in which with its rotation and slewing action.

material

is cut by digging

2.135 Cutting ResistanceThe force per unit length of cutting blade or lip in contact rial, th.is force is constant over a wide range for each type of material. 2.136 Cutting Speedoperation. 2.137 Cutting Time -The 2.138 Cutting Width shown in Fig. 2). Tangential speed or velocity of buckets along the lip

with

the mate-

circle

in

digging

time taken for individual of sickle shaped

slice cut of material slice

in digging operation. digging operation ( as

The width

cut off material in

2.136 Cylinder Equalizer - In case of four point support carriage of stacker/reclaimer machine, the carriage equalization for uneveness of track rail is accomplished by two hydraulic cylinders placed under the pair of carriage legs on two rails with common hydraulic pump. 2.140 2.141 Digging WheelSee 2.70.

of a rotating disc in horizontal plane and with a plough Disc Feeder - A device consisting on top surface of disc divert the materials dropping on thedisc from a chute of feed conveyor to down below on to the stacker conveyor for stockpiling in radial blending system.
resting

2.142 Jlouble Boom StackerA linear mobile machine consisting of a pair of boom conveyors opposite directions which make the lmear stock pile on both sides along the track alternatively simultaneously receiving incoming material from common yard belt conveyor. 2.143 Down Hill-The position and material 2.144 Idle Time position of boom conveyor when it is lowered is carried on the belt towards gravitation. below from its

on or

horizontal

each operating cycle and for which capacity of the machine.

All such time during which the machine is idling to the assigned performance in due consideration is taken in design to meet the rated average 8

IS:10463( Part 2) -1985

VIEW A Cutting length for a particular position S sin `p + w for a sharp cornered bucket, where 69 = slice depth at angle, (p; w = slice width; and S = slice depth or advance of the bucket centre. Average cutting correction factor for all the length `/m `, considering rounded corners of bucket knives; (1 -coscp) buckets engaging the sickle and applying of bucket is given by Sq -!- w, which is same as

/Ill = $-IKmS where

+B.cpHl
bottom and top of the cut sickle,

cpH = angle in radians K, = correction w = slice width. H = slice height, and

between

factor for rounded

knife corner,

FIG. 2 CUTTING

LENGTH AND WIDTH

2.145

Drive Base Frame -

See 2.148. top machined base on which drive units in complete travelling

2.146 Drive Base Plate - A fabricated and assembly is mounted for perfect alignment. 2.147 Drive Bogie motion. 2.148 2.149 2.150 Driven Driven Bogie-A A bogie whose bogie whose

all the wheels connected

are connected wheels

with drive units imparting

are propelled

by those of drive bogie.

Truck Frame -

See 2.146. See 2.147. 9

Drive Truck Frame -

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.151 Drum Type Recr'aimer-A mobile machine having cylindrical drum spanned across the pile and rail track with number of buckets staggered mounted along the outer periphery of drum to reclaim the materials. A conveyor mounted inside the drum or by the side of it receives the reclaimed material from buckets and carry it in the transverse direction of the pile and discharge to a ground based conveyor along the track. 2.152 Dummy Shaft - A hollow fabricated shaft which is placed slewing drive pinion shaft in turntable for sake of alignment. 2.153 Eccentric Disc - In harrow reciprocating verting rotary motion to reciprocating motion. 2.154 Eccentric Pin adjustment to maintain 2.155 Electric Slewing The pins used to hold uniform lip circle. DriveA slewing drive, a disc on in position prior to inserting the

mounted bucket

out

of centre on a shaft conpermitting the buckets

the buckets

wheels

drive by means of electric which gives actuating

motor. motion through the combina-

2.156 Electric Mechancial Actuator - A device tion of electric motor and mechanical elements. 2.157 End Carriage - Structures supported on single or multiwheel

supporting the bogie travelling

ends of the on rail track.

reclaimer

bridge

which

in

term is

2.158 End ConesIn process of making stockpile, the bulk material of inverted semicircular cone at its natural angle of repose in which not uniform at difterent cross-section. structure 2.159 End Frames - The fabricated end carriage or traversing truck frame. 2.160 action holding both ends

at ends of pile forms volume of material

the &tape content is

of reclaimer

bridge

and resting on

stands with cushion pads placed End Stops -The the mobile machine from further movement. A mechanical or hydraulic device

at the ends of rail tracks to stop by buffer
compensates/equalizes movements Of

2.161 Equalizer forces.

which

2.162 External Gear Rim - A gear cut along the outer periphery in mesh with pinion with required reduction in slewing speed.

of slewing

bearing

to slew the boon

short belt conveyor mounted across the boom t0 transfer the reclaimed 2.163 Feeder Conveyor -A material on to the boom belt, receiving from bucket wheel discharge zone, in case the direction discharge slope from bucket wheel to boom bett is not available. 2.164 Festooned CablesMeans of supplying electric current to carriage traversing On bridge girder for runways of limited length on straight tracks, through the medium of flexible cables running The flexible cable is suspended from a light auxiliary track or taut wire and parallel with the track. the festooning is taken up as the carriage travels away from the fixed end of the cable. 2.165 First-in First-Outbeginning of stock piling. 2.166 First-in Last-Outthe end of stock piling.
act

When reclaiming

Of the pile

is started from

the edge that has been et the

When the reclaiming

Of the pile is started

from

the

edge that has been et
periphery to

2 .I 67 Flanged Wheel - A travelling as guide on the rail track.

wheel

with

single

or double

flange(s)

On Outer

in Order t0 approach the entire 2.168 Flat Top Harrow - A harrow having its top structure flattened top area of radial stockpile while agitating the cross-sectional pile surface with reciprdceting motion, 2.169 winch Fleeting drum. Sheave A sheave that floats axially with the rope to provide a fair lead into a

2.176 Flexible Coupling - A mechanical device that.connects two shafts to transmit slip accommodating misalignment between axially oriented drrven machine members,

torque without

IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.171 Flight - Plane or shaped plates in the form of blades attached chain to push the materials. 2.172 Flight the conveyor Attachment chain(s). The elements assembled to the flights at equal spacings with conveyor

and

are used to connect

them to

2.173 Flight ConveyorA conveyor comprising flight are attached to push or drag the materials.

one

or more endless

propelling

chain(s)

to which

2.174 Flop Gate -A hinged or pivoted fabricated plate operated manually or with direct the material flow in selective direction generally in case of bifurcated chute. 2.175 Forward Speed direction of controlled

remote control

to

i) A travelling motion of truck/carriage in forward the stockpile at rated capacity of reclaimer.

speed to reclaim

ii) A travelling speed of stacker truck in forward direction fixed in relation with the tripper/ triller belt speed in the same direction in order to stock the uniform volume of material on the pile along the pile length. 2.176 Four Point Supportother although each support Consists of four independent supports not inter-equalized between independently could consist of one, two or more equalrzed wheels. structured in the shape each

plate fabricated 2.177 Gantry Cone -A for boom type bucket wheel reclaimer. 2.178 Gear Casing lubricants. 2.179 Gear Guard An encloser

of a cone used as a superstructure

around

a gear

train

to protect

from

dust

ingress

and

retain

A covering

fully

or partly for the safety purpo.se. the elevation of various points of machine structures

2.180 Grade Lime - The base line from which are referred for measurement. 2.181 Gradient-The rate of incline or reclaimer, etc, travels. or decline

in terms of

degree in the rail

track on which

stacker

2.182 Grizzly - A device made up of bar mesh placed below scalping of bulk material. 2.183 Ground Contact Area - Area of crawler foad, penetration, ground material, etc. 2.184 Ground Loadtion being transferred 2.185 Ground track

discharge

point

for coarse screening

or

in contact

with

the ground

which

depends

on

Load out of dead weight of machine structures onto the foundation through anchorage. weight or load of a machine

or dynamic

force of its opsra-

Pressure-The

per unit area bf ground

contact. from

2.186 -Guide Angle - A device made up of angle section or fabricated channel shape and hung reclaimer bridge supports and also guide the chain rollers of scraper chain conveyor. 2.187 Hand Winch A worm wheel type winch operated manually for harrow hoisting.

2.188 HarrowA set of fabricated frame projected below the reclaimer bridge to hold or channel track through which scraper conveyor chain moves in the set direction.

guide angle

2,186 Harrow - A structural frame work suitably sized/shaped for given pile dimensions and fitted with steel spikes, is used for agitating the transverse face Of pile wrth traverse or reciprocatrng motion for all bridge type reclaimer. 2.166 Harrow Base-The vvith hinged connection, bottom structural part Of harrow which is connected with reclaimer bridge

IS : 10463 ( Part 2) - 1995 .2.191 Harrow Frame - The structure
bridge with hinged connection. shaft with which links the harrow with travelling carriage on reclaimer

2.192 Harrow Reciprocation - Harrow mounted at the side of reclaimer bridge on guide roller~achieves reciprocating motion across the pile face-through reciprocating drive unit. 2.193 2.194 Harrow Spikes See 2.195. fabricated body of harrow on which spikes are fitted. structure

Harrow Structure -The

2.195 Harrow Teeth - Set of sized steel rods or barstitted ing downwards to agitate the pile surface. 2.196 Harrow TravelHarrow motion across the pile face. 2.197 Harrow Travel Speedthe -pile. mounted on travelling

at the face of harrow

project-

carriage

(harrow

wagon)

gets

travelling

The travelling

speed of

the carriage

at which

harrow

moves

across

2.198 Harrow Wagon - A travelling carriage on which a pair of harrow is mounted through frame structure and imparts motion to the harrow by its travelling to and fro over the reclaimer bridge. Also supports the pylon through which rope winch mechanism is operated for harrow hoisting. 2.199 Head conveyor. DischargeDischarge of material taking place at head end (pulley) from boom

2.200 Head EndThe farthest end of the cantilevered boom bucket wheel, drive unit of bucket wheels, etc, are mounted. 2.201 Head Room - The vertical distance needed to make specified piece of equipment or portion thereof on machinery 2;202 Head Sprocket-Any sprocket mounted distance on driving

structure

at which

conveyor

pulley,

possible floor.

a workable

arrangement

of a

shaft for scraper chain conveyor. bed or ground level on which pile is

2.203 Height of Pile stacked.

The vertical

of pile

top from

2.204 Hinged Boom - When the tail end of the boom is supported On the turntable or machine body. 2.205 Hinged Joint Type Chain A chain made up of links with structure

on the pivoted

or hinged bracket.

a hinge type joint. etc, are supported on

2.206 Hinged Support - When the cantilevered one end with the bracket with pin connection. 2.207 Hoist Pneumatic, hydraulic

such as boom, harrow,

or rope winch mechanism,

type luffing hydraulic

arrangement cylinder,

for boom or harrow, hoisting motion

etc. to

2.208 Hoist Device boom or harrow.

Wire rope winch

etc, giving

2.209 Hoisting-The motion of lifting or lowering of boom, stacker plane by means of hydraulic cylinder or rope winch mechanism.

conveyor

or harrow

in vertical

2.210 Homogenizing - In preblending system pile surface is stirred with harrow ed by scraper conveyor or bucket wheel consequently the material of different which is termed as homogenizing. 2.211 Hopper-A short of container with wide top and narrowed different quality get mixed which is termed as homogenizing. bottom

spikes then reclaimquality get mixed

to receive

material

of

2.212 Hopper Car- A mobile equipment consisting of a hopper body mounted on carriage receives reclaimed bulk material from pay loader, shovel or boom conveyor and loads on to yard belt placed under its carriage,

IS:10463(Part2)-1966
2.213 Hurricane Anchor location winds. Used for anchoring a mobile machine to the ground at a predetermined by means of either guy ropes or mechanical devices in the eventuality of critical high velocity

2.214 Hydraulic pump, etc.

Bucket Wheel Drive -

Where the bucket

wheel

is driven

through

hydraulic

motor,

2.215 Hydraulic Cylinder for Cabin Stabilization boom position through hydraulic cylinder.

When the cabin

is kept horizontal

irrespe-ctive

of

2.216 Hydraulic Cylinder for Skirt Lifting -When the tail out the reclaimed material through hydraulic cylinder. 2.217 Hydraulic Drive A drive through hydraulic

skirt on

boom

conveyor

is lifted

to pass

motor and pump. where liquid pressure is applied for luffing the

2.218 Hydraulic Lifting Mechanism -The device boom, harrow, etc, such as hydraulic cylinder.

2.219 Hydraulic Luffing - When a cantilevered structure or boom with one end hinged or pivoted is rotated up and down in vertical plane by means of hydraulic cylinder(s) is referred to as hydraulic luffing. 2.220 Hydraulic Slewing Drive -- Where the boom slewing motor, pump, etc. operation is achieved through hydraulic

2.221 Impact Carriage - Normally used with all reclaiming equipment and consists of a separate structural frame fitted with rubberized impact idlers and intended for the protection of belting (on long yard conveyor) against direct impact and avoiding spillage in course of such material transfer. 2.222 2.223 2.224 drives Impact Section Inner Ring See 2.221. ring of slewing bearing.

Inside

Interlocking ControlA system of electrical remote control which starts and stops the various of different components of the machine in predetermined sequence.

2.225 Intermediate ConveyorA loop conveyor introduced in boom type reversible reclaimer to transfer the incoming material from yard belt on to the boom conveyor for stacking and remains idler in case of reclaiming when yard belt is reversed tocarry the reclaimed material. 2,226 Intermediate Drive Shaft - A drive shaft mounted on truck frame in between two wheels and drive the wheels through a pinion mounted on it and in mesh with gear rims fitted on driven wheels. 2.227 Internal periphery. 2.228 Jack Gear Rim Slewing bearing consisting of inner rim with gear teeth along its

An adjusting

support

with

levelling

feature. and pillow

2.229 Jack Shaft - A secondary or intermediate shaft supported on independent bearings blocks and placed between drive shaft of carriage, etc, and the source of power. 2.230 Jib - A structure mounted with pivoted bracket on superstructure bale suspension and held the counterweight on other end for balancing 2.231 Jib Bracket-Pivoted or hinged bracket on through which

connects the boom through the boom. on superstructure.

jib is mounted

2.232 Jogging - The quickly repeated closure of an electric circuit purpose of accomplishing small movements of the driven machine. 2.233 force. Keeper Plate -A plate used to retain the pin, sprocket,

to start a motor from rest for the

hub, etc, from shifting

against

lateral

2.234 Lagging Chain l%X3Per -In series the preceding chain conveyor which from pile and pushes it to the regch Qf succeeding one for on-ward scraping.

reclaims

!he materig

1s : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985
2.235 2.236 Lagging Leading Chain Conveyor Chain Conveyor See 2.234. See 2.234. drags the material based conveyor at

2.237 Leading Chain ScraperIn portal type reclaimer, the chain scraper which brought in its reach by preceding chain scraper and discharges on to the ground one side along the track. 2.236 Length of Boom -Total length of the boom measured along wheel/discharge pulley to its articulated/support at the tail end. 2.239 Level Indicatora safe distance between 2.240 Level Luffing -A maintained at a constant

its axis from center line of bucket

An etectric or electronic device to control the pile height the stacker boom and top pile~in course of stock piling. luffing motion during which height during its operation. skirt board at tail for tail discharge. the boom, stacker

as well as to ensure

conveyor

or harrow

is

2.241 Liftable Skirt Board-The passing out reclaimed material

end of

boom

conveyor

subject

to

lifting

for

2.242 Lifting Power - Power required discharge point by the digging wheel. 2.243 Lifting Mechanism of boom or harrow. --The device,

to lift the material

from

bottom

digging

zone up to the final

be it hydraulic

cylinder,

rope winch,

etc, to effect the

lifting

2,244 Lifting Tackle -Various elements, constitute the parts of rope winch luffing

namely sheaves, pulley blocks, pins, thimbles, mechanism for harrow or boom hoisting. the material from bottom

etc, that

2.245 Lifting Work-The amount of work done in lifting to the discharge point by the digging wheel. 2246 Lip Circle The periphery generated between

digging zone up

by lip radius of bucket two bucket lips

wheel. through the cemtre of

2.247 Lip Diameter-The bucket wheel. 2.248 2.249 2.250 Lip of Bucket -The Lip Radius-The Lip Speed -

distance

measuring

front edge of bucket of any bucket

used for cutting

the material. wheel.

distance

lip from centre of bucket

The tangential

speed of bucket wheel scraper reclaimer

along its lip circle. travelling on linear track for blending

2.251 Linear Blender-The ( see 2.337 ).

bridge type

2.252 Linear B/ending-The process in which the linear pile of several layer of different material composition is agitated by harrow across the triangular cross-sectional surface and reclaimed by scraper chain canveyor mounted on the bridge and travelling on the two rails each laid along the outer edges of the triangular pile. 2.253 2,254 Linear Pile See 2.257. Rail tracks laid in straight bogie, etc,
traVelling

Linear Rail Track -

line for stacker or reclaimer
On rail

travelling

on it.

2.255 Linear Speed-Carriage, to as linear speed.

track at predetermined

speed is referred

2.256 Linear Stacker - Single or double boom stacker travelling pile the bulk material along the track. 2.257 Linear Stacking - Stockpiling of bulk material pgrallel to rail track by travellmg type boom stacker. in
triangUhr

on straight

rail track used to stock_

cross-section

in a straight

ling

2.25% Linear Plate - Removable plate of abrassion resistance lines on abrassion plate or back plate to protect the mother plate from wear-ing fast. 2.259 either 2.260 Lubrication -The process of greasing the wear prone surfaces of various by group or centralized lubrication method. Luffing -Angular movement The inclined of boom, position stacker conveyor or harrow

prone area of chute

parts of the machine

in ~a vertical at which

plane. it is kept to

2.261 Luffing Angle stack the material.

of the stacker conveyor

(boom)

2.262 Luffing Conveyor -The cantilevered belt conveyor hinged at tail end and hoisted from its horizontal position in vertical axis to stockpile the bulk material. 2.263 Luffing Hoist in upward or downward Hydraulic direction or rope winch device used to rotate the stacker from~horizontal position in vertical plane. inclined position of

up and down

conveyor

( boom)

2.264 Luffing Range - The angle between two extreme with respect to its horizontal position when it is hoisted.

the stacker

conveyor

2.265 Maintenance SpeedThe speed at which the machine travels or is moved to reach parking place for maintenance. This speed is generally higher than the operational speed. 2.266 Manual Rail Clamp -- A mechanical track rail being operated by handwheel. 2.267 which device fitted w~ith travelling bogie or truck to hold the

Maximum Angle of Inclination - Permissible rolling back of bulk material takes place while

limit of stacking.

boom

conveyor

inclination

beyond

2.268 Maximum Lip SpeedPermissible limit of peripheral speed of bucket the material in bucket may be thrown beyond the discharge-passage in wheel the structure. permissible 2.269 Maximum Number of Bucket Discharge -The pass over the discharge zone before the material content inside Such limit varies from material to material in digging operation. 2.270 Neoprene BufferThe buffer made of neoprene The theoretical material. of material inside limit over the bucket

wheel beyond which causing spillage over

which the bucket may may be fully emptied.

2.271 Nominal Volume of Bucket ring space of bucket wheel. 2.272 Non-Drive Bogie - The bogie by the wheel( s) of drive bogie. 2.273 2.274 2.275 2.276 Non-Driven Non-Driven Non-Driven Non-Driven Axle See 2.274.

volume

the bucket

and in the

whose

connected

set

of traversing

wheel(s)

is( are)

propelled

Shaft-The Bogie -

shaft of wheel See 2.272. See 2.272.

fitted

with

non-driven

bogie.

Truck Frame Wheels -

2.277 Non-Driven bogie. 2.278 Non-Drive

Set of traversing

or travelling

wheel(s)

those

are fitted

with

non-driven

Truck Frame -

See 2.272. at high velocity during which the mobile equipment is not

2.279 Non-Operating Windoperated for safety reasons.

Wind

2.280 Open GearAuxiliary gear mounted on traversing wheel shaft reduction of speed already accomplished by reducer in the sequence. `I 5

or on

winch

shaft

for further

IS:10463(Bart2)-1985
2.281 Open Gear Ratio The amount of reduction in speed by the use of a pair of open ~gears. the equipment wind velocity is permitted is taken into

2.282 Operating Wind Velocity - The range of wind velocity up to which for operational and due consideration of pressure arising out of such account in design of machine structure and driving components. 2.203 Operational Speed rail track when the machine

Predetermined and controlled movement of carriage, is operated to reclaim the material from pile.

bridge

or bogie

on

2.284 Operator's Cabin - Straitegically mounted on the equipment for equipment control from a centralized location to enable the operator to coordinate machine operation along with signals from other ground based equipment in the total system. 2.285 Outer Ring - The circular plate work on the outer face of the bucket room for material inside bucket till it reaches the discharge spot. 2.286 Output Pinion Pinion mounted on reduced output wheel which makes the

shaft for power transmission. component from

2.207 Overload Release - Amechanism of electrical motive force in case of overload on digging wheel, 2.28% Pad (Shoe or Plate) Ground contact

equipment to disconnect driven harrow, scraper conveyor, etc. type track. constitutes the

part of crawler

of steel and suitably lined blades 2.289 Paddle - Constructed reclaiming element on underground reclaiming equipment.

major

rotating

and

2290 Paddle FeederAn underground reclaiming equipment consisting of truck carriage for its mobility on rail track and paddles as reclaiming element. Rotating set of paddles extract the material from longitudinal slot of the hopper along the track and feed the material on to the underground conveyor belt passing over impact section fitted with the machine underneath. 2.291 Pass - A working type bridge reclaimer. trip of passage of digging wheel across the stockpile face, in case of rotary

earth moving equipment consisting of a picking bucket 2.292 Pay Loader - A crawler mounted and link mechanism to pick up recommended quantity of material and load it on to the hopper car, etc. 2.293 Permissible Slewing Speed - The maximum speed of boom slewing. in relation with the predetermined bucket wheel lip speed up to which the material content in each sickle cut by bucket wheel may remain consistent in view of uniform reclaim capacity. 2.294 Pillow Block-A bearing block or housing with flat guide the bearing and transfer the load through anchorage. 2.295 Pivot Bracket A hinge support. of a ring gear, a set of planet gears and a sun mounting surface to accommodate and

2.296 Planetary Drive - A gear drive consisting gear generally used for ~digging wheel drive. 2.297 2,296 2.299 Plow Plow See 2.209. See 2.290. See 2.294.

Feeder -

Plummer

Block -

2.300 Portal Scraper -The equipment consists of a portal as a main body spanned across the Portal supports one or two chain scraper for reclaiming the pile from its surface. Both stockpile. ends of portal are mounted on bogies travelling on rail tracks for the portal movement. 2.301 Portal Type Scraper Reclaimer See 2.300. consisting of hydraulic motor, pump,

2.302 Power Pack Hydraulic - A hydraulic package unit container valve and other accessories for hydraulic drive. 16

IS : 10463 ( Part 2) - 1985
2.303 Power Pack Electrical A combined function of stockpiling the incoming material of different composi-

2.304 P/e-Blending tion in layers. 2.305 Pre-Blending pre-blending.

System -An

arrangement of feeding

and stacking

operation

in sequence for

2.306 Primary Sampler pre-blending system.

The sampling device used to analyse the incoming material of stockpile

for

2.307 Propeller Shaft -A drive shaft that connects the gear box mounted on digging wheel shaft to prime mover mounted at a distance on boom structure in non-axial plane or at different level with the help of universal coupling. vertical structure on harrow 2.308 Pylon -A assembly is mounted for harrow hoist. wagon or travelling carriage on which rope winch

2.309 Rack and Pinion Gate - A gate fitted under reclaim hopper having gate plate operated by means of a rack and pinion gear set to adjust the bottom opening of hopper for controlled flow of material on to the reclaim conveyor. 2.310 Radial Blending - Combined function of stockpiling the material of different composition in layers by radial stacker and reclaimed from the stockpile across cross-sectional surface by scraper reclaimer in combination with harrow or rake. 2.311 Radial Rail Track - Rail laid along the specified outer periphery of circular pile with reference to central column on which the radial stacker or reclaimer travels for desired operation. 2.312 Radial Stacker - The machine having a boom conveyor mounted on a superstructure capable of slewing around a fixed central column and stockpiling the material in a circular form or triangular cross-section. 2.313 2.314 Radial Stacking Rail Centres The function of stockpiling the material in circular shape by radial stacker. centre lines of pair of rails of a track.

The extact distance between

2.3315 Rail Clamp - A manually, -electrically or electro-hydraulically operated device to clamp the The electrically opmerated rail clamps can sometimes be ~made equipment to rails during high wind. operable by direct signals from the anemometer. 2.316 Rail Cleaners See 2.326. .

2.317 Rail Fixtures - ~lnsert plates, holding plates, anchorage, etc, by which rail bottom is anchored with track foundation. 2.318 Rail Foundation Ballasted or fully concrete work on which rail track is laid.

2.319 Rail Cap expansion.

The space between two rail edge in a track which is kept to cater for linear thermal

2.320 Rail Misalignment - Deviations cally or parallelity of the rails.

from the specified dimensions

of track with respect to verti-

2.321 Rail Mounted Bucket Wheel Boom Reclaimer - A reclaimer having a -boom conveyor mounted on superstructure capable of slew~ing in either direction. Superstructure consisting of vertical -mast (tower), jib and counterweight, etc, supported on under carriage of truck wheels. A bucket wheel mounted at head end reclaims the materials by slewing and luffing action of boom from stockpile on either sides of rail track. 2.322 Rail Mounted Double Boom Stacker -A stacker similar to 2.385 conveyors and capable to create stockpile on either sides of track length. but having two boom

2.323 Rail Mounted Single Boom Stacker - A stacker having a boom conveyor mounted on structure in a direction perpendicular to rail track and a carriage of wheel trucks capable to create 17

18:10463-(Prrt2)-1996
triangular stockpile on one side of track length by means of boom luffing and travelling to and fro on the rail track. 2.324 Rail Mounted Slewing Boom Stacker - A stacker having a boom conveyor mounted on a superstructure capable of slewing in either direction of rail track and mounted on a carriage of wheel track, treat trapezoidal pile on either sides on rail track length by means of boom luffing and slewing and travelling to and fro on the rail track. 2.325 Rail Stop - A stop mounted at the ends of rail track of mobile equipment to stop the travelling wheels from further movement. 2.326 Rail Sweep - A device attached with front rail for smooth travel of wheels. and rear bogies of mobile machine to clean the

2.327 Rail Track - Parallel rails laid at specified centre distance of gauge along the length of stock pile on which the mobile stacker reclaimer, etc, travel for designed operation. 2.328 2.329 Rater ( Raka ) See 2.189. See 2.198.

Raking Carriage -

2.330 Raking Face -The bottom surface of a rake fitted with spikes in contact with materials while stirring the cross-sectional surface of the pile with traversing or reciprocating motion. 2.331 Raking Wheels motion to the rake. 2.332 Reclaimer wheel/scraper/drum A set of wheels under the raking carriage to travel on a rail track to provide

A equipment capable of reclaiming material from stockpile by means of or any other device as its main reclaiming element.

bucket

2.333 Reclaiming Conveyor ---A belt conveyor mounted~on bridge, drum, underground or ground based to carry reclaimed material from bucket wheel, bucket drum or scraper conveyor and discharge to a further location along the system. 2.334 Reclaiming Equipment An equipment capable of reclaiming material from storage. hopper to receive reclaimed material and guide its flow

2.335 Reclaimer HopperAn underground on to underground reclaim conveyor.

.

2.336 Reclaimer Bridge -A latticed or box constructed frame spanned across the stockpile supporting chain scraper together with harrow or bucket wheel with harrow to reclaim the pile. 2.337 Reclaiming Capacity -. The volumetric capacity of reclaiming equipment is the quantity of material in terms of volume a reclaiming equipment is rated to reclaim from a defined pile in an hourly period. 2.336 Reduced See 2.392.

2.339 Regenerative Drive -A drive when the operation of conveyor results in power being produced and absorbed by prime mover. 2.340 Regulating Gate - A gate fitted below the reclaim hopper or bypass hopper to vary size of opening in order to control the flow of material through the hopper bottom opening. 2.341 Reversible Stacker-cum-Reclaimer - A combined stacker and reclaimer machine used in conjuction with a bidirectional yard conveyor permitting the reclaimed material to be conveyed back in the same direction from which it was initially brought for stockpiling. 2.342 Ring Space - Space available below the bottomless bucket the outer ring of cell-less bucket wheel. 2.343 Ring Volume bucket wheel. Material content held by backing plate covered by backing plate inside

inside

ring space in the cell-less

18

IS:10463(Part2)-1985
2.344 Rollers Guide - Set of rollers fitted with harrow or bucket wheel on bridge carriage. 2.345 Roller %uide Bracket - An attachment support the rollers for guided movement. 2.346 Rope EqualizerA device which offset ropes employed for harrow or ~boom hoisting. 2.347 Rope Pulley Support A fabricated brackets capable to guide the movement of bogie,

fitted

with

truck

harrow

or carriage

frame to hold or

the

difference

of

stretches

in two

parallel

running

construction

to mount

the rope sheaves.

2.348 Rope Type RakerA raker or harrow having spike-edges connected with tar steel ropes in longitudinal direction of pile surface such that with the movement of raker, the tar steel ropes wipe the material on the pile surface dropping the material to-the root of pile for reclaiming. 2.349 Rope Winch Mechanism - A device in which a set of wire rope passing Over set of sheaves The drum is driven is connected with boom or harrow and wrapped round a grooved or plain drum. through a prime mover and reduction units and rope being wound or unwound over the drum impact the movement to the boom or harrow in vertical plane for hoisting operation. 2.350 2.351 Rotary Plate Feeder Rotary Plow Feeder See 2.141. See 2.290.

2.352 Rotary Reclaimer - A reclaimer having a large bucket wheel capable to rotate around a bridge spanned across the stock pile and mounted on two end carriages of truck wheels on rail tracks laid Bucket wheel and harrow together mounted on a traversing along the length of outer edges of pile. carriage on the bridge length, reclaim the pile and discharge the material on a reclaim belt conveyor mounted on the bridge which carry the material in transverse direction of the pile and discharge onto the ground based conveyor by the side of track. 2.353 Rotating Cone - A plated construction of conicla shape constituting as the superstructure of digging wheel boom reclaimer capable to rotate in either directions on slewing bearing for digging 1 reclaiming ) or operation. 2.354 Rotating Chute - A chute rigidly attached with stacker boom and mounted on a carriage frame fitted with rollers capable to rotate along with -stacker boom on a circular rail track around central column, such that the chute receive the materials from feed conveyor and transfer on to stacker conveyor for stockpiling. 2.355 Safety Ladderequipment. A ladder provided with safety cage to climb on high level platform of an

2.356 Sampler - A device having from main stream of material flow outgoing from a pile.

a reciprocating cutter element for periodically collecting samples to analyze the chemical composition of materials incoming to or

2.357 Scraper Bridge - A plate, box or latticed stockpile supporting chain scraper for reclaimation. 2.358 Scraper Reclaimering element. A portal or bridge

construction

spanned

over

the cross-section

of

type reclaimer

having

chain scraper as a main

reclaim-

2.359 Scraper Teeth - Set of teeth made of hardened material fixed on either side edges off scraper blades to loosen the materials on the root of the pile for easy scrapping. 2.360 Screw-Cage -Reclaimer - A mobile machine comprising essentially of a latticed, structure carrying the buckets arranged in the form of a screw with reclaiming operations the entire width of the stockpile through a cross conveyor mounted on the machine. 2.361 Sectional Stacking - The operation in which a rail pile covering the entire width of trapezoidal cross-section length. 19 tubular covering

mounted slewing stacker create a stockfrom one end to the other along the track

2.362 Semi-Cell Type Bucket Wheel - ffuckets, with back open, are mounted on outer edge of the wheel and a radial guide plate on the inside of the wheel is connected to the back of the buckets. The inside of the wheel has a conical shape in order to convey the material on to the boom conveyor belt. 2.363 Semi Portal -An inclined portal with the end resting on a set of truck frames mounted on one rail near the base of pile and other end resting on set of truck frames mounted on an adjacent rail a level higher than the top of pile and does not completely encompass the traverse dimensions of the stockpile. 2.364 Semi-Portal Scraperreclaimation of a pile. An equipment having chain scraper supported on semi-portal for

2.365 Service Factor - The amount by which service requirement over the rated condition.

rating

of unit is reduced to compensate

for

increased

2.366 Ship Loader -A rail mounted travelling portal type machine stationary conveyor for loading or trimming of vessels or ship holds.

having

a cantilevered

shuttle

2.367 Shuttle Conveyor - A belt conveyor in a self contained structure capable of travelling to and fro in defined range of rail track mounted on wagon loader structure for loading the rake of wagons. 2.366 Side Scraper A~chain scraper that reclaim the material from one side surface boom conveyor of a stockpile. -of luffing

2.369 Single Boom Stacker - A stacker (and slewing in case of slewing stacker) 2.370 Skip Width Chain A chain having

machine having one to create stockpile. one row of links.

capable

2.371 Skip Hoist ( inclined/Vertical) - An equipment with multiwheeled bucket or car operating up and down a definits path, through wire rope receiving and discharging bulk material on an inclined/vertical track carved at the top to tip and empty the skip automatically for loading or stacking piling. 2.372 Skirt Board - A plate construction conveyor to guide the stream of material. to form a trough guide on receiving loading zone of a

2.373 Slewing Angle - Amount of angular displacement of the boom (along with digging wheel ) in horizontal plane in either direction with respect to centre line of rail track or crawler track. 2.374 Slewing ArrangementClamp or king pin and roller or geared slewing permit the slewing of a boom or an entire superstructure subject to slewing. 2.375 Slewing Bearing Gear Rim - A slewing ~internal face to get engaged with driving pinion 2.376 Slewing Boom -A boom slewing in its horizontal plane. supported on bearing design to

ring bearing with gear rim fitted on its external for slewing motion of the superstructure. and suspended from a superstructure subject

or

to

2.377 Slewing Drive - Means of driving slewing with reduction unit or hydraulic pump motor. 2.37% Slewing Radius -See 2.50.

arrangement

such as electric

motor

in combination

2.379 Slewing Range - Pre-determined amount of angular displacement in horizontal plane that the boom ( along with digging wheel) undertakes in either direction with respect to centre line of rail or crawler track. 2.380 Slewing Ring - The circular ring fitted with rollers or antifriction bearing of boom, stacker portal or reclaimer bridge is mounted for slewing movement. 2.381 Slewing Ring Bearing that supports the superstructure A large circular ring fitted with permitting slewing movement. 20 row(s) of ball on which one end

or roller

bearing

IS: 10463 ( Part 2) - 1985
2.382 Slewing Speedhorizontal plane. The speed at which the boom (along with digging wheel) rotates in

2.383 Slewing StackerA stacker having a boom conveyor mounted on slewing structure capable of rotating in either direction of rail track ( in case of rail mounted) or of rotating all around the vertical axis of the stacking structure ( in case of fixed ground-mounted ) to create linear trapezoidal or circular conical stockpile. 2.384 Slewing Structure - A sturdy structure accommodating boom, counter-weight, hoist, etc, capable of slewing through a pre-determined arc (in either direction) power drive unit driving the slewing arrangement. 2.385 Sliding Base -A support providing controlled movement. to adjust the hopper tower, luffing by means of a

2.386 Slide Gate - A type of gate in which opening for controlled flow of material.

the gate plate slides in guides

2.387 Slide Ring for Portal - A circular ring fitted with guide rollers mounted along the periphery of central column through which one end-of portal is supported on column for its radial movement. 2.380 Slide Ring for Scraper it for radial movement. Similar to 2.357 except that the scraper bridge is mounted through

2.389 SlingerA device mounted at the bottom of the discharge chute to permit high speed aligning of material and maximum loading in-a ship, specially in case of handling relatively low density material like coal. 2.390 Slope - The inclination or angle at which the cross-sectional face of pile stay while being reclaimed. Also the rate of incline or decline in terms of degrees from the horizontal or percentage rise from horizontal for a rail track or pile bed in a yard. 2.391 Span - Length of the bridge or portal encompassing parallel rails close to outer edges of the pile base. across the pile to be mounted on the

~2.392 Speed Reducer-A power transmission mechanism designed to provide either a constant or variable speed for the driven equipment less than that of prime mover. Normally totally enclosed for lubrication and prevention of entry of foreign material. 2.393 Spring Take-up - A take-up potential energy of spring. 2.394 Sprocket -A wheel with engage with the link of a chain. mechanism where adjustments are made automatically by the

suitably

shaped

and

spaced

kegs or teeth on its circumference

to

2.395 Sprocket Ratio - The ratio between number of teeth respectively and indicating the change of speed existing through 2.396 Stability equipment. FactorA ratio of the stabilizing moment

of driven and a chain drive.

driving

sprockets

and the overturning

moment

for any given

of cross-sectional surface of a stock pile where the materials 2.397 Stable Slope - The condition stay firm even at higher slope than natural angles of repose -in case of cascating underneath by digging wheel. 2.398 Stacker and 2.312). The mobile equipment that creates the pile ~of bulk materials (see a/so 2.256

2.399 Stacker Conveyor creating stockpi le. 2.400 Stacker Portal-

A belt conveyor

mounted

on boom

capable

of luffing

and slewing and

The portal supporting

the stacker conveyor by lineqr

for creating qr radial

stockpile. (see also ?.25(i

2.401 Stacking and 2.312 ).

PrQcess of stockpiling

the material

stacker

31

IS : 10463 (-Part 2) - 1985
2.402 Stack Rate - A combined stacking and reclaiming machine comprising two separate booms one with chain and flights for reclaiming and the other a conveyor boom for stacking - all mounted on a comrr.on carriage supported on wheeled track running on rail track along the stockpile. 2.403 Starting its full running 2.404 Time speed. Duraticn of time taken by a driven component of an equipmenr to pick up

Steep Conveyor

with Cover Belt -

See 2.116. channel sections for

2.405 Stringers idlers mounting

- The longitudinal supporting members normally of angle or between the head and tail terminal supports of a conveyor.

2.406 Superstructure - A set of sturdy structured construction consisting of veritcal tower, job, counterweight, etc, and supported on under carriage through rotating ~element ( slewing bearing ). 2.407 Support for Disc Feeder - A ring with roller, etc, mounted column supporting the disc plate for its rotation in horizontal plane, 2.408 Surge Hopper - A properly shaped container to succeeding element of an equipment. to receive surge along the periphery of central

flow

of material

and pass it on

2.409 Suspension - The state in which the boom or harrow is held at certain by a counter balancing weight through bale ropes or strut ties.

angle

against

gravity

2.410 Swivel Leg -The bracket fitted with ball and socket or cup and cone through which the stacker portal or reclaimer bridge is mounted on truck carriage to cater for radial thrust and help maintain radial movement. 2.411 Table Diameter (disc ) feeder. 2.412 Tail Discharge when r&claiming. 2.413 Tail Drive The diametrical divension of the circular horizontal disc plate of table

Material

transfer

taking

place at tail pulley

of boom

canveyor

being

reversed

Drive unit connected shaft supporting

to the shaft tail pulley

of tail pulley or

of boom conveyor, of boom conveyor, reclaim

2.414 Tail ShaftsThe conveyor chain scraper. 2.415 2.416 TailSkirt Board-

sprockets

Skirt board fitted Sprockets mounted

at tail end of boom conveyor. on tail shaft of chain scraper.

Tail Sprockets-

2.417 Teeth -

See 2.63 and 2.359.

2.418 Telescopic Chute - Consists of a number of collapsable square or circular tubular members which are liftable or made collapsable by means of a rope hoist, commonly used for stacking equipment and shiploaders to minimize dust nuisance. 2.419 Torque Arm Drive - A type of drive incorporating a shaft mounted gear box ( speed reduced ) in which the developed torque is resisted by a pivoted connecting link between the gear box and a fixed anchor point on structure or frame. 2.420 Tow-BarInterconnecting element between between stacker/reclaimer and its trailer tripper. a driven and a non-driven
Equipment such as

2.421 Tower-The vertical structure of box or latticed structure and resting on turn@!& supports the jib and &orn structure.

consPuction counterweight

forming the part of superfqr balancing cantilevered

22

f;fiz

TOW

Pins

-

Set of pins to hold the bar with the bracket fihed on stacker/reclaimer

and traifer

2.423 Trailer ( Tripper ) - Consists of a mobile structure fitted with discharge pulley and a set of idlers in an inclined disposition, with a main belt of the yard conveyorreeved about the discharge The material on the yard conveyor is pulley and a separate bend pulley mounted on the structure. elevated and discharged either to a separate intermediate ( loop) trailer or directly to the boom conveyor for stock piling. The unit is attached to the main driven machine through interconnecting tow-bar or coupler to be propelled to and fro on main rail track along with the main machine. 2.424 Trailer ( Tripper) Discharge Chute - A chute that transfer the material from trailer ( tripper) onto the boom conveyor or stacker conveyor for stockpiling. 2.425 Transfer Car - An independently mobile platform used far relocating stackers, reclaimers or the like from one oair of rails to another oair of rails tracks to enable rails a aiven stacker or reclaipair of mer machine to handle more than one dile. The unit moves (travel ) on shy independent rails in a direction transverse to the length of the stockpile. 2.426 Transfer Chute - A chute mounted an transfer trolley yard belt trailer onto the tail end of intermediate conveyor. orienting the material discharge from

2.427 Transfer Trolley - Structure mounted on wheeled truck frames supporting the junction of yard belt and intermediate ( loop) belt trailers where material is transferred from yard bely to intermediate conveyor belt for onward discharge onto the boom conveyor for stockpiling. 2.428 Trapezoidal Pile - A linear pile of bulk material with wide base and flat top and whose crosssection is in the shape of a trapezium. 2.429 Traveling Mechanism -A set of mechanical device equipped with,pin,ion driven by prime mover through speed reduced imparting motion to harrow wagon and forth travel on rail track. 2.430 Travel Wheels See 2.432. and rack or chain or trolley for back

,

2.431 Traverse Drive Unit - A torque arm drive arrangement where one or more traversing wheel(s) fitted with truck frames or bogies is (are) connected to electric motor through shaft mounted speed reduced; coupling, brake, etc, for travelling motion on rail track. In some cases, besides speed reduced, a set of pinion and gear set of traversing wheels. rims are employed to drive the

2.432 Traverse Wheels - Set of flanged or flanged-less (or flat) wheels fitted with bogies or carripage to roll on rail track imparting travelling or traversing motion to carriage or bridge in predefined path. 2.433 trench `cables. A long-narrow ditch below the base floor or normal grade to lay the power supply

2.434 Triangular Harrow-A surface in blending system.

harrow structure

made in triangular shape to cater far triangular

pile-

2.435 Triangular Pile-A linear or circular pile of bulk material tap and whose cross-section is in the shape of a triangle. 2.436 Trimmer ship's hold, A conveyor or other means to

with wide

base and zero width at

level or shape a bulk

load in a bin; rail road car or

IS : 10463

( Part 2) - 1985
of main

2.437 Trolley - A wheeled frame or carriage supporting associated components/equipment machine either self driven or propelled by main equipment (see also 2.187 ). 2.438 Truck - A set of wheeled truck frames or main structure of the equipment. 2.439 2.440 2.441 Truck Drive Truck Frame See 2.431. See 2.39. See 2.40. or bogies connected in series to support the

carriage

Truck Frame Assembly-

frame subject to rotational movement 2.442 Turntable - A horizontal such that boom or superstructure mounted on it is rotated or slewed in the desired slewing range.

with the help of slewing along with in horizontal

drive, plane

2.443 Twin Boom -A pair of boom structure equipped with conveyors mounted on a stacker at opposite direction ( that is,_at 180") such that both the boom conveyors receiving material from trailer belt, can stackpile the material simultaneously or alternatively along the track length. or cell-less, 2.444 Twin Bucket Wheels - A pair of bucket wheels - whether cell type, semicell mounted on a common shaft and independently driven simultaneously reclaim the materials against all sides of a ship hold -ensuring no fouling of material with feeder conveyor on to which pair of wheels drop the materials. 2.445 Under Carriage - A sturdy box framed carriage that supports the turntable ( slewable) through slewing bearing mounted on horizontal top surface and itself resting on truck frames through four or three-point supports. beams of box 2.446 Under Carriage Beams -The truck frames and supporting under carriage through four- or three-point supports. construction combination connecting the series of wheeled of fixed and equalizer legs forming

2.447 Uni-directional Reclaiming - Stockpile being reclaimed the machine. The reverse movement is meant for transposition angle to the horizontal subtended 2.448 Valley Angle -The inclined planes or two adjacent sides of a hopper or chute.

with uni-directional of machine only. by the line of

movement

of

intersection

of

two

2.449 Variable SpeedThe speed of slewable boom, travelling harrow or rotating that varies or changes infinitely or in preset number of steps within designed limit.

digging

wheel

2.450 Vibrating Rake (Oscillating Rake) - A taking device consisting of a tube fitted with ~excavator teeth and in addition with toothed traverse is mobile support at the carriage and at the top~by hinged guide, thus capable of circular oscillating movement arising out from upward and traversing motion for cutting and dislodging the pile surface. 2.451 Volumetric Capacity-The rate of stacking, volume per hour (m"/hr) by an equipment. 2.452 Wagon LoaderA special machine with reclaiming or loading of bulk material in ,terms of

specifically side hand

meant for loading railings

wagons. conveyor or bridge to

platform 2.453 Walkway - A narrow provide access to various components. 2.454 Wearing Barwe~ar or damage, A replaceable

along boom

bar attached

to a runway

that

protects

the

main

member

from

34

IS:l0463(Part2)-1085.
2.455 Wearing Plate - A replaceable @ate that, is @laced at point, material, to protect the main member from wear or damage. 2.456 Weigh Idler-The conveyor idler mounted on the carriage of wear, due to discharge of

of a belt conveyor

scale.

2.457 Weighing Device -A hydromechanical, pneumatic or electrical device that registers and/or Can be equipped control the amount of material being handled by batch or continuous weighing. with either visual indicators or automatic registering. equipment of both. Can also be arranged to control speed to-compensate for lag in processing or non-uniform material load on conveyor. 2.456 Weigh LorryA travelling hopper for receiving, the wagon. Remote control device for operating the chessis. 2.459 Weight Control System control the flow of material. 2.460 Wheel-A turning ( rolling) A weighing weighing and loading bulk materials on to bunker or bin gates is mounted on the lorry

system in which

the weight

measurements

are used to

flanged or flange-less circular disc may be solid, about its central axis or on integral ball bearings.

built

up or

formed

capable

of

2.461 Wheel load - Load of the machine including all static, transferred to rail through wheels under operating or non-operating 2.462 Wheel Track See 2.327.

dynamic, wind condition.

or seismic

forces

2.463 Wheel Truck - A set of fabricated frames fitted with rolling wheels that structure or carriage or bridge of an equipment imparting motion to the supported tions or wheels. 2.464 Winch a line. A plane or grooved drum that can rotate so as to exert a storn

supports the main member by revolu-

pull while

winding

in

2.465 Winch Assembly - Winch equipped for hoisting of harrow or boom (stacker)

with worm conveyor. winch

wheel

or gear and pinion,

etc, for its rotation

2.466 Winch Drum Shaft - A shaft on which and pinion are employed for winch's rotation.

drum is mounted

in such

assembly

where

gear

2.467 Wind Row Pile - A pile of bulk materials having different grain size is made of number of short comes through entire cross-section of pile.

andbulk

densities

that

2.468 Wind Row Stacking - The stacking method in which the stockpile is made covering entire cross-section of pile in number of layers of small heights, by travelling the stacker to and fro with various hoist positions of boom being coordinated with particular slew positions, that is, combining travelling, hoisting and slewing motions simultaneously. 2.469 Yard Conveyordischarge the incoming for stacking or loading. A ground based conveyor material, namely, a tripper running along the length of the stockpile that ( and/or trailer ) onto the mobile equipment meant

25

3smAmAV

`1

,,

,,( ;::

In this standard an attempt has been made t&over the ten&r which are especially~applicable to stacking, lo&&g ati re&a&rb t3@#HwMi;.:r .cevwbg egvnpanti such as caWeyw systems, electrical equipment (motors, cables, $witch gear, ect ) and general engineering terms relating to bearings, structure, etc, have been feft out. Users of this standard are advised to refer to refated standards, where appficable, covering the corresponding terminologies. This standard ( Part 2) is one of the standards from the series of standards on glossary of terms relating to bulk handling equipment. The glossary of terms relating to cyclic loose bulk handling equipment (non-stationary) is given in IS : 10463 ( Part 6 ) - `1983 and those of equipments for urt?o#Wrg, hydraulic conveying, pneumatic conveying .and stationary - cyciic loose bulk handling are proposed to be covered subsequently.

28
Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

