UDC

621'0 : 614'8

I .

IS: 11016 - 1984
Indian Standard
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

1I Is1
I.
Scope
1.1 Identifies maintenance

GENERAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR MACHINE TOOLS AND THE~IR OPERATION

the basic requirements with regard to safety provisions for machines tools and their accessories and is applicable for new designs as well as re-designs and modifications and describes the safety measures to be adopted (~a ) at the actual place of working; and (b) for setting, utilisation and of machine tools and their accessories. for safety on machine tools and their
operations. such as noise,

1.2 Provides a general guidelines

1.3 Provides a general guideline and wherever specific limits are to be applied for values vibration, etc, reference shall be made to relevant standards on specific subjects.

Note lIn all such cases where it has not been possible to identify specific causes or identify specific limiting valUeS the best possible safety practices identified to overcome such specific cases should be practclsed.
number of related standards have been identified and listed and given in Appendix A. However, Note 2 -A wherever a doubt arises regarding the application of a particular standard, a decision regarding the applicability to be taken keeping in mind the safety requirements to be provided. 2.

Terminology
of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. tool and all its accessories and that

2.0 For the purpose

2.1 Normal Working Area - Area occupied by the machine required for operation, maintenance and material handling.

i,n which the actual machining operation is carried out. This 2.2 Hazardous Working Area -Area includes (a ) the area taken up for the movement of tools and workpieces, (b) the area required for material handling in the proximity of both the tool and the workpiece, (c) the area required for the movement of clamping elements, and (d) the area endangered by the flying of chips. 2.3 Hazardous Points - Freely accessible points between relatively between these parts and the workpieces where there is a possibility during machining or during setting. 2.4 Cutting work-piece, moving parts of the machine and of the operator being injured either

serves to reduce -heat and friction between Fluid - Fluid, which and aids in easy removal of the chips fermed during machining.

the

tool

and the

cutting machine tool is a power-driven machine, generally not portable by 2.5 Machine Tool --Metal hand while in operation, which works metal by cutting, forming, physico-chemical processing or by a
combination 2.6 Standard of these techniques. Accessories

functioning, 2.7 Special tools. 2.3 Machine
requirements,

control, Accessories

-These are tools and aids which service and maintenance of machine tools. These are tools and aids which increase

are

necessary

for

proper

setting,

the scope of function

of machine

They include

-These include standard Tool Equipment supplied in accordance with the agreement the servicing and instruction manuals.

and special accessories as per the technical between the manufacturer and the customer.

2.9 Control Elements - These are elements such as levers, hand-wheels, for ~controlting the various functions o-f the machine tool mechanically, pneumatically. 2.10 Clamping E/em&s-These are elements clamping of either tools or workpieces. such as collets, chucks,

push buttons, etc, required electrically, hydraulically or

arbors,

etc,

required

for

Adopted

11

August

1984

I
BHAVAN,

Q January
STANDARDS

1985, ISI

6r

6

I
INSTITUTION
SHAH 110009 ZAFAR MARG 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INDIAN
MANAK

IS:11016-1964
3. Basic Regulations

3.1 Every manufacturer and user of machine tool shall ensure the safety and protection requirements under the Factories Act and this standard as well as the operating, servicing and maintenance manuals are properly complied with. 3.2 Besides other technical specified in this standard. 4, Design 4.1 General Requirements Principles requirements, every machine tool shall conform to the safety requirements

4.1.1 Machine tools and their accesso:ies shall be so designed that they can be safely operated as per the instructions indicated in the operating manual of the respective machine tool. 4.1.2 While designing machine tools and their accessories, the physiological and psychological coupled with the safety and hygienic factors of the operator shall be considered as a composite requirements. 4.1.3 Sources of danger, wherever possible, shall be eliminated completely. factors of the

4.1.4 In a situation where it is not possible to eliminate the sources of danger, care shall be taken to incorporate safety precautions which will reduce the risk of accidents to a minimum. 4.1.4.1 Protective equipment shall be simple, reliable and convenient for use as well as inspection. and shall not hinder the

4.1.4.2 Protective equipments shall not themselves be sources of accident setting, normal working and maintenance of the machine tool.

-4.1.4.3 Protective equipment shall be so designed that it is possible to get them mutually interconnected with the control mechanism. This will ensure such equipment to be brought automatically into action, once the machine tool is switched on, and does not get disconnected till the machine tool is switched-off. 4.2 External ~Arrangement and Shape

4.2.1 As far as possible, the external surfaces shall be free from sharp edges, sharpcorners, projections and cavities. Projections and sharp corners shall be avoided in close proximity to control elements and in all such places where there is a risk of the operator getting injured. 4.2.2 For such of the machine tool parts which cannot be covered and which protrude into the working region either temporarily or permanently ( for example, clamps, clamping screws, ect. ) it is necessary to minimise the risk of an accident by: a) preventing partition; b) judiciously accessibility locating to such parts, by incorporating suitable suitable shape; so that while the protective guards, railings or

such parts and providing

c) providing convenient guiding machine tool is in operation, d) cautioning

system for tubes, hoses and electrical wires, there will be no obstruction from theme; and colour markings.

against danger by means of warning

4.2.3 The external shape of the machine tool and its protective equipment shall be such that the operator is able to see the workspot without any obstruction and is able to operate without getting unduly strained. 4.3 Painting 4.3.1 Colour schemes for machine tools shall balanced appearance of t.he machine tool without 4.3.2 The painted be selected so as to provide an optically causing any strain to the operator. be smooth and attractive. suitable and

surface of the machine tool should are confined shade which

4.3.3 When controls painted with a suitable

to distnict regions of the machine tool, the control area should be provides a convenient neutral base for coloured indication plates. and location of safety facilities and

4.3.4 For rapid assessment of hazards and for identification equipment, suitable safety colours shall be used. 2

IS : 11016 - 1984
4.4 Maintenance and Operation of chips. All such

4.4;1 The design of machine tool shall permit easy cleaning and safe removal places which are required to be manually cleaned, shall be easily accessible.

4.4-2 Parts requiring adjustment, cleaning, direct lubrication, etc ( for example: clutches, bearing, cams, stop drums, etc ) shall be easily accessible. Special care shall be taken while locating such parts requrring regular setting and cleaning, to restrict any possibility of an accident while operating the machine tool. 4.4.3 Standardized lubrication. symbols shall be marked at all lubricating points according to the periodicity of

4.4.4 Coolant tank/filters and their distribution piping shall be so designed replacement and it shall also be possible to drain off the coolant completely. 4.4.5 Parts located below the hazardous working area shall be safely maintenance and repairs and suitably provided. with protective guards. 4.4.6 All control machine tool. elernents shall be located at a suitable

as to permit easy cleaning/

accessible

for the purposes

of

height convenient

for normal operation

of the

4.4.7 Where necessary, suitable slip proof platforms shall be provided for the operator. platforms exceed a height of 500 mm, they shall be provided with guard rails. 4.5 Transportation, Mounting and Installation

Where

such

4.5.1 Design of machine tools shall enable easy assembly and dismantling or replacements.

for the purposes of

repairs

4.5.2 Machine tools and their individual component parts shall be so designed as to facilitate safe For this purpose it is essential handling during transportation, assembly, maintenance or manufacture. parts and/or on sub-assembly units, suitable lugs, to provide, wherever necessary, on individual eyebolts, opening for wire ropes, etc. Suitable provision for slinging of wire ropes should be provided and such provisions should be rounded so that the slinging rope does not get damaged. While providing these handling facilities, due regard should be given to the position of the centre of gravity and the strength of the material. 4.5.3 The instruction manual or service manual shall clearly slinging for the purposes of transporting and installation. 4.5.4 The base of the machine mounting and installation. tool shall be so designed state the best and safe method of

that it is possible

to use levers for easy

4.5.5 To help easy and safe installation, the machine tool shall be provided of lugs and holes for fixing the base, safely and rigidly on the foundation. 4.6 Design of Moving Parts with protective

with

sufficient

number

4.6.`l All moving parts likely to cause hazards shall be provided

guards. tool shall be

4.6.1.1 Driving and transmission mechanism -forming an integral completely enclosed within the framework.

part of the machine

4.6.1.2 When the driving and transmission mechanism does not form an integral part, but has to be provided within the reach of the operator, shall be positioned at a convenient height and covered by protective guards. 4.6.2 Whenever moving parts are enclosed by hinged and locked ensured that it is not possible to remove them during operation. protective covers, it shall be

4.6.3 The protective equipment shall be designed with due consideration to the surroundings in which it will be installed and fabricated from non-inflammable material which cannot be easily damaged and which is capable of getting cleaned easily. 4.6.4 In such machine tool where the weight of the moving parts is balanced by counterweights, which shall be located inside the machine frame or suitably covered by protective guards. 3

OS:11016 -1964
4.6.4.1It shall also be ensured that both the counterweights unless they are operated. 4.6.4.2 4.7 Design There shall be easy access to the balancing of Braking and Loching Equipment equipment and the balanced parts do not move

for inspection

purposes.

4.7.1 Wherever necessary the design of machine tool shall provide for a reliable and efficien1 braking system enabling quick stopping of the movement of either the workpiece, or the tool or any other part of machine tool. shall provide for suitable 4.7.1.1 For hydraulic or pneumatic braking system, the design precautionary measures to bring the machine tool to a stop automatically when the fluid pressure drops below the limiting pressure at which the braking efficiency would be affected. 4.7.2 In case the machine tool has a provision for loading and removal of heavy workpieces only in certain positions of the work table, the design shalt provide for suitable braking device to stop the auxiliary motions of different parts of the machine, when the work table is positioned at these points. 4.7.3 Machine tool shall be suitably designed to-prevent undesirable due to either a drop in the fluid pressure, a drop in the supply voltage, of the threads of the bearing nut. hazardous movements of parts power failure or due to damage

4.7.4 Suitable safety devices such as locking switches, shear pins, couplings, pressure switches, etc, shall be provided to eliminate any possibility of an accident overloading or damage of individual parts. 4.7.5 In atl cases where switch-off the feed drive switched-off automatically 4.6 Desfgn of l-lydraulic

temperature relays, as a result of neither

there is an independent feed drive, suitable system shall be provided to It will be ensured that the feed is before switching-on the main drive. if there is an interruption to the main drive. Equipment that

4.8.1 The design of hydraulic equipment for machine tools shall be noise free and it is ensured the fluid is discharged only into the concerned receiver or tank. 4.8.2 For controlling the fluid pressure and level, suitable devices shall be incorporated The design shalt also provide for overload-protective device. 4.8.3 The design shaH atso provide for suitable there is a possibility of forming of air cushion. equipment

in the design.

for the release of air at ail places where

4.8.4 Suitable controls shalt be incorporated in the design for cautioning an eventual fault in any part of the circuit such as choking of oil filter, temperature of oil in excess of normal range, etc. 4.9 Design of Clamping Equipment

4.9.1 Clamping equipment for cramping of either the workpiece or the tool shatl facilitate easy and safe clamping and unclamping. If the unit comprises several dismantleable parts, then assembling and d;smantling of the unit shall be as smooth as possible and shall not be a somce of injury to the operator. 4.9.1.1 Loading and unloading positions on the machine tool shatt be so arranged that any manipulation on the clamping unit is done at a safe distance from the dangerous parts. The design of clamping unit shall also permit easy and safe removal of the chips. 4.9.2 Rotating clampinq units shall have a provision braking or during rotation-in the opposite direction. 4.921 All projecting parts of the rotating clamping for locking against self-release either during

unit shail be covered by protective

guards.

4.9.3 In case the clamping units are designed only for a limited range and not the entire range of speeds and feeds of the machine tool, suitable locking system shall be provided for preventing any possible over-running of the machine toot beyond the range of the clamping unit. 4.9.4 For clamping hydrualcally, suitable equipmmt operated either electrically, electro-magnetically, pneumatically or safety precautions shall be taken either to bring the machine to a dead stop 01:to 4

IS: 11016 - 1984
move the tool away from the workpiece, whenever there is a drop in the clamping force. This drop in the clamping force may be either due to an interruption of the power supply or due to a drop in the fluid pressure. A suitable warning signal should be incorporated to warn the operator of any fault or of the eventual stopping of the machine. 4.9.5 If possible, when the minimum protective equipment should also be able to prevent the starting clamping force is not attained. of the machine tool

4.9.6 The design should also provide for a means of preventing the workpiece released during machining due to accidental operation of the release button. 4.10 Designing for Protection Against Chips and Cutting Fluid

from getting

itself

4.10.1 The design of a machine tool should ensure protection to operator from the action of chips, cutting fluid, grinding dust, broken tool particles, etc. For this purpose the design should provide for adjustable protective guards capable of arresting chips from flying hazardously and preventing the splashing of cutting fluid. 4.10.1.1 These guards should not come in the way of normal manipulations required workpiece or the tool. They should also not cause an obstruction to the operator in carrying normal duties nor should~they obstruct the light needed at the cutting zone. on the out his

4.10.1.2 The protective equipment shall be sufficiently rigid and form an integral part of the machine tool. The transparent part of the equipment shall be made out of abrasion resistant material which can be easily cleaned and if damaged shall be capable of being replaced easily and safely. 4.10.2 The design should also enable easy and quick removal places, by providing suitable inclination and smooth surfaces. 4.10.3 The design should also provide for suitable equipment of foreign matter. 4.11 Design of Control Equipment of control panel shall ensure an accurate, easy and quick manipulation of chips from the hazardous working

for cleaning

the cutting

fluid for removal

4.11.1 The design and location and reading.

4.11.2 Every machine tool shall be provided with machine tool gets disconnected from energy source. 4.11.3 The location ensure: of all control elements with

a IfMain Switch'

by -operating

which

the entire

such as levers, hand wheels, strain, from their

switches,

buttons,

etc. shall

a) easy and safe operation b) that they are within positions of control,

least physical

easy reach of the operators

normal

working

place in

all the

c) that there is no danger to the operator from the hazardous controls, and d) that they do not come in the way of normal movements 4.11.4 Different mutually blocked. control units for various motions ~which

moving

parts while operating

of the operator. simultaneously set in shall be

do not

4.11.5 Control elements shall be so designed as to prevent their changing and foot-operated controls shall be locked against accidental release.

of positions

by themselves,

4.11.6 For machine tools having more than one control station, the design should ensure that it is not possible to simultaneously operate from different control positions by providing suitable interlocking facility except for emergency stop push button. 4.11.7 Provision of preventing any forceful automatic disengagement operation during the cutting shall be made for process. manual control elements for

4.11.6 The control elements combination of these.

shall be easily distinguishable

by shape, colour or symbols or by suitable

5

ISrllOl(i- 1984
4.11.9For recommended practice regarding the direction of cperation of controls, IS : 2987-1983 `Recommendations for direction of operation of controls for machine tools ( first revision )' shall be followed. 4.11.10 Suitable control stops shall be provided near the places of danger or at ail control points by means of which the machine may be brought to a total stop, However, for machine tools which have a single operating position, only one such stop will suffice. 4.11.11 Whenever indication plates are used to clearly indicate the purpose of control elements then symbols to be used in siich indication plates shall be in accordarxe with IS : 2182-1962 `Recommendation for symbols to be given on indication plates for machine tools'. 4.11.12 Electrical control elements intended for stopping the machine or its parts shall be in red colour, or be indicated by red colour light signals. Similarly, control elements intended for starting shall be in green colour, or be indicated by green-colour light indication. 4.11.13 In general, control elements for electrical equipment IS : 1356 ( Part 1 )-t972 `Specification for electrical equipment equipment of machines for general use ( second revision )`. of tools shall be in accordance with 01 machine tools: Part 1 Electrical

4.11.14 For all machine tools, especially for automatic and programme controlled machine tools, auxiliary manual controls enabling manual operations of tables, slides, etc, shall also be provided to meet emergency requirements. (For example during failures of electric supply, or during accidents.) 4.11.15 For programme-controlled machines operating machine comes to a-dead stop when the tape is broken Sufficient care should also be taken while designing prevent the starting of the working cycle when the tape 4.12 Design of Electrical Equipment with a tape, it should be so controlled that the or when there is an error in tape movement. the control system for such machine tools to iswrongly introduced.

4.12.1 Regarding the safety requirements of electrical equipment for machine tools, standards have been formulated both at the International and national levels. IS : 1356 ( Part 1 )-I972 serves to the needs of the designers as regards the safety requirements of electrical equipment for machine tools, as applicable in India. 4.12.2 In addition, special care shall electrical equipment for machine tools. 4.13 Design of Exhaust Equipment be taken regarding the tropicalization and climate proofing of

4.13.1 The design of exhaust equipment should take into consideration the general hygienic and safety regulations prevailing. In addition, the following points are required to be borne in mind while designing the exhaust equipment. 4.13.1.1 area. 4.13.1.2 They should and disassembled. be noisefree in operation and should be capable of being easily assembled They should not obstruct the operation, impair the work and the view of the working

4.13.1.3 The suction head of the exhaust equipment shall cover the entire area of all sources of dust particles and shall be located in the immediate vicinity in such a way that the direction of suction is the same as direction of flow of the dust. 4.13.1.4 If the sources of dust get shifted during to shift simultaneously to the proper suction position. 4.13.2 The exhaust equipment shall be so designed machining, the suction head should also be made

as to prevent any choking-up

of the piping. as to enable easy

4.13.3 The exhaust pipes, dust separator and other rigid parts shall be so designed dismantling and cleaning.

4.13.4 The exhaust equipment should not be a source of danger either due to excess noise or due to excessive cooling down of the working area and the surroundings of the machine tool. 4.14 Design with

Regard to Noise

and Vibration

4.14.1 Design should take care of the permissible noise levels for different types of machine tools and maintain the noise levels within these limits; if necessary, with the aid of separate noise suppressors and vibration dampers. 6

IS: llOlQ -1984
4.14.2 Vibration and noise shall be kept to minimum by proper design of kinematic mechanism, proper balancing, accurate manufacture of components and proper use of scund insulating materials, etc. 4.14.3 The instruction their isolation. 4.14.4 If pneumatic air exhaust noise. 5. Additional 5.1 Instructions manual shall provide the correct information regarding type of foundation and

clamping

units are used, then the design

shall

include

suitable

damping

of the

Requirements for Servicing of Machine

Tool

5.1.1 With each new machine tool, the manufacturer ( supplier) shall provide the customer ( the person who orders ) with at least two copes of detailed and legible descriptions of the machine tool, with necessary drawings and schematic diagrams of electrical its equipment and accessories, connections together with instructions for its correct and safe installation, adjustment, maintenance and operation. 5.1.2 Similar descriptions users. 5.2 Training of Operators from the may also and instructions shall also be prepared for the existing machine tools by the

5.2.1 Every machine tool user shall carefully consider the provision of training of operators If necessary, refresher courses point of view of safe working as soon as they are employed. be arranged as and when required.

5.2.2 The training course should preferably include the safe and suitable methods of machining adopted in various machine tools, setting up of the machine tool, cutting tool, etc, proper use of measuring instruments, and care to be~taken while using the cutting fluid, during material handling and during machining. The operators should also be taught the principles of frrst aid, action to be taken in case of emergency, etc. They should also be taught the proper outfit to be worn during machining. 5.3 Requirements of the Shop Floor and the Arrangement of Machine Tools

5.3.1 The ~floor area alloted to each machine tool and the operator shall be in accordance with the valid health' regulations. In addition to this, necessary space required for storing the auxiliary equipments, raw materials, tools, etc, shall be provided. 5.3.2 Machine tools shall be so located that they are at a distance -of at least 600 mm from the permanent obstructions (walls, columns, etc) and at least 100 mm in cases where the operator is The dimensions shall be measured when the constantly stationed at one place during the operation. moving parts of the machine are positioned at their extreme positions in that direction. 5.3.3 Parts of machine tools which exceed the average height of the surrounding machines, may be marked in warning colours or provided with danger lights at their topmost points, if an overhead travelling crane travels above them. 5.3.4 Machine tools shall be located in the most faverable conditions for natural light. If natural light is inadequate, proper artificial lighting should be provided. Additionally, operating zones shall be illuminated properly, if required. 5.3.5 Old machines equipped with belt transmission from the line shali have a free pulley and a shifter which could be controlled from the normal place of operation of the machine. However, in majority of the cases, it may be necessary to change~over to unit drives. 5.3.6 Additional zone. 5.4 Working Place by the adjustable lights on machine tools shall be provided to illuminate to the operational

5.4.1 Working places shall be selected with due care to see that the operator is not disturbed neighbouring work places and that there is no obstruction to his movement during working. 6.4.2 The working the workers. floor should be insulated against dampness and should enable

easy movement

of

5.4.3 The working place shall be maintained mechanised and done regularly.

clean

and tidy,

cleaning

of chips shall be preferably

7

BS : 11018- 1984
5.4.4 Spilling of oily substances on the floor to be cleaned and dried by saw dusts immediatety. 5.4.5 Working area shall be illuminated adequately by overhead illumination the requirements of IS : 6665-1972 `Code of practice for industrial lighting'. and shall conform

5.4.6 All waste material shall be dumped in a separate portable waste bin, which ensures safety while transporting. The load-carrying capacity of the bin shall be clearly marked on it. 5~4.7 While stacking combustible and light inflammable materials ( solvents, lubricants, working place, suitable safety procedures currently in vogue may be followed. etc ) at the

5.4.6 Used cleaning material ( cotton waste, etc) shall be staked in separate metallic containers with lids, and they shall be regularly emptied. 5.4.9 Tools, gauges, etc, shall not be placed on the frames, tables or beds of the machine toolsunless separate space specially for keeping them is provided. 5.4.10 While stacking the raw material at the work place, the stack shall preferrably be not higher than 100 mm and the width of the passage between the stacks or between the staek and the machine be not less than 800 mm. To prevent sliding of the stack and falling of the workpieces, suitable supports shall be provided. 5.5 Movemenf of Objects (Material Handling )

5.5.1 For clamping and removal of heavy fixture, tools and workpieces, suitable lifting equipment Lifting equipment shall enable reliable gripping of the object and its shall be made available. convenient and safe lifting and-location on the machine. 5.5.2 Workers engaged in lifting operations shall be suitably trained and provided with all auxiliary equipments. 5.6 Working with Cuffing Fluid

5.6.1 Protection of the worker shall be ensured against any possible harm being caused due to the action of the cutting fluid. Only such cutting fluids, which have been approved by the competent authorities shall be used and all precautions taken as per regulations provided in corresponding health code. 5.6.2 Instructions shall be given to concerned workers regarding the safe methods of preparation and They shall be provided with suitable protective equipments according to safety use of cutting fluids. requirements. 5.6.3 Cutting fluid shall be regularly changed as per recommendation of the supplier. During each change, the tank and the entire system shall be washed with hot water and soda. If any disinfectant is used for cleaning, this should be later washed off from the tank. 5.6.4 Such workers who are suffering from skin diseases or those who are liable to contact them when they are in contact with the cutting fluid, shall not be encouraged to go near the places where the cutting fluid is being used. 5.7 Ufilisafion of Machine Tools and which corresponds

5.7.1 Machine tool shall be used only for such work for which it is intended to its type, size and capacity.

5.7.2 While machining special metals and alloys, due care shall be taken to meet the specific health and safety repuirements. 6. Duties 6.1 Duties of the Operator Before Starting fhe Work on the Machine Tools

of fhe Operator

6.1.1 Before starting the work, the operator shall attend to the following: a) Examine the machine tool, check its parts, safety equipments, starting and stopping switches, etc. Any discrepancy or damage should immediately be reported to his supervisor. 6

IS : 11018 - 1984
b) Check the oil level to make sure about the correct functioning c) Check the functioning of the clamping equipment. of the lubrication equipment.

d) Carry out proper selection e) Check whether f) Adjust 6.2 Dufies the controls

of the tools and check their use. are in correct positions.

the protective

guards to their active positions. Working on fhe Machine

of fhe Operator

While

6.2.1 Safe and proper method of working on the machine tool shall be followed. It is necessary to follow strictly the instructions provided in the instruction manual taking all precautions as prescribed. 6.2.2 While lubricatting to a total stop. or cleaning or while leaving the workspot, the machine tool shall be brought

6.2.3 While changing the tools, checking the surface of the workspot, clamping and removing the workpiece, and while measuring, the spindle of the~machine tool, shall be stopped. However, if there is a clamping equipment of tools or workpieces designed for safe clamping during motion, and if there is a -provision for automatic measurement, this need not be done. 6.2.4 During any interruption in thesupply of the elecIric current, the operator shall switch-off the main switch immediately and all other control elements brought to such a position that once the supply is restored, the machine tool does not get started automatically. 6.2.5 If rapid traverse is switched-on, the operator shall carefully workpiece, and switch-off the rapid traverse at a safe distance. observe the parts approaching the

6.2.6 For workpieces which project beyond the~clamping surface its surface of revolution should be checked as to whether it exceeds the maximum swing diameters and similarly for workpieces whose width exceeds the clamping width of the table, it shall be checked as to whether there is sufficient space for the movement of the workpiece between frames, cross-rails, etc. 6.27 The workpieces-shall be clamped by the right and size of the workpiece to ensure perfect clamping. clamping equipment depending upon the shape

6.2.8 Workpieces having irregular shape and centre of gravity outside the axis of rotation shall be properly balanced before machining to prevent any increase in vibration of the machine tool. ~Defective ( broken ) workpieces shall not be machined. 6.2.9 While clamping heavy objects, it is set and clamped. For supporting, the object shall remain supported by the lifting equipment until correct and undamaged clamps and supports shall be used.

6.2.10 Bearing surfaces of clamping equipments shall be clean and undamaged. Tool shall be~safely clamped and its overhang shall be adjusted such that during machining, unnecessary and dangerous stresses are not set up and that chip formation is easy and uniform. 6.2.11 Only suitable and undamaged tools shall be clamped. clamping key inserted in the clamping unit when it is in motion. leverage should be made use of. It is not For driving permitted a higher to leave the force, suitable

6.2.12 If the machine is not equipped with protective guards against chips or the guards cannot be used even if provided, then the operators shall use separate personal protection ( goggles, face covers, etc), 6.213 All tools, gauges, clamping slipping keys, etc, shall be stacked in their definite of belts during fhe Shiff place properly, remove the All cleaning aids shall also run shall be prohibited. positians.

6.2.14 Manual 6.3 Duties

and lubrication After

of the Operator

Complefing

6.3.1 After completion of the work, the operator shall arrange his working chips and used cutting fluid, clean the places meant for gauges, tools, etc. be suitably stacked.

6.3.2 If there are any faults or short-comings on the machine observed during the shift, the same should be reported to the superior for repair or remedy and for proper care to be taken by the operator working in the next shift. 9

IS : 11016- 1984
7. Outfit of the Operator
dress without apron covering (cap protect any loosely hanging part; loose up to the knees may be used. or kerchief his feet. ) to protect the hair. sandals

7.1 The operator
shirts should

should preferably wear close fitting A close fitting be tucked in the trousers. should preferably preferably wear wear a suitable a working

7.2 The operator

head cover shoe to

7.3 The
should

operator should be restricted. having

Use of open

7.4 Workers etc ).

bandages

on their

hands

or on fingers

shall

not work

on machine

is change of his hand or the fingers coming in contact
7.5 Protective clamping them not be worn. 7.6 Wherever protection.

with

the rotating

part ( drilling

tools where machine,

there
lathe,

hand gloves should preferably be worn while handling However, for normal in the hazardous working region.

workpieces or tools or working operations gloves

while need

needed

suitable

eye protection

equipment

such as `safety

goggles'

should

be worn

for eye

8. Removal 8.1 In general,
the machine

of Chips
chips shall not be removed tool itself permits it. when the machine tool is running unless the operation of

8.2 F~or removing the chips when brushes shall be used as and when the machine tool has been stopped

the machine tool is running, hooks, scrapers and long-handled Dusters and waste may be used for cleaning only when necessary. and after removing the chips by scrapers, etc.

8.3 In~general, cleaning of the machine tool by compressed air is prohibited. powever, if it is necessary as per the technological processes to use compressed air for cleaning the workpiece, clamping fixture, etc, then the air nozzle shall be covered and the pressure reduced to 1 atmosphere. In such cases the operator shall wear protective facial covers. 9. Setting

up and Maintenance
and its maintenance shall be in accordance with for operation and maintenance of the machine. it must be ensured in accordance with that all safety the instructions. and protective the instructions

9.1 Setting
given

up of the machine tool in the manual of instructions

9.2 Before setting up the machine, working properly and are positioned

equipments

are

9.3 While setting, it must be ensured that the cutting speed, change of tool and the working cycle do not cause any harm or injury to Ihe near by operators (due to dust, noise, spray of cutting fluid, etc ). Also all valid safety instructions and standards shall be strictly followed. 9.4 Routine inspection regard to parts which shall never be carried of the-machine are liable to fail out on defective maintenance shall be strictly tools shall be carried or break down. Any machines. schedule followed. shall be out fault at regular intervals, shall be immediately particularly rectified. with Work

9.5 A regular preventive tools and this schedule

worked

out

for

each

one

of the

machine

9.6 Before repairing the machine tools, a fool-proof arrangement shall be made to ensure started by unauthorised persons. It can be accomplished by several ways as for switching-off the electric motor and removing the pull~eey belts or by pressing the main netural position, etc. In addition to this, a suitable placard reading MACHINE UNDER NOT OPERATE shall be placed near the control switch. Restarting of the machine tool only after the repair and inspection of all protective guards have been completed.

that it is not example, by switch to the REPAIR - DO shall be done

IO

IS : 11016- 1884 APPEN-DIX A ( Clause 1.2, Nofe 2 )
LIST OF RELATED INDIAN STANDARDS requirements during welding in electric and gas welding ) revision) and

IS : 818-1968
IS : 1179-1967 IS : 1991-1973 IS : 25581971 IS : 2925-1975 IS : 3616-1982 IS : 3103-1975 IS : 3483-1965 IS : 4167-1980 IS : 4501-1981 IS : 4770-1968 IS : 5216-1969 IS : 5983-1980 IS : 6153-1971 IS : 6229-1980 IS : 6665-1972

Code of practice for safety and health cutting operations (first revision ) Equipment for eye and face protection

( first revision (first

Safety code for the use, care and protection Safety glass ( second Industrial revision ) )

of abrasive wheels

safety helmets ( first revision

Code of practice for fire precautions Code of practice for industrial

in welding

and cutting )

operations

( first revision

)

ventilation

( first revision

Code of practice for noise reduction

in industrial

buildings

GLossary of terms relating to air pollution Aprons, rubberized,

( first revision) ( first revision )

acid and alkali resistant purposes

Rubber gloves for electrical Guide for safety procedures Eye protector's Protective Method of attenuation ( first revision clothing

and practices in electrical )

works

leather

measurement of real-ear protection of earmuffs (first revision ) lighting

of

hearing

protectors

and

physical

Code of practice ~for industrial Industrial

IS : 6994 ( Part 1 )-1973 IS : 7194-1973 IS : 8235-1976 IS : 8519-1977 IS : 8520-1977

safety sloves:

Part I Leather and cotton gloves purposas

Assessment

of noise-exposure

during work for hearing conversation in hand operated hand tools for body protection

Guide for safety procedures Guide for selection Guide for selection

of industrial of industrial

safety equipment safety equipment

for eye, face and ear protection for woodworking machines

IS : 8964 ( Parts I to XXIV ) IS : 9474-1980 IS : 9637-1980 Principles Guidelines

Recommendations

for safety conditions of machinery in technical

of mechanical

guarding

for presentation

of information

manuals

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard has been formulated to lay down the principles of providing maximum safety and protection to the personnel operating all types of ~metal cutting machine tools and to provide general The specific requirements concerning any guidelines for safety on machine tools and their operations. particular kind to machine tool or accessory will be delt with separately in individual safety standards to be prepared later. Notwithstanding the requirements indicated ir this standard, if a particular requirement covered by any other legal document such as, Factories Act, Electricity Act, etc, the conditions ted in these legal documents should Abe satisfied completely. has been stipula-

This standard has been prepared mainly based upon various Indian Standards published on However, certain assistance has been derived safety aspects and experience gained by our industry. from JIS B 6014-1980 `General code for safety for machine tools' published by the Japanese Industrial Standards Committee.

11
Printed at Arcee Cress, New Delhi, lndlo

