RAT AAF IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Aan ait gach serdi a 
THA cis cht uga 
ANT 1 BTA A AHS CAT 
( FERT yr ) 


Methods of Sampling of Petroleum 
and its Products 
Part 1 Manual Sampling 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 75.080; 19.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2021 Price Group 9 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee, 


PCD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


Samples of petroleum and petroleum products are examined by various methods of test for determination of physical 
and chemical characteristics. The test results are often used for custody transfer and pricing determinations. It is 
accordingly necessary that the samples be representative of the petroleum or petroleum products in question. The 
precautions required to ensure the representative character of the samples are numerous and depend upon the type 
of material being sampled the tank, carrier, container or line from which the sample is being obtained, the type and 
the cleanliness of the sample container, and the sampling procedure that is to be used. A summary of the sampling 
procedures and their applications may be given as follows: 


Sampling Procedure 


Pre-cooled bottle sampling 


Cooler tap sampling 


Bottle sampling 


Tap sampling 
In-line sampling 
Bottle sampling 
Tap sampling 
Dipper sampling 
Tube sampling 
Thief sampling 


Dipper sampling 


Automatic sampling, thief 


sampling; bottle sampling; 


tap sampling 
Bottle sampling 


Boring sampling 
Grab sampling 


Grease sampling 


Extended-tube 
thief sampling 


sampling 


Type of Container 


Storage tanks, ship and barge tanks, 
tank cars, tank trucks 


Storage tanks with taps 


Storage tanks, ship and barge tanks, 
tank cars, tank trucks 


Storage tanks with taps 

Pipes or lines 

Storage tanks, ship and barge 
Storage tanks with taps 

Free or open-discharge streams 
Drums, barrels and cans 


Tank cars, storage tanks 


Free or open-discharge streams, open 
tanks or kettles with open heads; tank 
cars and tank trucks; drums 


Storage tanks, ship and barge tanks, 
tank cars, tank trucks, and pipelines 


Storage tanks, ship and barge tanks 


Barrels, cases, bags, cakes 


Freight cars, conveyors bags, barrels, 
boxes 


Kettles drums, cans tubes 


Storage tanks, tanks, lines, 


packages 


cars, 


Storage tanks, tank cars, lines, packages 
Ship and barge trucks, storage tanks 


Application 


Liquids of more than 110 kPa and not 
more than 179 kPa RVP 


do 


Liquids of more than 13.8 kPa and not 
more than 110 kPa RVP 


do 
Liquids of 110 kPa or less RVP 
Liquids of 13.8 kPa or less RVP 
do 
do 
do 


Bottom or thief sampling of liquids of 
13.8 kPa RVP or less 


Liquids or semi-liquids 13.8 kPa RVP 
or less 


Crude petroleum 


Industrial aromatic hydrocarbons 


Waxes, solid bitumens, and other soft 
solids 


Petroleum coke; lumpy solids 


Greases, soft waxes, asphalts 


Asphaltic materials 


Emulsified asphalts 


Bottom water composition 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF SAMPLING OF PETROLEUM 
AND ITS PRODUCTS 


PART 1 MANUAL SAMPLING 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) covers procedures and 
equipment for manually obtaining representative 
samples of liquid petroleum products, intermediate 
products and crude oils. This standard also covers 
sampling of semi liquid petroleum products. 


1.2 This standard does not cover sampling of electrical 
insulating oils and fluid power hydraulic fluids. 


1.3 Different degrees of uniformity or the presence 
of sediment and water are shown to present manual 
sampling difficulties that may affect the representative 
nature of final samples. 
WARNING — The use of this document can involve hazardous 
materials, operations and equipment. This Standard does 
not purport to address all of the safety problems associated 
with its use. It is the responsibility of users of this document 
to take appropriate measures to ensure the safety and health 
of personnel prior to the application of the standard, and to 
determine the applicability of regulatory limitations and any 
other restrictions for this purpose. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute the provisions 
of the standards. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
1448 


Title 
Methods of test for petroleum 
and its products 
Distillation of petroleum 
products (third revision) 


(Part 18) : 2020 


(Part 39) : 2012/ 
ISO 3007 : 1999 


Determination of vapour 
pressure — Reid method 
(second revision) 


(Part 148) : 2019/ 
ISO 6297 : 1997 


Petroleum products — 
Aviation and distillate fuels 
— Determination of electrical 
conductivity (first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Samples 


3.1.1 Uniform Petroleum Product — One in which 
spot samples from top, upper, middle, lower, and 
outlet agree within the precision of the laboratory tests. 
Similarly, in pipeline transfers, spot samples taken at 
1, 20, 50 and 80 percent of the total volume agree 
within the precision of the laboratory tests. 


3.1.2 Official Sample — A sample taken at the point 
of custody transfer and used for the custody transfer 
laboratory determination. 


3.1.3 Representative Sample — A portion extracted 
from the total volume that contains the constituents 
in the same proportion that are present in that total 
volume. 


3.1.4 All Levels Sample — A sample obtained by 
submerging a stoppered beaker or bottle to a point as 
near as possible to the draw-off level, then opening 
the sampler and raising it at a rate such that it is about 
three-fourths full (maximum 85 percent) as it emerges 
from the liquid. An all-levels example is not necessarily 
a representative sample because the tank volume 
may not be proportional to the depth and because the 
operator may not be able to raise the sampler at the 
variable rate required for proportionate filling. The rate 
of filling is proportional to the square root of the depth 
of immersion. 

NOTE — The tube sampling procedure may be (see 7.6) used 

to obtain on all levels samples from a barrel or drum. 


3.1.5 Running Sample — A sample obtained by 
lowering an un stoppered beaker or bottle from the 
top of the oil to the level of the bottom of the outlet 
connection or swing line, and returning it to the top of 
the oil at a uniform rate of speed such that the beaker 
or bottle is about three-fourths full when withdrawn 
from the oil. A running sample is not necessarily a 
representative sample because the tank volume may not 
be proportional to the depth and because the operator 
may not be able to raise the sampler at the variable 
rate required for proportionate filling. The rate of 
filling is proportional to the square root of the depth of 
immersion. 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


3.1.6 Spot Sample — A sample taken at a specific 
location in tank or from a flowing stream in a pipe at a 
specific time during a pumping operation. 


3.1.7 Top Sample — A spot sample obtained 150 mm 
below the top surface of the liquid (see Fig. 1). 


3.1.8 Upper Sample — A spot sample taken at the 
middle of the upper one-third of the tank contents 
(a distance of one-sixth of the liquid depth below the 
liquid’s surface) as shown in Fig. 1. 

NOTE — The outlet sample location shown applies only to 


tanks with side outlets. It does not apply when the outlet comes 
from the floor of the tank or turns down into a sump. 


3.1.9 Middle Sample — A spot sample obtained from 
the middle of the tank contents (a distance of one 
half of the depth of liquid below the liquid’s surface) 
(see Fig. 1). 


3.1.10 Lower Sample — A spot sample obtained from 
the middle of the lower one-third of the tank contents 
(a distance of five-sixth of the depth of liquid below the 
liquid’s surface) (see Fig. 1). 


3.1.11 Clearance Sample — A spot sample taken with 
the inlet opening of the sampling apparatus 100 mm 
below the bottom of the tank outlet. 


3.1.12 Bottom Sample — A spot sample obtained from 
the material at the bottom surface of the tank, container 
or line at its lowest point. 


HATCH 


15 om 


TANK 
CONTENTS 


OUTLET 


X — TOP SAMPLE 
X — UPPER SAMPLE 


X —— MIDDLE SAMPLE 


3.1.13 Bottom Water Sample — A spot sample of free 
water taken from beneath the petroleum contained in a 
ship or barge compartment or storage tank. 


3.1.14 Drain Sample — A sample obtained from the 
water draw-off valve on a storage tank. Occasionally, a 
drain sample may be the same as a bottom sample, as in 
the case of a tank car. 


3.1.15 Outlet Sample — A spot sample taken at the level 
of the bottom of the tank outlet (either fixed or swing 
pipe) but not higher than one meter above the bottom of 
the tank (see Fig. 1). 


3.1.16 Automatic Sampler — A sampler used to retrieve 
a representative sample from the liquid flowing in a pipe. 
The automatic sampler generally consists of a probe, an 
extracting mechanism, an associated controller, and a 
sample receiver. 


3.1.17 Single Tank Composite Sample — A blend created 
from the upper, middle, and lower samples from a single 
tank. For a tank of uniform cross-section, such as an 
upright cylindrical tank, the blend consists of equal parts 
of the three samples. For a horizontal cylindrical tank, 
the blend consists of the three samples in the proportions 
shown in Table 1. 


3.1.18 Multiple Tank Composite Samples (Ships, Barges, 
etc.) — A mixture of individual samples from the several 
compartments each of which contains the same grade of 
petroleum material. The mixture is blended in proportion 
to the volume of material in each compartment. 


UPPER THIRD 


MIDDLE THIRD 


LOWER THIRD 


Fic. 1 SAMPLING DEPTHS 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 1 Sampling Instructions for Horizontal Cylindrical Tests 
( Clause 3.1.17 ) 


SI No. Liquid Depth, Percent of Sampling Level, Composite Sample, 
Diameter Percent of Diameter Above Proportionate Parts of 
Upper Middle Lower Upper Middle Lower 
0) 2) 6) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) 100 80 50 20 3 4 3 
ii) 90 75 50 20 3 4 3 
ili) 80 70 50 20 2 5 3 
iv) 70 50 20 6 4 
v) 60 50 20 5 5 
vi) 50 40 20 4 6 
vii) 40 20 10 
viii) 30 15 10 
ix) 20 10 10 
x) 10 5 10 


3.1.19 Composite Spot Sample — A blend of spot 
samples mixed in proportion to the volumes of materials 
from which the spot samples were obtained. Some tests 
may also be made on the spot samples before blending 
and the results averaged. Spot samples from crude oil 
tanks are collected as follows. 


3.1.19.1 Three-way On tanks larger than 
1 000 barrel capacity that contain in excess 4.5 m 
of oil, equal volume samples should be taken at the 
upper, middle and lower or outlet connection of the 
merchantable oil, in the order named. On tanks of 
1 000 barrel capacity and less, this method may also 
be used. 


3.1.19.2 Two-way On tanks smaller than 
1 000 barrel capacity that contain in excess of 3.0 m 
and up to 4.5 m of oil, equal-volume samples should be 
taken at the upper and lower, or outlet, connection of 
the merchantable oil, in the order named. On tanks of 
159 m° (1 000 barrel) capacity and under, this method 
may also be used. 


3.1.20 Middle Spot Sample — On tanks larger than 
1 000 barrel capacity containing 3.0 m or less of crude 
oil, one spot sample should be taken near the centre 
of the vertical column of oil as possible and outlet 
connection. 


3.1.21 Dipper Sample — A sample obtained by placing 
a dipper or other collecting vessel into the path of a 
free flowing stream, so as to collect a definite volume 
from the full cross-section of the stream, at regular time 
intervals for a constant rate of flow, or at time intervals 
varied in proportion to the rate of flow. 


3.1.22 Tube or Thief Sample — A sample obtained 
with a sampling tube or special thief, either as a core 
sample or spot sample from a specific point in the tank 
or container. 


3.1.23 Tank Side Sample — A spot sample taken from a 
sample connection in the side of a tank. 


3.1.24 Surface Sample (Skim Sample) — A spot sample 
skimmed from the surface of a liquid in a tank. 


3.1.25 Flow Proportional Sample — A sample taken 
from a pipe such that the rate of sampling is proportional 
throughout the sampling period to the flow rate of the 
fluid in the pipe. 


3.1.26 Entrained Water — Water suspended in the 
oil. Entrained water includes emulsions but does not 
include dissolved water. 


3.1.27 Free Water — Water that exists as a separate 
phase and typically lies beneath the oil. 


3.1.28 Emulsion — An oil/water mixture that does not 
readily separate. 


3.1.29 Sample Receiver (Receptacle) — Container, in 
which all sample bites are collected during sampling 
operation. A receiver may be fixed or portable. 


3.1.30 Boring Sample — A sample obtained by 
collecting the chips made by boring holes with a ship 
auger from top to bottom of the material contained in a 
barrel, case, bag or cake. 


3.1.31 Zone Sample — Sample taken as that part of the 
liquid column that is trapped within the whole height 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


of a sampling device when it is sealed at a single spot 
location within a tank after having been fully flushed as 
it was lowered to that position. 


3.1.32 Nozzle Sample — Nozzle sample is one obtained 
from fuel dispensing nozzle of fuel station/retail 
outlet/petrol pump which dispenses fuel from the 
underground storage tank. The nozzle sampling 
is applicable for sampling of product from a fuel 
station/retail outlet/petrol pump or wherever fuel 
dispensing system is available. 


3.1.33 Homogeneity — Homogeneity is the quality of 
uniformity of a material. If irregularities are distributed 
evenly in a mixture of material, the material is 
homogeneous. Product shall be termed as homogeneous 
if density variation between UML or TMB is not more 
than + 3.0 kg/m? between any two layers. 


3.2 Vertical Cylindrical Tanks 


3.2.1 Spot Samples 


Lower the sampling device until its opening is at the 
required depth, open it in the appropriate manner and 
maintain it at the required level until it is filled. Retrieve 
it and either decant a small portion back to the tank 
to create an ullage space before sealing the sample, or 
carefully transfer the complete sample to a secondary 
sample receiver. 


In hot climate conditions or whenever there is a 
significant difference in temperature between the 
sampler and the product being sampled, the sampler 
should be conditioned to the temperature of the tank 
contents by gently raising and lowering it through 
approximately +300 mm for 1 min to 2 min before 
operating the opening mechanism. 


When sampling at different levels, take the samples 
in sequence from top to bottom, in order to avoid 
disturbance at a lower level. 


In the case of a zone sampler (with essentially full bore 
top and bottom valves that allow the tank contents to 
flush through the sampler as it is lowered), lower the 
sampler in a controlled manner until it is at the required 
depth. Close the valve(s) as soon as the lowering 
operation ceases, and retrieve the sample immediately. 
Carefully transfer the complete sample to a secondary 
sample receiver. 


Where the design of the zone sampler does not permit 
full flushing during lowering, it is recommended that 
the sampler be raised and lowered two or three times 
after reaching the spot sampling location, before 
closing the valve(s). The raising and lowering shall be 
through a distance of at least the height of the sampler. 


In the case of a top sample, lower the open 
sampler/container carefully until its neck is just above 
the surface of the liquid, and then allow the sampler 
to fall sharply 150 mm below the surface. When the 


sampler is full, as indicated by the cessation of air 
bubbles, withdraw it and proceed as for regular spot 
samples. 


3.2.2 Composite Samples 


Acomposite sample may be prepared fromrepresentative 
subsamples of spot samples obtained from within a 
single tank (for example, by combining subsamples 
from the upper, middle and lower spot samples), or may 
be prepared by combining subsamples representative 
of individual tanks to provide a composite for a larger 
oil quantity (for example, several ship or barge tanks of 
the same product). Composite samples shall include all 
the material collected in the primary sampling device 
without subdivision. The volume collected in the 
primary sampling device shall be chosen to allow the 
entire contents of the device to be added to the volume 
of the other subsamples in the transport container. 
Compositing of subsamples smaller than the entire 
contents of a subsample shall only be performed in a 
laboratory with facilities to assure adequate mixing and 
measurement of the subsamples. 


To prepare either type of composite sample, transfer 
subsamples of representative individual samples into 
a composite-sample container, and mix them together 
gently. The subsamples shall be volume weighted in 
proportion to the quantity that each represents. 


When the subsamples that are to be combined originate 
from a tank of non-uniform cross-sectional area 
(or from multiple tanks), the compositing operation 
shall require careful calculation and measurement of 
the subsamples to maintain the representative nature 
of the sample. These operations shall, if practical, be 
conducted under controlled laboratory conditions. 

NOTE — Evaporation of light ends, and adhesion of 

water/sediment to the wall of the original sampler, may 

influence the representative nature of composite sample(s). 
Do not prepare composite samples for testing unless 
they are specifically requested, and agreed by the 
interested parties. As an alternative to physical 
compositing, individual spot samples shall be tested 
and a mean value calculated from the individual test 
results in proportion to the bulk represented by each 
sample. 


3.2.3 Bottom Sampling 


Lower the bottom sampler until it rests in an upright 
position on the bottom of the tank so that the valve 
opens and the sampler fills. After withdrawing the 
sampler, examine it closely for leaks. If any are 
detected, discard the sample, clean the bottom sampler 
and re-sample. If necessary, transfer the contents into 
a secondary sample container, taking care that all the 
sample is properly transferred, including any water or 
solids that may adhere to the inner walls of the primary 
bottom sampler. 


3.2.4 Interface Sampling 


Lower the sampler with the valves open to permit the 
liquid to flush through the device. At the level desired, 
close the valve(s) and withdraw the sampler from the 
liquid. 

If a transparent tube is used, any existing interface can 
be detected visually through the wall of the sampling 
tube and its position within the tank determined by 
measurement on the graduated sampling tape. Check 
that the valves have properly closed; otherwise 
re-sample. 


NOTE — The sample may be retained for testing. 
3.2.5 Tap (Tank-side) Sampling 


This is not a preferred method for custody transfer or 
yield inventory purposes and therefore shall be applied 
only if no other method of sampling is possible. 


The sampling point valves shall be a minimum of 12.5 
mm in diameter and shall be fitted to the side of the tank 
at regular intervals, by connections extending at least 
150 mm into the tank, except on floating-roof tanks, in 
which this is impossible. The lower connection shall be 
level with the bottom of the suction pipe. 


Before a sample is taken, flush the tap or valve 

connection with the product to be sampled, after which 

draw off a sample into a container or receiver. 
CAUTION — Open the taps with care when sampling under 
pressure. Make no attempt to clear a blocked connection by 
rodding through an opened valve. 

If the contents of a tank fail to reach the upper or middle 

sample connections on a tank equipped with three 

connections, take the sample for the tank as follows: 


a) If the level of the contents is nearer the upper 
sample connection than the middle one, take 
two-thirds of the sample from the middle 
connection and one-third from the lower one. 


b) Ifthe level is nearer the middle connection than the 
upper, take one-half of the sample from the middle 
connection and one-half from the lower one. If the 
level of the contents is below the middle sample 
connection, take all the sample from the lower 


connection. 


3.2.6 All-level Sampling 


All-level samplers can be of the ‘top-down’ or ‘bottom- 
up’ type. As the sample receiver is filled while travelling 
in a single direction through the tank’s contents, 
different procedures are required for ‘top-down’ and 
‘bottom-up’ techniques. 


wm 


Follow the manufacturer’s instructions when using 
proprietary devices. 


To obtain a (bottom-up) all-level sample with a bottle 
fitted to a weighted sampling cage (or with a weighted 
sampling can), proceed as follows. Stopper the bottle 
or can, and lower it to the tank bottom (avoiding any 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


bottom-lying free water). Jerk the cord to remove the 
cork, and raise the sampler back to the surface at a 
uniform speed without any pause or hesitation. The 
hauling speed should be chosen so that the bottle 
or can is about 80 percent full, but not more than 
90 percent full, when withdrawn from the liquid. Cap or 
stopper the bottle immediately, or carefully transfer the 
complete sample from the weighted can to a secondary 
transportation receiver. 


If a fixed volume all-level sampler is less than 
90 percent full when retrieved from the liquid, it may 
be assumed that oil was flowing into it from all depths 
during its passage through the tank’s contents. If the 
sampler is more than 90 percent full when retrieved 
from the liquid, the sample may not be representative 
and should be discarded before re-taking the sample 
using a faster raising speed. 


4 SUMMARY OF PRACTICE 


4.1 This practice provides procedures for manually 
obtaining samples of petroleum and petroleum 
products of a liquid, semi solids or solid state samples 
from tanks, pipelines, drums, barrels, cans, tubes. It 
addresses in details, the various factors which need to 
be considered in obtaining a representative sample. 


4.1.1 If the tank contents are not homogeneous from 
top to bottom of the tank or if the conditions in 4.1.2 are 
not met, automatic sampling is recommended. 


4.1.2 Tank samples will be representative if the tank 
contents are homogeneous from top to bottom. This is 
rarely the case in actual practice. However, tank samples 
are acceptable if all of the following conditions prevail: 


a) Tank contains a heavy component (such as water) 
that clearly separates from the main component; 


b) Tank is equipped with either a swing suction or a 
weir on the outlet that prevents any shipment of 
the heavy component; and 


c) Tank samples are taken so that none of the heavy 
component is included. 


4.1.3 See 6 for additional precautions and instructions. 
5 APPARATUS 


5.1 Sample Containers 


Sample containers come in various shapes, sizes and 
materials. Select the proper container based on the 
product to be sampled. To select the right container 
for a given application, knowledge of the material 
to be sampled is required to ensure that there will 
be no interaction between the sampled material and 
the container which would affect the integrity of the 
sample. Type of mixing required to remix the contents 
before transferring the sample from the container is 
additional consideration required while choosing the 
container type. 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


In general clear or brown glass bottles, or cans may 
be used. The clear bottle is advantageous because 
it may be examined visually for cleanliness and also 
allows visual inspection of the sample for free water or 
solid impurities. The brown glass bottle affords some 
protection from light. 


Cans made up of stainless steel with welded seams 
and aluminium bottle containers are suitable for many 
sampling operations. 

The following are general design considerations for 
choosing the sample container: 

a) The bottom of the container should be sloped 
continuously downwards to the outlet to ensure 
complete liquid withdrawal. 

b) There should be no internal pockets or dead spots. 

c) Internal surfaces should be designed to minimize 


corrosion, encrustation, and water/sediment 
clingage. 
d) There should be an inspection cover/closure of 


sufficient size to facilitate filling, inspection, and 
cleaning. 


e) The container should be designed to allow 
the preparation of a homogeneous mixture of 
the sample while preventing the loss of any 
constituents which affect the representativeness of 
the sample and the accuracy of the analytical tests. 


f) The container should be designed to allow the 
transfer of samples from the container to the 
analytical apparatus while maintaining their 
representative nature. 


5.1.1 Plastic Bottles 


Plastic bottles made of suitable material (un-pigmented 
linear polyethylene) may be used for handling and 
storage of diesel oil, fuel oil and lubricating oils. 
Bottles of this type should not be used for gasoline, 
aviation jet fuel, kerosene, crude oil, white spirit or 
other petroleum products unless testing indicates there 
is no problem with solubility, contamination or loss of 
light components. In no circumstances shall nonlinear 
conventional polyethylene containers be used to store 
samples of liquid hydrocarbon. Used engine oil samples 
that may have been subjected to fuel dilution shall not 
be stored in plastic containers. Plastic bottles have an 
advantage. They will not shatter like glass or corrode 
like metal containers. They are generally used only 
once and discarded so that re-cleaning and recovery 
procedures are not required. 


5.1.2 Sample Containers for Aviation Fuels 


A number of aviation fuel properties are affected by 
trace levels of polar or other compounds. Therefore, 
the sample containers used should not add or absorb 
any material. 


5.1.2.1 Epoxy coated cans are generally considered 
satisfactory for aviation gasoline. 


5.1.2.2 Amber coloured glass bottles or glass bottles 
covered with opaque material such as aluminium foil 
are used as sample containers for aviation fuels. 


5.1.2.3 Because no specification is known to describe 
a satisfactory epoxy-coating, below listed procedures 
is an approval procedure, which can be used to identify 
a satisfactory coating. For initial qualification of new 
container sources, coated cans should be examined 
closely to assure that the coating covers all inside 
surfaces. 


The sample containers used for Jet A-1 may be 
acceptable, if they comply to the following test: 


a) The container to be filled with Jet A-1 and stored 
for at least one month at room temperature. During 
this period the sample should be shaken strongly 
at least once a week. At the end of storage, the 
sample to be tested for electrical conductivity and 
water separation. The final electrical conductivity 
should not be higher by more than 2 pS/m from the 
initial value. The water separation rating should 
decrease by no more than three MSEP units. 


b 


we 


Supplemental testing is necessary if the fuel 
normally contains additives such as conductivity 
improvers which may be desorbed. In that case a 
large additive-containing sample which has been 
stored for a month or longer to equilibrate additive 
content should be used as the test fuel. Such fuel 
should have a conductivity above 50 pS/m, if 
the additive is conductivity improver additive; 
and the MSEP value should also be determined. 
After similar storage for at least one month, the 
final electrical conductivity should not change 
more than the repeatability limits of test method 
IS 1448 (Part 148). The final MSEP rating should 
be within the repeatability limits for the initially 
obtained value. 


5.1.2.4 The summary of recommendation for various 
containers of aviation fuel is given in Annex B. 


5.2 Container Closure 


Cork stoppers, or screw caps of plastic or metal may 
be used for glass bottles. Corks must be of good 
quality, clean, and free of holes and loose bits of cork. 
Situations in which cork should not be used include 
liquids in which loss of light ends may affect any test 
result and liquids that are hygroscopic or have a low 
water content specification. 


Never use rubber stoppers. Prevent the sample from 
contacting the cork by wrapping tin or aluminium foil 
around the cork before forcing it into the bottle. Screw 
caps made of a material that will not deteriorate or 


contaminate the sample are to be used for glass bottles. 
Screw caps should provide a vapour tight seal. 


Glass stoppers must be a perfect fit. Cans and plastic 
bottles should be closed with screw caps made of the 
same material as the container. Screw caps must be 
protected by a disk faced with tin or aluminum foil, 
or other material that will not affect petroleum or 
petroleum products. 


5.3 Cleaning Procedure 


All sample containers must be absolutely clean and free 
of water, dirt, lint, washing compounds, naphtha, or 
other solvents, soldering fluxes or acids, corrosion, rust, 
or oil. Before using a container rinse it with standard 
solvent or other naphtha of similar volatility (It may 
be necessary to use sludge solvent to remove all traces 
of sediment and sludge from the container previously 
used). Following the solvent wash, the container 
should be washed with a strong soap solution, rinsed 
thoroughly with tap water, and given a final rinse using 
distilled water. Dry the container either by passing a 
current of clean, warm air through the container or by 
placing it in a hot dust-free cabinet at 40 °C or higher. 
When dry, stopper or cap the container immediately. 
In the ordinary sampling of crude petroleum, washing 
with soap and rinsing with water may be eliminated. 
Finally, container shall be thoroughly rinsed with 
product. 


5.4 Sampling Cage 


This shall be a metal or plastic holder or cage, suitably 
constructed to hold the appropriate container. The 


C 


CORK DETAIL 


> Le 


1 UTRE SAMPLE WEIGHTED 


ALTERNATE RIG CAGE (CAN BE FABRICATED 
TO FIT ANY SIZE BOTTLE) 
A B 


1 ARRANGEMENTS 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


combined apparatus shall be of such a weight as to sink 
readily in the material to be sampled, and provision 
shall be made to fill the container at any desired level 
(see Fig. 2). Bottles of special dimensions are required 
to fit a sampling cage. The use of sampling cage is 
generally preferred to that of a weighted sampling 
beaker for volatile products since loss of light ends is 
likely to occur when transferring the sample from a 
weighted sampling beaker to another container. 


5.5 Sampling Apparatus 


Described in detail under each of the specific sampling 
procedures. Sampling apparatus shall be clean, dry 
and free of all substances that might contaminate the 
material. 


6 PRECAUTIONS AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR 
SPECIFIC PRODUCTS 


6.1 Sampling certain products requires a due amount 
of caution for their handling. See Annex A for 
precautionary statements regarding these products. 


6.2 Crude Petroleum and Heavy Fuels 


6.2.1 Usually are non-homogeneous. Automatic 
samplers are recommended for sediment and water 
(S&W) and density measurement. Tank samples may 
not be representative because of the following reasons. 


6.2.1.1 The concentration of entrained water is higher 
near the bottom. The running sample or the composite 
of the upper, middle and lower sample may not 
represent the concentration of entrained water. 


COPPER 


WASHER 
1 LITRE WEIGHTED 
BEAKER 


FIG. 2 ASSEMBLIES FOR BOTTLE SAMPLING 


7 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


6.2.1.2 The interface between oil and free water is 
difficult to measure, especially, in the presence of 
emulsion, layers, or sludge. 


6.2.1.3 Determining the volume of free water is 
difficult because the free water level varies across the 
tank bottom surface. The bottom is often covered by 
pools of free water or water emulsion impounded by 
layers of sludge or wax. 


6.2.1.4 In case of high pour and high viscous 
crudes exercise great care with respect to heating 
and homogenizing to ensure that sample remains 
representative during all handling stages from primary 
container to test apparatus. 


6.3 Gasoline and Distillate Products 


Usually are homogeneous but they are often shipped 
from tanks that have clearly separated water on the 
bottom. Tank sampling is acceptable under conditions 
covered in Foreword. 


6.4 When using tank samples, the S&W deduction 
is usually the sum of the free water volume 
(usually determined from a paste cut) and the entrained 
water volume determined from the S&W analysis of 
the tank sample. The difficulty of determining the 
free water volume limits the accuracy of the S&W 
deduction. 


6.4.1 Automatic samples are recommended. However, 
by mutual agreement, shore tanks, ship(s) compartment 
or manual line samples may be used. 


6.5 Aviation Fuels 


6.5.1 Sampling equipment fabricated from copper and 
its alloys shall not be used for sampling aviation fuels. 


6.5.2 Before sampling, the sampler and the container 
shall be flushed and rinsed thoroughly at least three 
times with the product to be sampled and allowed to be 
drained before use. 


6.5.3 Certain container types are found suitable for some 
test and not for others. Some containers are adequate 
for immediate use and not for storage. A summary of 
recommended containers is provided in Annex B. 


6.5.4 Electrical conductivity of jet fuels is known to 
change during storage. Results obtained from shipped 
samples may not be a reliable indicator for the fuel’s 
actual conductivity level. Therefore, conductivity test 
should be carried out directly on the fuel in tankage or 
by drawing a sample for immediate testing. 


6.6 Sample Handling and Dividing of Crude 
Petroleum and Non-Uniform Products 


6.6.1 The transfer of crude oil samples from the 
sample receiver to the laboratory glassware in which 


they will be analyzed requires special care to maintain 
their representative nature. The number of transfers 
should be minimized. Mechanical means of mixing 
and transferring the samples are recommended. An 
external circulating system provided with pump and 
in-line mixing element that couples directly to the 
sample container is one method. Mixing time and flow 
rates are critical in such systems. A mixer that is inserted 
in the sampler container is another method. Whatever 
handling, dividing, and mixing system is chosen, its 
performance should be verified by introducing and 
transferring samples of known water concentration. 


6.6.2 In mixing and transferring, representative 
samples; the variation from known water concentration 
should not exceed +0.05 percent when the known water 
concentration is | percent or less and +5 percent of the 
known water concentration when it is over 1 percent. 


6.7 Marine Custody Transfer 


By mutual agreement, samples can be taken from shore 
tanks, from ship(s) tanks, or from pipelines. Pipelines 
samples may be taken automatically or manually. 
Properly taken automatic pipeline samples are the 
most representative. Manual pipeline samples are less 
representative than automatic pipeline samples. Manual 
pipeline sampling is described in 7.4. Tank samples 
will usually not be representative unless the tank is 
completely homogeneous and contains no free water. 


6.7.1 Stationary or Shore Tanks 


6.7.1.1 Crude petroleum tanks may be sampled in the 

following ways by mutual agreement, composite spot, 

middle spot, all levels, running samples or by sample 

cocks. Additional samples may be taken as necessary. 
NOTE — Where emulsions are in relatively higher 
concentration in the bottom portions of the tank, the lower 
sample would not be considered representative of this lower 
third. Automatic line sampling is recommended in such cases. 
If this is not possible, an outlet sample or bottom sample 
should be required instead of the lower sample. In addition, a 
bottom thieving should be made for both opening and closing 
gauges so that any change in the S&W level at the bottom of 
the tank may be observed and noted. 


6.7.1.2 Where tank samples must be used for crude oil 
fiscalization and the tanks do not have swing suction 
lines or weirs, it is recommended that upper, middle, 
and outlet samples be taken. These samples should be 
tested and reported separately. The S&W deduction 
should be the average of the three values. Other 
analyses should also be averaged. 


6.7.2 Ship or Barge Transfers 
Samples of ship cargoes of crude petroleum may be 
taken by the following methods by mutual agreement. 


6.7.2.1 From the shore tanks before loading and both 
before and after discharging as previously described. 


6.7.2.2 From the pipeline during discharging or 
loading, pipeline samples may be taken either manually 
or with an automatic sampler. If the pipeline requires 
displacement or flushing, care must be taken that the 
pipeline sample includes the entire cargo and none of 
the displacement. Separate samples may be required to 
cover the effect of the line displacement on the prior or 
following transfer. 


6.7.2.3 From the ship(s) tanks after loading or before 
discharging, an all-levels sample or a running sample 
shall be obtained from each compartment of the ship(s) 
cargo tanks. Except for the following: 


a) Except where specifically exempted, when 
loading a ship, the shore tank sample or the 
pipeline sample taken from the loading line shall 
be official. However, ship(s) tank samples may 
also be tested for sediment and water, and for 
other quality aspects when required. The results 
of these ship(s) tank sample tests, together with 
the shore tank sample tests may be shown on the 
cargo certificate. 


b 


wm 


When discharging a ship, the pipeline sample taken 
from a properly designed and operated automatic 
line sampler in the discharge line shall be official. 
Where no proper line sample is available, the 
ship(s) tank sample will be official except where 
specifically exempted. 


6.8 Finished Products 


When loading or discharging finished products, take 
samples from both shipping and receiving tanks, and 
from the pipeline, if required. 


6.8.1 Ship or Barge Tanks 


Sample each product after the vessel is loaded or just 
before unloading. 


6.8.2 Tank Cars 


Sample the product after the car is loaded or just before 
unloading. 


6.8.3 Package Lots (Cans, Drums, Barrels, or Boxes) 


Take samples from a sufficient number of the individual 
packages to prepare a composite sample that will be 
representative of the entire lot or shipment. Select at 
random the individual packages to be sampled. The 
number of such random packages will depend upon 
several practical considerations, such as, 


a) The stringency of the product specifications; 


b) The source and type of the material and whether 
or not more than one production batch may be 
represented in the lot; 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


c) Previous experience with similar shipments, 
particularly with respect to the uniformity of 
quality from package to package; and 

d) In most cases, the number specified in Table 2 will 
be satisfactory. 


Table 2 Minimum Number of Packages to be 
Selected for Sapling 


[ Clause 6.8.3 (d) ] 


SI No. Number of Packages Number of Packages to 
in Lot be Sampled 
a) (2) (3) 
i) 1 to3 all 
ii) 4 to 64 4 
iii) 65 to 125 5 
iv) 126 to 216 6 
v) 217 to 343 T 
vi) 344 to 512 8 
vii) 513 to 729 9 
viii) 730 to 1 000 10 
ix) 1 001 to 1 331 11 
x) 1 332 to 1 728 12 
x1) 1 729 to 2 197 13 
xii) 2 198 to 2 744 14 
xiii) 2 745 to 3 375 15 
xiv) 3 376 to 4 096 16 
xv) 4 097 to 4 913 17 
xvi) 4914 to 5 832 18 
xvii) 5 833 to 6 859 19 
xviii) 6 860 or above 20 
6.9 Obtaining Samples 


6.9.1 Extreme care and good judgment are necessary 
to ensure samples are obtained that represent the 
general character and average condition of the material. 
Clean hands are important. Clean gloves may be worn 
but only when absolutely necessary, such as in cold 
weather, or when handling at a high temperature, or for 
reasons of safety. Select wiping clothes so that lint is 
not introduced, which would contaminate samples. 


6.9.2 As many petroleum vapours are toxic and 
flammable, avoid breathing them or igniting them from 
an open flame or a spark produced by static. Follow 
all safety precautions specific to the material being 
sampled. 


6.9.3 When sampling relatively volatile products of 
more than 13.8 kPa RVP, fill and allow the sampling 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


apparatus to drain before drawing the sample. If the 
sample is to be transferred to another container, also 
rinse this container with some of the volatile product 
and then drain. When the actual sample is emptied in to 
this container, suspend the sampling apparatus into the 
opening of the sample container and allow to remain in 
this position until the contents have been transferred so 
that no unsaturated air will be entrained in the transfer 
of the sample. 


6.9.4 When sampling non-volatile liquid products of 
13.8 kPa RVP or less, the sampling apparatus shall be 
filled and allowed to drain before drawing the actual 
sample. If the actual sample is to be transferred to 
another container, rinse the sample container with some 
of the product to be sampled and drain before it is filled 
with the actual sample. 
NOTE — When taking samples from tanks suspected of 
containing flammable atmospheres, precautions should be 
taken to guard against ignitions due to static electricity. Metal 
or conductive objects such as gage tapes, sample containers, 
and thermometers, should not be lowered into or suspected in, 
a compartment or tank which is being filled or immediately 
after cessation of pumping. A waiting period will generally 
permit a substantial relaxation of the electrostatic charge. 


6.10 Handling Samples 
6.10.1 Volatile Samples 


It is necessary to protect all volatile samples of 
petroleum and petroleum products from evaporation. 
Transfer the product from the sampling apparatus to 
the sample container immediately. Keep the container 
closed except when the material is being transferred. 
When samples of more than 210 kPa RVP are being 
obtained, be sure to use containers strong enough to 
meet local safety regulations. After delivery to the 
laboratory, volatile samples should be cooled before 
the container is opened. 


6.10.2 Light Sensitive Samples 


It is important that samples sensitive to light, such 
as gasoline containing tetraethyl lead, be kept in the 
dark, if the testing is to include the determination of 
such properties as colour, tetraethyl lead and inhibitor 
contents, sludge-forming characteristics, stability tests, 
or neutralization value. Brown glass bottles may be 
used. Wrap or cover clear glass bottles immediately. 
It is a definite advantage to use covered cardboard 
cartons into which the sample bottles may be placed 
immediately after collection. 


6.10.3 Refined Materials 


Protect highly refined products from moisture and dust 
by placing paper, plastic, or metal foil over the stopper 
and the top of the container. 


10 


6.10.4 Container Outage 


Never completely fill a sample container, but allow 
adequate room for expansion, taking into consideration 
the temperature of the liquid at the time of filling and 
the probable maximum temperature to which the filled 
container may be subjected. Adequate sample mixing 
is difficult if the container is more than 80 percent full. 


6.11 Shipping Samples 


To prevent loss of liquid and vapour during shipment, 
and to protect against moisture and dust, cover the 
stoppers of glass bottles with plastic caps that have been 
swelled in water, wipe dry, place over the tops of the 
stoppered bottles, and allow to shrink tightly in place. 
Before filling metal containers, inspect the lip and caps 
for dents, out-of-roundness or other imperfections. 
Screw the caps of metal containers down tightly and 
check for leakage. Appropriate regulations applying to 
the shipment of flammable liquids must be observed. 


6.12 Labelling Sample Containers 


Label the container immediately after a sample is 
obtained. Use waterproof and oil proof ink or a 
pencil hard enough to dent the tag, since soft pencil 
and ordinary ink markings are subject to obliteration 
from moisture, oil smearing, and handling. Include the 
following information: 


a) Date and time sample was taken (the period 
elapsed during continuous sampling and the hour 
and minute of collection for dipper samples); 

b) Name of the individual who obtained the sample; 


c) Tank/Vessel/Pipeline/container identifier 


description; 


or 


d) Product name; 

e) Reference symbol or identification number; 
f) Type of sample; and 

g) Quantity represented (tank /vessel). 


7 SAMPLING PROCEDURE 


7.1 The standard sampling procedures described in 
this method are summarized in Foreword. Alternative 
sampling procedures may be used if a mutually 
satisfactory agreement has been reached by the parties 
involved. Such agreement shall be put in writing and 
signed by authorized officials. 


7.2 Bottle or Beaker Sampling 


7.2.1 Application 


The bottle or beaker sampling procedure is applicable 
for sampling liquids of 101 kPa RVP or less in tank 
cars, tank trucks, shore tanks, ship tanks, and barge 
tanks. Solids or semi-liquid that can be liquefied by 
heat may be sampled by this procedure, provided they 
are true liquids at the time of sampling. 


7.2.2 Apparatus 


A suitable sampling bottle or beaker, as shown in 
Fig. 2 is required. Recommended uses and diameter of 
openings in the bottle or beaker are given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Weighted Sampling Bottle or Beaker 


( Clause 7.2.2 ) 
SI Material Diameter of Opening 
No. mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Light lubricating oils, kerosenes, 20 
gasolines, transparent gas oils, 
diesel fuels and distillates 
ii) Heavy lubricating oils, 40 
non-transparent gas oils 
iii) Light crude oils viscosity less 20 
than 43 mm/’/s at 40 °C 
iv) Heavy crude and fuel oils 40 
7.2.3 Procedure 


7.2.3.1 All level sample (one-way) 


Inspect the sampling bottle or beaker, graduated 
cylinder and sample container for cleanliness and use 
only clean dry equipment. Obtain the estimate of the 
liquid level in the tank. 


Lower the weighted, stoppered bottle, or beaker as near 
as possible to the draw-off level, pull out the stopper 
with a sharp jerk of the line and raise the bottle at a 
uniform rate so that it is about three-fourths full as it 
emerges from the liquid. For light products or deep 
tanks, a restricted opening may be needed to avoid 
filling the bottle. 


7.2.3.2 Running sample (two-way) 


Lower the unsupported bottle or beaker as near 
as possible to the level of the bottom of the outlet 
connection or swing line and then raise the bottle or 
beaker to the top of the oil at a uniform rate of speed 
such that it is about three-fourths full when withdrawn 
from the oil. For light products or deep tanks, a notched 
cork or other restricted opening may be needed to avoid 
filling the bottle. 


7.2.3.3 Top, upper, middle, lower and outlet samples 


Lower the weighted, stoppered bottle to the required 

top, upper, middle, lower, and outlet depths as shown 

in Fig. 1. 
NOTE — Where emulsions in relatively higher 
concentration in the bottom portions of the tank, the lower 
sample would not be considered representative of this lower 
third. Automatic line sampling is recommended in such cases. 
If this is not possible an outlet sample or bottom sample should 
be required instead of the lower sample. In addition, make a 


are 


11 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


bottom thieving for both opening and closing gages so that any 

change in the S&W level at the bottom of the tank may be 

observed and noted. 
a) At the selected level, pull out the stopper with 
a sharp jerk of the line and allow the bottle or 
beaker to fill, completely. When judged full, raise 
the bottle or beaker, pour off a small amount, and 
stopper immediately. 
b) Where tank samples must be used for crude oil 
fiscalization and the tanks do not have swing 
suction lines or weirs, it is recommended that 
upper, middle, and outlet samples be taken. 
Test these samples and report separately. The 
S&W deduction should be the average of the 


three values. Also average other analyses. 


7.2.3.4 Multiple tank composite sample 


Prepare a composite sample in the laboratory 
(not in the field) by mixing portions of the all levels 
samples as specified in 3.1.18. 


7.2.3.5 Composite spot sample 


Prepare a composite spot sample by mixing spot 
samples in equal proportions as specified in 3.1.19, 
using either the three-way or the two-way procedure, 
whichever applies. 


7.2.3.6 Middle spot sample 


Obtain this sample in the manner specified in 3.1.20. 


7.2.3.7 Handling 


Stopper and label bottle sample, immediately after 
taking them, and deliver to the laboratory in the original 
sampling bottles. There is an advantage to using a 
bottle and a sampling cage instead ofa weighted beaker 
for volatile products. The loss of light ends is likely 
to occur when transferring the sample from a weighted 
beaker to another container. 


7.3 Tap Sampling 
7.3.1 Application 


The tap sampling procedure is applicable for sampling 
liquids of 101 kPa RVP or less in tanks that are 
equipped with suitable, sampling taps or lines. This 
procedure is recommended for volatile stocks in tanks 
of the breather and balloon-roof type, spheroids, etc. 
(samples may be taken from the drain cocks of gage 
glasses, if the tank is not equipped with sampling taps). 
The assembly for tap sampling is shown in Fig. 3. 
NOTE — If RVP is more than 110 kPa but not more than 
179 kPa, a cooling bath as shown in Fig. 8 shall be used 
between the tank tap and the sample container to cool the 


sample and container and prevent volatilization of low-boiling 
components. 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


OPTIONAL 


Fic. 3 ASSEMBLY FOR TAP SAMPLING 


7.3.2 Apparatus 


7.3.2.1 Tank taps 


The tank should be equipped with at least three sampling 
taps placed equidistant throughout the tank height. On 
tanks that are not equipped with floating roofs each 
sample tap should extend into the tank a minimum of 
10 cm. A sample tap should be equipped with a delivery 
tube which permit the filling of the sample container 
from the bottom. 


7.3.2.2 Sample cocks 


Samples of crude petroleum may be taken through 
sample cocks properly placed in the shell of the tank. 
The upper sample cock shall be located 457 mm 
below the top of the tank shell; the lower sample cock 
shall be located level with the bottom of the outlet 
elbow or other similar fitting if installed on the outlet 
connection; and the middle sample cock shall be 
located halfway between the upper and lower sample 
cocks. An additional cock for the clearance sample 
shall be located 102 mm below the bottom of the 
Outlet connection to determine whether the level of 
merchantable oil is at least below this point. The sample 
cocks shall be located a minimum of 1.8 m distant 
circumferential from the pipeline outlet and drain 
2.4 m from the filling line connection. The sample, 
cocks shall be of 19.5 mm size, and the lines shall 
be of 19.05 mm nominal diameter for crude oil of 
18° API gravity or less. For lighter oil, 12.7 mm 
size cocks, with 12.7 mm nominal diameter lines, 
shall be used. The lines shall extend a minimum of 
102 mm inside the tank shell, except on floating-roof 
tanks, where flush installations are necessary. All 


12 


sample cocks shall be equipped with sealable valves 
and plugged inspection tees. 


On tanks of more than 1 590 m? (10 000 barrel) capacity, 
at least two sets of sample cocks shall be installed, 
located equidistant around the circumference of the 
tank. Five or more sample cocks should be installed 
per set, evenly spaced between lower and upper sample 
levels. 


7.3.2.3 Tube 


A delivery tube that will not contaminate the product 
being sampled and long enough to reach to the bottom 
of the sample container is required to allow submerged 
filling. When a cooling bath is used while tap sampling, 
a similar suitable tube should be used between the tank 
tap and the cooler inlet. 


7.3.2.4 Sample containers 


Use clean, dry glass bottles of convenient size and 
strength to receive the samples. If the vapour pressure 
of the product to be sampled is between 110 and 
179 kPa RVP, protect the bottle with a metal cover until 
the sample is discarded. In some cases, such as the 
sampling of crude petroleum, metal containers may be 
used instead of glass bottles. 


7.3.3 Procedure 


7.3.3.1 Before a sample is drawn, flush the tap 
(or gage glass drain cock) and line until they are purged 
completely. Connect the clean delivery tube to the tap. 
Draw upper, middle, or lower samples directly from the 
respective taps after the flushing operation. Stopper and 
label the sample container immediately after filling, 
and deliver it to the laboratory. 


7.3.3.2 When a sample cooler is used during the tap 
sampling operation, flush the tap (or gage glass drain 
cock). Then, using a section of clean tubing, connect 
the tap to the cooler inlet. Flush the cooler thoroughly, 
after which connect the clean delivery tube to the cooler 
outlet and proceed with the sampling operation. 


7.3.3.3 In the sampling of crude petroleum, check for 
merchantable oil at the clearance sample cock. Flush 
each sample connection until all oil from the previous 
run has been removed and the sample lines are filled 
with fresh oil from the tank. 


a) On tanks of 1 590 m° (10 000 barrel) capacity 
or smaller, take samples of equal amounts from 
the lower, middle and upper sample connections. 
A measuring cup of proper size may be used to 
assure the drawing of the proper quantity from 
each sample cock. 


On tanks of more than 1 590 m? (10 000 barrel) 
capacity, take samples of equal amounts from each 
of the sample connections at each set of sample 
connections. 


b) 


c) Mix all samples in equal proportions for a 
composite sample, or test the samples separately 
and average the results. 

d) When crude oil in a tank fails to reach the upper 

or middle sample cocks on a tank equipped with 

three sample cocks, it is suggested that the sample 
for the run be obtained as follows: 

1) Ifthe level of the oil is nearer the upper sample 
cock than the middle, take two-thirds of the 
example from the middle sample cock and one 
third from the lower; 


2 


wa 


If the level of oil is nearer the middle sample 
cock than the upper, take one half of the sample 
from the middle and one half from the lower; 
and 


3 


wm 


If the level of the oil is below the middle sample 
cock, take all the sample from the lower cock. 


7.4 Manual Sampling of Pipeline Streams 


7.4.1 Application 


This manual line sampling procedure is applicable 
for sampling liquids of 101 kPa RVP or less and 
semi-liquids in pipelines, filling lines, and transfer 
lines. Where custody transfer is involved, continual 
automatic sampling is the preferred method. In the event 
of automatic sampler failure, manual samples may be 
needed. Take such manual samples as representatively 
as possible. 


7.4.2 Apparatus 
7.4.2.1 Sampling probe 


The function of the sampling probe is to withdraw from 
the flowing stream a portion that will be representative 
of the entire stream. Probe designs that are commonly 
used are shown in Fig. 4. These are: 


a) A tube extending to the centre of the line 
and bevelled at a 45° angle facing upstream 
(see Fig. 4A). 


b) A short-radius forged elbow or pipes bend 
extending to the centre line of the pipe and facing 
upstream. The end of the probe should he reamed 
with to give a sharp entrance edge (see Fig. 4B); 
and 


B 


Ti 
SHARP EDGE 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


c) A closed-end tube with a round orifice spaced 
near the closed end that should be positioned 
in such a way that the orifice is in the centre of 
the pipeline and is facing the stream as shown in 
Fig. 4C. 


7.4.3 Probe Location 


Since the fluid to be sampled may not always be 
homogeneous, the location, the position and the size of 
the sampling probe should be such as to minimize any 
separation of water and heavier particles that would 
make their concentration different in the gathered 
sample than in the main stream. 


7.4.3.1 The probe should always be in a horizontal 
position to prevent drain back of any part of the sample 
to the main stream. 


7.4.3.2 The sampling probe should be located 
preferably in a vertical run of pipe where such a vertical 
run can be provided. The probe may also be located in 
a horizontal run of pipe provided the flowing velocity 
is high enough to provide adequate turbulent mixing. 
While adequate flowing velocity may not eliminate 
a concentration difference between the bottom of the 
pipe and the top of the pipe, it may provide an average 
concentration at the mid-pipe probe location that will 
be representative of the entire stream at the sampling 
station. 


7.4.3.3 Where adequate flowing velocity is not 
available, a suitable device for mixing the fluid flow 
should be installed upstream of the sampling tap to 
reduce stratification to an acceptable level. If flow has 
been vertical for a sufficient distance as in a platform 
riser, such a device may not be necessary even at 
low-flow rates. Some effective devices for obtaining 
adequate mixing area reduction in pipe size; a series of 
baffles, an orifice or perforated plate, or a combination 
of any of these methods. The design or sizing of 
the device is optional with the user, as long as the 
flowing stream is sufficiently well mixed to provide a 
representative sample from the probe. 


7.4.3.4 The sampling point should be as near as 
practicable to the point where the oil passes to the 
sample receiver. 


ORIFICE IN SIDE 
OF PROBE FACING 


RECEIVER OR 
SAMPLER 


A s > UPSTREAM END OF 
4 PIPE TO A A PIPE TO A A 

3 s ee eno ó A PIPE TO oR Z A PROBE TO BE CLOSED 
A SAMPLER Z A SAMPLER g 4 

Z i A -Es ; 2 

A 2 A er> - ee 

A A A A eno REAMED A PIPE TO 

5 g Z ATO A Z 

5 A g Z Z 

4 < p 4 g 


ASSSAY 


NOTE — Probes may be fitted with valves or plug cocks. The probe should be oriented horizontally. 


Fic. 4 PROBES FOR CONTINUOUS SAMPLING 


13 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


7.4.3.5 The sampling lines should be as short as 
practicable and should be cleared before any samples 
are taken. 


7.4.3.6 To control the rate at which the sample is 
withdrawn, the probe should be fitted with valves or 


plug. 
7.4.4 Procedure 


7.4.4.1 Adjust the valve or plug cock from the sampling 
probe, so that a steady stream is drawn from the probe. 
Whenever possible, the rate of sample, withdrawal 
should be such that the velocity of liquid flowing 
through the probe is approximately equal to the average 
linear velocity the stream flowing through the pipeline. 
Measure and record the rate of sample withdrawal 
as litres per hour. Divert the sample stream to the 
sampling container continuously or intermittently to 
provide a quantity of sample that will be of sufficient 
size for analysis. 


7.4.4.2 In sampling crude petroleum, samples of 
0.25 litre or more should be taken every hour or less, 
whichever is thought necessary. By mutual agreement, 
the sample period or sample size, or both, may be 
varied to accommodate the parcel size. It is important 
that the size of the samples and the intervals between 
the sampling operations be uniform for a uniform-flow 
rate. When the mainstream flow rate is variable, vary 
the sampling rate accordingly so that the amount of 
sample is always withdrawn from any given amount of 
fluid passing the sampling point in the mainstream. In 
practice, this is difficult to accomplish. 


a) Place the sample of crude petroleum in a closed 
container and at the end of the agreed upon 
time period, mix the combined sample and take 
a composite sample for test purposes. Refer to 
6.6 for mixing and handling. Store the sample 
container in a cool, dry place; avoid exposure to 
direct sunlight. 


b 


ma 


Alternatively, line sample may be taken at regular 
intervals and individually tested. The individual 
test results may be arithmetically averaged, 
adjusting for variations in flow rate during the 
agreed upon time period. 


Cc 


wa 


Either composited or arithmetically averaged 
results arc acceptable. 


7.4.4.3 With either procedure, always label the sample 
and deliver it to the laboratory in the container in which 
it was collected. 
NOTE — When sampling semi-liquids, heat the sampler lines, 
valves, and receiver to a temperature just sufficient to keep the 
material, liquid and to assure accurate sampling and mixing. 


14 


7.5 Dipper Sampling 


7.5.1 Application 


The dipper sampling procedure is applicable for 
sampling liquids of 13.8 kPa RVP or less and 
semi-liquids where a free or open-discharge stream 
exists, as in small filling and transfer pipelines 
(500 mm diameter or less) and filling apparatus for 
barrels, packages and cans. 


7.5.2 Apparatus 


7.5.2.1 Dipper 


Use a dipper with a flared bowl and a handle of 
convenient length, made of material such as tinned 
steel that will not affect the product being tested. The 
dipper should have a capacity suitable for the amount 
to be collected and must be protected from dust and dirt 
when not being used. 


7.5.2.2 Sample container 


Use a clean, dry container of the desired size. 


7.5.3 Procedure 


Insert the dipper in the free-flowing stream so that a 
portion is collected from the full cross-section of the 
stream. Take portions at time intervals chosen so that a 
complete sample proportional to the pumped quantity 
is collected. The gross amount of sample collected 
should be approximately 0.1 percent but not more 
than 150 litre, of the total quantity being sampled. 
Transfer the portions into the sample container as soon 
as collected. Keep the container closed, except when 
pouring a dipper portion into it. As soon as all portions 
of the sample have been collected, close and label the 
sample, container, and deliver it to the laboratory. 


7.6 Tube Sampling 


7.6.1 Application 


The tube sampling procedure is applicable for sampling 
liquids of 13.8 kPa RVP or less and semi-liquids in 
drums, barrels and cans. 


7.6.2 Apparatus 
7.6.2.1 Tube 


Either a glass or metal tube may be used, designed so 
that it will reach to within about 3 mm of the bottom 
and have a capacity of approximately 0.5 or 1.0 litre. 
A metal tube suitable for sampling 190 litre drums is 
shown in Fig. 5. Two rings soldered to opposite sides of 
the tube at the upper end are convenient for holding it 
by slipping two fingers through the rings, thus leaving 
the thumb free to close the opening. 


O 
O 


a 


Fic. 5 SAMPLING TUBE 


7.6.3 Sample Containers 


Use clean, dry cans or glass bottles. 


7.6.3.1 Drums and barrels 


Place the drum or barrel on its side with the bung up. 
If the drum does not have a side bung, stand it upright 
and sample from the top. If detection of water, rust, or 
other insoluble contaminants is desired, let the barrel 
or drum remain in this position long enough to permit 
the contaminants to settle. Remove the bung and place 
it beside the bung hole with the oily side up. Close 
the upper end of the clean, dry sampling tube with the 
thumb and lower the tube into the oil for a depth of 
about 0.3 m. Remove the thumb, allowing oil to flow 
into the tube. Again close the upper end with the thumb 
and withdraw the tube. Rinse, the tube with the oil by 
holding it nearly horizontal and turning it so that the 
oil comes in contact with that part of the inside surface 
that will be immersed when the sample is taken. Avoid 
handling any part of the tube that will be immersed in 
the oil during the sampling operation. Discard the rinse 
oil and allow the tube to drain. Insert the tube into the oil 
again, holding the thumb against the upper end (if an all 
levels sample is desired, insert the tube with the upper 


15 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


end open). When the tube reaches the bottom, remove 
the thumb and allow the tube to fill. Replace the thumb, 
withdraw the tube quickly, and transfer the contents to 
the sample container. Do not allow the hands to come 
in contact with any part of the sample. Close the sample 
container, replace and tighten the bung in the drum or 
barrel. Label the sample container and deliver it to the 
laboratory. 


7.6.3.2 Cans 


Obtain samples from cans of 19 litre capacity or larger 
in the same manner as from drums and barrels using a 
tube of proportionately smaller dimensions. For cans of 
less than 19 litre capacity, use the entire contents as the 
sample, selecting cans at random as indicated in Table 2 
or in accordance with agreement between the purchaser 
and the seller. 


7.7 Thief Sampling 


7.7.1 Application 


The thief sampling procedure is applicable for obtaining 
bottom samples (see Fig. 1) or of semi-liquids in 
tank cars and storage tanks. The thief is also widely 
used in sampling crude petroleum in storage tanks. 
In this application it may be used for taking samples 
at different levels as well as for bottom samples of 
non-merchantable oil and water at the bottom of the 
tank. 


7.7.2. Apparatus 


7.7.2.1 Thief 


The thief shall be designed so that a sample can be 
obtained within 13 mm of the bottom of the car or tank. 
Two types of thiefs are illustrated in Fig. 6. One type is 
lowered into the tank with valves open to permit the oil 
to flush through the container. When the thief strikes the 
bottom of the tank, the valves shut automatically to trap 
a bottom sample. The other type has a projecting stem 
on the valve rod which open the valves automatically 
as the stem strikes the bottom of the tank. The sample 
enters the container through the bottom valve and air 
is released simultaneously through the top. The valves 
snap shut when the thief is withdrawn. A core type 
thief similar to that shown in Fig. 6B with a uniform 
cross-section and bottom closure and with a capacity 
depending upon the size of the sample required, may be 
used for sampling crude petroleum. The thief should be 
capable of penetrating the oil in the tank to the required 
level, mechanically equipped to permit filling at any 
desired level, and capable of being withdrawn without 
undue contamination of the content. The thief may be 
equipped with the following: 


a) Sample cocks for obtaining samples for the 
determination of water and sediment. 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


LINE FOR 
LOWERING 


4 LUGS 


A 
Bomb-Type Sampling Thief 


B 
Core-Type Sampling Thief 


Fic. 6 SAMPLING THIEFS 


b) Extension rods for use in obtaining samples at 
levels corresponding with requirements for high 
connections or for samples to determine high 
settled water and sediment levels. 


c) Water and sediment gage for determining the 
height of water and sediment in the thief. 

d) Windshield to be used when taking the gravity and 
temperature of the oil. 

e) Opener to break the tension on the valve or slide at 
any desired level. 


f) A thief cord marked so that sample can be taken at 
any depth in the vertical cross-section of the tank. 


g) Hook to hang the thief in the hatch vertically. 


7.7.2.2 Sample containers 


Use clean, dry cans or glass bottles. 
7.7.3 Procedure 


7.7.3.1 Lower the clean, dry thief through the dome of 
the tank car or tank hatch until it strikes the bottom. 
When full, remove the thief and transfer the contents 
to the sample container. Close and label the container 
immediately and deliver it to the laboratory. 


7.7.3.2 In the sampling of crude petroleum lower the 
clean, dry thief slowly into the oil to the desired depth, 
trip the thief to secure the sample and rise slowly to 
avoid agitation. The proper depths for sampling are 
described in 4.1. 


16 


7.8 Extended-Tube Sampling 


7.8.1 Application 


The extended-tube sampling procedure may be used 
only for obtaining bottom water samples. 
NOTE — The user should be aware that the procedure is used 
for sampling bottom water primarily on ships and barges. The 
procedure may be used for sampling bottom water in shore 
tanks, but no specific guidelines for such use are available. 


7.8.2 Apparatus 


7.8.2.1 A typical extended-tube sampling assembly is 
shown in Fig. 7. The extended-tube sampler consists of 
a flexible tube connected to the suction of a manually 
operated pump. For support purposes and to establish 
a known sampling point, the tubing is attached to the 
weighted end of a conductive wire or tape such that 
the open end of the tube is located approximately 
125 mm above the tip of the weight. The tubing and 
wire (or tape) shall be long enough to extend to the 
bottom (reference height) of the vessel or storage tank 
from which the sample is to be obtained. A grounding 
cable shall be provided for the assembly. 


7.8.2.2 In addition to the sampler, a clean, dry bottle or 
other appropriate container is required to collect each 
sample. 


7.8.3 Procedure 


SUPPORT WIRE 
OR TAPE 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


Fic. 7 TYPICAL EXTENDED-TUBE SAMPLER 


7.8.3.1 Assemble the extended-tube sampler 


7.8.3.2 Lower the weighted end of the sampling 
tube into a bucket of water and prime the sampler 
by operating the pump. When the assembly is 
satisfactorily primed, close-off (ensure it’s not vented 
to the atmosphere), the top end of the assembly to 
prevent the loss of priming water as the sampling tube 
is removed from the bucket. Remove the sampling tube 
from the bucket, connect the grounding cable, to the 
ship or barge tank, and lower the weighted sampling 
tube to the bottom of the tank. 


7.8.3.3 Begin the sampling operation by slowly and 
steadily operating the manual pump. To reduce the 
possibility of capturing a contaminated sample, collect 
a volume greater than twice the sampling assembly’s 
capacity in a graduated cylinder or other measuring 
device and discard this volume. Collect the sample(s) 
directly in a clean, dry bottle(s) or other appropriate 
container(s). 

NOTE — The capacity of the sampler may be calculated from 


the sampler, dimensions or may-be determined by measuring 
the volume of liquid discharge from a completely full assembly. 


7.8.3.4 If a sample at a different level within the bottom 
water layer is required, raise the weighted bob and 
tubing to the new level above the bottom. Purge the 
residual water from the assembly and collect the new 
sample(s) as instructed above. 


7.8.3.5 After each sample has been collected, 
immediately close and label the bottle (or container) in 
preparation for delivery to the laboratory. 


7.8.3.6 When the sampling operation is complete, clean 
and disassembles the sampler components. 


17 


7.9 Nozzle Sampling 


Nozzle sample at Fuel Station/Retail Outlet/Petrol 
Pump, etc, shall be representing the constituents 
present in the underground storage tank connected with 
the dispensing unit. Use suitable sample container as 
specified in 5 for nozzle sampling. 


8 SAMPLING INDUSTRIAL AROMATIC 
HYDROCARBONS 


8.1 Application 


For obtaining samples of industrial aromatic 
hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene, xylene and solvent 
naphthas), proceed in accordance with 5 to 7 
particularly those pertaining to precautions, care and 
cleanliness. 


9 SAMPLING FOR SPECIFIC TESTS 


9.1 Special Precautions 


Special sampling precautions and instructions are 
required for some test methods and specifications. Such 
instructions supplement the general procedure of this 
method and supersede them if there is a conflict. 


9.2 Distillation of Natural Gasoline 


When obtaining samples of natural gasoline that are to 
be tested using IS 1448 (Part 18), the bottle sampling 
procedure 7 is preferred with the exception that 
pre-cooled bottles and laboratory composition is 
required. Before obtaining the sample, pre-cool the 
bottle by immersing it in the product, allow it to fill, and 
discard the first filling. If the bottle procedure cannot be 
used, obtain the sample by the tap procedure and with 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


the use of the cooling bath as described in 7.2.3. Do 
not agitate the bottle while drawing the sample. After 
obtaining the sample, close the bottle immediately 
with a tight-fitting stopper and store it in an ice bath or 
refrigerator at a temperature of 0 to 4.5 °C. 


9.3 Reid Vapour Pressure 


9.3.1 When sampling products that are to be tested using 
IS 1448 (Part 39) observe the following precautions 
and instructions. 


9.3.1.1 Precautions 


Vapour pressures are extremely sensitive to evaporation 
losses and to slight changes in composition. When 
obtaining, storing, or handling samples, observe the 
necessary precautions to ensure samples representative 
of the product and satisfactory for Reid vapour pressure 
tests. Official samples should be taken by or under 
the immediate supervision of, a person of judgment, 
skill, and sampling experience. If sampling or sample 
requirements for other tests differ from those described 
in 9.3.1.2 to 9.3.1.9, obtain a separate sample for the 
Reid vapour pressure test. Never prepare composite 
samples for this test. Make certain that containers which 
are to be shipped by common carrier conform to state, 
or local regulations. When flushing or purging lines 
or containers, observe the pertinent regulations and 
precautions against fire, explosion, and other hazards. 


9.3.1.2 Cooling bath 


A bath (see Fig. 8) of sufficient size to hold the sample 
container and a cooling coil of about 7.6 m of copper 
tubing 9.5 mm or less in outside diameter shall be 
required when using the procedure described in 9.3.1.7. 
One end of the coil is provided with a connection for 
attaching it to the tank sampling tap or valve. The 
other end is fitted with a suitable valve (outlet) of good 
quality. A removable copper tube of 9.5 mm or less in 
outside diameter and of sufficient length to reach the 
bottom of the sample container shall be connected to 


18 


the open end of the outlet valve. 


9.3.1.3 Sample containers 


Use containers of not less than 0.9 litre and not more 
than 7.6 litre capacity, of sufficient strength to withstand 
the pressures to which they may be subjected, and of a 
type that will permit replacement of the cap or stopper 
with suitable connections for transferring the sample to 
the gasoline chamber of the vapour pressure apparatus. 
Open type containers have a single opening which 
permits sampling by immersion. Closed type containers 
have two openings; one in each end (or the equivalent 
thereof), fitted with valves suitable for sampling by 
water displacement or by purging. 


9.3.1.4 Transfer connections 


The transfer connection for the open-type container 
consists of an air tube and a liquid delivery tube 
assembled in a cap or stopper. The air tube extends 
to the bottom of the container. One end of the liquid 
delivery tube is flush with the inside face of the cap or 
stopper, and the tube is long enough to reach the bottom 
of the gasoline chamber while the sample is being 
transferred to the chamber. The transfer connection 
for the closed type container consists of a single tube 
with a connection suitable for attaching it to one of 
the openings of the sample container. The tube is long 
enough to reach the bottom of the gasoline chamber 
while the sample is being transferred. 


9.3.1.5 Sampling open tanks 


Use clean containers of the open type when sampling 
open tanks and tank cars. An all level sample obtained 
by the bottle procedure 7.2.3 is recommended. Before 
taking the sample, flush the container by immersing it 
in the product to be sampled. Then obtain the sample 
immediately. Pour off enough so that the container will 
be 70 to 80 percent full and close it promptly. Label the 
container and deliver it to the laboratory. 


OUTLET 
VALVE 
THERMOMETER 


COPPER 
TUBING 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


TO TANK 


TOP VIEW 


Fic. 8 COOLING BATH FOR REID VAPOUR PRESSURE SAMPLING 


9.3.1.6 Sampling closed tanks 


Containers of either the open or closed type may be 
used to obtain samples from closed or pressure tanks. If 
the open type is used, follow the cooling bath procedure 
described in 9.3.1.7. If the closed type is used, obtain 
the sample using the water displacement procedure, 
9.3.1.8 or the purging procedure, 9.3.1.9. The water 
displacement procedure is preferable because the flow 
of product involved in the purging procedure may be 
hazardous. 


9.3.1.7 Cooling bath procedure 


When using a container of the open type, keep it at 
a temperature of 0 to 4.5 °C during the sampling 
operation by using the cooling bath (see Fig. 8). 
Connect the coil to the tank sampling tap or valve and 
flush it with a sufficient amount of product to ensure 
complete purging. When obtaining a sample, throttle 
the outlet valve so that the pressure in the coil will 
be approximately the same as that in the tank. Fill the 
container once to wash and cool it, and discard the 
wash product. Then draw the sample immediately. 
Pour off enough so that the container will be 
70 to 80 percent full and close it promptly. Label the 
container and deliver it to the laboratory. 


9.3.1.8 Water displacement procedure 


Completely fill the closed-type container with water 
and close the valves. The water should be at the same 
temperature or lower than that of the product to be 
sampled. While permitting a small amount of product 
to flow through the fittings, connect the top or inlet 


19 


valve of the container to the tank sampling tap or 
valve. Then open all valves on the inlet side of the 
container. Open the bottom or outlet valve slightly to 
allow the water to be displaced slowly by the sample 
entering the container. Regulate the flow so that there is 
no appreciable change in pressure within the container. 
Close the outlet valve as soon as gasoline discharges from 
the outlet; then in succession close the inlet valve and the 
sampling valve on the tank. Disconnect the container 
and withdraw enough of the contents so that it will be 
70 to 80 percent full. If the vapour pressure of the product 
is not high enough to force liquid from the container, 
open both the upper and lower valves slightly to remove 
the excess. Promptly seal and label the container, and 
deliver it to the laboratory. The above is not applicable to 
LPG sampling. 


9.3.1.9 Purging procedure 


Connect the inlet valve of the closed-type container to the 
tank sampling tap or valve. Throttle the outlet valve of the 
container so that the pressure in it will be approximately 
equal to that in the container being sampled. Allow 
a volume of product equal to at least twice that of the 
container to flow through the sampling system. Then 
close all valves, the outlet valve first, the inlet valve of the 
container second, and the tank sampling valve last, and 
disconnect the container immediately. Withdraw enough 
of the contents so that the sample container will be 
70 to 80 percent full. If the vapour pressure of the product 
is not high enough to force liquid from the container, 
open both the upper and lower valves slightly to remove 
the excess. Promptly seal and label the container and 
deliver it to the laboratory. 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


9.4 Oxidation Stability 


9.4.1 When sampling products that are to be tested for 
oxidation stability, observe the following precautions and 
instructions. 


9.4.1.1 Precautions 


Very small amounts (as low as 0.001 percent) of some 
materials, such as inhibitors, have a considerable effect 
upon oxidation stability tests. Avoid contamination and 
exposure to light while taking and handling samples. 
To prevent undue agitation with air which promotes 
oxidation do not pour, shake or stir samples to any greater 
extent than necessary. Never expose them to temperatures 
above those necessitated by atmospheric conditions. 


9.4.1.2 Sample containers 


Use only brown glass or wrapped clear glass bottles as 
containers, since it is difficult to make certain that cans 
are free of contaminants, such as rust and soldering 
flux. Clean the bottles by the procedure described in 5.3 
and if possible or required, further clean with cleaning 
mixture, and nearly saturate powdered potassium or 
sodium dichromate in concentrated sulphuric acid 
and allow it to stand for several hours, preferably 
4 to 5 h. The acid is then poured off and thoroughly rinsed 
with distilled water; allow draining until dry and then 
protecting the bottles from dust and dirt. 


9.4.1.3 Sampling 


A running sample obtained by the bottle procedure 
prescribed in 7 is recommended because the sample is 
taken directly in the bottle. This reduces the possibility of 
air absorption, loss of vapours, and contamination. Just 
before sampling, rinse the bottle with the gasoline to be 
sampled. 


9.5 Lacquer, Solvents and Diluents 


9.5.1 When sampling bulk shipments of lacquer, solvents 
and diluents observe the following precautions and 
instructions. 


20 


9.5.1.1 Tanks and tank cars 


Obtain upper and lower samples (see Fig. 1) of not more 
than 1.0 litre each by the bottle procedure prescribed in 
7.2.3.2. Prepare in the laboratory a composite sample of 
not less than 2.0 litre by mixing equal parts of the upper 
and lower samples. 


9.5.1.2 Barrels, drums, and cans 


Obtain samples from at least five percent of the number 
of containers in any shipment. The number of containers 
to be sampled may be increased at the discretion of the 
purchaser. In the case of expensive solvents which are 
purchased in small quantities, it is recommended that 
each container be sampled. Withdraw a portion from the 
centre of each container to be sampled with a clean tube 
(see 7.6.3) or weighted bottle (see 7.2.3.2) (A smaller 
bottle may be used). Prepare a composite sample of at 
least 1 litre by mixing equal portions of not less than 
0.5 litre from each container sampled. 


9.6 Asphaltic Materials 


When sampling asphaltic materials obtain samples by 
the boring procedure or the grab procedure. A sample 
of sufficient size to yield at least 100 g of recovered 
bitumen is required. About 1 000 g of sheet asphalt 
mixtures usually will be sufficient. If the largest lumps in 
the sample are 25 mm, 2 000 g will usually be required 
and still larger samples if the mixtures contain larger 
aggregates. 


9.7 Emulsified Asphalts 


Obtain samples from tanks, tank cars, and tank trucks by 
the bottle sampling procedure prescribed in 6.2.3, using 
a wide mouth (40 mm or greater) bottle. Use the dipper 
procedure prescribed in 6.5.3 to obtain samples from 
filling or discharge lines. Sample packages in accordance 
with Table 2. If the material is solid or semisolid, 
use the boring sampling procedure, as mentioned in 
IS 1447 (Part 3). Obtain at least 4 litre or 4.5 kg from 
each lot or shipment. Store the samples in clean, airtight 
containers at a temperature of not less than 4 °C until 
tested. Use glass or black iron containers for emulsified 
asphalts of the RS-1 type. 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 1.3 and 6.1 ) 
MANDATORY INFORMATION 


A-1 PRECAUTIONARY STATEMENTS 


A-1.1 The following substances may be used 
throughout the course of this standard test method. The 
precautionary statements should be read prior to use of 
such substances. 


A-1.1.1 Benzene 


Keep away from heat, sparks, and open flame. Keep 
container closed. Use with adequate ventilation. 
Use fume hood whenever possible. Avoid 
build-up of vapours and eliminate all sources of ignition, 
especially non-explosion proof electrical apparatus and 
heaters. Avoid prolonged breathing of vapours or spray 
mist. Avoid contact with skin and eyes. Do not take 
internally. 


A-1.1.2 Diluents (Naphtha) 


Keep away from heat, sparks, and open flame. Keep 
container closed. Use with adequate ventilation. Avoid 
buildup of vapours and eliminate all sources of ignition, 
especially non-explosion proof electrical apparatus and 
heaters. Avoid prolonged breathing of vapours or spray 
mist. Avoid prolonged or repeated skin contact. 


21 


A-1.1.3 Flammable Liquid (General) 


Keep away from heat, sparks and open flame. Keep 
container closed. Use only with adequate ventilation. 
Avoid prolonged breathing of vapour or spray mist. 
Avoid prolonged or repeated contact with skin. 


A-1.1.4 Gasoline (White) 


Harmful if absorbed through skin. Keep away from 
heat, sparks and open flame. Keep container closed. 
Use with adequate ventilation. Avoid build-up of 
vapours and eliminate all sources of ignition especially 
non-explosion proof electrical apparatus and heaters. 
Avoid prolonged breathing of vapour or spray mist. 
Avoid prolonged or repeated skin contact. 


A-1.1.5 Toluene and Xylene 

WARNING — Flammable. Vapour harmful. 
Keep away from heat, sparks, and open flame. Keep 
container closed. Use with adequate ventilation. Avoid 
breathing of vapour or spray mist. Avoid prolonged or 
repeated contact with skin. 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 5.1.2.4 and 6.5.3) 
MANDATORY NFORMATION 
SUMMARY OF CONTAINER RECOMMENDATION 
Material/Type of | Thermal | MSEP Electrical Lubricity | Trace Copper Particulate 
Analysis Stability” Conductivity” Metals | Corrosion” 
Hard borosilicate 
glass 
Immediate use S P P S NR S NE 
Storage NE P S NR S NE 
Reuse S S P S NR S NE 
Soft soda lime 
glass 
Immediate use NE S S NE NR NE NE 
Storage NR NR NR NR NR NE NE 
Reuse NR S S NR NR NR NE 
Aluminium 
container 
Immediate use NR NR NR NR NR NR NE 
Storage NR NR NR NR NR NR NE 
Reuse NR NR NR NR NR NR NE 
Epoxy lined steel 
Immediate use P P P P NR S P 
Storage P P P P NR S P 
Reuse P P P P NR S P 
Polytetrafluoroeth 
ylene 
Immediate use NE S NR NR P S NE 
Storage NE NE NR NR P S NE 
Reuse NE NE NR NR P S NE 
Tin plate soldered 
steel 
Immediate use S S S S NR NR NE 
Storage NR NR NR NR NR NR NE 
Reuse NR NR NR NR NR NR NE 
High-density 
linear 
Polyethylene 
Immediate use NR S NR NR P S NE 
Storage NR NR NR NR P S NE 
Reuse NR NR NR NR P S NE 


D All transparent or translucent containers must be shielded from light by wrapping with opaque material. 
P = preferred, S = suitable, NR = not recommended, NE = not evaluated but may be suitable. 


22 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and 
Lubricants Sectional Committee, PCD 01 


Organization Representative(s) 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun Dr ANJAN Ray (Chairman) 


Air Headquarters, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi WG CMDR S. A. TAWAB 
WG CMDR D. ANANDRAJ Roy (Alternate) 


All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers Pror G. M. Rao 
Association, Mumbai 


Bharat Oman Refineries Limited, Bina SHRI ANAND PRATAP RAGHAV 
SHRI B. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 
SHRI R. SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 
Castrol India Limited, Mumbai SHRI RAMAN RAI 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and DR SMITA MOHANTY 
Technology, Bhuwaneshwar 
Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi Dr T. A. SREENIVASA RAO 
Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 
DR V. SELVAVATHI (Alternate) 
CSIR - Central Institute for Mining and Fuel SHRI P. K. SINGH 
Research, Dhanbad Suri S. R. K. Rao (Alternate I) 


SHRI S. DUTTA (Alternate II) 


Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality SHRI SANTOSH NAMDEO INGOLE 
Assurance, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of SHRI C. B. PANDEY 
Defence, New Delhi 


Elico Limited, Hyderabad SHRI N. RAJU 
Suri T. V. Suiva K. Rao (Alternate) 
GAIL (India) Limited, Noida SHRI R. K. KASHYAP 


DR SUSANTA MAHANTY (Alternate) 
Gulf Oil Lubricants India Limited, Silvasa SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai SHRI MADHUSUDAN 
SHRI ELECHERAN KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHITANSHU Pat! (Alternate II) 


HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, Noida SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI SATYABRATA BANDYOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad SHRI V. KAGDIYAL 
Dr S. K. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and DR ASHUTOSH MISHRA 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi SHRI SHASHI PAL SINGH (Alternate) 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai SaRI P. D. DUSANE 


SHRI G. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Lubrizol India Limited, Mumbai SHRI SHARAD TARSODE 


23 


IS 1447 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization 


Mangalore Refinery and Petro Chemical Limited, 
Mangalore 


Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Numaligarh Refinery Limited, Golaghat 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Oil India Limited, Duliajan 


Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, 
New Delhi 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 

BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SHALINA KUMAR 
SHRI YOGEESHA (Alternate I) 
SHRI R. M. PRAKASH (Alternate II) 


SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SONAM GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. NASKAR 
SHRI P. K. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI DHIRAJ M. GONDALIA 
SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI HARSAL Mop (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANJAN KALITA 
SHRI SOBHAN KONWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR JAIN 
SHRIMATI LEENA JOHN (Alternate I) 
SHRI DinesH S. R. REDDY KAKUTURI (Alternate II) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ANIL MEGHANI 
SHRI Noor KuHaN (Alternate) 


SHRI M. P. BANGWAL 


SHRI PRAMOD MALL 
SHRI SHAMBHU THAKUR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI N. K. BANSAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T. 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (PCD), BIS 


24 


(Continued from second cover) 


Each procedure is suitable for sampling a number of specific materials under definite storage, transportation, or 
container conditions. The basic principle of each procedure is to obtain a sample or a composite of several samples 
in such manner and from such locations in the tank or other container that the sample or composite will be truly 
representative of the petroleum or petroleum product. 


IS 1447 ‘Methods of sampling of petroleum and its products’ was initially published in 1966, based on the overseas 
publications IP Part IV 1962 Ed. 2 ‘Methods of sampling’ issued by ‘The Institute of Petroleum, London, ASTM 
D 270 ‘Sampling and petroleum products’ and ASTM D 1265 ‘Sampling of liquefied petroleum (LP) Gases’ 
issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials, respectively. Later with the advent of techniques, the 
Committee decided to revise the standard dividing it into four parts revision. Accordingly, this standard was 
revised for the first time, as IS 1447 (Part 1) in 2000. The other parts in this series are as follows: 


(Part 2) : 2013 Liquefied petroleum gases - Method of sampling (LPG) (second revision) 
(Part 3): 1992 Method of sampling of semi-solid and solid petroleum products (first revision) 
(Part 4) : 1989 Sampling of petroleum coke for laboratory analysis (first revision) 


This second revision was taken up as a result of the review of the standard by the concerned Technical Committee. 
The sample containers and design of sample containers for jet fuel were included in this revision. Nozzle sampling 
procedure has also been included. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been obtained from the joint publication ASTM 
D 4057 ‘Standard practice for manual sampling of petroleum and petroleum products’, ISO 3170 ‘Petroleum 
liquids-Manual sampling’, ASTM D 4306 ‘Aviation Fuel Sample Containers for Tests Affected by Trace 
Contamination’ and API Designation: MPMS (Chapter 8.1) issued by the American Society for Testing and 
Materials (USA) and Petroleum Measurements Tables. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to 
be rounded off it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 01 (12514). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


