IS 13072: 1991 IEC Pub 376 (1971 )

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

SULPHUli HEXAFLUORIDE FOR ELECTRICAL PURPOSES-SPECIFICATION

UDC

621.315-618 : 661.21-487

0

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

June 1991

Price Group 12

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971 )

Standard
SULPHUR' HEXAFLUORIDE FOR ELECTRICAL PURPOSES - SPECIFICATION
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard, which is identical with IEC Pub 376 ( 1971) `Specification and acceptance of new sulphur hexafluoride' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEG) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Fluids for Electrotechnical Applications Sectional Committee ( ETD 03 ) and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. The text of IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are however not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. Text of Section 13 - Mineral oil content test, have been incorporated IEC Pub 376 ( 1971 ). taking from First Supplement to

Text of clause 26, dew point method, have been incorporated taking it from Second Supplement to IEC Pub 376 ( 1971 ). Only the English language text in the International standard. Standard has been retained while adopting it in this

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

.

SECTION

ONE

-

SCOPE

1.

scope This Recommendation applies solely to new and unused sulphur hexafluoride, that is, as supplied

by the chemical manufacturer and before introduction properties and methods of test applicable to sulphur for use in connection with any electrical equipment.

into any electrical equipment. It covers the hexafluoride when this substance is supplied

SECTION

TWO -

GENERAL

PROPERTIES

OF SULPHUR

HEXAFLUORIDE

2.

Physical properties
Sulphur hexafluoride and pressures it is gaseous of air). Since its critical transported as a liquid is a compound having the formula SF,. At normal room temperatures and`has a density of 6.16 g/l at 20 "C and 760 torr (about five times the density temperature is 45.6 "C it can be liquefied by compression; it is normally The saturated vapour pressure curve is shown in Figure 1. in cylinders.

The pure gas is colourless,
Warning. -

it has no smell and it is non-toxic.
containing sulphur hexafluoride

Although the gas is non-toxic, it will not support life, and equipment must not be entered without adequate ventilation.

Similarly, since the gas has a much greater density than air, trenches and so forth may remain full of the gas and personnel must be made aware of the danger of asphyxiation in such places.

3.

Electrical properties
The gas is electronegative (i.e., tends to attract free electrons) and has arc quenching properties and high electric strength. The electric strength is greatly affected by the conditions of test or of use, but for guidance, at about atmospheric pressure, under the usual conditions of test or use and in a uniform field, the electric strength may be expected to be about two and a half times that of nitrogen.

4.

Compatibility
Up to temperatures of about 180 "C its comPure sulphur hexafluoride is an inactive material. patibility with materials used in electrical construction is similar to that of nitrogen. Higher temperature operation may be possible with the pure gas but the merits of .each case must be considered separately. Discharges in equipment cause dissociation of the pure gas; the breakdown products may be incompatible with constructional materials.

IS 13072: 1991 lEC Pub 376 ( 1971) 5. Effects of impurities

Any departure from the above properties is caused by impurities that are generally present in sulphur hexafluoride as supplied commercially; these impurities arise from the manufacturing process&, from leakage in manufacturing plant, or from contamination from the containing cylinders. Tests are carried out t'o detect these various impurities, and later sections of this Recommendation describe the nature and importance of such itipurities, lay down limits for impurities so that new gas complying with this Recommendation is suitable for electrical applications, and specify methods to be used in testing for these impurities.

SECTION THREE -

NATURE AND LIMITING

QUANTITY

OF IMPURITIES

6.

Toxic impurities

Certain impurities that can be present in new gas are highly toxic, in concentrations so small that they cannot readily be determined by analytical methods. A biological me'thod of test for toxic impurities is given in Clause 22; sulphur hexafluoride conforming to this Reccmmendation must comply with the requirements df that test.
Note. It is important that users are assured that the gas conforms to the toxicity requirements. Attention is drawn to the provisions of Clause 15, which oblige the manufacturer to supply a certificate of non-toxicity if so requested.

7.

Impurities affecting safety of equipment

Many categories of impurity must be limited to quantities sucli that either separately or in combination they will not present a hazard to the operation of the equipment in which the gas is to be used. For example, water, acidic impurities and oxygen (especially in combintition) may promote corrosion leading to faulty mechanical operation; water in combination with any acidic impurities may condense at low operating temperatures and high operating pressures with danger to the electrical safety of the equipment. Thus the quantities of such impurities must be small so that corrosion or condensation is insignificant.

Impurities diluting the product

There may also be substances in the commercial gas which do not present any particular hazard to equipment, but are undesirable only because they are a dilution of a more valuable material, or because in certain circumstances they can lead to difficulties in subsequent handling. In practice, air is the only material likely to be found in substantial quantities. The air content and/or nitrogen and oxygen are determined together with carbon tetrafluoride by the method of Section Ten, Oxygen and nitrogen will not necessarily be present in the same proportions as in the atmosphere, .due to the manufacturing processes. Sulphur hexafluoride conforming to this Recommend&ion must not contain more than the maximum allowable quantities of impurities shown in Table 1.

4

IS 13072 :199i IEC Pub 376 ( 19%
TABLE I

)

Impurity or group of impurities . ~__
-4

Maximum permitted concentration mass by mass _..~ _ .__ 0.05 "/, 0.05 % 15 ppm 0.3 ppm I .O ppm See Note 3 -__

As determined by test method(s) of Section No. -___ 10 10 9 12 11 13

Oxygen + nitrogen, air Water Acidity expressed as HF Hydrolysable fluorides, expressed as HF Oil content

Notes 1. 2. 3. -

Industrial application of this gas is at present limited; the above provisional figures may be revised after more experience has been obtained. The purchaser may wish to specify a maximum condensation listed in the table above. See Clause 23 for further details. temperature in addition to the impurities of oil and the method of

SF, shall be substantially free from oil. The maximum permitted concentration measurement are under consideration.

9.

Impurities in relation to electric strength Impurities have so little effect on the electric strength of sulphur hexafluoride that the impurities in the gas complying with the present Recommendation will have no detectable effect on the electric strength.

10.

Impurities in relation to smell Some impurities (mainly acidic impurities) that can be present in new gas have an odour, but

the quantities of such impurities in gas conforming to this Recommendation for any smell to be detectable by normal human beings.
Warning. -

are not large enough

Gas must not be inhaled unless it is known to comply with the toxicity requirements.

SECTION

FOUR

-

CONTAINERS

FOR

SULPHUR

HEXAFLUORIDE

Preferred sizes of cylinders The standard sizes of cylinders, expressed in litres, for SF, are: 3, 5. 10, 20, 40, SO, 150 and 500.

For preference 70 bars. The maximum country

10 1 and 40 1 cylinders

are to be used.

The test pressure

of the cylinders

is to be

tilling ratio of the cylinder regulations, etc.

must be in accordance

with requirements

in force in the

of use, transport

Note. -- In temperate countries a maximum filling ratio of 1.04 kg/l is usual. ratio (e.g. 0.75 kg/l) is often specified.

In tropical countries a smaller filling

The mass of sulphur

hexafluoride.

(kilogram)

in each cylinder

is to be stated

with each cylinder.

5

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)
12. Identification of cylinders

Each cylinder should be legibly marked at the valve end and preferably off the cylindrical part of the boty with: a) b) c) the symbol SF,; " sulphur hexafluoride " in words, in the language of the country of origin; the tare weight of the cylinder without protective cap.

Additional markings, colourings, etc., may be added in accordance with national or manufacturer's practice.
13. Cylinder valve outlets

This question is under consideration by ISO. Pending the preparation and publication of an IS0 Recommendation dealing with valve outlets for gas cylinders, IS0 expressed the wish that a country still requiring a national standard valve outlet for sulphur hexafluoride cylinders should adopt the connection described in Figure 2.

SECTlON 14.
Competence

FIVE -

CONDUCT

OF TESTS - GENERAL

of the test laboratory

Many of the tests described necessitate specialized equipment, facilities, or skills (e.g., biological testing arrangements, gas chromatograph equipment, knowledge of high-sensitivity weighing techniques); it is essential that all tests are carried out by a properly competent organization using suitably experienced personnel. 15.
Cixtification

If requested by a purchaser of the gas, the manufacturer shall supply a written statement or certificate that the new gas meets all the requirements (or by agreement, certain of the requirements:) of this Recommendation.

SECTION 16.
General

SIX - - SAMPLING

TECHNIQUE

Sulphur hexafluoride is normally supplied under pressure substance is liquid. with a small proportion in vapour form in both phases but in differing proportions. Samples shall they are representative of the majority of the substance in cylinder so that the outlet is at the lowest point.

in cylinders so that the majority of the above the liquid; impurities are present be taken from the liquid phase so that the cylinder, by tilting or inverting the

17.

Sampling line and connection

It is preferable for samples to be passed directly from the supply cylinder to the analysis equipment; a sampling line is required for this purpose. The sampling line serves primarily to vapourise the liquid SF, coming from the cylinder, and may also conveniently incorporate a fine-control needle

6

1s l3072 : 1991
RX Pub 376 ( 1971 ) valve since it is often difficult to control flow by means of the cylinder valve alone. The sample line assembly would thus consist of the following components.
.

17.1 Fiue-control valve (optional) An all-metal fine-control needle valve or all-metal pressure reducing valve, screwed directly into the outlet of the cylinder valve or connected to it by a short length of stainless steel tubing similar to the sample line itself (see Sub-clause 17.2).
Note. The portion of the system connected to the cylinder must be suitable for working at pressures that may occur in the cylinder, that is, up to about 40 bars. The cylinder valve and needle valve must never be left closed at the same time with liquid SF6 trapped between them, as a r& of temperature is likely to lead to an explosion.

Warning. -

17.2 Sadnpk line The qample line may conveniently consist of approximately 2 m of stainless steel tubing. +pproximately 3 mm internal diameter. One end is fitted by means of a metal connector to the fine-control valve (or directly to the outlet of the cylinder valve, if no fine-co&r01 valve is used); the,othcr end is connected without valves or other restriction to the analysis apparatus or to the intermediate sampling cylinder. 17.3 Joints To make gas-tight threaded joints, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tape is permissible but a grade containing no plasticiser should be used, otherwise there is a risk of introducing impurities into the sample. Permanent metal-to-metal joints in the sample line assembly are to be brazed or soldered (afterwards being cleaned of flux). Other types of all-metal (e.g., compression) joints may be used. At the analysis apparatus, the butt-joint technique described in Sub-clause 24.3 is suitable.

17.4 Use of' sample line To vapourise the liquid from the cylinder, it may be necessary to warm the sample line slightly. This warming may be by a heating tape or by a small hot-air blower. The line may be coiled for ease of handling. Purge the sample line by a gentle flow of sulphur hexafluoride for several minutes immediately before beginning a test.

18.

Intermediate sampling cylinder If it is impossible to take gas from the supply cylinder and pass it directly into the analysis equipment, it may be necessary to use an intermediate sampling cylinder.

18.1 Filling technique for sampling cylinders Heat the cylinder to 100 "C with its valve open and evacuate it with an oilsealed rotary pump. Connect the evacuated cylinder JO the SF, container, and, after cooling the cylinde'r, introduce a small amount of liquid SF,. Shake the cylinder and vent off the gas. Re-evacuate the cylinder and repeat the washing procedure. Introduce intq the cylinder the required sample quantity.

7

IS 13072 : 1991

IEC Pub 376 ( lMl-)
Note. It must be realized that impurities present in an intermediate cylinder will generally be added to those already in the consignment; thus if the sample is to pass the required purity standards, every effort must be made to ensure that the sampling cylinder is chemically clean, otherwise a higher standard of purity in the original cylinder may well be necessary. (For example, sampling cylinders must not be used for materials other than nep SF6. When not used they should be stored filled with SF6 under a slight pressure.)

WuvCng. - Intermediate sampling cylinders must withstand a test pressure of 70 bars and must not be overfilled. In temperate countries a maximum filling ratio of 1.04 kg SF6 per litre cylinder volume may be allowed. It is recommended that the sampling cylinder be weighed just before and after filling.

SECTION SEVEN -

IDENTIFICATION

OF GAS

19.

General Tf there is doubt whether the material supplied is sulphur hexafluoride, identification may be confirmed by the following methods.

20.

Infra-red absorption spectrum Where the required apparatus is available, it may be verified whether the gas is SF, by examining its infra-red absorption spectrum and comparing this with that of gas from another source known to be SF,.

21.

Density determination

21.i Principle qf method
A known volume of gas is weighed.

21.2 Apparatus
A glass bulb or cylinder fitted with vacuum-tight stopcocks at opposite ends. A capacity of about 100 ml is suitable but a larger volume may be used provided it can be accommodated on the balance pan and provided its mass is appropriate to the range of the analytical balance.

21.3 Calibration of the volume of the glass bulb Obtain the volume of the bulb by weighing it to f 0.1 g empty and then full of distilled water at approximately ambient temperature; the difference gives the mass of water and hence the volume of the bulb at that temperature.
Note. For borosilicate glasses no further bulb volume correction is required.

21.4 Operating procedure Carefully dry the bulb, then evacuate it and weigh it to rt 0.20 mg. Cool the bulb to just below ambient temperature and then fill it with sulphur hexaff uoride. Allow the filled bulb to attain ambient temperature then momentarily open a stopcock to bring the gas in the bulb to atmospheric pressure. Note the ambient temperature and barometric pressure and then reweigh the bulb.
Note. Care should be taken to ensure that the bulb is properly Med. 1 min at 5 l/mm. It will be so if the bulb is purged for about must be taken.

Warning. -

In both evacuation and filling with SFe, proper safety precautions

8

IS 13m2 : 1991 mx?ab376(197i) 21.5 Calclrlation of result
Density (kg/m3) = 1 OOfl % v nr'

where : mass of b;lb filled with SF6, in grams mass of evacuated bulb, in grams volume of gas, corrected to reference temperature and pressure (e.g. 20 "C and 760 torr) from the temperature and pressure existing at the time the pressure in the bulb was adjusted, in millilitres

SECTION EIGHT 22.
Toxicity tests

TOXICITY

22. I E.vperimental details Five femalk albino mice, previously maintained under barriered conditions so that they are as free as possible from disease, are to be used for each test. They are to be kept under observation for at least 5 days prior to exposure to ensure that they are in good healtt.. `I`hey are then to be introduced into the exposure chamber containing an atmosphere of 79% SF, and 21% 0, by volume and kept there for a period of 24 h. During this time water and laboratory mouse diet are to be supplied ad
libitunt.

2' -.-' E.~posure coditions The SF, is taken from a cylinder maintained in an inverted position so that the gases generated are truly representative of the liquid phase. The oxygen is supplied from a cylinder and the required ratio of 7971 SF,: 21 I,g0, by volume is to be obtained by balancing the rates of flow of the two gases as measured by calibrated flow-meters. The two gases are to be mixed in a mixing vessel prior to being-led into the exposure chamber. The rate of gas flow must never be less than $h of the total volume of the exposure chamber per minute. After 2 h (when stable conditions have been obtained) and 22 h (to ensure that no significant deviation from the required values has occurred), the atmosphere is to be analysed for oxygen content by means of Drhger oxygen analysis tubes or other suitable means. `3 3 __._ During exposure the mice are to be observed at frequent intervals for evidence of abnormal behaviour. On.completion of the exposure period, they are to be removed and returned to their original cages for subsequent observation during a period of 72 h. _-. 37 4 Interpretation qf results Any deviation from normal behaviour on the part of the mice must be viewed with suspicion and may or may not indicate the presence of toxic impurities. If frank symptoms of toxicity are observed then the response must be considered positive. It is conceivable that one or more animals may occasionally exhibit signs of unusual reaction, or indeed may die either during exposure or during the observation period, perhaps from causes unrelated to the experimental treatment. In such cases the experiment should be repeated with a total of ten mice to confirm or deny the real significance of the previous observation. Any inouse that dies during the investigation and/or any mouse exhibiting any deviation from normal behaviour should be subjected to detailed autopsy in an attempt to establish the cause.

IS 13Q72: 1991 IJX Pob 376 ( 197i)
SECTION NINE WATER CONTENT TEMPERATURE AND CONDENSATION

23. General
in general the major item of condensable material in new SF, will be water and several meihods

may be used to verify that the water content does not exceed the permitted amount. However, the gravimetiic method is the only absolute method and therefore must be available to check other methods. The gravimetric method shall be used as the reference method in cases of doubt or dispute for the determination of the water content of the gas. A suitable technique is described in Clause 24.

For the routine assessment of water content it may be convenient to use either an electrolytic or a condensation temperature technique and suitable procedures are specified in Clauses 25 and 26. These tests are such that they can be performed quite readily by a purchaser of new gas.

The condensation the limits of detection,

temperature

technique,

however,

is not specific to water and will reveal, within in the new gas.

any condensable

material

that is present

Jn certain items of equipment, it may be necessary to avoid the condensation of any materials and in these circumstances a maximum condensation temperature may be specified by agreement between the supplier and purchaser, either as an additional test requirement or as an alternative to the water content requirement of Table I. If it is established that the condensation temperature of the gas under test is below -42 the gas may be assumed to comply with the requirements for water content given in Table content not more than 15 ppm by massj. "C then
I (water

,lf, however, the condensation temperature is above ---42 "C, it canfiot be assumed that the &ndensing material is'solely water and if the actual water content is to be determined either the gravimetric techniqbe described in Clause 24 or the electrolytic method of Clause 25 must be used.

Note. -The relationship between condensation temperature and water content condensable material is present can be calculated from standard tables.

for new gas assuming no other

24. Gravimetric method of water determination (for reference purposes) 24.1 Principle of method
A measured volume of sulphur hexafluoride is passed through tared tubes containing magnesium .perchlorate (anhydrone) as desiccant. The increase in mass of the tubes gives the water content of that volume of gas. Due to the inherent difficulties of the method, the test should be carried out only by skilled personnel. Changes, of ambient conditions during the test, such as temperature and humidity, may influence the results. Jt is advisable therefore to operate in an air-conditioned room.

24.2,Apparatus
Desiccant tubes: three glass or stainless steel U-tubes and 13 mm bore containing an intimate mixture of two volume of glass powder, 355pm - 42Opm. Immediately to keep the desiccant in place and then seal off the ends natively polychloroprene caps can be used. (See Figure A,, A, and.A,, approximately 100 mm high volumes of magnesium perchlorate and one after filling the tubes, insert glass wool plugs of the tubes with a blow-pipe flame. Alter3.)

10

Note. -While

the tubes contain desiccant but are not connected to the absorption train, the side-arms should be closed by means of polychloroprene caps, etc. When not in use the caps must be kept in dry conditions. Alternatixely the inlet and outlet arms of the tubes may be fitted with stopcocks which will help in isolating the desiccant from the atmosphere when the caps must be removed for weighing or installation in the absorption train.

242.1 Guard tube A guard tube containing the same desiccant as in tubes A,, A, and A,. Note. - This guard tube protects A3 from water contamination 24.2.2 Gas meter A gas meter to measure a quantity of 50 1 or more, to an accuracy of f 2 %. 24.2.3 Filter A fritted glass filter, porosity 2 (40~ 242.4 Supply of dry oil-free air This may be prepared by passing air through a vessel packed with layers of soda-asbestos and magnesium perchlorate.
Note. Soda-asbestos is a mixture of caustic soda (NaOH) and asbestos, often used as an absorbent for k0,. coming from the gas meter.

to 50p.m).

25.2.5 Stopcocks (optional)

are useful to maintain dry conditions in the Isolating stopcocks as shown in Figure 3, absorption train when the desiccant tubes are removed for weighing.

24.3 Operating procedure Dry the inlet end of the absorption train, including the filter and any isolating stopcocks, with hot air and then connect tubes A,, A, and A3. Polychloroprene tubing shall be used for the connections. lt iS essential that the components of the absorption train are butt-jointed; the flexible tubing shall be reasonably tightly fitting and act as sleeving. Open the stopcocks and pass dry air through the absorption train at the rate of about 250 ml/min for 15 min to condition the tubes. Close the stopcocks, disconnect tubes A,, A, and A,, and close the side arms of all tubes with polychloroprene caps. Carefully wipe the tubes with a soft dry cloth or chamois leather anh place them in the balance case.
Note. Once the tubes have been wiped, subsequent handling must be with dry tongs di ivith chamois leather finger stalls, etc. The glasswaie should also be protected from dust and other contamination.

Allow the tubes to stand in the balance case.for 20 min, then weigh them separately to the nearest 0.1 mg. The caps should be removed temporarily from the side-arms of the tubes. The conditioning procedure shall be repeated until each single tube shows a difference in ma& less than 0.2 mg between two consecutive weighings, in order to ensure complete conditioning. '

11

Isl3m :l99l IEcPob376(l!nl) Dry the sampling Reconnect tubes A,, at the gas meter and a flow-rate of about train.
Note. -

line with hot air and then purge the sampling line with sulphur hexafluoride. A, and A, to the absorption train. Note the gas-meter reading, the temperature the atmospheric pressure. Open the stopcocks in the absorption train and, with 250 ml/min, pass about 50 1 to 100 1 of sulphur hexafluoride g&s through the

If a wet gas meter is used, the indicated volume of gas will be the volume of dry gas plus the volume of water vapour needed to saturate it at the temperature and pressure at the meter.

Close the cylinder valve and needle valve, close the stopcocks in the absorption train and note the new reading on the gas meter, the temperature at the meter and the atmospheric pressure. Now pass dry air through the absorption train to displace the sulphur hexafluoride gas in the desiccant tubes. Disconnect tubes A,, A, and A, from the absorption train and refit the caps to the side-arms. Wipe and reweigh the tubes as before. If, in any single determination, tube A, shows an increase in mass greater then 1 mg or 10% of the increase in mass of A,, both these tubes should be refilled with fresh desiccant and the test repeated. No water should pass through the train as far as tube A, so that if there is any measurable increase in the mass of this tube, tubes A, and A, should be refilled with fresh desiccant and the test repeated.

24.4 Calculation of result Calculate the corrected volume V, of SF, at 20 "C and 760 torr as follows:

v, =
where:

~;(P, + P2)293
760 (273 + f (11 -I- t&

(V, -

VJ

p1 and p2 = initial and final atmospheric pressures at the gas meter, torr t, and t2 = initial and final temperatures at the gas meter, Celsius degrees V, and V, = initial and final gas meter readings, litres Then the water content as ppm (mass by `mass) is:

6.16 v, where: m, = mass of tube A, after conditioning, in milligrams
mb =

-

mass of tube A, after conditioning, in milligrams

111,= mass of tube A, at the end of the determination, in milligrams = mass of tube A, at the end of the determination, in milligrams my V, = volume of SF, used at 20 "C and 760 torr, in litres 25. Electrolytlc'method (for routine purposes)

25.1 Principle of method The essential basis of the electrolytic hygrometer is a cell through which a water-containing gas is passed. This cell contains two rhodium-wire electrodes coiled inside or on the outside of an insulating tube or former. The small space between these electrodes is bridged by a thin film of phosphorous pentoxide (P,O,). A direct voltage is applied between these electrodes, but so long as the P20S is completely dry, no current flows!

12

IS l3072 : 1991

IECPub376(l!Wf) Gas to be analysed is passed through the cell close' to the P,O,. which absorbs any water present in it. Simultaneously, current passes through the Film,electrolyzing the absorbed water into hydrogen and oxygen; the amount of electricity needed is a measure of the amount of water absorbed, from Faraday's law. If the rate of gas flow is steady and accurately known, the electrical current flowing when steady-state Conditions have been reached is a measure of the water concentration in the gas; this current may be measured by a sensitive ammeter. This is the normal method of use but in circumstances in which steady-state conditions are not achieved, the current may be recorded using a potentiometer recorder so that the energy may be calculated by integration. 25.2 Apparatus Several manufacturers offer apparatus of this type and any one may be' used for the present purposes. Preference may be given to a type in which the wire electrodes are accessible so that recoating with phosphoric acid is practicable. All-metal joints shall be used to connect the apparatus to the sampling line. Overall accuracy of the equipment involves absorption efficiency;Aow meter accuracy and ammeter accuracy. The absorption efficiency especially may lead to a large error without any obvious indication that this has occurred. This is most likely if the instrument has been used for purposes other than the examination of new SF,, when it may have become saturated with water, contaminated with oil vapour, etc. Where an electrolytic instrument is used for many purposes, only by very frequent recalibration can the accuracy of observation be assured. Where an instrument is used only for examination of new SF,, overall accuracy is tc be assessed for each instrument at least every 12 months by comparison with results from gravimetric tests using SF, containing not more than 15 ppm by mass of water; an accuracy of _t 2 ppm at about this water content shall be obtained. In addition to the above periodical recalibration each instrument may with advantage be checked more frequently by reference to a cylinder of SF, kept for that purpose. It is acceptable to use nitrogen having the same concentration of water per unit volume (i.e., not more than 80 ppm of water by mass). 26. Dew point method Under consideration.

SECTION TEN of nMbod

CAR.BON TE'IBAFLUORIDE,

OXYGEN AND NiTROGEN

27.

Prhciie

Samples of SF, gas are analysed by gas-solid chromatography using a katharometer detector and an adequate separating column. The concentration of air (or its cpnstituents: oxygen and nitrogen) as well as carbon tetrafluoride are determined from their peak areas and correction factors which take into account the differences of detector response to the compounds under investigation.

28. 28.1 Gas chromatograph
Wh tltermal-conductdvity detector

Any instrument with thermal-conductivity detector suitable for use with columns about 2 m long and about 5 mm or 6 mm outside diameter can be used. The oven shall be CaPable of being maintained

13

IS l3072

: 1991" IEC Pub 376 ( 1971) at 40 7`. The gas sa~nplcs shall be injected by means of a properly designed injection valw of injecting I ml samples. Injection' c;f samples by hypodermic syringe shall not be permitted.
. 28.2 Recorder This must suit the actual gas chromatograph used but should preferably be with a 0 mV to I mV
cclpablc

range, I s response time and a 250 mm wide chart. 28.3. Carrier gas Helium is preferred as carrier gas. Hydrogen may be used but the necessary safety precautions must be taken in that case. 28.4 Separating column The column recommended for the determination of (0, -C N,) and CF, is a 2 m long stainless steel tubing packed with 30-50 mesh silicagel coated with 3% of 2 ethyl-hexyl sebacate. Packed columns are supplied by several manufacturers or may be prepared according to manufacturer's instructions. New columns should be conditioned before use at 120 "C for at least 4 h while passing carrier gas through them. Other column packing may be used for special purposes. Molecular sieves allow separate determinations of oxygen and nitrogen (see figure 4, page 42). Crosslinked polystyrene, 80-100 mesh will enable besides air' and CF, also the determination of CO, as well as lower sulphur fluorides (such as SOF,, SO,F,, SOF, + SF,, C,F,) if a sufficient concentration (at least 1%) is present.

Note. - For information, 13X molecular sieve and cross-linked polystyrene such as Porapak Q have been found
suitable.

29.

Procedure Switch on the gas chromatograph and, operating according to the manufacturer's instructions, allow it to stabilize using an oven temperature of 40 "C and a carrier gas flow-rate set within the range 50 ml/min to 80 ml/min. .4ttach a piece of 3 mm bore tubing, about 50 cm long, to the outlet of the sampling loop of the injection valve. Purge the'sampling line from the cylinder with SF6 gas gnd then connect the sampling line to the inlet of the sampling loop. Flush all air or carrier gas out of thk loop with SF6 gas from the cylinder to be analysed, then close the needle valve on the sampling line and operate the injection valve on the gas chromatograph in that order with the aim of bringing the gas in the sampling loop to atmospheric pressure. Maintain steady conditions to obtain the chromatogram. order: air, CF,, SF,. Components are eluted in the following

30.

Calibration The recorded peak areas of the different components are not directly proportional to the corresponding concentrations by mass in the mixtures, owing to the differences in detector response to individual components,

14

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 3% (ml

Empirical correction factors must be determined and the recorded peak areas multiplied by them. The most accurate determination of the correction factors is obtained by analysing standard mixtures of air and carbon tetrafluoride with sulphur hexafluoride.
.

Calibration mixtures may be prepared by dynamic mixing of main and impurity components * From the chromatograms of the standard mixtures the correction factors, fir and fcF,, are calculated for air and CF, relative to SF,, for which f& = 1 can be set. A very much simpler, although slightly less accurate method for determining the correction factors involves injections of 1 ml samples of pure constituents into the chromatographic column under the same analytical conditions. The correction factor f, of the component x with respect to SF, is given by the relation:
J&F SF, peak area = f, 6M . x component peak area X

where :
&Fe =

molecular mass of SF, = 146

MX = molecular mass of component x (28.8 for air, 88 for CF$ The following correction factors may be used for routine analysis: "fSFS = 1.0

f (9 + Nz)= 0.4 = 0.7 f CF,
31. Results Obtain the area of each peak by multiplying the peak height by the peak width at half height. Correct the measured area for differences in detector response by multiplying it by the relevant correction factor. The percentage by mass of any component is then given by:
x=-

A* 100
A,

where : x = mass percent of component x A, = corrected area of the peak for component x (air or CF,) A, = sum of the corrected areas of peaks (air, CF, and CF,)

SECTION ELEVEN 32. Principle

HYDROLY SABLE FLUORIDES

The gas is shaken in a large gas pipette with dilute sodium hydroxide solution. produced is determined calorimetrically with lanthanum alizarin complexone.

The fluoride ion

* The method described by J. C. Cage (Journal of Scientific Instruments 30 (1953) 25) is recommended. In this method a small flow of the impurity is delivered at a known rate from a syringe, whose piston is driven by a synchronous motor and suitable gear train, into a stream of SF,5 flowing at a known steady rate. The flow rates of the two streams are adjusted to give the impurity concentration required.

15

rsl3u72:1991 IRcpllb376(l97l)
33. Apparatna Gas pipette 1 1 capacity with tubulure fitted with a serum cap. Hypodermic syringe 10 ml capacity. Me&u-y seal. Spectrophotometer 34. Resgeats aiizarin j?uo&e blue (3aminomethyh&arin-NNdiacetic ammonium hya7roxidesvfution density 0.880 g/ml; ammonium acetate svlution, 20 T! mass/volume; anhydrous sodium acetate; glacial acetic acid; acetotie; lanthanum oxide; hydrochloric acid, 0.1 N; hydrochloric acid, 2 M dilute 17.2 ml of hydrochloric water sodium jboride; sodium hydroxide solution, 0.1 N; lanthanum-alizarin complexone reagent ; Dissolve 0.048 g of alizarin fluorine blue a) in 0.1 ml of ammonium hydroxide solution b) and 1 ml of ammonium acetate solution c) together with a few millilitres of water. Filter the solution through a small Whatman No. 1 paper into a 250 ml graduated flask containing 8.2 g of anhydrous sodium acetate d) and 6.0 ml of glacial acetic acid e) dissolved in just sufficient water. Wash the fiber with a small quantity of water and then add to the flask 100 ml of acetone, slowly with swirling. Dissolve 0.041 g of lanthanum oxide, g) in 2.5 ml of 2 M hydrochloric acid i) warming gently to' aid dissolution. Mix the warm solution with the aqueous acetone solution in the flask and dilute the solution to 250 ml with water. Mix the solution thoroughly and when it is cool, adjust the volume to 250 ml. This reagent is stable for one week. stock sodium jfuoride &tivn, I mg F]ml; Dissolve 2.210 g of dried sodium fluoride j) in 50 ml of water containing 1 ml of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution and dilute to 1 1 with water. Store in a polyethylene bottle. standard sodium flu&de solution IO Fg F/ml; Dilute the stock sodium fluoride solution j) 100 - fold daily as required. 35. Rocedere Evacuate the gas pipette. Connect the gas s.ample point with a T-piece one arm of which is connected to a mercury seal. Open the sample valve and allow a steady flow of gas to bubble through the seal. Fill the sample bulb by cautiously opening the tap so that gas flows into the bulb, observing _ the seal to ensure that no mercury is sucked into the pipette. P acid (density 1.18 g/ml) to 100 ml with acid); with 2 cm or 4 cm cells.

16

IS 13072 : 1991

IEC Pub 376 (l!Vl)
The pipette rapidly oflh. is full when the gas again bubbles solution freely into the seal. to the atmosphere. Disconnect the pipette and inject

open and close the tap to equalize pressure

Using the hypodermic,

10 ml 0.1 N sodium hydroxide
l

into the bulb.

Shake for 1 min in every 5 min for a period

Transfer the solution from the bulb to a small beaker, adjust to pH 5 with 0.1 N hydrochloric acid solution h) and transfer to a 100 ml graduated flask. Add 10 ml lanthanum-alizarin complexone reagent Z). Dilute to the mark with water, mix and allow to stand for a 30 min away from direct light. Measure the optical density in a 2 cm or 4 cm cell at 600 nm against a " blank " carried out upon all the reagents including the 10 ml 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution

k).
to prepare a fresh calibration

R-cad the amount curve daily.

of fluorine from a calibration

curve.

Ii is advisable

36.

Preparation of calibration curve To 10 ml portions of 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution

k) add respectively

0 ml, 0.5 ml, 1 ml, 1.5 ml

and 2.0 ml portions of the 10 pg/ml standard fluoride solution n). Adjust to FH 5 with 0.1 N hydrochloric acid solution h), transfer to 100 ml volumetric flasks and continue as described above.

37.

,Calculation of result Calculate the amount as follows : of hydrolysable fluorides as ppm (mass by mass) of hydrofluoric acid (HF)

20 000 n HF @pm) = 293 19 x 6.16 V~-----760 273 + t

where : n = amount of fluorine found in the form of fluorides, in micrograms

V F volume of the gas pipette, in millilitres
p = atmospheric t = ambient pressure, in torr in Celsius degrees.

temperature,

SECTION

TWELVE

-

ACIDITY

,

38.

Principle of method Acid and acid producing constituents in the sample are absorbed the excess alkali back-titrated with standard acid. The resultant acidity is expressed as HF. in standard alkali solution and

39. 39.1

Apparatus Gas wash bottles Drechsel type, 250 ml capacity. Three of these are required, distributor and two with an open tube distributor. one fitted with a fritted glass gas

17

IS mm : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971 )

39.2. Microburette Graduated to 0.01 ml.
.

39.3 Gus meter To measure about 10.1 or more of sulphur hexafluoride gas to an accuracy of i- 2 %.

40.

Reagents

40.1 Bromocresol purple indicator solution Dissolve 1 g of bromocresol purple in 100 ml of ethanol (95%).
Note. Strictly speaking this indicator is not particularly purple is preferred in practice because : suitable for weak acid titrations. However bromocresol

a) the colour change is very distinct;
b) in general it is not necessary to prevent contact with atmosphere during titration; c) the present test is solely for go/no go purposes and extreme accuracy is therefore not required.

40.2 Standard sodium hvdroxide solution 0.01 N This reagent should be carbonate-free. 40.3 Standard sulphuric acid solution 0.01 N

41.

Procedure

Boil about 600 ml water for 5 min in a 1 1 flask, then cool it quickly to room temperature. Add about 10 drops of bromocresol purple indicator solution, and then just neutralize the water by adding standard sodium hydroxide solution (0.01 N) from a microburette.
Pour about 150 ml of the neutralized solution into each of the three Drechsel bottles and then add to each from a microburette, 2.00 ml of sodium hydroxide solution (0.01 N). Replace the heads on the bottles and keep one of the open-tubed bottles as a blank.

Assemble the gas washing train as shown in Figure 5, bottle first of the two in the train.
Note. The object of the plain-tubed

keeping the fritted glass washing

gas wash bottle is to trap any spray from the fritted glass bottle.

Purge the sampling line with SF,, then close the needle valve. Note the gas-meter reading. Connect the sampling line to the train and, by adjusting the needle valve, pass gas through the train at the rate of about 0.5 I/mm for about 20 min.
Notes I. 2. Too fast a flow rate can cause foaming. The fastest flow rate that can be used must be found by trial; the suggested 0.5 l/min is given as a guide. A bigger sample-for instance 50 l/min-should be used if a better accuracy is needed.

Stop the flow of gas and note the new reading on the gasmeter. Disconnect the gas wash bottles and titrate the solutions in each of the three bottles with standard sulphuric acid solution (0.01 N).

18

IS 13072 : 1991 IEX Pub 376 ( 1971)

42.

Calculation of result

Calculate the corrected volume V, of SF, used at 20 "C and 760 torr as follows:
.

V, = P-2 where : v,

VI)

:

(P, -t
760

PJ

293 273 + ; (tt -t- tz>

= corrected vblume, in litres

p1 and ~2 = initial and final atmospheric pressures at the gas meter, in torr t, and t2 = initial and final temperatures at the gas meter, in Celsius degrees V, and V, = initial and final readings of the gas meter, in litres Calculate the acidity as ppm (mass by mass) of hydrofluoric acid (HF) by means of: ,HF = where :
R=

200@-

X) + (B 6.16 v,

Y)

the volume of sulphuric acid solution used for the titration of the blank solution, in milhlitres millilitres

x= the volume of sulphuric acid solution used for the titration of the solution in wash bottle 1, in
Y=

the volume of sulphuric acid solution used for the titration of the solution in wash bottle 2, in millilitres

19

IS 13072 -: 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

A
I
__-a---

I

I

I

II

Critical temperature

45.6 "C ---

- - -

30

20

1c

0

-1c

-21

-31

-41

-5

-6i0 I *

-7'0

b

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

.(I bar = lo5 N/m') Pressure, absolute bars

FIG. 1. -

Saturated

vapour pressure curve for SF,.

9

20

ISl3m :1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

0K -+I--

0F

T

t-

II

II
-f
-0

J1

-I0

D* -

-f 0 Jag Y

7

_A-

I

-l_

-L

Dimension

Dimension

mm

Ii

Dimension

mm

A B 0C 0 Dt 0E
OF

9min 13.3 112 7 21.?80 - 21:387 6 11.5 18.0 - 18.5

0L

DK
0P

0 JI H N

oG

Q

1 12 19 16.0 - 15.8 6 5 1.8

0

D2

I

0 J;

T

u
V
0.

Y

21.8 16.3 - 16.1 12 min 16.3 - 16.0 21 30

iu

2 Threads 0 D1 and 0 9 = 14 threads per inch ri@t-hand whitworth form

FIG. 2. -

V&e outlet.

21

IS l3m : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

Stopcock

(optional)

.
Adniission of SF,, from sampling line

Guard tube

Gas meter

FIG.3. -

Gravimetric determination of water in SF, gas.

Chromato&am

obtained

using a molecular sleeve column and helium carrier gas; showing order ofelution of 02, Nzand CF.4

Chart speed approximately

I/ cm/min (% in/min)

l-k. 4. -- Example fluoride.

of chromatogram

obtained

when determining oxygen, nitrogen and carbori' tetra-

22

IS 13072: 1991 IEC Pub 376 (1Ml)

SF, from sampling

line Gas meter

Gas wash
fritted

bottle with glass gas distributor

Gas wash bottle with plain tube inlet

FK. 5. -

Apparatus for the determination of free acidity.

23

IS uo72 : 1991 ! -IECPub376(1971)

.

SECTION

THIRTEEN

-

MINERAL

OIL CONTENT

43.

Scope This method fluoride. covers the determination as written, of the amount to the determination of mineral oil in new sulphur lubricants. hexa-

It does not apply,

of synthetic

44.

Principle of the method Mineral oil dispersed in sulphur hexafluoride is absorbed in carbon tetrachloride by bubbling a known volume of gas through the solvent contained in two absorption tubes. The concentration of mineral oil in carbon tetrachloride is then determined by the infrared absorbance of the solution at 2930 cm-1 methyl and methylene groups.
Note. -

corresponding

to the absorption

band

of paraffinic

Carbon tetrachloride is highly toxic and health regulations of many countries prohibit its indudrial use. However, carbon tetrachloride is widely used in analytical laboratories, especially in connection with infrared_ spectroscopy. Even where local legislation prohibits the laboratory use of carbon tetrachloride the method described below can be followed by replacing carbon tetrachloride with less toxic tetrachloroethylene. In this case, on account of the absorption of tetrachloroethylene itself in the region of 2930 cm-t. the accuracy of the method is decreased, especially for lower oil contents. The estimate of precision given in Clause 49 only applies to tests performed with carbon tetrachloride.

45. 45.1

Apparatus Inflared spectrophotometet Any suitable infrared spectrophotometer.

45.2

Absorption cells Two types of fixed cells for liquids provided with sodium chloride windows may be used:

Type I : with a sample path length of at least 3 mm, is suitable for use with Procedure A; Type 2: with a sample path length of at least 20 mm, is suitable for use with Procedure B. 45.3 Sampling line The sampling line, which connects the absorption train to the gas cylinder, shall be in accordance with Clause 17. All parts of the sample line must be suitable for rinsing with carbon tetrachloride (or tetrachloroethylene) as described in Sub-clause 47.2.1. For this reason,. to provide fine control of gas flow, an ah-metal the note under Sub-clause needle 45.4). valve is preferred to a pressure reducing valve (see also

24

IS 13072: 1991 IEC Pub 376 (1971) _._--45.4
Ahsorp~ion truitt

The absorption

train

consists

of two gas wash

bottles,

silicate glass and dimensioned as in Figure~6, page 14. Ground

100 ml capacity, made of borojoint Drechsel-type absorption

tubes are also allowed provided that they can be used without any sealing grease. The inlet tubing is fitted at its end with a fritted glass disk of porosity Grade I (average pore diameter 90 pm to 150 pm). Connections to the sampling line and tubing between used the components being of the made of absorption train shall be butt-jointed, the flexible silicone rubber or fluorinated elastomers. `No/c,. as sleeving

To check the suitability of the tubing used as sleevingimmerse a 3 cm long specimen in 50 ml of carbon tetrachloride for 30 min. Obtain the clbsorbance of the washing liquid at 2930 cm 1 against unused solvent. No absorption should be detected.

45.5

Gfts-mrtct

A gas-meter

to measure

30 I of SF, gas to an accuracy

of -f 2%.

45.6 A borosilicate 45.7 One IO ml and one 100 ml borosilicate 46. 46. I Carbon 46.2
Sodittttt Reagents

glass or porcelain

crucible,

capacity

50 ml to 250 ml.

glass graduated

flask.

tetrachloride,

analytical

grade. freshly distilled

(boiling

point

76-77

C).

.sitlplitrtr

Sodium 46.3

sulphate.

anhydrous.

Tett-achloroethylen~. 47. 47. I Prepare a number
Procedure

amtlytical

grade

(boiling

point

120-121

C).

of standard

solutions

chloride containing approximately be weighed to the nearest 0.2 mg. Transfer the standard solutions absorbances absorbance

of paraffinic minera! oil per litre of carbon 20 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg and .200 mg. The oil 10 mg. to the cell of the desired path length and

tctrasl~ot~ld

read

the

at 2930 cm 1. Repeat the measure on the carbon tetrachloride. Plot the net values against the concentrations of oil to obtain the calibration curve.

17.2 17.2.1

r)c,tcl,`tttiti(ttioti RWI~IYII

of'oil

cotitwt

of oil /t.om SF, gtr.\

Add 35 ml of carbon tetrachloride to each of the two Flean and diy wash bottles. C`arefully rinse the pipework. the valve and the connections with carbon tctrachlnridc and awmhle IIIC sampling line and the absorption train 21s indicated in Figure 7:'

". i

IS 13072: 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( Ml) Place the wash bottles the needle reading, the temperature Carefully open and bottles in .a cooling bath at 0 "C made up with ice and valve on the cylinder. water. Check that

valve Vr is closed

and open the main

Note the gas-meter the gas wash

at the gas-meter and the atmospheric pressure. adjust valve V, to allow the gas to flow through

a; a slow steady rate of 10 1 per hour'maximum.

Note. -

If Drechsel-type cooling bath.

wash bottles

are used, check

the tightness

of the ground

joint

by sinking

it into

the

After

passing

about

30 I of SF, through, by itself.

close the main

valve and continue

bubbling

as

long as the flow continues

Close valve V, and record the new reading of the gas-meter (to the nearest 0.2 I), the temperature at the gas-meter and the atmospheric pressure. Remove the cooling bath, disconnect the wash bottles and quantitatively transfer the liquid into a 100 ml graduated Separately flask. and all pipework and connections with 10 ml portions to the graduated at 2930 flask and make up to the 100 ml with either Subrinse the wash bottles

of carbon tetrachloride. Add the washings mark with carbon tetrachloride. Measure the absorbance clause 47.2.2 or 47.2.3. of the solution

cm- 1 in accordance

47.2.2

InfLared

determination.

Procedure

A (3 mm length cell)

Transfer the solution volume of about 5 ml.

from

the

graduated

flask

to the crucible

and

evaporate

it to a

Norrs I. --- As an alternative. the solution'may be concentrated by distillation. on the ground joints of the equipment. PTFE sleeves may be used.

In this case, no grease shall be used

2. -- Remove water visible on the surface of the solution after the concentration. if any, by adding l-2 g of anhydrous sodium sulphate. Filter the solution and wash the residue on the filter with a few ml of distilled cnrhon tetrachloride to avoid any retention of oil.

Quantitatively transfer the residue to a IO ml calibrated flask. Rinse the crucible with 3 ml of carbon tetrachloride. add the v+ashings to the residue and make up to the mark with carbon tetrachloride. Fill the 3 mm cell (Type I) with the solution by means of a pipette and read the absorbance at 2930 cm 1. Run a blank by evaporating 100 ml of pure carbon tetrachloride (tetrachloroethylene) to 5 ml and measure the absorbance of the residue. Calculate the concentration of oil from the calibration curve.

By means of a pipette transfer the solution contained in the 100 ml graduated flask into the Type 2 test cell having a path length of at least 20 mm. Read the ahsorbancc at 2930 cm 1. Measure the absorbance Obtain the concentration of the solvent in the same cell at 2930 cm 1. of mineral oil in the solution from the ca-libration cure.

IS 13072 : 1991 IIX Pub 376 ( 1971) 48. Calculation Calculate . of tesults the corrected volume c', at 20 C and 760 torr, as follows: (VL! V,)

v, =

4 (/`, + 172)293 760; 273 + t (f] + /?)I

where : p, and 1~~. = initial fl and t2 = initial V, and V2 = initial Calculate and tinal atmospheric pressures (torr); and final temperatures at the gas-meter and final gas-meter reagings (litres). of mineral oil present in the sample

(degrees centigrade);

the amount

of sulphur

hexafluoridc

in parts

ppm by mass of mineral oil in SF,: concentration in mg;`l of mineral oil in the solution; concentration in mg;l of mineral oil in the solvent (blank corrected volume (litres) of SF,,
pas

determination):

used in the test.

49.

Sensitivity Procedure tetrachloride Procedure

and prkision A allows the determination of 0. I mg of mineral
III~ of

oil dissolved
oil in 100

in IO ml of carbon
ml

with a precision of * 25'!&. B allows the determination of 0. I

mineral

carbon

tctra-

chloride to the same precision. From the above sensitivity and the amount of SF, used (30 I). it is possible to calculate that 0.5 ppm by mass of oil in SF, may be determined according to either procedure with a precision of i The precision follows: 25%. of the method is better when the
~IIIOLIII~ 01`

oil collcctcd

is grcatcr.

as

Amount

of oil (mg) 0.1 .0.5 1.0

Precision * 25% * I 5 `>i, * 10%

50.

Permissible

concentration hexafluoride shall not contain more than IO ppm by mass of oil.

New sulphur

27

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

0 4 int. - 0 7 ext. t

--.0

4 ht. - 0 7

ext.

A

Sintered glass disk (Gl)

0 10

(Dimensions in mm)

._

FIG. 6. -

Gas wsh

bottle

for absorption

of oil from SF6 gzs.

IS 13072:1991
IEC Pub 376 ( 19'71)

A Absorption D Gas-meter.

tube.

VI Needle valve.

I
2 3 4 5

Brasstitting.
Glass tube: Union Metallic Metallic 0eut. 7 mm. rubber or in fluorinated elastomer.

in shcone union. tube:

0ext.

6-7 mm.

FIG. 7. -

General

design of the apparatus.

"9

IS 13072 :1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

26. Dew-point method
Replace Under consideration 26. I Scope
describes a simple apparatus determined. -60 "C with an accuracy and a test procedure with which the dew point of an insulating values of dew point may be measured Using solid COz as a coolant of + 1 "C.

by the following text:

This recommendation down to approaching

or other gas may be accurately

26.2

Principle of the method
temperature of the impurities in a gas, that is the dew point of a gas, is measured by passing

The condensation

a sample of the gas through a closed cell in which is exposed a surface (almost always a metal mirror) the temperature of which is lowered artificially in a controlled manner. When the temperature of the surface is low enough, impurities in the gas, such as water or water plus other substances, condense on the surface forming a visible mist at which this condensation or "dew" or, at low temperatures, a crystalline "frost". That surface temperature remains stable, that is, neither grows nor diminishes with time, is for all practical purposes the dew point of the gas. However, it must be emphasized that, particularly at low dew points such as' are normal for electrical insulating gases, the true dew point temperature at which condensation is stable is significantly higher than the temperature at which condensation is first observed - the actual difference depending on the instrument used and upon many other factors - and the temperature of first appearance cannot be used by itself to determine the dew point.

Notes I. -

The term dew point will be used for present purposes since this is the commor) usage in chemical and similar contexts irrespective of whether the deposit is actually a dew or frost. Different terminology is used in, for example, meteorological applications. As already pointed out, the measured dew point of an insulating gas is not necessarily an indication of the Ho\rcv&r, in some circumstances it,may be convenient to have available data of the pure water concentration to ;I gi\cn dc\~ point. For this purpose, Appendix A shops values of saturation vapour pressure, absolute ppm hy mass of water in SF,, for a pure water condensate. These data indicate the lowest concentration of pure c~i\l at ii gi\cn dew point. water content. corresponding humidity, and water that can

2. -

Existing

instruments

for determining

dew point fall into two broad

categories:

a) Automatic

instruments. Most of them are so constructed that the quantity of condensate is monitored by a photo cell, the output of which is used to control the mirror temperature so as to maintain a stable quantity of condensate; the mirror temperature should therefore be automatically held at the required dew point, which may be obtained by measuring the mirror temperature with a thermocouple, etc.

b) Manual instruments. These are made in numerous different designs. but have the common fkature, mirror cooling is controlled manually in response to the appearance or disappearance of condensate.
N&c. ISOjTC I25 is at present preparing a recommendation which will be a general survey instruments. difficulties of use and operational precautions, etc., for condensation of the requirements, different

that

patterns,

Existing automatic instruments are generally purposes, provided it is known that the mirror

expensive and often bulky; however, temperature is correctly indicated.

they can be used for present

30

IS 13072: 1991
IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

Existing manual instruments are difficult to use and erroneous readings are usually obtained at low dew points, which require the use of correction factors. The instrument described in this recommendation has been developed to meet the need for an inexpensive instrument that can easily be used on site. It avoids most operational difficulties, is easily used by personnel with minimum experience and at the same time gives high accuracy. Figure 8, page 16, shows the recommended dew-point cell in outline diagrammatic form. (Details of assembly, sealing, etc., which may vary from one pattern to another, are omitted.) The essential features of this design are as follows:
a)' Although an ordinary liquid-in-glass thermometer is used, the temperature of the cooled mirror surface is accurately measured by employing an appropriately designed thermometer pocket forming part of the isothermal mass on which the mirror is formed.

b) The design ensures a high thermal resistance between the cooled mirror and the ambient air, so that leakage of heat to the mirror is small; this ensures that the mirror temperature is constant over its area and the same as `the temperature of the thermometer pocket. cl Observation of first appearance of condensate is made very easy by two design features. Firstly, the cooled .mirror, which is a disk about 1 cm in diameter made of polished nickel-plated copper, is surrounded without significant break of surface by a comparison mirror region which is always warmer than the cooled mirror and therefore remains free from condensation; secondly, a blackened screen is so arranged that all mirror surfaces appear black so long as no ,deposit is present. These two features ensure that when deposit appears it does so as a definite white disk on a black background, which is clearly and immediately observed even by those without previous experience of the instrument. This instrument is intended to employ solid CO2 in acetone as a coolant and, when used in accordance with the instructions below, gives accurate results better than i 1 "C at dew points around -50 "C, and more accurate results at higher dew points. 26.4
Apparatus cell

Dmyoint

Essential features of the dew-point cell are shown in Figure 8, and described in Sub-clause 26.3.

Flownlctrr

To indicate the flow of the tested gas in the range of 0.5 to 2 litres/minute approximately.
Note. A float-type flowmeter is most suitable, but a ~/r.y gas meter and a watch or clock may be used instead. No great accuracy is required; indeed, the flowmeter can be dispensed with, but since some indication is needed that flow is taking place at an approximately constant rate and at about the suggested value, a suitable flowmete? is strongly recommended.

Solid carbon dio.ride

A supply of solid CO, is needed. This may be purchased.in blocks and broken up as required for use (the broken CO, may be kept for some days in a vacuum jar). Alternatively, devices are available for making solid CO, pellets from cylinders of CO,.

A liquid-in-glass thermometer of suitable range is usually the most convenient method of measuring the temperature in the thermometer well of the dew-point jnstrument. Thermometers should be available to enable temperatures between ambient and 60 C to be measured with an accuracy of at least + 0.5 `C. It is essential that these thermometers are calibrated or corrected for immersions of 3 cm (stem in ambient air) and that the lowest graduation is at least 14 cm from the base of the bulb: maximum diameter of bulb and stem: 7 mm. Where more convenient. another temperature measuring device, which will measure temperatures in the present situation with the above accuracy. may be substituted.

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971 )

Clean the mirror surface of the cup and the inside and outside of the transparent casing with a soft duster. Assemble the cell, making sure the sealing rings or washers are clean and lubricated with a trace of silicone grease.
.

Figure 9, shows how it is recommended to connect the apparatus. Gas flows from the gas cylinder, through an all-metal fine control valve, if necessary, and through a sampling line as described in Clause 17. From the sample line, the gas flows through the dew-point cell and finally through the flowmeter. The direction of flow through the cell is unimportant. Connect at least half a metre of 3 mm to 6 mm bore, stainless steel or polytetrafluoroethylene tubing between the cell outlet and atmosphere, without valves or other restrictions. Notrs I. - The purpose of the length of outlet tubing is to prevent any contamination of the gas in the cell with water vapour from the
outside atmosphere. This length of tubing may most conveniently be the tubing that connects the dew-point cell to the flowmeter. 2. - The test method described in this recommendation is designed to obtain the dew point at atmospheric pressure, and it is for this reason that there must be no restriction in the outlet line. A float-type flowmeter suitable for measuring gas flow does not constitute a significant restriction and will thus not significantly raise the pressure in the cell. For greatest accuracy, the atmospheric pressure should be noted; normal maximum variation of atmospheric pressure (about t 10%) will change the observed dew point by roughly i 1 "C. Under unusual (e.g. high altitude) conditions the pressure shall always be measured and reported together with the test results. 3. - The cell itself may be suitable for tests at pressures above atmospheric; the manufacturer's data should be consulted. For tests at such higher pressures, a suitable pressure gauge and all-metal throttle valve should be connected'to the outlet of the cell, ensuring that all other parts of the system are also suitable for the proposed pressures.

All tubing joints shall be air-tight and of all-metal (e.g. compression) type; alternatively, lengths of tubing may be butt-jointed with the joint covered by a tightly-fitting sleeve of polyethylene or polytetrafluoroethylene. Put acetone into the inner cup of the dew-point cell to a depth of 3 cm to 5 cm (about 20 ml). Take care that no significant amount of acetone enters the space between inner and outer cup. Insert the thermometer into the thermometer well. Note that in this cell there is a spot rather less than 1 cm diameter on the side of the cup adjacent to the thermometer well, which is the only point that is cooled; this is the only point at which a deposit will form. Position the cell in as good a light as possible, so that the cold spot is observed approximately tangentially with the eye approximately level with the cell. Then position the rotatable screen so that from the observation point the mirror surface reflects the blackened inside surface of the screen. Under these conditions, when a deposit forms.the cold spot will appear white against a black background. Establish flow of the gas to be tested through the cell. A flow rate of roughly 2 l/min will normally be found suitable at dew points of the order of -40 "C or -50 "C.
Notes I. 2. ShouId the gas tested have a higher dew point, a lower flow rate may be adequate; 0.5 l/min is sufficient. e.g. at a dew point of 0 "C, about

Each test made in accordance with the procedure given in this recommendation will usually consume between 10 1 and 40 1 of gas (at atmospheric pressure), assuming that all pipework and equipment is dry prior to the test. Possible extensive drying out of the equipment may be avoided by keeping each item dry when not in use, e.g. by sealing with bungs, caps, etc., in accordance with normal low-humidity practice.

After gas has been flowing through the cell for at least 3 min to 5 min, drop small pieces of solid COz into the inner cup, keeping watch on the thermometer and on the cold spot. The temperature indicated will fall steadily until each piece of solid COe has evaporated; do not put a further piece of COz into the cup until the previous piece has had its effect. Continue cooling until the cold spot appears to turn white, due to a deposit of condensate. Note the temperature at which this occurs, and discontinue adding further solid COz. Also note the lowest temperature reached. Allow the temperature to rise again and note the temperature at which the deposit finally disappears. The dew point of the gas in the cell is between this temperature and the temperature at which deposit first appeared.

32

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)
This result should be regarded as a first trial run. and now that the required

dew point has been roughly

estab-

lished, further readings should be made by re-cooling the cell. Cool the cell by not more than 2 "C at a time until a deposit is seen, then` do not add further solid CO?. For rough guidance, a piece of solid CO, about the size of a small pea will cool the cup by I `C to 2 C. Do not stir the acetone. Record tempeiatures t,, ft? and trl in accordance with the notes below:

takes the form of a white mist entirely and simultaneously In the vast majority of cases, the first appearance covering the whole surface of the cold spot, so that the cold spot turns white quite suddenly. This occurs below the correct dew point; with the gas-flow rates quoted. it occurs about 0.5 C to I -C below correct dew point for dew 20 `C, but the difference becomes progressively more important as the dew point fails points between 0 C and even further (at --4O `C a deposit will not generally correct dew point). be first observed until the cup temperature is about 3 "C below

With the step-by-step the cup temperature

cooling

technique

outlined

above, where cooling

is discontinued

as soon as tI is observed,

will not drop more than 0.5 "C to 1 "C below the temperature

at which deposit is first observed.

The temperature will then rise gradually. Particularly to change from an overall apparent mist to a number appearance of the desposit. Temperature of disappeurancc, tz3

at dew points below about -20 "C, the deposit is likely of very small ice crystals; do not mistake this for the dis-

Carefully note the temperature at which the deposit disappears entirely. If the above procedure has been correctly carried out, this will be not more than 6 "C to 8 `C above the lowest temperature reached (f~).

26.6

Calculatior~of dew point the lowest temperature reached, tg, and the temperature of

The dew point is calculated as the mean between final complete disappearance of the deposit, t3.

temperature below this mean value Check that the temperature of the first appearance, tl, is an appropriate (in accordance with the above notes) and that the first visible decrease of deposit occurs at slightly above this calculated mean value. Repeat the observations expected). to check that a repeatable mean value is obtained (a repeatability of + I .O "C is to be

If a repeatable value is not obtained, purge the system thoroughly and make a new series of observations. If a repeatable value is still not obtained, and the system is made up of the recommended materials, a leak may be suspected. 26.7 Reporting of results

The report should include: a) the mean of valid measurements; 6) the values of tl, t2 and t3 for each of the valid measurements; c) the atmospheric pressure.

33

is 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1Ml)

APPENDIX
HYGROMETRIC FOR UNCONTAMINATED .

A
DATA WATER VAPOUR

Dew point "C

SW torr

(see Note

1) mbar

AH (see Note g/m3

2)

ppm by mass in SF, (see Note

3)

20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 I1 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 1; -3 -4 -5 -6 -7 -8 -9 -10 -11 -12 -- 13 -14 -15 -- 16 -17 -18 -19 -20 -21 -22 -23 -24 -25 -26 --27 -28 -29 i

11.527 16.471 15.471 14.524 13.629 12.782

23.36 21.95 20.62 19.36 18.17 17.04 15.97 14.96 14.01 13.11 12.27 11.47 10.72 10.01 9.34 8.72 8.13 7.57 7.05 6.66 6.11 5117 5.42 4.75 4.37 4.01 3.68 3.37 3.09 2.84 2.59 2.37 2.17

17.30 16.26 15.26 14.33 13.45 12.61 11.82 11.08 10.37 9.71 9.09 8.49 7.93 7.41 6.91 6.45 6.01 5.60 5.22 4.86 4.52 4.16 3.83 3 :53 3.25 2.97 2.73 2.50 2.29 2.09 1.92 1.76 1.61 1.47 1.34 1.22 1.11 1.Ol 0.922 0.839 0.763 0.693 0.629 0.570 0.516 0.467 0.423 0.382 0.345 0.31.1

2 2 2 2 2

840 670 510 360 210

11.982 11.226
10.512 9.889 9.204 8.606 8.041 7.510 7.010 6.540 6.097 5.682 5.291 4.925 4.581 4.219 3.880 3.565 3.280

2 070 1 940 1 $20 1 700 1 600 1 490 1 400 1 300 1 220 1 140

1 060
989 922 858 799 743 684 629 577 532 488 448 410 376 344 316

'

3.010 2.765 2.531 2.322 2.128 1.945

I .782 1.630
1.486

289
264 240 221 201 183 167 152 138 125 114 103 94 85 78 70 63 57 51

1.98
1.81

1.359
1.239 I .I30 1.029 0.936 0.851 0.774 0.703 0.638 0.578 0.524 0.479 9.429 0.388 0.350 0.316

'

1.65 1.51

1.37
1.25 1.13 1.03 0.94 0.85 0.77 0.70 0.64 0.57 0.52 0.47 0.4'

I -

34

IS l3072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971 )

Dew point "C -30 -31 -32 -33 -34 -35 -36 -37 -38 -39 -40 -41 -42 -43 -44 -45 -46 -47 -48 -49 -50 -51 -52 -53 -54 -55 -56 -57 -58 -59 -60 \

SVP (see Note 1) torr 0.286 0.256 0.231 0.208 0.137 0.168 0.150 0.134 0.121 0.108 0.0962 0.0858 0.0766 0.0681 0.0607 0.0540 0.0479 0.0425 0.0377 0.0333 0.0295 0.0261 0.0222 0.0203 0.0178 a.ot5-l 0.0138 0.0121 0.0106 0.0094 0.0081

AH (see Note 2) g/m3 0.281 0.253 0.228 0.205 0.187 0.165 0.148 0.133 0.119 0.106 0.094(8) 0.084(7) 0.075(4) 0.067(2) 0.059(8) 0.053(2) O&+7(2) 0.041(9) 0.037(l) 0.032(9) 0.029(l) 0.025(7) 0.022(7) 0.020(O) 0.017(6) \ 0.015(5) 0.013(6) 0.01 l(9) O.OlO(4) 0.009(l) 0.008(O) \

ppm by mass in SFa (see Note 3)

I

mbar 0.38 0.34 0.31 0.28 0.25 0.22 0.20 0.18 0.16 0.14 0.128 0.114 0.102 0.091 0.081 0.072 0.064 0.057 0.050 0.044 o.d39, 0.035 0.030 0.027 0.024 0.021 0.018 0.016 0.014 0.012 0.011

l

46 41 37 34 30 27 24 22 20 17 16 14 12 11 10 8.7 7.8 6.9 6.1 5.4 4.8 4.2 3.6 3.3 2.9 2.5 2.2 2.0 1.7 1.5 1.3

Notes

1. -

= Saturated Vapour Pressure. Values corresponding to dew points of 20 "C, 10 "C and 0 "C agree with the mean values in the International Skeleton `Steam Tables (1963), intermediate values being in accordance with Bain's interpolation (National Engineering Laboratory Steam Tables, 1964). Values below 0 "C are from the Smithsonian Meteorological Tables, 6th Edition, 1951, and refer to conditions over ice. SVP

2. -

Humidity. The value shown is the mass of water vapour contained ,in unit volume corresponding to the observed dew point of a sample taken from that volume. It is assumed a) that the sample is at the same pressure as that volume, and b) that the volume from which the sample was taken is at 20 "C. AH = Absolute

3, - ppm = Parts per million. The water vapour content of SFs, expressed in ppm by mass, is equal to 162.2xSVP where SVP is in torr, assuming the total pressure is 760 torr.

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

Thermometer well, stainless B 10 ext., wall: 0.6

steel tube:

Inner cup, stainless 25 ext., wall: 0.9

steel tube:

50 ext., wall: 3

Clear acrylic or glass

Thermally-resistive comparison mirror

(Note 3)

-18~ I

'

Cooled

mirror

0 8-10

' Rotatable

blackened

screen

258174

Notes 1. -

All lower parts polished. Main dimensions

of the cup

are

nickel-plated

and

in millimetres. form; details vary and arc

2. -

Base, cell, etc., shown in diagrammatic of seals, assembly methods, etc., may therefore omitted.

3. -

The thermally-resistive comparison mirror may bc formed by letting in a thin plate of stainless steel, or by thinning the brass outer cup, or by any suitable method. The resistive zone extends over about 90 of the cup circumference.

FIG. 8. -

Xlain features of de\v-point cell design. 36

IS 13072 : 1991 IEC Pub 376 ( 1971)

Gas cylinder

Flow Cylinder valve

meter

Fine control

valve J t -

Dew-point

cell

Outlet

line
259174

FIG. 9. - Arrangement for measurement of dew point.

37

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any from without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type of grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Revision of IndiansStandards Indian Standards are reviewedaperiodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on t-his Indian Standard may be sent in BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. ETD 03 ( 3246) Amenilments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters
:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah &far Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephone : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern
southern : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mare

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone { 331 331 01 13 75 31 37 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16 6 32 92~95

NEW DELHI 1~10001
: I/14, CIT.

Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktoia, CALCUTTA 700054 160036

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East )

Western Branches

BOMBAY 400093
: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRWANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at the Central Electric Press, Delhi-7 India

