IS:27341EM4
(Reaffirmed 2004) 9

Indian Standard CODE OF PRACTICE FOR. EQUINE HOUSING
UDC 728.94 : 636-1-1.083.1 AFDC 17 Ljvestock Housing Sectional Committee,
Chairman

Representing

DR. P. 5

BHATTACEARYA

Ministry of Food & Agriculture

.

Members

T. NARAYANAN ( Altcfnate to Dr. P. Bhattacharya) SHRIJ. P. J. BILI~IOBIA SHRIH. M. DALAYA
SHRI

Central Public Works Department KairinDirrct Co-operative Milk Producers' Union Ltd.,

DR. M. -K. SHAH( Alicrnatc ) Directorate of Military Farms, Army Headquarters COL R. C. DATTA In personal capacity ( &suer,East Wamfesh ) SHRI RAJE J. R. DEEIEMUKH Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar SHRI M. R. DHANDA DR. S. S. PRABW ( Alternate) Directorate of Animal Husbandry, Government of Madras , DIRECTOR DEPUTYDIRECTOR 0~ ANIMAL HUSBANDRY ( LIVESTOCK ) ( Alternate ) Dire;;;ct;;hof Animal Husbandry, Government of Uttar DIRECTOR ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (P) ( Alternate) DIRECTOR MAJ I. S. DUQUAL Dr&.~%;TA&r Rural Housing Wing, University of Roorkee, Roorkee Military Engineering Service, Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal In personal capacity ( Vasundhara, Jaipur ) National Buildings Organization, Ministry of Works & Housing Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd., Bombay Ministry of Works & Housing Directorate of Animal Husbandry, Government of Maharashtra In personal capacity ( JVasirpur Fawn, Patiala ) Director, IS1 ( &-o&o Member )
Secretary

' Da S N RAY ( Altemafti ) Srrar VI hi. KAK SRRI K. C. KAKU
SRRI V. S. KAMAT SHRIH. D. NARUOLWALA SERI K. N. VELAXKAR( Al&mate ) SHRIM. M. A. REHMA,N DR. P. D. LELE (Al&note) SHRISATWANT SIN~H DR. D. V KARMARKAR,. Deputy Director ( Agrr & Food )

I

SERI E. N. SUNDAR Extra AssistantDirector ( Agri & Food ), ISI

.

Equine Housirig Subcommittee, AFDC 17 : 5
Convener

SHRIM. M. A. REHB~AN
Members

\

Direcgshqf,a

Animal

Husbandry,

Government of

SHRI M. K. JADHAV LT-COLP. L. NE~I PROB.R. V. SATHE

Buildings and Communications Department, Government of Maharashtra Directorate of Remounts and Veterinary Services, Army Headquarters Education and Social Welfare Department, Government of Maharashtra

@ Copyright 1964 by INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARC

1

,

324 1964

IS:2734-1064 I

n&an

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EQUINE HOUSING
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 27 May 1964, after the draft finalized by the Livestock Housing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Horses still have an important role to play in spite of the continuously growing mechanization in the country and it is unlikely that they will horse racing is ever be ousted. Unquestionably, still acclaimed as a refined pasume, though it is confined to only a small proportion of the society. Apart from using horses for racing purpose, they are more widely used in the country for drawing So the need for stabling them will purposes. The sizes of animals found in different continue. parts of the country vary considerably and hence the ~dimensions of the stalls also would vary accordingly. Mules are also used in the country for doing heavy work such as carrying loads and drawing carriages. They are popular for the above purposes specially in the Defence Services. In this code, provision has been made for suitable housing facilities for equines, such as horses and mules in order to provide them with the necessary , comforts. 0.3 This code has been prepared with the intention to serve as a guide for the construction of various structures required for stabling horses. 0.4 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this code, it shall be taken as, a reference to the latest version of the standard. 0.5 Metric system has been adopted in India and all dimensions appearing in this code have been given in this system. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this code is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values ( Revised ). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE X.1 This code deals with the general layout and constructional details of stables, including stalls, loose boxes, paddocks and other ancillary structures relating to the housing of equines. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, ing definitions shall apply. 2.1 Brood breeding. 2.2 Colt Mare -A

22 Stall -A single animal. 2.10 Stallion -

partitioned

unit

for

housing

a

A horse kept for breeding.

2.11 Yearling-A young horse over one year but below two years of age.

the follow-\ 3. LAYOUT of

mare in the condition

A young male horse.

2.3 Equine-A term which means anything pertaining to horse ( derived from the Latin term Equinus, which means a family of single-hoofed animals, such as horse, mule, ass and zebra ).

I . 3.1 The general layout of the various structures mentioned in 1.1 shall be as given in Fig. 1. The layout of paddocks shall be generally as given in Fig. 3. The dimensions given are only approximate and would vary depending on the size of the stalls, loose boxes, etc. 4. SELECTION OF SITE

2.4 Foaling Box 7 A part of a. stable ( see 2.8 ) ' 4.0 The following points-shall be considered for where mares are kept for foaling purpose. the location of the site for a stable. 2.5 Filly 2.6 Gelding A young female horse. A castrated male horse. where animals are 4.1 The surroundings shall be healthy. 4.2 T-he clayey or loamy type of soil shall be avoided and gravelly or sandy soil shall be preferred. 4.3 Low lying areas shall be avoided. Flat and moderately elevated site shall be preferred. 2

2.7 Loose Box - A stable kept untied or loose. 2.8 Stable I A building confining equines.

consisting of stalls for

Is:273401964 4.4 The site shall be located at a reasonable distance from the residential areas. 4. The structures shall be so oriented that the ant mals are plrotected from severe draughts. A north-south orientation shall be preferred. 5. DESCRIPTION 5.1 Stalls-The stalls in the stables shall be arranged in a single or a double row depending upon the number of animals (see Fig. 1 and 2 which refer to typical stalls of 3 x 2.5 m size ). In the case of the double row system, the stalls shall be so constructed that the horses do not face each other. A passage of 1.5 to 2 m width shall be provided in the case of the single row system, while in the case of the double row system, the width of the passage shall be 2.5 to 3 m. 5.1.1 The dimensions of the stalls required to house animals of different sizes would vary. The floor area to be provided for each animal shall be as given in Table I. The height from the floor to the roof shall be at least 4 m in case of the flat roof and, if the roof is gabled, the height shall be at least 3 m from the floor level to the tie-beam.
TABLE I DIMENSIONS OF STALLS

manger shall be 750 mm from the floor level. The manger -may be portable or built-in-type. All the corners shall be well-rounded. 5.2 Loose Boxes -The loose boxes shall be of two sizes - with floor area 4 x 4 m and 4.5 x 4.5 m, and with a height of 3 m. The door shall be of 2 m height and shall consist of two horizontally swinging door leaves opening outside. The lower door leaf shall be 1.2 m high. There shall be separate types of loose boxes for (a) brood mares or foaling box, (b) colts and fillies and c ex ernal loose boxes for the isolation of sick !1m&. The floor space of ,this type of loose box shall be 5 x 5 m. There shall be a peeping hole in the door of the box to keep the mare under observation without being disturbed. The box shall be used to keep the mare and colt for two or three days after foaling. The other details shall be as given in 5.2.
Box -

5.2.1

Loose Box for

Brood

Mares

or

Foaling

5.2.2. Loose Box for Colts and Fillies - The floor space of this type of loose box shall be 4 x 4 m. The box shall be used to keep colts and fillies until they are four to seven months old. The other details shall be as given in 5.2. The box shall accommodate not more than three yearlings. 5.2.3 External Loose Box - The dimensions and other details shall Abeas given in 5.2. 6. CONSTRUCTIONAL DETAILS STALL AND LOOSE BOX OF

SIZE OF ANIMAL

DIMENSIONS

(1)
Small Average Large

(2)
3.0.x 2.5 m 3-5 X 3.0 m 4.0 X 3.5 m

5.1.2 Stall Division - There shall be stall divisions or partitions to separate one stall from the other ( see Fig. 1 and 2 ). The partitions shall be of hardwood of sufficient strength, or of reinforced concrete or of brickwork [ see IS : 456-1957 Code of Practice for Plain and Reinforced ConCrete forGenera Building Construction ( Revised) and IS : 22 12-1962 Code of Practice for Brickwork 1. In case of the wooden partition, a gap of at least 150 mm, between the bottom of the partition and the floor level, shall be provided. 5.1.3 Manger - The manger may be in three parts for providing grain and mother seeds, hay and water to the animals. The water trough may also form a separate unit. The manger shall have a wide thick top of chin rest made of reinforced concrete to avoid crib-biting. The hay rack of the manger may be of either mild steel bars or wooden poles. The ends of these bars or poles shall be suitably fixed to the wide thick top of the manger and their opposite ends to the walls. The hay rack shall be at a level lower than the animals' heads and not above. The dimensions of the manger shall be 450 mm wide at the top, 220 mm wide at the bottom, 750 mm long and 300 mm deep. The bottom of the 3

flooring shall be of moorum, 6.1 Floor -The brick-on-edge over concrete bedding or cement A slope of at least 1 in 80 shall be concrete. provided for the floor and the slope shall be directed towards the drain. The plinth shall project zt least 300 mm. A ramp with a slope of at least 1 in 50 shall be provided at the entrance to the passage ( see Fig. 2 ). 6.1.1 Moorum Flooring - The moorum flooring shall be constructed over a sub-base of thickness about 15 to 20 cm of rubble packing or broken bricks, wetted and well-rammed. _A 150-mm layer of hard m.oorum shall be spread over this sub-base with coarser particles at .-the bottom and finer at the top. A layer of powdery or flaky variety of moorum about 25 to 40 mm thick Water shall be spread over the top of this layer. shall then be sprinkled freely and the surface shall be well-rammed. The water shall again be sprinkled until the floor is fully saturated and a thin film of about 6 mm water is formed at the top. The surface shall be trampled under the feet and levelled until the cream of moorum rises to the top. The floor shall be left in this condition for 12 hours and thereafter for three days the floor shall be well-rammed at an interval of 12 hours ( during mornings and-evenings ) with A thick paste of cowdutig flat wooden rammers. shall be spread and it shall be rammed at an

IS:2734-1964

interval of 24 hours ( during mornings ) for two days. A final thin coating of a mixture of cowdung ( four parts ) and cement ( one part ) shall be applied after the floor has dried up and wiped clean to prevent cracking and peeling. This mixture of cowdung and cement shall be applied weekly or fortnightly to keep the floor in good condition. 6.1.2 Brick-on-Edge Flooring - The sub-base for this type of flooring shall be of rubbles or brick-bats, handpacked and watered, and shall be well-rammed to a thickness of about 150 to 225 mm. A layer of cement concrete (-1 : 4 : 8 ), 75 to 150 mm thick, shall be spread over the sub-base. Thoroughly wetted bricks shall then be laid on edge with cement mortar over the sub-base. The quality of bricks shall conform to Class I bricks as given in IS : 1077-1957 Specification for Common Burnt Clay Building Bricks. The thickness of the joints shall be not more than 10 mm. The joints shall be flush pointed with cement mortar. The whole surface shall be cured with water for three weeks. The bricks shall be laid in rows having the joints parallel and at right angles to the walls or in ' herring-.bone ' pattern. 6.1.3 Cement Concrete Flooring - The cement concrete flooring shall consist of 40 mm thick cement concrete ( 1 : 2 : 4 ) laid over a suitable sub-base. The sub-base shall be of rubble or brick-bats handpacked, watered and well-rammed to a thickness of about 150 to 200 mm. A layer of lime concrete or cement concrete ( 1 : 4: 8 ), 100 to 150 mm thick, shall then be laid. The coarse aggregate for the cement concrete shall be graded to the minimum size 12 mm. The sub-base shall be watered and the concrete shall be laid over the sub-base in sections of one square metre. The concrete shall then be spread and beaten with wooden beaters until the cement slurry rises to the surface which shall then be finished with wooden trowels. The surface shall then be cured for 21 days with water. 6.2 Walls -The walls shall be of either rubble ' masonry, brick masonry or timber. 6.2.1 Rubble Masonry - The inside of the walls shall be plastered at least to a height of 2 m, if such type of walls -are provided. Unplastered surfaces shall be cement pointed. 6.2.2 Brick Masonry-The external walls shall -be 200 thickness of the mm and pilasters

each of 400 mm thickness shall be provided to support the roof. 6.2.3 Timber Walling-This type of walling may be used for internal partitions of the stables ( walls ) and the walls of the loose boxes and shall be non-load bearing. 6.3 Roof - The roof may be of RCC, Mangalore tiles, country tiles, or of corrugated galvanized steel sheets. The roof shall be gabled, if the stables are arranged in double row or it shall be made lean-to-type, if the stables are arranged in a single row (see Fig. 2 ). A layer of suitable insulating material shall be provided on the top, if the roofing is of corrugated galvanized steel sheets. floors shall be sloped to 6.4 Drainage -All provide effective drainage. The cement concrete floor may be grooved to facilitate drainage. At the entrance of the stable there shall be a halfround channel of at least 150 mm diameter which shall have a slope of at least 1 in 40. The channel shall partly be covered at the end of the stable. The channel shall lead to inspection chambers at the ends of the stables. The sullage water shall lead to soak pits. Rain-water gutters and pipes may be provided and-the rainwater may be discharged into some natural drainage course. 6.5 Ventilators - The inlet of the air shall be controlled by gratings which shall be suitably placed. For each stall one ventilator with tophinge adjustable shutters shall be provided 2 m above the floor level to give adequate cross ventilation and draught. The size of` the ventilator shall be 750 x 500 mm. The ventilators of the foaling box shall be covered with fly-proof wire netting. 7. PADDOCKS 7.1 Paddocks ( see Fig. 3 ) shall be provided for horses, geldings, pregnant and empty mares, stallions, yearlings, colts and fillies, in order to provide them with fresh air and natural environment. Food and water troughs shall be provided in each paddock. Each paddock shall be separated from the other by wooden fencing and the width of the pathway ( lane ) in between paddocks shall be not more than 4 m. Hay and straw stores, implement store, veterinary centre, guard room and dispensary, shall be in the vicinity of paddocks ( see Fig. 3 ). ,

'

.

`>PARTlTlONS

STALLS 3X24m EACH RAMP STALLS 3 X 2*im EACH 3m WIDE PASSAGE T

tr

X T 2

\

T

PARTITION

PARTITION

\

SECTION

XX

PARTITION

-

SECTION
16 UNIT OF INDEPENDENT

YY

SECTION

ZZ
iz .. 3 rp I

IA UNIT OF 24 HORSES WITH BACK TO BACK STALLS AND PASSAGE ON BOTH SIDES

24 HORSES WITH STALLS FNO PASSAGE

1C UNIT OF 24 HORSES STALL WITH COMMON CENTRAL PASSAGE

FIG. 1 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF STALL* FOR EQUINE HOUSINO (24

ANIMALS)

5t %

SECTION SECTION ZA E&K XX 510~5

YV

TO BACK STALLS WITH 14 in WIDE PASSAGE ON G~H

28 INDEPENDENT HORSE STALLS WITH 1*8m WIDE PASSAGE

FIG. 2

DETAILS OF TYPICAL STALLS FOR EQUINE HOUSINQ

,

i_________`__________-_

I

I
1

3 STALLIONS-

i
MENIAL STAFF

LAYATORY

BLOCK/

CENTRE

,

-hiI

d

MENIAL

STAFF

`

HORSES 60

OR GELDINGS X 60

r-l
C HORSES OR GELDINGS 60 X 60 HA" AND STRAW STORE 5 YEARLINGS 60 X 75

L COLTS

OR FILLIES 26.5 X &5

4 COLTS OR

FILLIES 26.5 X 55 C PREGNANT 60 MARES 6 PREGNANT 60 -IMPLEMENTS STORE MARES X 60 X 60

3.5 LANE oc) FbOD TROUGH

1 STALLION

60 X 27

WATER TROUGH

6 EMPTY 60 6;EARLINGS 60 X 90

MARES

6 EMPTY 60 i

MARES 60

X 60

I STALLION 26.5 x L5

All dimensions in metres. FIG. 3 TYPICAL LAYOUT OR PADDOCKS FOR EQUINE HOUSINQ ( 50 ANIMALS )

PUBLICATIONS _

OF INDIAN
INDIAN

STANDARDS INSTITUTION

STANDARDS
classified under the following main heads, have

been

Over 2600 Indian issued so far:

Standards,

broadly

Agriculture Buildin~g Chemical Consumer
Of foltowing these, the categories: Feeds

& Food

Electrotechnical Mechanical Engineering Structural & Metals

Products
standards belonging to the

Textile.
Agriculture Food & Colours Handling and Storage and By-Products Food Group fall under the

Animal

Baking Aids Bee-Keeping Biscuits Cereal Cocoa Dairy Dairy Dairy Dairy Edible Equipment and Confectionery Products Products Equipment Industry, Laboratory Products Starch and Starchy Prod'ucts Products and Machinery Methods of Test Apparatus

Fpod Grain iioney Infant Foods

Meat and Meat Products Pest Control Pesticidal Pesticides Regulated Starch Tobacco Market Yards Spices and Condiments Derived Products Sugars and By-Products Products Equipment Formulations

Farm Implements Fish and Fishery

/
IS.1 Bulletin ( Published

OTHER j
... ... )

PUBLICATIONS

.

Rs

Every Month') Copy Subscription

Single Annual Annual Reports

.. . ... ...

... ... .. .

2-00 IS+? 2.00 to 3.00 each

( from

1948-49 Onwards

Available

from: IN6lAN STANDARDS Headquarters INSl1TUTION

.

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar
Phones

Marg. New

Delhi

I

:

273611-18 Branch Grams

Grams Offices

:

Manaksanstha

:

Monaksanstha Bombay Calcutta Kanpu r I I3 2 Phone 9, 9, .t 262945 23-1823 37695 87278

232 Dr. II l4/69

Dadabhoy Street Lines Patters

Naoroji

Road

Sooterkin Civil

64 General

Road

Madras

