IS 15646 (Patt 1) :2006

wF?rMmi'm-

T@Mfaditiym mm TmTwl-m
m
1

wfifi

Indian Standard MEASUREMENT OF FREE SURFACE FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS
PART 1 METHODS

Ics 17.120.20

0 BIS 2006

B-U REAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

ST AN

DA-RDS
MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

ZAFAR

March 2006

Price Group 2

Hydrometry Sectional Committee, WRD 01

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, afler the draft finalized by the Hydrometry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. The measurement of fluid flow and level in partially filled closed conduits poses particularly difficult problems and is not filly documented. An attempt has been made in this standard to give guidance to users on the existing methods employed and on recent developments in this field. The measurement of flee surface flow in closed conduits is analogous to normal gauging in open channels, and thus open channel gauging techniques may be applied to fi-eesurface flows in closed conduits. Closed conduits may be classified as: a) Sanitary, where only domestic and industrial waste are conveyed in the conduit; b) Storm, where, following a rainstorm, run-off from impermeable areas is conveyed to the nearest watercourse; c) Combined, where both domestic and industrial waste together with storm run-off are contained in one conduit; and d) Culvert, where the water course is conveyed under a road, railway, etc. The purpose of closed conduit systems types (a), (b) and (c) is to remove waste water tlom urban areas to a site where treatment (mechanical, chemical and/or biological) can be undertaken. The cheapest way of conveying effluents in a conduit is by laying the conduit so that it follows the natural topography, while providing sufficient gradient so that effluents will not stagnate but will flow under gravity. In very flat areas, conduits may have to be laid at greater depths to attain a sufficient hydraulic gradient to avoid frequent pumping. At times of intense rainfall, systems of type (b) may run full, and under such circumstances, overflow system be constructed so that excess water is conveyed to the nearest water course or storage areas to avoid surface flooding. Conduits may be constructed as closed or open, and maybe made of various materials, such as, vitreous clayware, concrete, asbestos cement, cast iron, brick and, more recently, plastic and resin-bonded materials. They may range in diameter from 1-50mm onwards, and it is rare to have diameter longer than 3.m for the conduits. Effluents carry floating and suspended solids, and may, at times be corrosive in nature. In addition, the atmosphere within the closed conduit system may contain both inflammable and corrosive gases. Thus the environment within the closed conduit system may be described as hostile. A flow-meter will have to operate in these hostile conditions over a wide range of flows, from free surface open channel flow to conduit full pressure flow. The nature of urban drainage is such that steady flow conditions are rare, except near the outfall from large catchment areas, where flow attenuation has -occurred. Non-uniform flow also occurs as a result of bends, junctions and displaced joints. The access to any closed conduit system is limited -to-the outfall or to specially built access points (that is manholes). Manholes are constructed at regular intervals and at points where the conduit changes in direction or gradient or at a junction. The manhole points are hydraulically not suitable for discharge measurement. Within the channel at a manhole, an additional difficulty may be encountered when the depth of flow is more than half the diameter, as working space is required to be provided for workmen to stand within the manhole. It is recommended that in deep conduits, a platform or gallery be constructed at vertical intervals of 10 m from the poin[ of view of safe climbing up or going down in the manhole. The sensing and recording elements must be capable of withstanding inundation.

(Continued

on third cover)

M 15646 (Part 1) :2006

Indian Standard MEASUREMENT OF FREE SURFACE FLOW IN CLOSED CONDUITS
PART
1 SCOPE

1 METHODS 4 METHODS OF-FLOW MEASUREMENT There are.two basic types of flow measurements, known as direct measurement and indirect measurement. 4.1 Direct Measurement A direct measurement is one in which the flow is determined from measurements of various flow components, that is, it is not inferred. The methods available for direct measurement -are volumetric and dilution gauging. 4.1.1 Volumetric Method
4.1.1.1

This standard (Part 1) provides the methods of flow measurements that can be empl yed in closed conduits flowing under partial and fulT flow conditions and details the advantages and disadvantages of the various methods. 2 REFERENCE The following standard contains provisions, which through reference in this text, constitutes provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 1SNo.
1191:2003 Title

A tank of known volume is taken and all the flow is directed into this tank. The time for the tank to fill is recorded and the average flow is calculated accordingly. This method is usually not practical in an underground system. 4.1.1.2 In a system where a sump or wet-well has,been constructed and a pump is available to draw from the sump, the flow can be measured by: a) b) calculating the depthholume relationship of the sump, and measuring the water level (using a level recorder) in the wet-well at discrete time intervals.

Hydrometric determinations Vocabulary and symbols

--

3 DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this standard, definitions given in IS 1191 and the following shall apply. 3.1 Permanent Flow-Meter -- Flow-meter installed for along period of time (more than 12 months) and used to measure flow continuously or at discrete time intervals.
NOTES 1 The high costs incurred in the installation of these flowmeters may be accepted as they are to operate over a long period of time. .2 The measurements made maybe stored in an archive system and used to examine present trends to forecast future trends and to determine daily operational requirements.

4.1.1.3 [n a drainage system where, during a storm, the pumps are working continuously, the discharge can be measured by:

a) b)

monitoring the level in the wet-well, and monitoring the discharge of pumps under operation.

3.2 Temporary Flow-Meter -- Flow-meter installed for a specific period of time (less than 12 months) and used to measure flow continuously or at discrete time intervals.
NOTE -- The installation of the meter needs to be simple with minimal or rToassociated civil work.

4.-1.1.4 Discharge through a pump or a combination of pumps shall be calibrated by independent fieldtests that is by monitoring the time it takes to empty the sump. The volumetric method has the following advantages and disadvantages: a)
Advantages:

3.3 Portable Flow-Meter -- Flow-meters that are used to obtain instantaneous measurements of flow, or the velocity and depth components thereof. 1

1) Flow is measured directly, 2) Instrumentation can be powered by an electrical supply main, and 3) Sensing can be by remote methods.

IS 15646 .(Part 1) :2006

b)

Disadvantages:

1) Measurements may be erroneous in drainage systems with large sediment andtor sludge contents, as the volume of the sump gets reduced as they get deposited at the bottom. 2) Sediment can also reduce the rate of discharge of the pumps. 4.1.2 Dilution Gauging Standard dilution gauging techniques, either constantrate injection or integration method can be employed. Dilution gauging is best suited to measure instantaneous flow or at best average flow over a short period (usually less than 1 h), although it is possible to take measurements over a long period of time (that is days) if suitable devices for injection and analysis are available (for example, radioactive tracers). The following points shall be kept in view while employing dilution gauging techniques: a) b) it is necessary to obtain a sut%cient degree of mixing at the sampling site, and it is important that a tracer is chosen which is not absorbed and which does not react with the liquid-that is being measured.

does not excessively obstruct the flow. In this case also, the rating curve is depended on the slope and roughness of the conduit. The trapezoidal weir can measure lower depths and smaller flows more accurately than the vertical slot weir. This type of weir is most suited for use in large diameter conduits where there is no surgingl surcharging.

L---J
AHdimensions in metres. FIG.

1 VERTICAL SLOTWEIR

4.2 Endirect Measurement
All dimensions in metres.

An indirect measurement is one in which flow is derived from measurements of various flow components. Slope-area and area-velocity techniques are generally employed for indirect measurements of discharge. Hydraulic structures like weirs and flumes are also used for this purpose. 4.2.1 Flumes and Weirs In closed conduits where the liquid contains a high proportion of solid materials and where pressure as well as fi-eesurface flow conditions occur, conventional flumes and weirs cannot be used. Therefore, special devices, designed and built to work under such conditions, have to be employed. These are described in 4.2.1.1 to 4.2.1.6. 4.2.1.1 Vertical slot weir This weir as shown in Fig. 1, allows solid materials to pass through the installation. The rating curve of the vertical slot weir depends on the slope and roughness of the conduit. This will be all the more relevant during low flows throwgh weirs with wide slots. Vertical slot weir is most suited for use in large diameter conduits,when there is free surface flow only.

FIG. 2 TRAPEZOIDAL WEIR

4.2,1.3 USgeological Fig. 3).

survey meter (USGS meter) (see

Since drainage systems frequently become surcharged, a device wlich can measure flows under both free surface and pressure flow conditions is necessary; the US geological survey meter is such a device. Under free surface flow conditions, the meter acts as a.flume and offers the reliability and accuracy of a flume. The accuracy, however, has to be traded off against constriction of the conduit, that is the greater the constriction, the better the accuracy. For pressure flow conditions, the meter operates as a nozzle and flow is determined by measuring the pressure upstream and downstream of the nozzle through piezometers.
Pienmeter teps `Thmetwee

Q b.lm m -d

4.2.1.2 Trapezoidal

weir (see Fig. 2)

o
sideview "Throet WOee-mction
FIG. 3 US GEOLOGICAL SURVEY .SEWXR FLOW-METER

This weir timctions in the same way as the vertical slot weir in that it allows the passage of solid materials and 2

IS 15646 (Part .1) :2006 4.2.1.4 University of illinois meter (UI) (see Fig. 4) 4.2.2 Slope Area Method

This meter is similar in performance to the USGS meter and measures flow under both tiee surface and pressure flow conditions in an identical way. The transition from free surface to pressure flow, however, is not as smooth for this meter as for the USGS meter owing to the shape of the constriction in the conduit sofflt.

In the slope area method, the flow level is measured using constriction devices such as flumes and weirs but, in addition, a level sensor which measures the depth of flow can be used to calculate the discharge in conjunction with the conduit roughness and gradient. The two most commonly used formulae are given below. 4.2.2.1 Manning formula

Crii"ml xbn

Thmm crc.ss-section

o

where ~ = ma~ing ~gosity coefficient,
R~= hydraulic radius, S = energy gradient, and ~ = mean velocity. The level measurement is best achieved by using small non-mechanical devices such as bubblers, pressure transducers, resistancelcapacitance and acoustic sensors. The environment within the conduit may be too corrosive for the use of mechanical devices. The energy gradient is assumed to be equivalent to the conduit gradient, but two level sensors may be used to measure both depth and energy gradient; the unsteady state conditions for free surface flow, however, make the measurement of the energy gradient difficult. Flow is calculated by multiplying the cross-sectional area of the conduit by the mean velocity.

FIG. 4. UNIVERSITY OFILLINOIS SEWER FLOW-METER

4.2.1.5

Parshallflume

(see Fig. 5)

The critical-depth or venturi flume has been developed in many different forms. One of the more popular designs is the Parshall flume, originally developed in 1920 for irrigation channels. For this device the head/ discharge relationship independent on the throat width. Again, this device is most suited for large diameter conduits.
COnvwging Throat MaiOn Dlwrglng section

m .a.

m

4.2.2.2 Colebrook-white
l,3b t
I 0,61

formula

0,91 i
Wmw Wrface

i+~ where

(

-- 14.8R~+ R~y32gR#

k

1.255

)

All dimensions in metres FLUME FIG. 5 PARSHALL

4.2.1.6

Palmer-Bowlusflume

(see Fig. 6)

Another critical-depth flume, the Palmer-Bowlus flume, has recently been tested for sloping conduits. It exhibits a successful head/discharge calibration for both sub-critical and supercritical free surface now. Modifications to the flume design are recommended to improve the head/discharge relationship in the transition zone horn free surface to pressure flow.

g = acceleration due to gravity, k = roughness height, R~ = hydraulic radius, S = energy gradient, v = mean velocity, and y = kinematic viscosity of the fluid. The main advantage in using this formula is that only the fluid level has to be measured. However, several disadvantages exist as follows: a) Hydraulic conditions must be ideal (that is no bends or junctions) and the energy and conduit gradient must be identical, unless two level sensors are employed in upstream and downstream reaches; b) Roughness value has to be assumed; and c) It is not possibie to measure surcharge flow unless two level monitors in adjacent manholes are employed to determine the energy gradient.

Wme7

t `:=%
Cdtiil

['-"
----

i

l'hfwt aedul

F)q

Throat
mm -*m

= J
3

FIG. 6 PALMER-B� WLUS FLUME

IS 15646 (Part 1) :2006

Until now, the slope area method has been the method most widely used but the velocity area method is becoming increasingly popular. 4.2.3 Velocity Area Method The need to assess the hydraulic performance of a drainage system has led-to the use of the velucity area method, where the velocity and the depth of flow are measured. This enables the.flow to be calculated when surcharge occurs without having to use two level sensors some distance apart. 4.2.3.1 Electromagnetic
method

and downstream is recorded. The velocity is calculated using the formula: ~. where L = acoustic path length from A to B, t ~A= downstream night path time, t *B= upstream flight path time, ~ = line velocity, and O = angle between the direction of flow and the acoustic path. In this method the mean velocity is inferred ftom a line velocity this is a disadvantage, but the uncertainty is reduced, when more than one acoustic path is used. 4.2.3.2,2 The second method uses a Doppler velocity meter to measure the velocity. The meter is mounted in a streamlined housing on a metal band or ring and positioned in the conduit invert. The acoustic signal transmitted by the meter is reflected by air in suspension and particulate matter and returned to the sensor at a different frequency (Doppler effect). The shitl in frequency between the signal transmitted and that received is proportional to the liquid velocity. The advantage of this method is that velocity is measured in the flow away from the sensor head, and thus, the effect of the size and shape of the sensor ,,. on the measured velocity is minimized. The disadvantages are that it does not measure mean velocity and it is dependent on the presence of air and particulate matter for its correct operation. 4.2.4 Other Methods Other flow measuring techniques tested in conduits but found to be either too expensive or impractical are the following: a) b) Optical flow-meter, Vibrating-mass flow-meter, c) Thermal-wave flow-meter, d) Steam-pulse flow-meter, e) `Passive' flow-meter, f) Rotating-type flow-meter, and g) Hot-wire and hot-film flow-meters. --L 2 cOse 11 ----
()
tBA tAB

This method as shown in Fig. 7, allows direct measurement of the mean velocity. The principle of measurement is based on Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction where the average velocity of the liquid moving through a magnetic field is proportional to the electromotive force generated between two electrodes. Normally, the coil is mounted above the conduit where there is easy access, that is in the manhole. The electrodes which sense the electromotive force should be housed in a preformed insulated pipe section that can be positioned in the manhole/pipe configuration. The depth of fluid is measured using a bubbler, an acoustic sensor or a pressure transducer sensor. The advantage of this method is that it gives a direct measurement of the mean velocity. An alternative arrangement is to place the coil inside and the electrodes on the surface of a small streamlined sensor. The sensor is fastened to a metal band or ring which is in turn positioned in the flow, normally with the sensor in the invert of the conduit. The disadvantage of this arrangement is that the measured velocity has to be related to the mean velocity for different depths of flow. Again, depth measurement is carried out in order to calculate the cross-sectional area of flow and hence the flow.
Fieldcoil

5 UNCERTAINTIES
FIG. 7 ELECTROMAGNETIC FLOW-METER

4.2.3.2 Acoustic method Two methods are available. In both these methods, the fluid level is measured to enable the flow to be calculated.
4.2.3.2.1

In the time-of-flight method, the time it takes for sound pulses to be transmitted diagonally upstream 4

Sensors can measure level and velocity to a better accuracy but the inaccuracies present in measuring the cross-sectional areas of old brick or irregular-sha~ed conduits may be large. In addition, steep gradients, nonuniform flow and unsteady flow conditions increase the uncertainty in the calculation of discharge. However, it is necessary that measurement uncertain~es are kept within +10 percent.

(Continuedfrom

second cover)

In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO/TR 9824-1:1990 `Measurement of free surface flow in closed conduits -- Part 1: Methods'. The other standard in this series is IS 15646 (Part 2): 2006 `Measurement of free surface flow in closed conduits: Part 2 Equipment'. The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The"number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

,,, ,

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
-Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 1 (356).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected
.,, ,

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone ~ 23237617 ~ 23233841 23378499,23378361 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, NewDelhi-2

