( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Is/: 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR CO-ORDINATION OF DIMENSIONS IN SHIPBUILDING
PART I PRINCIPLES OF DIMENSIONAL CO-ORDINATION
Sectional Committee, MCPD 1

Shipbuilding
Chairman SHRI S. PARMANANDHAN Members

Representing Ministry of Defence ( NHQ )

CHIEF MECHANICAL ENGINEER Indian Ports Association, New Delhi CALCUTTAPORT TRUST CHIEF MECHANICALENGINEER BOMBAYPORT TRUST ( illlernate ) SHRI V. G. DAMLE AFCO Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. D. PARALKAR ( Alternate ) SHRI V. G. DAMLE Institute of Marine Technologists, Bombay Sum A. T. ,JOSEPR( Alternnte ) SHRI I. N. PRADHAN ( Altmmte) SHRI R. S. SACIIIXV ( Alternote ) DESIGNMANAGER Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd, Calcutta DIRECTOR OF NAVAL CONSTRUC- Ministry of Defence ( NHQ) TION SHRI V. P. GOYAL Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI SUUAKSHAN KUMAR ( Alternote ) SI3RI D. B. IRAN1 Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay SIIRIJ. S. BHATTI ( Alternate ) SHRI G. K. KURIYAN Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Cochin .JOINT FISI~RWS SCIENTIST ( Alternute ) CDR N. A. MULLERWORTH Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT CDR MEHR SINCH ( dlternate ) SHRI I. N. PRADIIAN Indian National Shipowners' Association, Bombay PRESIDENT Institute of Marine Engineers, Bombay SHRI P. C. KUMAR ( Alternate ) SHRI II. K. KAUL ( Alternnte ) SIZRI K. S. MANI ( Alternate ) SIIRI R. K. MEI~ROTRA( Alternnt~ ) CAPT P. MLJKUNDAN ( Alternnte ) Ericson & Richards, Bombay SARI T. S. RAJAN Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI H. S. RAO ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyrighr STANDARDS 1978 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1

IrS: 87i2 ( Part I ) - 1978
( Con~iauedfrom @age 1 )
Representing Members ~ Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRIR. RATRA SHRI D. MADHOK (Alternate) Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay CAPTD.S.RUPA SHRIS.SUNDARAM (Alternate) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRIR.SARANCARAJAN

.SHRIB.R.SAWARKAR SHRI P. R. GOVIL (Alternate ) SHRIS. G.SCHAEFFER SHRI K. SHARMA (Alternate) SHRI D.S. SHETH SHRI M. G. KUTTY (Alternate ) SHRIG. SINHA SHRIH.SVENSSON(Alternate) SHRI T.N. SUJAN SHRIA.S.THAKUR SHRI S.RAGHAVAN (Alternate) SHRI P. S. DAS,
Director ( MCPD ) (Secretary )

New Delhi Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin American Hindustan

Bureau of Shipping, Shipyard

Bombay

Ltd, Visakhapatnam

SF India Ltd, Calcutta Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay Ministry of Shipping & Transport, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio New Delhi

Member )

18: 8712( Part 1) - i97d

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES ~FOR CO-ORDINATION DIMENSIONS IN SHIPBUILDING
PART I PRINCIPLES OF DIMENSIONAL CO-ORDINATION

OF

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1978, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 The rationalization of traditional shipbuilding methods and the increasing use of prefabricated assemblies necessitates the utilization of standardized components wherever possible. In the outfitting of ships, in order to achieve the maximum benefit from the use of these components a systematic design method, applying both to the components and the spaces within which they are used, must be adopted which will give a common basis for layout, production and assembly. 0.3 Dimensional co-ordination is a system of applying a range of related dimensions to the sizing of components and assemblies and the structures incorporating them. This method of standardizing sizes or dimensions, which are not necessarily related to particular components, materials or manufacturing processes, permits its application to the widest possible range of components and assemblies, and will give the following advantages: a) The maximum economy variety reduction; in the production of components by

b) The reduction in the manufacture

of non-standard units; on site by and

c) The avoidance of wastage in cutting components achieving maximum flexibility in assembly; and d) The interchangeability of components flexibility for designers. giving

more choice

0.4 Modular co-ordination is a particular form of dimensional coordination in which the range of related dimensions is restricted by utilizing a standard step or module, the size of which is selected in order to satisfy 3

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978
the following requirements:

It should be sufficiently small to give multiples which satisfy the sizes required for the various components in shipboard use and provide suitable increments to minimize alterations to existing sizes; It should be sufficiently large to achieve an effective simplification to the existing number of sizes; measure of

For case of application, it should be expressed as a whole number bearing a simple relationship to existiisg systems of measurement; and It should be selected to give the widest possible agreement any national or international standards for dimensional ordination in shipbuilding or for related components. with co-

0.5 The advantages of dimensional and modular co-ordination have been internationally recognized for many years and an international standard has been agreed for the increments or modules to be used in the construction industry. 0.6 The ultimate aim in publishing recommendations for dimensional coordination is the establishment of standardized ranges of sizes for components, and in order to achieve the maximum utilization of these components it is necessary to establish a comprehensive system which will form a framework for sizing, positioning and assembling co-ordinatcd components. 0.7 In shipbuilding the main advantages in utilizing co-ordinated components occur m the accommodation areas where repetitive components are used which are common to the other industries operating dimensional co-ordination. 0.8 This standard on dimensional co-ordination The other parts are: issued in four parts. Part II Part III Part IV Glossary Controlling of terms sizes dimensions Co-ordinating in shipbuilding is being

0.9 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO/3827/1 Shipbuilding-Co-ordination of dimensions in ships' accommodation-Part I Principles of dimensional co-ordination' issued by the International Organization for Standardization.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard ( Part I ) sets out the basic 4 principles of dimensionzl

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978
co-ordination, with particular in ships' accommodation. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this ( Part II )-1978* shall apply. 3. BASIS OF DIMENSIONAL standard, the definitions given in IS: 8712 reference to the co-ordination of dimensions

CO-ORDINATION

3.1 Dimensional Framework - In order to ensure that dimensionally co-ordinated components or assemblies of components fit the spaces allocated to them, a dimensional framework, or reference system, is employed which is common to both. 3.1.1 Modular Grids - The dimensional framework is represented by a grid, in which the grid lines are spaced in multiples of the standard modules, or increments of size, and the grid lines indicate the boundaries for the component and the space allocated to it. The use of a grid on drawing is an aid in locating components and in reading the drawings; as such it is a tool for communication.

3.2 Modular Components -The size of components should be coordinated in accordance with the preferences given in Tables 1 and 2. A component having a co-ordinating size derived from these preferences is a modular component.
*Guidelines for co-ordination of dimensions in shipbuilding 5

: Part II Glossary of terms.

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978
TABLE 1 STANDARD MODULES

FIRSTPREFERENCE SECONDPREFERENCE THIRD PREFERENCE

I

300

1

100

I

50

I

TABLE

2

CO.ORDINATING

SIZES

PREFERENCE FIRST PREFERENCE ECOND PREFERENCI El THIRD
_.--

50 100 200 300 400 150 250 350 450 500 600

1
-

I 4

6

IS:8712(PartI)-1978 3.2.1 The co-ordinating size of a component is equivalent to the size of co-ordinating space allocated to it. Both include the work size of the component plus an allowance for its joints and tolerances.

NOTE - In the accompanying sketches certain different spaces and sizes. These conventions are: Reference lines Normally

conventions

are used to identify

indicated

as a continuous line.

Centre and axial lines

Are normally also reference lines but are indicated as a thin chain line.

Controlling

lines

Indicated by a circle reference line.

at the end of a 0

Controlling

dimensions

Represented

by an enclosed arrow.

Co-ordinating

space and size

Represented

by an open arrow-head.

Work size

Indicated

by a solid arrow head.

7

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978 4. CONTROLLING REFERENCE SYSTEM

4.1 In establishing dimensional framework, or reference system, which can be related to both dimensionally co-ordinated components and the structure incorporating them, it is essential to establish certain controls over the The initral control is based principal dimensions of the reference system. on the use of the standard modules given in Table 1 but in order to reduce the considerable number of permutations possible with these modules, further controls are necessary.
4.1.1 Certain known datum lines, which are related to user requirements, can be identified within the structure and the structure can be divided by these datum lines into a number of spaces. Some of these spaces are termed ` usable spaces `, for example cabin interiors, and other termed ` zones ' are the spaces surrounding the usable space and are These terms arc describcdlater in allocated to the structure or services. this clause. The principal dimensions of these zones and spaces can be standardized to give a limited range of sizes, which are multiples of the standard modules, but achieve a considerable degree of variety reduction, These dimensions are therefore in relation to particular components. termed ` controlling dimensions `. The identified datum lines which define the zones and usable spaces are termed `controlling lines ' and in threedimensional considerations the planes which these lines represent on plans, sections and elevations are termed ` key reference planes `. The entire ~framework of planes, zones and dimensions is described as the ' controlling reference system `. 4.2

Lines and Planes

4.2.1 Controlling Lines - Lines representing a key reference planes. Controlling lines are the identifiable datum lines which indicate the main structural items such as deck levels, ceiling levels, bulkheads, etc.
00
I

-0 -0

-0

8

IS : 8712 ( Part I) - 1978 Planes - Reference planes which define the 4.2.2 Key Reference boundaries of controlling zones or the axes of bulkhead, deckhead etc. These arc the three dimensional planes represented by the controlling lines on planes, and elevations. 4.2.2.1 Vertical key reference planes -These are the planes the finished surfaces of bulkheads, linings, casings, etc. relating to

4.2.2.2 Horizontal key reference planes - These are the planes relating finished horizontal surfaces such as floor, deck, ceiling, etc. 3 1 I

to

4.3 Zones and Spaces-The effect of delineating the key reference plan-s on the structure is to divide it into a number of zones and usable When the principal dimensions of these zones and spaces are space;. standardized a controlling reference system is achieved which shall accept modular components.

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978 4.3.1 Controlling <oneA zone between key reference planes provided for a deck, deckhead, bulkhead or lining. This is a space having It standardized dimensions, which is allocated to a part of the structure. In may be occupied, hut not always filled, by one or more components. principle, finishes should be contained with the zone.

4.3.2 Usable S'ace -The space between controlling zones in which human or mechanical activity takes place. Vertical usable spaces -are bounded by finished Boor and ceiling planes and horizontally they are the spaces between bulkheads or linings. 97 0

I

I

I

3

_.... ---_ tl4.3.3 Controlling Dimensions - Dimensions between key reference planes, for example deck to ceiling height, and width of controlling zones. These are the standardized principal dimensions of zones and spaces and are expressed as a selection from the range of multiples of standard modules. The controlling dimensions will be covered in a separate Indian Standard on dimensional co-ordination in shipbuilding. 10

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978

5. CONTROL

BOUNDARY

AND AXIAL

CONTROLLING

LINES

5.1 In applying the controlling reference system to a design, there are two methods for locating the controlling lines in relation to the structural or subdivision zones. 5.1.1
Controlling Lines on the Boundaries of <ones

Controlling lines on the boundaries of zones, that is, on either face of the zone, are recommended as the method which will give the most benefit in accommodation areas, especially where repetitive arrangements occur, such as a row of similar cabins.
5.1.1.1

5.1.1.2 The main advantage of face dimensioning, where the controlling lines occur on the boundaries of zones, that is, at the junction of

11

1s : 8712 ( Part I) - 1978 components, is that there is then a usable space for components and assemblies which bears a direct relationship to the controlling dimensions regardless of the size of the zones. 5.1 .1.3 In practical applications this method enables co-ordinated components abutting bulkheads, linings, etc to be positioned within the the need for special fitting or make-up pieces to usable space, without compensate for the variations in the width of the zones which contain the bulkheads, etc.

6. CONTROLLING

DIMENSIONS

6.1 Recommendations for the sizes of controlling dimensions are given in IS : 8712 ( Part IV )-1978*. The object of these recommendations is to provide ~a framework of controlling dimensions for use in the design of ships' deckhouses and accommodation and for guidance in the selection of coordinated sizes for components. 6.2 Vertical Controlling Dimensions - Vertical controlling dimensions In order to make the are the dimensions for the deck to ceiling height. maximum use of dimensionally co-ordinated components, a rectilinear IS : 8712 ( Part IV )-1978" contains a recommenstructure is preferable. dation that wherever possible flat decks without camber or sheer should be If camber arranged and the recommendations are based on this premise. and/or sheer is present careful consideration should be given to the design in order to give the maximum possible degree of co-ordination. *Guidelines for co-ordination or dimensions in shipbuilding: Part
dimensions, IV Controlling

12

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978

6.2.1 Deck to Ceiling Height - Controlling dimensions for the deck to ceiling height are measured between controlling lines situated on the boundaries of the finished floor to ceiling zones. This dimension is of primary importance in the co-ordination of dimensions -for shipbuilding as the maximum benefit would appear to derive from standard components Heights in for deckhouse subdivision, that is bulkhead and lining pan&. multiples of 100 mm ( preferred ) or 50 mm may be selected.
6.2.2 Intermediate Vertical Controlling Dimensions - Intermediate vertical controlling dimensions are the dimensions for the height of window, sidelight and doorset heads and for the height of window and sidelight sills

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978 above the controlling plane at floor finish level. In relation to windows and sidelights these dimensions govern the position of the openings in linings to take window boxes rather than the position of the window itself. 6.2.3 Height of <ones - The zones which contain the deck and finish, services and ceiling are governed by the physical requirements for these The height of the zones shall be items together with the deck structure. decided by these physical requirements and the tween-deck height in order to achieve a preferred dimension for the deck to ceiling height. 6.3 Horizontal Controlling Dimensions - Horizontal ~controlling dimensions are for the width and spacing of controlling zones for the structural bulkheads, linings, etc, and for the spacing of zones for subdivision bulkheads. The controlling lines to which the dimensions are located may be positioned either on the boundaries or on the axes of the zones. As in the vertical controlling dimensions, a rectilinear structure is preferable for the maximum use of co-ordinated standard components and IS : 8712 ( Part IV )-1978" makes a recommendation that, wherever possible, raked and/or cambered house fronts, shaped house sides and sloping side shell should be avoided or obviated internally. Wherever shaping is present, consideration must be given to its effect in order to obtain the maximum possible degree of co-ordination,

*Guidelines dimensions.

for

co-ordination

of dimensions in shipbuilding:

Part IV Controlling

14

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978 6.3.1 Sfiacing of <ones - Horizontal controlling dimensions given in the table for the spacing of zones are applicable to boundary method and refer to the horizontal distances between the controlling lines for the zones.
First Preference

Multiples of 300 mm from 300
Second Preference

Multiples of 100 mm from 300 6.3.2 Dejth of Controlling <ones - Horizontal controlling dimensions for the width of controlling zones refer to the dimensions within the boundaries of zones. These sizes are for the zones such as deckhouse side or casing and include structure, space for services, fixings and finished linings. The sizes of controlling zones should be in multiples of 50 mm, although some deviation may be required by structural arrangements.
DECKHOUSE SIDE/CASING

.y-qpyq--;

6.4 Neutral Zones - Neutral zone is defined as ` a zone which interrupts the regular increments of a reference system ' in IS : 8712 ( Part II ) 1978*. Neutral zones are used to accommodate non-modular sizes components; in The the shipbuilding application these may be for subdivision bulkheads. size of the zone shall be determined from the actual thickness of panels, plus finishes, fixings, etc but not including trim. 7. LOCATION OF COMPONENTS 7.1 Components and assemblies should be located in a space within the reference system defined by reference planes or lines in the system, the coordinating space. This space should include the space required for joints In co-ordinated planning, different methods and tolerences or deviations. of locating components may be applied and a distinction shall be made between vertical and horizontal location. 7.2 Vertical LocationFor vertical location a component only requires a single dimension from it to the finished floor plane. This dimension should accord with the recommendations for vertical controlling dimensions and intermediate vertical controlling dimensions contained in IS : 8712 ( Part IV ) 1978t. *Guidelinesfor co-ordinationof dimensiona in shipbuilding: Part II Glossary of terms.
TGuidelines for co-ordination dimensions. of dimensions in shipbuilding: Part IV Controlling

15

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978

-0

7.2.1 The total possible range of vertical co-ordinating spaces derived from controlling and intermediate controlling lines is restricted, in the shipbuiiding application, to those for internal subdivision. The spaces shown are given a reference letter for ease of identification, and are referred Related components and assemblies shall not necessarily to as space types. contain all the space types and only those types commonly associated with particular components shall be considered in the tables of co-ordinating spaces to be published in subsequent Indian Standards in this series, for example internal door-sets commonly include space types F and H.

NOTE - It will be noted that space types D to J, which occur lines, are related-to controlling dimensions.

between

controlling

7.3 Horizontal Location - For horizontal location, components require location in two directions; for this reason it is convenient to introduce a 16

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978
grid to which they may be related. A grid is defined in IS : 8712 (Part II)1978* as ` a rectilinear network of reference lines in one plane ' and as such it is intended as a reference tool for the layout of modular designs. The horizontal dimensions for components derived from the grid should be based upon the -horizontal controlling dimensions for width and spacing of zones.

7.3.1 The relationship of components, grids and controlling lines shall depend upon the size of grid, the sizes of the zones and whether the controlling dimensions arc on the facts or axes of zones. The range of space types for horizontal co-ordinating spaces is limited to three, that is

USABLE

SPACE

*Guidelines

for co-ordination

of dimensions

in shipbuilding

: Part II Glossary

of terms.

17

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978

width of zone, face spacing of zones, and axial spacing of zones. types are also given identification reference letters :

These

NOTE- It will be noted that space types L and M which occur between controlling lines, are related to controlling dimensions. 7.4

Location Grids - The advantage of using various grids on drawings is that they provide a reference system for sizing and positioning modular components both for the designer and for those reading the drawings.

-7.4.1 Size of Grid - The basic module grid that is, with spacing of 100 mm between the lines, is sufficientlysmall to show detailed construction and the precise relationship of components, and would generally be used on drawings to scales of 1 : 50 and 1 : 20.

7.4.1.1 The 300 mm grid is more convenient for layout drawings. On this grid the components will often be offset from the grid lines. This grid would generally appear on drawings to scales of 1 : 200 and 1 : 100.

18

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978 7.4.2 Application of Grids

7.4.2.1 Interrupted grid - It is recommended that for ease of detail design an interrupted grid be employed to accommodate the varying widths of-zones. Controlling lines are positioned on the faces of the zones and the spacings of zones are multiples of 100 mm. The method shall ensure that the usable space, where the maximum benefit from coordinated components shall be obtained, is always fully modular.

7.4.2.2 Continuous grid - In the initial planning and layout of the accommodation areas it may be convenient to utilize a continuous grid but in this instance varying relationship between the grid and zones shall be apparent. Great care must therefore be, taken to ensure that allowance is made for the widths of the neutral zones contained within a -particular layout.

7.5 Location

Zones

7.5.1 Penetrution of <ones --The range of co-ordinating spaces derived from the controlling and intermediate controlling lines may be regarded as preferred ranges. However, it is sometimes essential that a component within a co-ordinating space should penetrate the adjoining zone or stop short of it. This relationship between the key reference plane, which defines the boundary of a controlling zone, and the reference plane which defines the boundary of the co-ordinating space for a component or assembly is known as a boundary condition.

19

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978 -

\BOUNOARY CONDITION

I

1

0

0

7.5.1.l Positive and negative boundary condition - Boundary conditions are positive where the co-ordinating space extends past the key reference plane, and negative where the co-ordinating space stops short of the key refxence plane.

o--=

--

--------o
\POSIT~VE

c)--zr

0
~NEGATIvE

co-ordinating space, 7.5.1.2 <:ro bowdary condhon - The preferred whose boundary is coincident with the key reference plane, has a zero b xndary condition.

_4-POSITIVE

NEGATIVE

____

I-----

In the instances where penetration of the zones is necessary for functional requirements it is desirable that the depth of penetration should accord with the standard modules, or increments of size, given in in order that the component remains modular. IS : 8712 ( Part III )-1978*,
"Guidelines for co-ordination sizes. of dimensions in shipbuilding

: Part III Co-ordinating

20

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978
The total range of co-ordinating spaces is obtained by the addition or subtraction of boundary conditions to the preferred co-ordinating spaces, but wherever possible, in the interests of standardization of components, boundary conditions should be limited to zero conditions. As a practical esample the accompanying sketches indicate the relationship between a bulkhead panel and the finished floor and ceiling controlling lines. 7.5.1.3 In@ pieces - Where the final co-ordinating space, derived from the preferred range and the boundary condition, is non-modular it is usually possible in assembly, to arrange that the space can be filled by the use of modular components and ` infill ' pieces. The use of ` infill' or ` make-up ' pieces will increase the flexibility of a limited range of modular components so that they can be adapted to fill a wider range of coordinating spaces.

<

NON-MODULAR

DIMENSION

>

INFILL < I

./

MODULAR

COMPONENT

\/ /.

INFLLL > II 1 INFILL

MODULAR < 0

COMPONENT

\/ /\

0

8. SELECTION

OF COMPONENT

SIZES

8.1 The

total range of co-ordinating spaces obtained by adding or subtracting the boundary conditions can be very wide, but it is not necessarily essential to produce a range of components to fill all these spaces. A reduction in the range is desirable and in selecting a range of sizes for modular components the objective is the development of a limited range of sizes giving maximum flexibility of assembly for the component. Flexibility is the measure of the number of different co-ordinating spaces that a component range can fill, both singly and in various assembly combinations. Components that can be assembled or coupled in combinations are ` additive ' components. Several factors which influence the termed selection of co-ordinated sizes for components need to be considered to achieve the most flexible additive range. These factors are: ergonomics, 21

IS : 8712( Part I ) - 1978 economics, frequency of use, flexibility, compatibility and interchangeability. From consideration of these factors it shall be possible to select certain preferred sizes and in some instances to identity key components, which are those components having a particular significance, and are described later, in detail. 8.1.1 Ergonomics - Any space within which~human live or work must be related to both the body dimensions, obtained from anthropomorphic data, and the dimensional requirements for activity which are determined from ergonomic data. 8.1.1.1 As the methods of measurement are fairly coarse, a dimension based upon multiples of 100 mm is sufficiently fine for most applications but certain sizes, such as height of worktops, may require smaller increments.
2100 SET HEAD WINDOW HEAD 2000 1900

CEILING DOOR

1700 1600 1500 lb00 1300 1200 1100 1000

900 600
700 600 500 LOO 300 200 100 0

22

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978
8 S.2 Economic Usage - The size of any component is limited in its maximum and minimum dimensions by the economic use of materials, manufacture, storage, handling and transport. These factors shall be determined by individual manufactures and industries.

8.1.3 Frequency of Use - An examination of the anticipated frequency of use for each component will inevitably identify certain sizes as being more frequently required than others. Wherever this preference or weighting is established it will be indicated in the tables of co-ordinating sizes which will be drawn up for the shipbuilding industry at a later stage in the development of dimensional co-ordination. 8.1.4 Flexibility - In order to achieve the maximum flexibility of assembly for a component a method must be found of arriving at the smallest range of components which, when in combinations, can fill the greatest range of co-ordinating spaces. 8.1.4.1 The mathematical technique called ` combination of numbers', which is based on the use of certain mathematical equations, is an established method for determining groups of numbers which will achieve this aim. In selecting two sizes for a component, for example, if these sizes have a common factor it will be impossible to combine these sizes to fill all the spaces. In the example shown with sizes of 4 and 6 it is impossible to achieve any odd numbers, because they have a common factor of 2.

"1'B"`Il"i"B"`i':r:`l"`li'i'lt" :.:: :-.> :.::: .:.::: :.:.:. ... :.:..: ..: .,..:. ._:.:.:..: AND SO ON

If, however, two numbers are chosen which have no common factors, in which case they are said to be relatively prime, these will combine after a particular point to fill every space. This particular point is termed the critical number and is given by the formula ( a- 1 ) ( b- 1 ) where a and b 23

IS : 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978
are the sizes. In the example number is given by N= = Hence all spaces ( u-l) (4-l) 12 12 will be filled. =3x4 shown (b-l) (5-l) with sizes of 4 and 5 the critical

above

6 7 8 9 10 3,

CRITICAL

NUMBER

;1
13 11 15 16 17

AND

SO ON

8.1.4.2 A similar technique can be employed with three or more numbers to arrive at the best range of sizes for flexibility of the components. The range of numbers and the derived critical number can obviously be related to numbers of any units; in the dimensional COordination framework they shall generally be in terms of the 100 mm increment of size. Hence in the last example, components of 400 and 500 mm shall fill all spaces larger than 1 200 mm which are multiples of 100 mm.
8.1.4.3 A practical example occurs in the division of rigid flat sheet materials such as bulkhead panels where the division of a panel 1 200 wide into two 600 panels would only give 600 flexibility, but by dividing it into 700 and ~500 wide panels greater flexibility is achieved and critical number of 2 400 is obtained, above which all sizes in multiples of 100 can be filled. 8.1.5 Compatibility and Interchangeability - With the adoption of dimensional co-ordination, components shall be required in far fewer sizes than at present, and the same range of sizes shall apply to compDnents with similar functions, without the minor variations in dimensions which are now encountered. 24

IS : 8712 ( Part I) - 19-78 0 0 * 0

0 < 8.1.5.1 These similar components >
will be interchangeable in isolation but in order to achieve completr; interchangeability the relationship between adjoining components shall also require to be rationalized. This relationship with adjoining components is termed compatibility. 0 0 0

0 8.1.5.2 Compatibility can be achieved not only by standardizing sizes and location in relation to the grid reference lines but also by an agreed system of tolerances and by rationalizing the joining profile of the components. By designing components so that they are compatible with each other and combining sizes to give maximum flexibility it is then possible to exchange components within an assembly, and to change sizes, materials, positions and functions without affecting the overall co-ordinating size of the assembly.

CHANGE

OF

SIZE

CHANGE

OF

MATERIAL

25

IS:8712(PartI)-1978 0 0 . ~ ;&.y:: �~ 0

0
CHANGE OF POSITION

CHANGE

OF

FUNCTION

8.1.6 Key Comjonents - Within a preferred range of co-ordinating sizes certain particular sizes may be identified as being of greater significance in terms of dimensional co-ordination because of their frequency of usage, economic production, flexibility, etc. These components are termed ` key components ' and while in the selves they shall not fulfil all the requirements for a range of sizes, it is anticipated that they shall indicate the main bulk of the demand and should be included in all manufacturers' ranges for the component.
8.1.6.1 It is intended that the key components shall be identified within the tables of co-ordinating spaces to be published in subsequent Indian Standards in the dimensional co-ordination series and that wherever possible these shall correspond to the key components recognized for other industries using related products. 9. ASSEMBLY

9.1 One

main objective of dimensional co-ordination is to avoid cutting components on site, and in order to achieve this at the assembly stage the actual size of components and the design of the joints needs to be rationalized.

9.2 The co-ordinating size for a component and the co-ordinating space allocated to it are in theory identical, but in practice, the actual size shall vary in manufacture. To arrive at the maximum and minimum limits of size for a component requires an agreed procedure for determining the margin which provides an allowance for tolerences, movements and jointing. 26

IS : 8712( Part I ) - 1978
the assembly stage it is essential that an understanding of dimensional co-ordination and its application be applied to the practical aspects of setting-out or making-off the structure so that the maximum The accuracy with which the benefits in case of assembly are obtained. first components are assembled in extremely important and shall determine the space available for fitting other components within the co-ordinated framework. 9.4 During assembly the installation of services shall need to be carefully controlled to ensure the minimum interference with adjacent components, for example within a deck zone, and to ensure wherever possible that the terminal connections and appliances are dimensionally co-ordinated where they impinge upon the co-ordinated usable spaces.

9.3 At

MARGIN

10. PRACTICAL

APPLICATION

10.1The Fig. 1 to 6 are intended to illustrate the application of dimensional co-ordination to ships' deckhouse accommodation in various stages of the design. The sizes indicated for components, although shown as co-ordinated, should not be regarded as recommended sizes. The conventions given in the note to 3.2.1 are used in the examples and are recommended for clarity in dimensionally co-ordinated drawings.

GRID-

300

FIG. 1

GENERAL CARGO SHIP, BRIDGE DECK: GENERAL ARRASGEMENT, SCALE I:200

i i

G: ..

m

tiiiiiiiil'lt

ts : 8712

( Part I ) - 1978

100 GRID FIG.

3

GENERAL CARGO SHIP, BRIDGE DECK: ACCOMMODATIONLAYOUT, SCALE 1 : 50

30

IS I 8712 ( Part I ) - 1978

. .

:y
1100 LINING PANEL & T 700 xl/ LINING PANEL I-' 1200 LINING PANEL t?O I-N g

!

xi<
600 \NEUTRAL
Fm. 4

CONTROLLING

DIMENSION

!,

600 ZONE

..L

1200

1200 NEUTRAL ZONE

~,

100 INTERRUPTED TYPICAL &PICER'S CABIN: 31

GRID SPACE PLAN, .%XLE 1 : 20

IS : 8712 ( Part

1) - 1978

ELEVATION

A
>

-0

,

t

I I

-0

!
Fm. 5

I
ELEVATION

]
B
32

.

-0

TYPICAL OFFICER'S C:ABIN: ELEVATIONS A AND u, SCALE 1 : 20

I

. -

ELEVATION

c

c
IS I 8712 ( Part I ) - I978

0

-0 -0

ELEVATION
ha. 6
33

D
D,

-t !hALF,1 : 20

rhPIChL OFFICER'SCABIN:ELEVATIONS c AND

