( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 9852 - 1981

Indian

Standard

GENERAL REQ-UIREMENTS AND TESTING OF CAPSTANS
Marine Engineering
Chairman SHRI N. CHAKRABORTY Directorate

Sectional Committee,
Representing

MCPD

3

General of Shipping,

Bombay

SHRI K. N. S. RAO (Alternate to Shri N. Chakraborty ) The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. C. CHATURVEDI SHRI B. J. D'SILVA ( Alternate ) AFCO Ltd. Bombay SHRI V. G. DAMLE SHRI A. KAPUR ( Alternate ) Cummins Diesel Sales and Service ( I ) Pvt Ltd, SHFU SUNILGOVINDGADCIL Calentta --.____SHRI JAGADISH V. JOSHI ( A&mate ) The Great Eastern Shipping Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. C. JAIN South India Shipping Corporation Ltd, Madras SHRI A. T. JOSEPH SHRI ASIM DAS ( Alternate ) ' Institute of Marine Technologists, Bombay SHRI A. T. JOSEPH ' SHRI B. D. WADIA ( Alternate I ) SHRI V. G. DAMLE ( Alternate II ) CAPT P. S. BARVE ( Alternate III ) Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta SHRI M. G. KALE Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI S. R. KHARE The Indian National Shipowners Association, Bombay SHRI KIRPAL SINGH American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay SHRI MADAN L. KOCHHAR SHRI P. K. BANERJEE ( Altematc ) Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd, Pune SHRI R. D. KOLHE SHRI S. G. SARDE~AI ( Alternate ) Greaves Cotton & Co Ltd. BombavI COMMODORE I. K. MALHOTRA LT CDR K. P. MENON (Alternate) SHRI M. SEN ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence (-NHQ) CDR A. MASTHANALUZ LT M. GEORGE ( Al&mate ) The ShiDDing Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. L. MEHTA SWRI S. K. SOOD( Alternate ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. A. NOORUDDIN SHRI L., J. DHANARAJ( Alternate ) Voltas Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. L. PILLAI SHRI A. N. INDURKAR( Altemate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN This publication is protected Copyright 1982 INSTITUTION of 1957 ) and

STANDARDS

under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9852 - 1981
( ChtinuedjTom page 1 )
Members PRINCIPAL~OFFICER Repesenting The Institute of Marine Engineers, Bombay; and Shipping Corporation of India, Bombay SHRI R. K. MAHROTRA ( Alternate ) SHRI T. S. RAJAN Fricson & Richards, Bombay SHRI G. M. RANA Scindia Workshop Ltd, Bombay SHRI T. A. SHAXKH ( Alternate ) SHRI C. M. RAO Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRI R. V. RAMACHANDRAN ( Alternate ) SHRI S. RATRA Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI S. S. SASTRY Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin SHRI P. KOTE~WARARAO ( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI H. K. SHARMA Directorate General of Technical Development. New Delhi SHRI K. S. SADASIVAN ( Alternate ) SHRI SHI~NARAIN Escorts Ltd, Bombay SHRI HARISH BHARGAVA( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. SINHA Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, Calcutta CDR S. MAZUMDAR ( Alternate ) SHRI A. B. THAKUR Ministry of Shipping and Transport ( Development Wing ) SHRI S. N. SUMAN ( Alternate ) SHRI P. B. WARRIER Bureau Veritas, Bombay SHRI B. Nucrr~s ( Alternate ) SHRI P. S. DAS, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&cio Member ) Director ( MCPD ) Secretary SHRI V. K. SEHGAL Deputy Director ( MCPD),

IS1

Winches,

Windlasses land Steering

Gears Subcommittee,

MCPD

3 :4

Convener
SHRI

F. D. Gouzs Membms

Scindia Workshop Ltd, Bombay

G. M. RANA ( Alternate to Shri F. D. Gomes ) SHRI S. N. BATRA The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. P. DATAR ( Alternate) SHRI V. G. DAMLE AFCO Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. KAPUR ( Alternate ) Usha Telehoist Ltd, Calcutta SHRI J. M. KHANNA SHRI S. S. KAKKAR ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. KHATTAR Bombay Port Trust, Bombay American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay SHRI MADAN L. KOCHHAR SHRI P. K. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay SHRI P. N. MEHROTRA SHRI K. N. S. RAO ( Alternate) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRI B. SAHEB NAIDU SI-IRIB. V. S. N. RAJU ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 12 )
SHRI

2

IS : 9852 - 1981

Indian

Standard

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTING OF CAPSTANS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 May 1981, after the draft finalized by the Marine Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 Most of the deck machinery is idle during much of its life and, due to this intermittent duty requirement, gears and drive are normally designed to a limited rating of one-half to one hour. It is to be kept in mind that this equipment is subjected to heavy stresses due to handling by dock labour in different ports of the world and is also exposed to highly corrosive saline atmosphere. Despite long periods of idleness, often in severe weather conditions, the machinery must operate immediately when required. 0.3 Attention of the manufacturers and the users of the equipment is also drawn to the provisions of Chapter VIII Loading and Unloading and Machinery and Gear in publication `Safety and Health in Dock Work', issued by the International Labour Oragnization ( IL0 )* 0.4 In the preparation of this standard, the current work done at the IS0 level, within ISO/TC 8 - Shipbuilding, has been taken into account. 0.5 The information to be provided by the purchaser at the time of enquiry is given in Appendix A for guidance. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the general requirements testing of ships' capstans for hauling ropes only. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the fallowing definitions in addition to those given in IS : 8650-1977*, shall apply.
*Glossary of terms and graphical symbols for ship's deck machinery.

and methods

of

3

IS : 9852 - 1981 2.1 Nominal Size - The nominal size of a capstan hauling load in tonnes at-its design speed. corresponds to the

NOTE 1 -The range of nominal sizes and associated hauling loads covered by this standard are given in Table 1. NOTE 2 - The nominal sizes of capstans in Table 1 have been selected from the R 10 series of preferred numbers.

3. GENERAL 3.1 Capstan 3.1.1 The 3.1.2 The specified.

REQUIREMENTS Heads minimum capstan capstan head head diameters be supplied are given in Table plain, or with 1. if

shall

whelps,

3.2 Material Stresses -The manufacturer of the capstan shall be responsible for determining the strength requirements of the component parts of the capstan to withstand the hauling load of the respective nominal sizes of capstans specified in Table 1. 3.3 Control ~Brake System

3.3.1 A system of braking shall be automatically applied to the prime mover when the control handle is in the `off ' position, or when the power supply is cut off. 3.3.2 The control brake system shall be capable 1.5 times the hauling load. of sustaining a load of

3.3.3 Brakes applied by hand shall require a force in order to exert the braking torque of 25 percent in torque required to maintain the hauling load. The foot pedal to exert the same braking torque shall not

not exceeding 160 N excess of the driving force supplied to a exceed 320 N. acting power

3.4 Emergency Stop - The capstan shall be fitted with a quick local emergency stop mechanism which when operated removes from the capstan and applies the control brake system. The emergency stop shall be located in a clearly marked position close to a remotely controlled capstan and adjacent controlled capstan. 3.5 Speed Control

and accessible to a manually

3.5.1 The light line speed of the capstan shall be in accordance with the values given in Table 1. In case of electric capstans, the number of steps and periods of operation thereof shall be specified.

4

IS : 9852 - 1981 3.5.2 The control system shall be such that it is possible to move the controls from the full veer position to the full haul position in less than two seconds, or vice versa. The speed with which the controls are manipulated shall not have an adverse effect on either the capstan machinery or the safety of the operator. The capstan response times shall be supplied by the manufacturer to the purchaser on request. 3.5.3 The capstan shall be fitted with otherwise agreed to between the purchaser 3.6 Wire Rope variable speed control and the manufacturer. unless

3.6.1 This standard is based on the use of 6 x 24 galvanized wire rope with fibre core conforming to IS : 2266-1977*. The diameters of wire rope associated with the hauling loads are given in Table 1. 3.6.2 Where manila ropes are used as a design basis, these shall be Grade 1 as specified in IS : 1084-19697. The diameters of manila rope associated with the hauling loads are given in Table 1. 3.6.2.1 The above requirement types of ropes in service. does not preclude the use of other

3.6.3 The rope size shall be such that its minimum is not less than the hauling load divided by O-33. 3.7 Control Methods and Movements

breaking

load ( kN )

3.7.1 Methods of Control - The methods of control shall be either manual or remote. A combination of the terms may be used to describe control methods, for example, Manual/Remote. Manual control is where the capstan is directly controlled by an operator.

Remote control - is where the control position is at a distance from the capstan being controlled. The control position may be fixed or portable. 3.7.1.1 Unless specially requested, capstans shall not be provided with manual hauling gear. If requested, the capstan head shall be provided with sockets for operating bars and a non-return pawl. 3.7.2 Direction of Motion of the Operating Devices

* Steel wire ropes for general engineering purposes ( second revision ) .

t Manila ropes ( second revision ),

5

IS : 9852 - 1981 3.7.2.1 The direction of rotation of the capstan head shall be clearly marked in relation to the movement of the control.

3.7.2.2 All control handles, handwheels and push buttons shall be clearly and permanently marked with their purpose and mode of operation, unless this is obvious from their design and position. 3.7.2.3 The maximum travel of a control handle shall not exceed 600 mm in one direction or 300 mm on each side of a central position. 3.7.3 Foot Pedals 250 mm. The maximum travel of the pedal shall not exceed

3.7.4 Push Buttons - When fitted, separate push buttons shall be provided for each direction of rotation. fitted, gear levers shall be positively locked 3.7.5 Gear Levers -When in any gear position or neutral by click stops norother similar means. 3.8 Construction - Good workmanship and adequate essential requirements for compliance with the standard. materials are

3.8.1 Materials - The materials used for the construction of the capstans shall be in accordance with the appropriate Indian Standards selected to ensure stresses not exceeding those specified for the material. 3.8.2 Welding IS : 823-1964*. All welding shall be carried out in accordance with

3.8.3 Access-Access openings to prime movers, reduction gearing, bearings, brakes and control mechanisms shall be provided to facilitate adequate inspection and maintenance. 3.8.4 Lubrication -The capstan shall be designed to ensure that all bearing surfaces are lubricated during operation when inclined at an angle up to 15' in any direction. 3.8.4.1 Adequate and accessible greasing and foiling points shall be provided to ensure that all required surfaces are capable of being properly lubricated. Lubricating nipples shall be in accordance with IS : 4009-19677. Sumps and oil baths shall be provided with sight glasses or means of measuring oil level. Wherever the means of measuring oil level is in the form

* Code of procedure for manual metal arc welding of mild steel. t Specification for grease nipples.

6

IS : 9852 - 1981
of a dipstick, arrangements shall be made to make it a watertight fitting when hot in use. Where necessary, oil and condensation drain plugs shall be provided. 3.8;5 Electrical Equ$ment - The electrical equipment shall in accordance with the related regulation on the subject. 3.8.5.1 The requirements complied with : of the following Indian be installed

Standards

shall be

a)
b) c)

IS : 2026-1962* IS : 4722-1968t IS : 6380-1971:

3.8.5.2 Deck mounted enclosures of electrical equipment shall be deck watertight land deck portable enclosures of electrical equipment shall be weather proof as specified in IS : 4691-19688.

3.8.6 Protection of Metallic Surfaces oil, grease, dirt, weld-spatter, burrs protective finish is applied to metallic

Surfaces shall be free from moisture, and other imperfections before the surfaces. be primed with against a marine of the surface

3.8.6.1 External surfaces and internal surfaces shall anticorrosive priming paint, adequate to provide protection environment, as soon as practicable after completion preparation. 3.8.6.2 paint. Internal surfaces of gear boxes shall be coated

with an oil proof

4. PERFORMANCE 4.1 The capstan
shall be capable 30 min while exerting the hauling of continuous operation load given in Table 1. for a period of

4.2 The minimum given in Table 1. the purchaser.

design speeds associated with the hauling loads are Higher design speed may be provided, if specified by

4.3 The
values

light line speed of the capstan given in Table 1.

shall be in

accordance

with the

*Specification for power transformers. TSpecification for rotating electrical machines. SSpecification for elastometric insulation and sheath of electric cables. SDegrees of protection provided by enclosures for rotating electrical machinery.

7

IS : 9852 - 1981
TABLE (CZuuses2.1,
NOMINAL HAULING SIZE LOAD DESIGN SPEED,

1 PERFOBMANCE

DATA md4.3)
DIA OF MANILA ROPES ( Grade lt) CAPSTAN DIA.

3.1.1, 3.5.1, 3.6.1, 3.6.2,4.1
LIGHT LINE SPEED, ROPE STRENGTH,

Min

Min ( Hauling Load @33 )
kN (5) :"o 90 240 150 375

Mi?Z
kN (1) (2) 4s (3) 0'5 0'5 8:; 0'3 0'25

DIA OF STEEL WIRE ROPES*

HE An Min

m/s
(4) 0.5 8:; 8:; 0.5

mm

nun

(6)
10 14 :: 26 32

(7)
20

:
3

:FJ
30

28 :i 60 76

;
12
*See IS t&e IS

125

iii

320 320 320 400 450

: 2266-1977 : 1084-1969

Specification for steel wire ropes for general engineering purposes. Specification for manila ropes ( secondreuision ).

5. TESTING

OF CAPSTANS

5.1 Type tests or individual

tests shall be carried out at the manufacturer's works, but, where it is not possible, the tests may be carried out at a place to be agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 5.1.1 The capstan shall be tested as complete prime mover and gearing. 5.1.2 The result of the tests carried stated in the test certificate. unit, that is capstan head,

out in accordance

with 5.2 shall be

5.1.3 When a batch of 5 or more similar capstans is supplied to one order, type tests on one of these capstans may be carried out in the manufacturer's premises or at a place agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser, if so required. 5.1.4 The type test may be replaced by the purchaser.
by a type test certificate, if agreed

5.1.5 Where tests are required in excess of the type test, these shall be agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser at the time of contract. 5.2 Type Testing These tests shall be carried out as follows.

8

IS : 9852 - 1981 5.2.1 Test Without Loud - The capstan shall be run at light line speed for 30 minutes continuously, 15 minutes in each direction. When the capstan is provided with a gear change mechanism, it shall be run for an additional five minutes in each gear position, in each direction.
5.2.2 Test With Full Hauling Load - The rope shall be clamped to the capstan head and it shall be demonstrated that the capstan is capable of exerting a pull equivalent to the hauling load in Table 1 at the design speed. Where capstan motor is fitted inside the capstan head, this test may be carried out on boardship. 5.2.2.1 The result shall be recorded on the test certificate.

5.2.3 Test With Holding Load - The rope shall be clamped to the capstan head and a load of l-5 times the hauling load in Table 1 applied. The controller shall be positioned in the `off' position. The capstan head shall not rotate and there shall be no detrimental effect upon the capstan. Where capstan motor is fitted inside the capstan head, this test may be carried out on boardship. 5.2.3.1 The result shall be recorded on the test certificate. be verified against the manu-

5.2.4 While testing, the following facturer's specification : a) b) c) d) e)

shall

Oil tightness of joints, Temperature of bearings, Presence of abnormal noise, Power input ( Watts ), and Speed of rotation of the capstan

head in each direction. system test shall be carried out out

5.2.5 Brake Test-The control brake to meet with the requirements of 3.3. 5.3 Individual Test-The following remaining capstans of a batch : a) b) 7)

tests shall

be carried

on all con-

Test without load - running for 30 minutes, 15 minutes tinuously in each direction at light line speed. Control brake system test to verify the requirements against While testing, the following facturer's specification : i) ii) iii) iv) v) shall be verified

of 3.3. the manu-

Tightness against oil leakage, Temperature of bearings, Presence of abnormal noise, Power input ( Watts ), and Speed of rotation of the capstan

head

in each direction.

9

IS : 9852 - 1981 5.4 On Board Tests and Inspections

5.4.1 The shipbuilder together with the manufacturer of capstan shall arrange for the following inspections and tests to be carried out on boardship, in the presence of the shipowner, prior to handing over the ship, to ensure that the capstan is fully operable. 5.4.2 Primary Inspections of casing checked

5.4.2.1 Inspection ports to be opened and interior for cleanliness, surface deterioration and foreign matter. 5.4.2.2 5.4.2.3 5.4.2.4 Filters in hydraulic lines to be checked to be checked connections

for cleanliness,

if fitted.

Power connection Deck and casing

for tightness. for tightness.

to be checked

5.4.2.5 Check that the correct grades of oil have been supplied in sufficient volume for safe operation. Sumps and oil baths to be checked for correct volume of oil. 5.4.3 Running Tests - The capstan to be run for 30 minutes at light line speed, 15 minutes continuously in each direction under ship power. 5.4.4 against gated. Bearings -Bearing temperature the type test results. Abnormal rises to be measured and checked temperature rises shall be investi-

5.4.5 Vibration - At the end of the tests, the capstan the full range of speeds as a check for vibration. 5.4.6 Additional Tests - Other at his expense and convenience. 6. MARKING

shall be run through

tests may be requested

by the purchaser

6.1 All capstans shall be permanently marked by means of a rating plate, prominently displayed. The rating plate shall contain such information as is relevant to the capstan, including the following:

a) b) cl 4

Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, and serial number, Number of this Indian Standard, Nominal size, Type of drive, and 10

reference

type

number

IS : 9852 - 1981
e) Power requirements i) ii) iii) iv) 6.1.1 Rated Rated Rated Rated ( for example, electric ):

voltage ( Volts ), frequency ( Hertz ), current ( Amperes ), and input ( Watts ). may also be marked with the IS1 Certification Mark.

The capstans

NOTE-The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

6.2 A rating plate to IS : 325-1970*.

shall

be separately

attached

to the motor

according

APPENDIX A ( Clause 0.5 )
INFORMATION A-l. TO BE PROVIDED BY THE PURCHASER
with

The purchaser should provide the manufacturer of the capstan the following information at the time of the enquiry : a) b) c) d) e) Capstan to IS : 9852, Type of drive required, Nominal size, Position of prime mover in relation to capstan head, If manual hauling gear required, If whelps required, If variations are required from standard speeds, If additional tests are to be performed, Additional paint finish specification as required, Power supply available, and Ambient conditions.

f)
g) h) j ) k) m)

*Specification for three-phase induction motors ( third mixion ).

11

IS : 9852 - 1981
( Continued from page 2 ) Members Refiresenting

Geeta Engg Works Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. C. NANCIA SHRI J. K. NANGIA ( Alternate ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. A. NOORUDDIN SHRI L. J. DHANARAJ ( Alternate) Bharati Engg Co, Bombay SHRI M. G. &%NE SHRI S. G. KULKURANI ( Alternate ) Lloyds' Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI S. RATRA Shaparia Dock & Steel Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SKRI P. A. SHAPARIA SHRI C. N. MISTRY ( Alternate ) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engg Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. K. SINHA SHRI A. K. JOARDAR ( Alternate) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI A. N. SRIVATHSA SHRI S. L. SRIDHARA MIJRTHY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( NHQ) STAFF OFFICER

12

