IRRI Alte IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Tet aaa ch fero tas firf2ra Raa sn 
sr AT vite — fates 
STTT 1 Has 
( RAT ATOT ) 


Rubberized Coir Sheets for 
Cushioning — Specification 
Part 1 Curled 
( Third Revision) 


ICS 55.040; 59.060.10; 59.080.40 


© BIS 2019 


weds Ae Sq 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Wa, 9 Teg STH AMT, 4$ fereft — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2019 Price Group 6 


Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft 
finalized by the Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1977 and further revised in 1987. On the basis of experience gained during 
use and as per the demand of the coir industry and other stake holders, this standard was again revised in 2018 and 
was published in three parts. 


The other parts in this series are: 
Part 2 Needle felt 
Part 3 Sandwiched 
Further, it has now been revised to incorporate the additional requirements for Ecomark. 


The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India has instituted a scheme for labelling environment 
friendly products known as ‘Ecomark scheme’. This standard is based on the criteria as notified by the Government 
of India vide Gazette Notification No. 893(E), dated 18 September 2018 for labelling Coir and Coir products as 
environment friendly. 


The Ecomark scheme is being operated by the Bureau of Indian Standards. However, to obtain the licence to use 
the Ecomark on a product, it is also essential to obtain BIS licence to use the Standard Mark as per the relevant 
Indian Standard for that product. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex M. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


RUBBERIZED COIR SHEETS FOR 
CUSHIONING — SPECIFICATION 


PART 1 CURLED 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) prescribes the requirements 
and methods of test for rubberized curled coir sheets 
for cushioning. 


1.2 It does not cover articles made from 
shreddedrubberized coir or fabricated articles consisting 
of cover of rubberized curled coir sheets enclosing 
springs or other cushioning material, or industrial and 
packaging material. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Rubberized Curled Coir — A resilient product of 
porous structure containing curled coir fibre suitably 
coated and bonded with natural rubber, synthetic 
rubber or a combination of both containing suitable 
ingredients, and vulcanized for the final set to the 
desired size and shape. 


3.2 Indentation Hardness Index — The indentation 
hardness index is the load in kilogram required to 
produce an indentation in the sample equivalent in 
depth to 40 percent of the original thickness of the 
sample of a cross section of 1 square decimeter. 


3.3 Original Thickness — The thickness determined 
by needle gauge method for the whole sample will be 
termed as original thickness. 


NOTE — For sample having thickness less than 38 mm, 
the original thickness shall be determined by superimposing 
minimum number of pieces to give a total thickness of about 
38 mm and the average taken as the original thickness of the 
sample. 


4 GRADES 


The rubberized curled coir sheets for cushioning shall 
be graded on the basis ofthe indentation hardness index 
and density as given below: 


Grade Indentation Density, Min 
Hardness Index g/dm? 
Medium 6.00-8.99 60.0 
Firm 9.00-11.99 70.0 
Extra firm 12.00-15.00 80.0 
NOTES: 


1 The tolerance on indentation hardness index has been 
provided to take care of the agreement between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer in respect of this requirement when it is 
desired to have different value in any portion of the coir sheet. 
2 In view of additional reinforcement, the indentation 
hardnessindex of the central portion (one-third lengthwise) 
may exceed up to +15 percent of the maximum value specified 
for the grade. 


5 MANUFACTURE, WORKMANSHIP AND 
FINISH 


5.1 Rubberized curled coir sheets shall be manufactured 
using unretted coir fibre, mechanically extracted by 
regulated and even feeding of the fibre with the help of 
a mechanical arrangement in curling machines to form 
a thick strand of evenly distributed parallelized fibres 
which is processed further to form twisted curled coir 
rope as per IS 9308 (Part 4) for effectively utilize the 
resiliency of the fibre material, the fibres being bonded 
to each other by vulcanized rubber to keep them in 
position, utilizing rubber latex containing compounding 
ingredients of such nature and quality that the finished 
product complies with the requirements of this 
specification. The side walls of the sheets after cutting 
to the desired dimensions shall be bonded by rubber 
latex compound with Hessian cloth or tapestry or any 
other suitable material so as to provide additional 
support, if necessary. 


5.2 Rubberized curled coir sheets shall be of a 
resilientnature and porous structure, in the form 
of sheetings or in fabricated sheets. Any special 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


characteristics other than those prescribed in this 
specification which may be desired for specific 
application shall be as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 


5.3 The rubberized curled coir sheets shall present 
anuniform appearance throughout the structure and 
shall not contain loose fibres or voids. 


5.4 Due to manufacturing conditions, the material 
mayhave to be altered or repaired. The repaired or 
altered material shall be acceptable provided the 
material used in such repairs or alterations is ofthe same 
composition and quality as the original product and 
provided such alterations do not affect the requirements 
given in this specification. The odour of rubberized 
curled coir sheets shall be as mild as possible and shall 
not be objectionable. 


6 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


6.1 Rubberized curled coir sheets may be supplied 
infabricated shapes or in sheet form as specified by the 
purchaser. 


6.2 The dimensions of rubberized curled coir 
sheets, when tested according to the method prescribed 
in Annex B, shall be as specified by the purchaser 
subject to the tolerance given below: 


Length or Width Permissible Tolerance 


mm 
Uptolm +6 
Imtol.5m +9 
Over 1.5m +12 
Thickness Permissible Tolerance 
mm 
Up to 12 mm +3 
-0 
Over 12 mm up to 38 mm +6 
-3 
Over 38 mm up to 100 mm 112 
-6 
Over 100 mm +15 
-6 
7 REQUIREMENTS 
7.1 Density 


Density requirement is optional and has been given for 
guidance only. Density corresponding to various grades 
is as given in 4. The method of test shall be as given in 
Annex C. 


7.2 Indentation Hardness 


When tested according to method given in Annex D, 
different grades of rubberized coir products shall have 
the indentation hardness as prescribed under 4. 


7.3 Resistance to Ageing 


When tested according to method prescribed in 
Annex E, the indentation hardness of the sample after 
ageing shall not vary by more than +18 percent of the 
value obtained with un-aged sample. 


7.4 Resistance to Flexing 


When tested according to the method given in Annex F, 
the indentation hardness of the test specimen shall not 
vary by more than +18 percent. This shall be calculated 
on the resultant thickness. 


7.5 Compression Set (Aged) 


The compression set of the sample, when determined 
by the method prescribed inAnnex G, shall not exceed 
+18 percent. 


7.6 Compression Set (Un-aged) 


The compression set ofthe sample, when determined by 
the method prescribed in Annex G, under atmospheric 
conditions without the elevated temperature, shall not 
exceed +15 percent. 


7.7 pH Value 


The pH value of aqueous extract of material when 
determined by the method prescribed in Annex H shall 
be within 5 to 8.5. 


7.8 Chloride Content 


The chloride content of the aqueous extract of the 
material calculated as ‘Cl’ when determined by 
the method prescribed in Annex J shall not exceed 
0.3 percent by mass. 


7.9 Sulphate Content 


Sulphate content of aqueous extract of the material 
prepared as in H-2 and, tested by the method prescribed 
in Annex K, shall not exceed 0.2 percent by mass. 


8 TESTS 


8.1 Preparations and Conditioning of Samples 


8.1.1 Wherever practicable, the tests shall be conducted 
on the whole rubberized curled coir sheet. 


8.1.2 The specimen shall be cut from the centre of the 
sample piece as far as possible and the specimen shall 
be subjected to test, preferably within 24 h of cutting. 


8.1.3 When the finished product does not lend itself 
to testing or to the preparation of test pieces because 
of complicated shape, small size or other reasons, 
standard test slabs shall be prepared. 


8.1.4 When difference due to the difficulty in obtaining 
suitable test pieces from the finished product arises, 
the manufacturer and the purchaser may agree on 
acceptable deviations. This can be done by comparing 
results of standard test pieces and those obtained on 
actual product. 


8.1.5 Test shall be carried out not before 24 h after 
vulcanization of the sample. Sample and test pieces 
shall be protected from direct light as far as possible 
and from any stress or strain whenever they are not 
actually in the process of being tested. 


8.1.6 Conditioning 


Each sample selected for test shall be conditioned for a 
minimum period of 24 h at 27 + 2?C and 65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity (see IS 6359) prior to testing and 
testing shall be in the same atmosphere when the testing 
cannot be carried out in the same atmosphere then the 
testing shall be commenced within 2 min of withdrawal 
of specimen from the conditioning atmosphere. 


9 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ECOMARK (OPTIONAL) 


9.1 The product shall meet the requirement specified in 
this Indian Standard. 


9.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consent 
clearance as per the provisions of Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and 
the authorization(s), if required under the rules notified 
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and 
the rules made there under while applying for the 
Ecomarkas per Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016. 


9.3 The product(s) or product packaging(s) may display 
in brief the criteria based on which the product(s) has/ 
have been labeled environment friendly. 


9.4 The material used for product packaging(s) shall be 
recyclable, reusable or biodegradable. 


9.5 The product shall meet the specific requirements as 
given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Specific Requirements for Ecomark 
( Clause 9.5 ) 


SI Parameter Requirement Method of 
No. Test 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Residual pesticides (Sum 1.0 IS 15651 
parameter) (ppm) (Max) 
i) pH of aqueous extract 6-7 IS 8391 
(Part 1) 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


10 SAMPLING 


10.1 Lot 


All rubberized curled coir sheets of the same grade, 
size and shape manufactured under similar conditions 
shall constitute a lot. 


10.2 Sample 


That part of the lot, which is drawn randomly to 
represent the lot. 


10.3 Test Specimen 


An appropriately shaped piece taken from the sample 
for use in physical and chemical tests. 


11 MARKING OR LABELLING 


11.1 Each rubberized curled coir sheets for 
cushioningshall be attached with a label bearing the 
following information: 


a) Name of the material; 


b) Manufacturer’s name, initials, trade-mark or any 
other identification mark; 


c) Grade; 
d) Dimensions; 


e) Criteria for which rubberized coir sheets has been 
labeled as Ecomark; and 


f) Any other information required by the buyer or by 
the law in the force. 


11.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed there under, and the products may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


12 PACKING 


The rubberized curled coir sheets shall be packed as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


13 INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE 


Rubberized curled coir sheets shall be kept in well- 
ventilated store in an atmosphere free from the products 
of combustion from any heating appliance and free 
solvent vapours, out of contact with damp surfaces. 
Under no circumstances shall the products be stored 
in direct sunlight or exposed to ultraviolet light. When 
products are stacked in stores, care shall be taken to 
avoid undue compression or distortion. Special care 
shall be taken when stacking fabricated products of 
irregular shape. 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water — 15651:2006 Textiles — Requirements for 
Specification (third revision) a labelling = — 
t 
2711 : 1979 Specification for direct reading pH ns Mae . 
meters (second revision) 15651 : 2006 Textiles — Requirements for 
Envi tal ^ Labelli — 
9308 (Part 4): Specification for mechanically A a abelling 
1999 extracted coir fibre: Part 4 Machine E . . 
twisted curled coir fibres 8391 (Part 1): rubberized coir sheets for 
: XO 2018 cushioning — Specification: Part 1 
6359 : 1971 jen) for conditioning of Curled (second revision) 
ANNEX B 
( Clause 6.2 ) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR MEASUREMENT OF DIMENSIONS 


B-1 DETERMINATION 
WIDTH 


OF LENGTH AND 


Measure the length and width of the sample using a 
steel rule nearest to 1 mm, ensuring the measurement 
along a line perpendicular to opposing faces of the 
sample. 


B-2 DETERMINATION OF THICKNESS 


B-2.1 A test specimen 100 x 100 mm cut out from the 
sample shall be placed between two larger horizontal 
plates with a load of 200 g on its upper surface. The 
distance between the plates is determined at about the 
middle on each side correct to the nearest mm and the 
average of the four readings taken as the thickness of 
the sample. 


B-2.2 Determination of Thickness of the Whole 
Sample 


The instrument for measuring the thickness consists 
of a 250 mm long, rigid, narrow measuring needle 
made out of the suitable material and finished to 
give a smooth polished surface, one end of which is 
fixed vertically to the centre of a polished plate of 
3mm thickness and 50x50mm size, the other end 
being tapered to a point, to facilitate insertion of the 


rod through the rubberized coir sheet. The needle is 
calibrated in millimeter all along its length starting 
with the point fixing it with the plate as 0, every 5 and 
10 mm from this point being prominently marked 
out. A disc of 35 mm diameter, weighing 200 g with 
a central hole to facilitate movement of the weight all 
along the length ofthe calibrated needle also forms part 
of the measuring instrument. 


B-2.2.1 Procedure 


For measuring the thickness of the sample, the 
calibrated needle measuring instrument is inserted 
through bottom side of rubberized curled coir sheets, 
so that the needle is in a plane perpendicular to the free 
surface of rubberized curled coir sheets and base plate 
of the instrument is in contact with the bottom side of 
the rubberized curled coir sheets. Thereupon, the sliding 
weight is introduced on the projecting part of the needle 
and the combined thickness of the rubberized curled 
coir sheets and that of the sliding weight read directly, 
correct to the nearest 1 mm, on the calibrated needle. 
The thickness of the sliding weight is deducted from 
this reading to obtain the thickness of the test sample. 
The measurements are recorded at last at four points at 
random on the test piece and the average value taken as 
the thickness of the test material. 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX C 


( Clause 7.1 ) 
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF DENSITY 


C-1 Determine the length, width and thickness of 
thesample as described in Annex B. 


C-1.1 Weigh the test specimen correct to 0.1 g. 


C-1.2 Determine the density of the sample by 
dividingthe mass in grams by the volume in cubic 
decimetres. 


ANNEX D 


( Clause 7.2 ) 
METHOD FOR DETEMINATION OF INDENTATION HARDNESS INDEX 


D-1 TEST SPECIMEN 


Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 mm, 
leaving a space of 25 mm from the edges of the whole 
piece. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 The testing apparatus shall be capable of 
applying an indentation in such a way that the load is 
applied on the sample at a uniform rate through a load 
measuring device of suitable capacity for measuring 
the load required to produce the specified indentation. 
The sample shall be placed on smooth flat horizontal 
surface of platform of the load measuring device. The 
surface of platform being larger than the size of the 
sample. 


D-2.2 The essential parts of the testing apparatus (see 
Fig. 1) are an adjustable indentor of the dimension 
specified 


In D-2.2.1 which can be moved vertically up or down 
by a threaded shaft, working through a sleeve of same 
pitch and dimension, operated by a hand wheel. The 
sleeve is fitted to a framework which rests on the 
horizontal surface of a table without having contact 
with the load measuring device of minimum 20 kg 
capacity with accuracy of 10 g. The thickness of the 
sample can be measured by means ofa pointer mounted 
on the indenter with suitable guides and sliding in 
front of a vertical scale graduated in millimetre. The 
pointer is so adjusted that when the indentor touches 
the platform of the balance, the reading of the pointer 
on the scale is zero. 


D-2.2.1 Indentor 


A 105 mm square mild steel plate of 3 mm thickness 
shall constitute the indentor, fitted to the threaded 
shaft by a ball and socket joint, so that the surface of 
the indentor can adjust itself to the contour of the test 
specimen. 


The test specimen shall be of size minimum 100 x 
100 mm raise the indentor to a height greater than 
the thickness of the sample and place the sample over 
the platform of the load measuring device below the 
indentor. Note the weight of the sample recorded by 
reading on the load measuring device (x g). Lower the 
indentor by rotating the handle so as to press the sample 
against the platform of the load measuring device. 
When the load measuring device reads (200 g + x g), 
note the reading of the pointer on the scale to record 
the thickness of the sample (f). Gradually lower the 
indentor to apply a load at the rate of 0.5 kg/min until 
the sample is pressed to a thickness of 60 percent of t. 
The load recorded on the load measuring device for this 
indentation is taken as the indentation hardness index 
of the specimen. 


DIAL SCALE 
BALANCE 


HAND WHEEL 


SPINDLE 
(SQ. THREAD) 


TABLE 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR IDENTATION TEST 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 7.3 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO AGEING 


E-1 PRINCIPLE 


The ageing test consists of subjecting samples to 
controlled deterioration by air at elevated temperature 
and atmospheric pressure after which the physical 
properties are measured and compared with those 
of un-aged samples. The deterioration is measured 
and compared with those of un-aged samples. The 
deterioration is measured by the observed change in 
indentation hardness index. 


E-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


From each sample cut out two test specimens of size 
100 x 100 mm and measure the indentation hardness 
index (/,) as specified in Annex D. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


E-3.1 Arrange an air oven of such size that the 
totalvolume of test specimens does not exceed 
10 percent of the free space in the oven. Make 
provision for suspending specimens so that they are 
not within 12 of each other or the oven sides. Control 
the temperature of the oven thermostatically so 


E-3.2 Adjust the oven to 70 + 2?C. Place the test 
specimens in the oven adjusted as indicated in E-3.1. 
Arrange the test specimens so that they are stationary, 
free from strain, freely exposed to air on all sides and 
not exposed to light. Continue the ageing for 48 h. 
At the completion of the ageing period, remove the 
test specimens from the oven and place on a flat 
surface to cool to room temperature. Allow them to 
cool for not less than 24 h. Measure the indentation 
hardness index (/,) of the aged specimens as in 
Annex D. 


E-3.3 Compare the indentation hardness index of 
bothaged and un-aged test specimens. 


E-4 CALCULATION 


Calculate the resistance to ageing as follows: 
Resistance to ageing, percent = (7, — Z) / J, x100 


Where, 


I = indentation hardness index of the original 


sample, and 


that the test specimens are kept at 70 + 2°C. Place l,— indentation hardness index of the aged 
thermometer near the centre of the oven to record the sample. 
actual ageing temperature. 

ANNEX F 

( Clause 7.4 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO FLEXING 


F-1 METHOD 


The method involves subjecting a sample to continued 
flexing with an indentor for 250 000 cycles at 4 cycle/s 
and measuring the loss/gain in indentation hardness. 


F-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 mm, 
leaving 25 mm from the edges of the whole piece. 


F-3 APPARATUS 


F-3.1 The essential parts of the apparatus (see Fig. 2), 
which has been found suitable, consists of an indentor 
of dimensions specified in F-3.2, connected through a 
threaded adaptor and held by a locking nut to a push 


rod. This push rod is constrained to move vertically by 
fixed sleeves and is driven vertically by a motor which 
rotates a crank disc, the crank disc and push rod being 
joined by a connecting rod. This connecting rod is 
adjustably mounted in a radial slit in the crank disc, the 
length of the strokes, therefore, being adjustable. The 
motor is mounted upon a steel beam above the table 
upon which the specimen to be tested is placed. A square 
frame made of mild steel angles with a clear internal 
dimension of 107 x 107 mm is positioned on the table 
just below the indentor to prevent lateralmovement 
of the specimen in the course of its repeated flexing 
by the indentor. The fixtures are adjusted for effecting 
four flexes per second. A revolution counter is attached 
to the machine to record the number of flexes for the 
specimen. 


REVOLUTION COUNTER 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


CRANK DISC 


PUSH ROD 


Fic. 2 APPARATUS FOR FLUXING TEST 


F-3.2 A 105 mm square mild steel plate of 3mm 
thicknessshall constitute the indentor. 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


Measure the thickness of the sample as described in 
AnnexB. Determine the indentation hardness index (/,) 
as given in Annex D. Adjust the stroke ofthe crankshaft 
for a depression of the indentor by a distance equal to 
40 percent of the thickness of the sample. This is done 
by adjusting the position of the connecting rod in the 
crank disc. Raise the indentor to the top most position 
of the stroke and the test specimen in the mild steel 
angle box below the indentor. Place wooden blocks 
of suitable thickness below the specimen to ensure 
that the top surface of the specimen is in contact with 
the bottom side of the indentor when the indentor is 


at the topmost position of the stroke. Subject the 
specimen to flexing at a rate of 4 cycle/s. After flexing 
250000 cycles, allow the sample to remain for 30 min. 
Thereafter, determine the indentation hardness index 
(L) by test method prescribed in Annex D. 


F-5 CALCULATION 


Calculate resistance to flexing as follows: 


Resistance to flexing, percent = (4, — J,)/J, x 100 
Where, 


I = Indentation hardness index of the original 
sample; and 


I,= Indentation hardness index of the flexed 
sample. 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX G 
( Clauses 7.5 and 7.6 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COMPRESSION SET 


G-1 PRINCIPLE 


The compression set under constant deflection is the 
measure of the residual strain in a test piece after it has 
been strained under compression to a given extent for 
a given time and then allowed to recover for a given 
time, the temperature being substantially constant 
during the test. 


G-2 TEST SPECIMEN 
The test specimen shall be of size 100 x 100 mm. 


G-3 APPARATUS 


The compression device shall consist of two flat steel 
plates, between the parallel faces of which the test 
piece is compressed. Steel spacers in the form of bars 
and of thickness, such as to give the required 40 percent 
compression shall be provided to control the thickness 
of the piece during the test. 


G-4 PROCEDURE 


Measure initial thickness of the test piece accurately 
as prescribed in B-2. Compress the test piece by 


40 percent of its original thickness between the 
parallel steel plates, which shall be larger than the test 
piece. Use steel spacers between the plates, sufficient 
clearance being allowed for tilting of the test piece and 
care being taken to avoid displacement of the test piece. 
After being compressed for 22 h at a temperature of 
70 + 2°C, remove the test piece from the clamp while 
still at the test temperature and allow recovering for 3 h 
at room temperature. Then measure the thickness of the 
test piece again. Test at least two test pieces and take 
the average of test results. 


G-5 CALCULATION 
Calculate the compression set as follows: 
Compression set at constant strain, percent — 
(T,- T )/ T. x 100 
Where, 


T = original thickness of the test piece; and 
T,— thickness of the test piece after recovery. 


ANNEXH 
( Clause 7.7 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF pH VALUE 


H-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


Draw a square piece of rubberized coir sheet weighing 
about 10 g. 


H-2 PREPARATION OF AQUEOUS EXTRACT 


Cut the piece taken into about 5 mm? pieces and weigh. 
Transfer it to a clean, chemically resistant glass flask, 
fitted with ground glass joint for reflux condenser. Add 
distilled water (see IS 1070) weighing 20 times the 
weight of the rubberized coir under test, to the flask. Fit 


the flask to the reflux condenser and heat the contents 
of the flask to boil. Continue boiling for 1 h. Remove 
the flask and close while the liquid is still boiling 
gently using a clean ground glass stopper. Cool to room 
temperature. 


H-3 DETERMINATION OF pH VALUE 


Transfer a portion ofthe aqueous extract to the electrode 
of pH meter (see IS 2711) and determine the pH. 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 7.8 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF CHLORIDE 


J-1 REAGENT 


J-1.1 Calcium Carbonate (Chloride Free) 

J-1.2 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1 N. 
J-1.3 Potassium Chromate Solution — 5 percent. 
J-1.4 Burette 

J-1.5 Pipette 

J-1.6 Conical Flask 

J-1.7 Measuring Flask 


J-2 PREPARATION 
SOLUTIONS 


OF STANDARD 


J-2.1 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1N. 


Take 16.989 g of silver nitrate having molecular weight 
of 169.89 and dissolve in distilled water to make it one 
litre. 


J-2.2 Potassium Chromate Solution — 5 percent. 


Dissolve 50 g of potassium chromate in one litre 
distilled water. 


J-3 PROCEDURE 


J-3.1 For the potassium chromate solution prepared 
addstandard silver nitrate solution of 0.1 N till a red 
precipitate is formed. Allow it to stand for overnight 
and filter. Dilute the filter to one litre with distilled 
water. Note down the volume of silver nitrate solution 


transferred. 


J-3.2 Take 100 ml of aqueous extract of the 
solutionwhich was prepared during pH analysis. 


J-3.3 Neutralize the aqueous extract ofthe solution with 
calcium carbonate till a pale yellowcolor is obtained 
(usually 0.5 g is sufficient). 


J-3.4 Add 1 ml of potassium chromate solution. 


J-3.5 Titrate against standard silver nitrate solution tilla 
red colour is obtained. Note down the volume of silver 
nitrate solution transferred. 


J-3.6 Calculate the percentage of chloride by 
theformulae given in J-4. 


J-4 CALCULATION 


3.546 (V, -V,)N 


Chloride (as Cl), percent by mass = 
W 


— volume of standard silver nitrate solutionused 
in titration with material, in ml; 


V,= volume of standard silver nitrate solution used 
in blank with material, in ml; 

‘N= normality of silver nitrate solution; and 

W — mass of the material out of which the aqueous 


extract was made for chloride content test 
only, in g. 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX K 
( Clause 7.9 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SULPHATE CONTENT 


K-1 REAGENTS 


K-1.1 Barium Chloride Solution, 2 percent (w/v). 
K-1.2 Hydrochloric Acid (Concentrated) 


K-2 PROCEDURE 


Take a measured portion of extract. Filter through 
a suitable filter paper and wash the filter paper with 
distilled water. Add concentrated hydrochloric acid 
drop-by-drop to the combined filter and washing until 
the solution is just acidic to litmus.Add 1 ml of acid 
per 100 ml of solution. Boil the solution for 5 min and 
leave it to cool overnight. Filter off any precipitate on 
a filter paper pulp pad. Wash with water and heat the 
combined filtrate and washing to boiling. To the boiling 
solution add drop-by-drop 10 ml of hot barium chloride 
solution. Boil for 30min and leave to cool overnight. 
Transfer the precipitate quantitatively to an ignited 
tarred Gooch crucible with asbestos pad and wash with 
cold water until the washing are free from chloride. 
Ignite the crucible and its contents gently at first and 
finally at 800?C to 900?C to constant weight. 


NOTE — Whatman No. 41 paper is suitable. 


K-3 Carry out the blank determination. 


10 


K-4 Calculate the percentage of water-soluble 
sulphateby the following formula: 


2058 (a — b) 
P = SSS 
V 


percentage by weight, of water soluble 


sulphates as sulphate ion; 


a= weight of the precipitate obtained as in test, 
in g; 

b= weight of the precipitate obtained as in blank, 
in g; and 

V= volume of extract taken for the test, in ml. 


NOTE — 100 ml of extract are equivalent to 2.0 g of 
conditioned test specimen. 


K-5 Repeat the test with extract with extracts of 
theremaining test specimens and calculate the 
percentage of water-soluble sulphate in each test 
specimen. 


Calculate the average of the values obtained as in K-4 
and K-5. 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


ANNEX M 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


Organization 


Central Coir Research Institute, Kalavoor 


Coir Pith and Allied Products Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association, Coimbatore 


All India Rubberized Coir Products Manufacturers 
Association, Tirunelveli 


Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bengaluru 
Coconut Development Board, Ernakulam 

Coir board, Kochi 

Coir Mats and Mattings Association, 

Coir on Foam Products, Coimbatore 

Coir Shippers’ Council, Cherthala 


Federation of Indian Coir Exporters’ Associations, 
Alleppey 


Hindustan Coir, Coir Board Complex, Alappuzha 


Karnataka State Coir Development Corporation Ltd. 
Bengaluru 


Kerala Organic Manure and Fertilizer, Kerala 


Kerala State Coir Corporation Ltd, Alappuzha 


Kerala State Small Scale Coir Manufacturer’s Federation, 
Alappuzha 


Kerala State Coir Marketing Federation, Kerala 


Kurlon Enterprises Limited, Bengaluru 


M M Rubber & Co, 


National Coir Research & Management Institute 
(NCRMI), Thiruvanthapuram 


National Coir Training & Design Centre, 


Natural Green Tech (P) Ltd., 


Orissa Co operative Coir Corporation Ltd, Bhubaneshwar 


11 


Representative(s) 
Dr Anita Das RAVINDRANATH (Chairman) 
SMT SUMI SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNDARESAN 
SHRI MATHEW GEORGE (Alternate) 


JOINT DIRECTOR 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI SUGATA GHOSH 
Dr K MuRALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 
Jort Director (Alternate) 


SHRI V. A. JOEPH 
SHRI PAVITHRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI HARIRAJAN 
SHRI PHILIP VARGHESE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. S. SANJEEV 
SHRI SAJAN B Nar (Alternate) 


SHRI JOSPAUL MATHEW 
SHRI Sasan B. Naim (Alternate) 


WEAVING MASTER 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI G. KUMARASWAMY 
Suri K. R. KuMARASwAMY (Alternate) 


Suni G. RAJESH 


SHRI G. SREEKUMAR 
Suri N. SunuRA) (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRI NARENDRA KUDVA 
Suri P. ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI JOSEPH CHERIYAN 


Dr K. R. ANIL 
Suri C. ABHISHEK (Alternate) 


ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


ALAPPUZHA REGIONAL OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI TOMMY MATHEW 
SHRI ABHISHEK THOMAS (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 


IS 8391 (Part 1) : 2019 


Organization 


Rubber Board, Kottayam 
Shaa Pith Media Co., Coimbatore 


Sivanthi Joe Coirs, Tuticorin 


Tamil Nadu Coir Cooperative Federation, Chennai 


Venugopal Fibre Industries, Pattukottai 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Dr J. THOMAS 
Dr James JAcos (Alternate) 


SHRI S PRABHU 
SHRI RAMESH (Alternate) 


SHRI DUNSTEN JOSEPH 
SHRI K. SIVAKAR (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 


Suni R. B. SHYAM SUNDER 


Suri A. K. Bera, Scientist ‘F’ AND Hean (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suni P. N. MURALI 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 25 (13893). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


