-1-S14774 (Part 2) : 2000
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard

I

ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE TRACE HEATING IN POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERE-S
PART 2 INFORMATIVE APPLICATION GUIDE FOR DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE

ICS 29.260.20

0

BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
NEW

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

April 2000

Price Group

9

Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee, ETD 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This standard (Part 2) is one of the series of Indian Standards which provides guidance for applications of electrical resistance trace heating systems in areas where potentially explosive atmospheres may be present. The series comprises of the following two parts: Part 1 General and testing requirements Part 2 Informative application guide for design, installation and maintenance In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from Dot. 31/283/CDV International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). circulated by the

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test, shaH be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000

India8 Standard

ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE TRACE HEATING IN POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES
PART 2 INFORMATIVE APPLICATION GUIDE FOR DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE

1 SCOPE

This standard (Part 2) provides guidance for the application of electrical resistance trace heating systems in areas where potentially explosive atmospheres may be -present. It provides recommendations for the design, installation and maintenance of trace cheating equipment and associated control and monitoring equipment. This part supplements the requirements specified in IS 14774 (Part 1). 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No.
5571 : 1981 Title

with temperature classification in accordance IS 557 1. Where special considerations apply or where site conditions may be especially onerous, these conditions should be detailed in the trace heating specification. Where trace heating systems are to be installed on mobile equipment, or interchangeable skid units, the specification for these trace heating systems should be designed to accommodate the worst conditions that the trace heating system may be used in. Where any parts of the trace heating-system may be exposed to ultra violet radiation those parts shou!d be suitable for use in such conditions. 4.2 Corrosive
Areas

Guide for selection of electrical equipment for hazardous areas Classification of hazardous areas (other than mines) having flammable gases and vapours for electrical installation (seco,nd
revision)

5572 : 1994

14774 (Part 1) :

2000

Electrical resistance trace heating in potentially explosive atmospheres: Part 1 General and testing requirements

3 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 14774 (Part 1) shall apply. 4 APPLICATION
4.1 General CONSIDERATIONS

All components of electric trace heating systems should be examined to verify that they are compatible with any corrosive material that may be encountered during the lifetime of the system. Trace heating systems operating in corrosive environments may have a higher potential for failure than in non-corrosive environments. Deterioration of the thermal insulation system is made -worse by corrosion of the weather barrier and the possibility of pipeline and vessel leaks soaking the thermal insulation. Particular attention should be given to the materials of piping systems, as well as the electric trace heating systems, as related to the etfective earth leakage/ground fault return path. The use of non-metallic or hybrid piping systems may further complicate the earth leakage/ground fault return path and special consideration should be given to these piping systems. Earth leakage/ground fault return paths that are established at the time of installation may become degraded due to corrosion during the operation of the plant. 4.3 Installation
Considerations

Where trace heating systems are to be installed in potentiallly explosive atmospheres, full details of the hazardous area classification(s), IS 5572, should be specified. The specification should state the zone of risk (1 or 2), gas group (IIA, IIB or TIC) and

For convenience, various process types, according to the degree of application criticality and process temperature accuracy required, may be specified (see Table 1). However, it should be recognized that each specific application may involve a combination of considerations.

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 Table 1 Process Types (Chse 4.3) 5 THERMAL INSULATION

5.1 General The selection, installation and maintenance of the thermal insulation should be considered a key component in the performance of an electrical trace heating system. The thermal insulation system is normally designed to prevent the majority of heat loss with the trace heating system compensating for the remainder. Therefore problems with the thermal insulation will have a direct impact on the overall system performance. The primary function of thermal insulation is to reduce the rate of heat transfer from a surface that is operating at a temperature other than ambient. This reduction of energy loss may: reduce operating expenses; improve system performance; and increase system output capability.

Process Type -._ Application Criticality Process Temperature I
Above a Minimum Point Type I -_-___ Critical (C-) Non-critical (NC-) -___ C-I NC-I

Accuracy Required 7
Within a Narrow Band Type 111 C-III NC-III

Within a Moderate Band Type II C-II NC4

_

Type C are critical applications; Type NC applications.

are non-critical

When the trace heating is critical to the process, consideration should be given to circuit monitoring heating circuits should be monitored for correct operation and alarms provided to indicate damage or fault and to back up (redundant) heating systems. Spare or back up trace heating controls may be specified to be automatically activated in the event of a fault being indicated by the monitoring/alarm system. This sometimes known as `redundance'. Back up trace heating allows maintenance and repairs to be performed without a process shutdown. 4.4 Process Temperature 4.4.1 Type I A Type I process is one for which the temperature should be maintained above a minimum point. Ambient sensing control may be acceptable. Large block of power may be controlled by means of a single control device and a panel board. Heat input may be provided unnecessarily at time and wide temperature excursions should be tolerable. Energy efftciency may be improved through the use of dead leg control techniques (see 6.13). 4.4.2 Type II A Type II process is one for which the temperature should be maintained within a moderate band. Pipeline sensing mechanical thermostats may be typical. 4.4.3 Type III A Type III process is one for which the temperature should be controlled within a narrow band. Pipe sensing controllers using thermocouple or resistancetemperature detector (RTD) units facilitate field (work site) calibration and provide maximum flexibility in the selection of temperature alarm and monitoring functions. Heat input capability may be provided to melt or raise the fluid temperature, or both, within a specified range and time interval. Type III considerations require strict adherence to flow patterns and thermal insulation systems. 2 Accuracy

-Prior to any heat loss analysis for an electrically traced pipeline, vessel or other mechanical equipment, a review of the selection of the insulation system is recommended. The principal areas for consideration are as follows: _ _ selection of an insulation material; selection of a weather barrier (cladding); selection of the economic insulation thickness; and selection of the proper insulation size. of Insulating Material

5.2 Selection

The following are important aspects to be considered when selecting an insulation material: thermal characteristics; mechanical properties; chemical compatibility; _ moisture resistance; personnnel safety characteristics; fire resistance; smoke, toxicity; and cost. materials commonly available include:

Insulation -

expanded silica; mineral fibre; cellular glass; urethane; fibreglass; calcium silicate; isocyanurate; and perlite silicate.

For soft insulants (mineral fibre, fibre glass, etc), actual pipe-size insulation may be used in many cases by banding the insulation tightly. Care should be taken to prevent the heater from being buried within the insulation, which may cause damage to the heater

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000

or may restrict proper heat transfer. As an alternative, the next larger pipe-size insulation that can easily enclose pipe and electric trace heater is also acceptable. Rigid insulation (calcium silicate, expanded silica, cellular glass, etc), may be pipe-size insulation if board sections cut to fit the longitudinal joint are used. This type of installation technique is commonly referred to as an extended-leg installation. Alternatively, the next larger insulation size may be selected to accommodate the trace heater. In all cases, the insulation size and thickness should be clearly specified. 5.3 Selection
of Weather Barrier (Cladding)

Jacketing, that is, overlapped or otherwise closed without sealant is not effective as a barrier to moisture. A single unsealed joint can allow a considerable amount of water to leak into the insulation during a rainstorm. The, type of weather-barrier used should, as a minimum, be based on a consideration of the following: effectiveness in excluding moisture; corrosive nature of chemicals in the area; fire protection requirements: durability to mechanical abuse; and cost.
of the Economical Thickness

Proper operation of an electrically trace heated system depends upon the insulation being dry. Electric tracing normally has insufficient hesit output to dry wet thermal insulation. Some insulation materials, even though removed from the piping and force dried, never regain their initial characteristics after once being wet. Straight piping may be weather protected with metal jacketing, polymeric, or a mastic system. When metal jacketing is used, it should be smooth with formed, modified `S' longitudinal ,dints. The circumferential end joints should be sealed with closure bands and supplied with sealant on the outer edge or where they overlap.

5.4 Selection

At a minimum, an economic consideration of the insulation will weigh the initial costs of the materials and installation against the energy saved over the life of the insulation. It should be noted that the actual insulation thicknesses do not always correspond exactly to the nominal insulation thickness. When choosing the insulation size, considerations should be made as to whether or not the actual pipe-size insulation is suitable for accommodating both pipe and trace heater. IMFTAL JACKET

SECTION A-A METAL JACKff INSULATED

PIPE

INSULATION

INSUU\TION

STRAP A

PIPE

FIG.1 THERMAL INSULATION: WEATHER-BARRIER INSTALLATION

3

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 5.5 Double Insulation
The double when allowable insulation technique may be employed the maximum temperature design of any trace heating system should conform all requirements in these standard. Each process imposes unique demands on the designer in order maintain heating specified insulation to achieve it within systems items of the desired the specified necessarily equipment temperature conditions. with such and Trace other for the use of electrical the requirements areas and with to equipment of this

the pipe

temperature

exceeds

temperature

of the trace heater. Prevention in high

of the freezing appiication.

of condensate

steam lines when these lines are not in use is a typical It consists of locating the trace heater the pipe. is to outerin an technique of inner-and result between two layers of insulation determine insulation the correct combination type and thickness surrounding

The essence of the double-insulation

interface

as thermal to power of in and of these

that will

and the electrical parts

supply available so the values perform

acceptable interface temperature for the trace heater. This relationship is illustrated in Fig. 2. It may be noted that maximum ambient temperature conditions should 5 be considered in this determination.

the system. The final system will all these component interface Local items have to be known temperature

be an integration and controlled maxima

order to design systems that will ambient minima, design. have to be known

as required. into the

data, both

SYSTEM

DESIGN

and incorporated

6.1 Introduction
When designing trace heating systems for use in and The

Consideration

potentially constraints classification

explosive are imposed

atmospheres,

additonal

due to the requirements consideration.

of the area under

should be given to maintenance of the systems and of the process equipment; to energy efficiency, and to testing the installed systems for operational satisfaction and safety.

PIPE

INNEll INSULATION

LAYER

OUTER INSUlATlON

IAVER

METAL FOIL (ALUMINIUM)

OUTER

C

ri
RADIUS

ro

FIG. 2 TYPICAL TEMPERAT~JRE PROFILE 4

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000

6.2 Purpose of, and Major Requirement Heating
Trace heaters should as to provide a) sufficient be selected power for:

for, Trace

excess of installed
and the way installed

power over the power as required trace shall heaters are applied, not be the cause, not

in which

and installed

such

and operated

even after evaluation of worst case conditions, to any unacceptable risk in a potentially explosive area. 6.3 Heat Loss Calculations To determine heat losses for a given set of condiLlons, insulation details at several desired specification is required, of the size and the type of temperaand wind of the thermal specified, workpiece ambient conductivity

compensation a specified heat exchange 6.3, and/or;

of~heat losses when maintaining temperature of a workpiece method (no in is assumed with the workpiece j;ee calcualtion

or its contents),

a complete including insulation thickness, conditions.

b)

raising value period,

the temperature when to be established see calculation

of a workpiece, with within method

and

mean temperatures, insulation maintenance temperature

its content

specified,

a specified a specified

weather-barrier

in 6.4;

ture, and the minimum

c)

a combination

of (a) and (b). that heat losses established in by

It should be observed accordance a safety factor

For example the following

given

these calculation.

For example; by

with 6.3 and 6.4 should be multiplied determined

the heat loss for pipes and tubes may be evaluated equation:

on the basis of 6.5. The

<T,-r,>
Y' 1 71Dlhi where 4 is the (W/m); is the desired is the minimum ("CL is the inside diameter layer (m); is the outside diameter layer (m); (inside diameter of the outer insulation layer of the inner insulation of the inner insulation maintenance design temperature ("C); Vessel heat losses are more complex ambient temperature sinks that penetrate the insulation require a more complex analysis heat loss and the trace heating consulted. For ease of product suppliers insulations, A simnlified is the outside diameter of the outer insulation layer when present (m); K, is the thermal of insulation conductivity evaluated of the inner layer will furnish heat losses for variously which when present); version is: of Ean. I, expressing selection, simple most charts heat loss per unit length of pipe +m(4DI) --_-++
W4/4)+ 1 I co

1

...(Eqn.

1)

2n: K,

2n: K,

x D,h
weather

n

D3ho

barrier to ambient

(Wim'K)

(typical

values for this term range from 3 W/m K to 284 W/m K for low temperature below 50�C. due to the heat total be applications

surface. They often to determine supplier should

trace

heating of and

and graphs

maintained include

temperatures a safety factor.

usually

heat loss

per unit length,

2xK( Tp - r,)
' = In (4

at its mean temperature

ID,)

. ..(Eqn.

1A)

(W/m K);
is the thermal of insulation, conductivity when present, of the outer layer evaluated at its

6.4 Heat-up Considerations
In certain specify raising from the when certain surface plant operations, it may be necessary system is capable within to of a

that the trace heating the temperature time period.

mean temperature
hi

(W/m2 K); coefftcient

of a static product

is the inside air contact pipe to the inner present (W/m2 K);

For example,

the heat-delivery may equation:

insulation

requirement be evaluated

of a trace heated system on piping by use of the following

h co is the inside air contact coefficient
outer insulation when present (W/m2 K);

from the

surface to the weather-barrier

t=Hln

P,V,,hf
c/c -U(G -T,)
..(Eqn. 2)

ho

is the outside

air fiim coefficient

from

the

5

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000
where U is heat loss per unit length of pipe per degree of temperature difference

CT,%)
9" -+ 7t Dlh,
where H is the thermal time constant, which is the total energy stored in the mass of pipe, fluid, and insulation per degree of temperature divided by the heat loss per unit temperature
P,C*I v,,

1

In(4/4)+In(4/4) 271K, 27rK,

IpI-_ 1

I

(see Eqn. I)

is the inside diameter (m); is the inside weather-barrier is the outside weather-barrier . ..(Eqn. 3)

of the insulation

layer

air contact (W/m2~K); air contact

coefficient

of the

length

per degree

coefficient

of the

differential.
v,, + 05wp3v,3

to the ambient

(W/m' K); from pipe

is the inside air contact coefficient

H=

+ wp2

to the inside insulation is the temperature occurs ("C);

surface (W/m' K); phase change

u

at which

is the density of product

in pipe (kg/m3);

is the latent (J/kg); and

heat of fusion

for the product

is the specific heat of the product (J/kg K); is the output of the trace heater(s) (W/m). is the internal volume of pipe (m'/m); The preceding densities, relationships thermal over also assume that system conductivities, the temperature and heat range of a is the density of pipe (kg/m3); is the specific heat of the pipe (J/kg K); is the pipe wall volume (m3/m); (kg/m3); (J/kg~K);

volumes,

losses are constant phase change during representative provisions

interest. Note that some products of a straight pipeline,

do not undergo

heat up. Although

the model is

is the density of insulation

it does not have

for equipment for valves, irregularly from

such as pumps and valves. pumps, instruments, may be or This can

is the specific heat of the insulation is the insulation is the initial wall volume (m'/m);

Insulation and other constructed

flanges, shaped block,

equipment

temperature

of the pipe ("C); of the fluid and pipe

for the particular covers.

configuration. insulation

be fabricated is the final temperature flexible

segments,

removable

I ("C);
Uninsulated is the ambient temperature ("C); temperature ("C); or partially insulated pipe supports or equipment require additional heat input to compensate for the higher heat loss. Insulating cements or fibrous materials should be used to fill cracks and joints. Where insulating cements are used for total insulation of pipe per of an irregular of cement insulating is the thermal is the thermal time constant (s); conductivity of the inner surface, a proportionally thicker layer may be ~applied to achieve capability. the desired

is the desired maintenance

is the desired heat up time (s); is the heat loss per unit degree of temperature length

(W/m K);

6.5 Heat Loss Design Safety Factor Since heat loss calculations result in theoretical values

insulation evaluated (W/m K); is the thermal insulation (W/m K);

at its mean temperature

and do not account for imperfections actual work site installations, be applied to the calculated safety factor and typically cent.

associated with

conductivity

of the outer

a safety factor should values. The calculated

evaluated

at its mean temperature

should be based upon past experience will range from IO per cent to 25 per of a safety are generally factor connected of the heaters. is used to with the in the trace heating system. system, the voltage

is the outside diameter of outer insulation (m); is the outside diameter layer (m);

layer

The addition

compensate for tolerances These tolerances efficiency

of the inner insulation

of the thermal insulation

supp!y and the characteristics 6

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 6.6 Selection
For

of Trace Heater
application there are some basic the choice

ctassification maximum heater whichever may for use~in tracing. is

is exceeded. allowable either power the

The

limiting for chosen

value from

of the

a particular

density

each trace

design requirements of trace heater(s). These are as follows: a)

which may determine

value However,

manufacturer's be further

data or that specified limited

for the process, density multiple for

is the lower.

the power

by the need

The trace heaters should be certified potentially explosive atmospheres; The maximum trace (which operating heaters may maximum withstand should

The designer may then select the type, length or size of the the and loading load should above. installed of the trace heater. The actual be not less than the design of trace heater density installed and of loading

b)

temperature be greater than and be suitable the

than

possible

workpiece

temperature normal

the actual power density not greater than that obtained The type arld the values should load and power be recorded

be greater

temperature); heaters

in the system documentation. for conditions atmosphere 6.7 Maximum

c)

The trace operation specified,

should

in the environmental for example, a corrosive temperature.

Temeprature

Determination Temperature.

or a low ambient

6.7.1 Maximum Workpiece Stabilized Design For a stabilized temperature temperature energized. potential

NOTE - Any change to certified certificate

apparatus may invalidate

the

design the maximum the trace heater

possible

pipe

is calculated with The formula

at maximum

ambient

For any application power without with density damaging

there

is a maximum

allowable

continuously the maximum of the is as follows:

at which

a trace heater can be used or its contents. critical, such as value has Multiple caustic soda or

for calculating which

either the workpiece is particularly

pipe temperature

is a re-arrangement

Sometimes

this value

terms of the heat loss formula

lined pipes, vessels containing materials.

with heat sensitive to be recorded tracing or spiralling

This limiting

In (4/4>
2k

+-+-

1

1

in the system documentation.

Dzh,,

Dzh,

of a single trace heater may be where T pr personnel are competent in the is the maximum ("C);
The maximum

required. The choice of trace heater may be further limited by whether fabrication on site is possible. Site fabricated that: installation
special

...(Eqn. 4)

I

+T,

trace

heaters

may

be permissible

provided

calculated

pipe temperature

a)
b)

NOTE -

process pipe temperature

may exceed

techniques

required.

the calculated value.

the irace heater(s) :<sts specified

pass the field

(site work)

W

is the trace heater output (W/m) I10 percent rated voltage manufacturer's output tolerance;

corrected and

for

in 8.5.2.

and maximum

c)

f he trace heater(s) is/are marked in accordance
with 6.3 of IS 14774 (Part 1).

k
the above for the the Other

is the thermal conductivity its mean temperature terms are defined

of the insulation

at

Trace

heater(s)

not are

excluded

by

(W/m K). in 6.3, Eqn. I. Iterative

considerations application, maximum

technically power density

suitable of each.

but it is still necessary to determine allowable

techniques conductivity

may need to be applied of the insulation

to the calcu!ation cable

of Eqn. 4 in order to arive output may be a function 6.7.2

at TP,, since the thermal and the heating

This is a function withstand classification operating temperature For each

of the construction, the trace and required heater, maximum

the maximum temperature the maximum permissible insulation. maximum from

temperature, of the temperature

of pipe temperature.

Sheath

Temperature:

Metallic

Applications
the sheath to

of the workpiece particular power trace

and thermal heater the

For metallic temperature

pipe or vessel applications,

of a trace heater should be considered

the extent that product in the application. insulation temperature

ratings are not to be exceeded but also the maximum insulation and The maximum may be deter-

allowable specified should withstand

density

should be determined

This includes not only the electrical of the thermal

the manufacturer's be chose

data which so that

are based on tests 1). The value used the maximum temperature

and sheath materials, limitations

in 5 of IS 14774 (Part temperature

neither

pipe wall material sheath temperature

or process material. of a trace heater

nor the required

IS 14774 (Fart 2) : 2000
mined by product testing or using the system approach as described temperature in 5.1.10 of IS 14774 Part 1. The sheath of a trace hearer is as ~foliows: The overall is heat transfer coefficient for plasltic pipe

Li,- u,,, k,
&, = 2 where T* C U win is the trace heater sheath temperature is the trace heater circumference is overall heat transfer coefficient (m); (W/m*K); L k P ("C); + Tp,,, . ..(Eqn. 5)
where Lb u,, is the-overall metallic heat transfer coeflicient pipe (W/m'

l _L+L

...(Eqn. 6)

for non-

K);
coefficient for

is the overall metallic

heat transfer

pipe (W/m' K); (m); and of pipe wall material

is the pipe wall thickness is the thermal conductivity (W/m K).

is the trace heater output (W/m) at the maximum pipe temperature as defined below at 110 percent rated voltage and maximum tolerance (declared by the output manufacturer); and

Because of the additional thermal resistance of the non-metallic pipe wall, a temperature difference will exist across the pipe wall; that is, the outside pipe wall and fluid temperature are not the same as in the case of metallic pipe. Therefore, fluid temperature pipe, then should be considered. For non-metallic

is the maximum pipe temperature ("C). Pm The overall heat transfer coefficient is different for each trace heater type, installation method, and system configuration. It is a combination of conductive, convective, and radiation heat transfer modes. The value of U can vary from 2.2 for cylindrical heating cable in air (primarily convective), to 30 or more for a trace heater applied using heat transfer aids (primarily conductive). Upon request, the trace heating supplier should provide the U-factor for given 7
applications, determined The power exceed maximum or furnish calculated or perimentally sheath temperatures.

. ..(Eqn. 7)
where rf Equation complex is the fluid temperature 7 is a cocservative problem that involves ("C). simplification criteria beyond of a the data of the

scope of this standard. manufacturers

The individual The power provide the maximum exceed

trace heating output

should provide applications. selected should not should

sheath temperature

output (W,,) of the trace heater selected
the stabilized design and should listed above. not classification limitations or any other

for specific
trace design heater and

should provide

the stabilized temperature temperature

the temperature temperature

classification limitations.

or any other

6.7.3 Sheath Applications

Temperature:

Non-Metallic
6.8

Design Information Design Information Documentation

For non-metallic thermal resistance
metallic materials l/200 difference depending tracing

pipe applications, the pipe wall shouid be considered, as the nonmedium. These conductivity (k-factor) temperature density. compared

6.8.1

To ensure a workable function should information system.

trace heating design, the design with up-to-date piping be notified of any revisions

pipe is a poor heat transfer may have a thermal of steel, may develop that

be furnished

and should

and a substantial cable power (when

of items and drawings

that pertain to the trace heating

across the pipe or tank wall

on the heating pipes

This
to Any or all of the following thermal may be applicable: design parameters;

higher than normal
metallic adverse effects. a)

temperature

and vessles)

may

have two

system flow diagram; equipment etc); layout drawings (plans. sections,

The non-metallic temperature

pipe

maximum

allowable

-

may be exceeded.
allowable temperaobtained from of the _ -

b)

The trace heater maximum ture may be exceeded.

pipe drawings (plans, isometrics, piping thermal specifications; insulation detail etc); sp.ecifications; drawings

line lists, etc);

Sheath temperature operating conditions

of the trace heater under normal is in principle in obtaining U, the effect

Eqn. 5. However,

equipment strainers,

(pumps,

valves,

thermal resistance of the pipe wall should be included.

8

IS 14774~(Part

2) : 2000 heater at

-

electrical etc);

drawings

(one lines, elementaries,

12)
13)

watts

per unit

length

of trace temperature;

desired maintenance

-

bill of materials; electrical equipment manuals; equipment specifications; and instruction

heat loss at desired maintenance per unit length of pipe;

temperature

14) 15) 16)

watts, total; circuit thermal thickness, current, start-up and steady state; type, nominal size,

installation

insulation

-

equipment thermal

details; schedules; documentation; of gas or vapour involved; 18) 17)

and k-factor; including for the lowest area (if

insulation

area classification, ignition temperature applicable); ~bill of material.

each

area classification ignition and temperature

-

process procedures pipe temperatures, exothermic

that would that

cause elevated out or

The drawing should also indicate the power distribution panel number or designation, the alarm and control equipment designation, and set points.

is, steam

reactions.

6.9 Power System

6.8.2 Isometric

or Heater

Configuration

Line Lists

The trace heater branch circuit capable of interrupting as short-circuit as well faults

protection

should

be

and Load Charts
Each heater circuit depicting relevant system. include a) b) c) d) e) should be shown on a drawing and

high impedance

earth faults,

[see 4.4 of IS 14774

its physical

location,

configuration,

data for the trace heating and its piping The drawing and/or design data should the following information:

(Part I)]. This should be accomplished by an earth fault equipment protective device with a nominal 30 mA trip interruption devices capacitive specified qualified rating or a controtler for with earth fault with capability use in conjunction

-piping system designation; pipe-size piping and material; or line number; or circuit number;

suitable circuit protection. is typically leakage

The trip level for adjustable of the heater as

set at 30 mA above any inherent characteristic and supervision service operation Where condisystems, for the

location

by the trace heating supplier. persons will circuit

tions of maintenance and continued safe operation

ensure that only

trace heater designation

the installed is necessary

location of power connection, end seal, and temperature sensors as applicable; trace heater number; and

of the equipment

or processes, earth

0 g)

design data such as the following:

fault detection without interruption is acceptable if alarmed in a manner to assure an acknowledged response. 6.10 Start-up at Low Ambient Temperatures low

I? 2)
3) 4)

temperature maximum minimum maximum applicable); maximum required);

to be maintained; process temperature; ambient exposure temperature; temperature (when

When trace heating ambient protective current temperatures devices.

systems are started at very there may be initial

current of for

surges which could cause nuisance tripping The rating devices occur. protective may should

on current

and characteristics be appropriate low ambient to the trace

5)

sheath

temperature

(when

the trace; heating systems-where conditions supplier's Refer for instructions

start up heating and

additional

details

6) 7) 8) 9)

heat-up parameters length of piping;

(when required);

recommendations

in these cases.

6.11 Long Cable Runs When parallel circuit trace heaters are used in long_ at the end of the run can be at the beginning due to density

trace ratio of trace heater per length of pipe; extra length of trace heater applied to valves, pipe supports, and other heat sinks;

runs, the power density less than the power

10) 11)

length of trace heater; operating voltage; 9

voltage drop. This should be taken into considerations when determining trace heater output and the location of temperature sensors.

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 6.12 Flow Pattern Analysis
Where critical temperature in determining is illustrated in Fig. 3. All control is required, network all drops below the desired maintenance valve temperature. common as

A bypass around a control occurrence where additional shown in Fig. 4.
NOTE bypass line. Since

is another

possible flow conditions be considered segments. example circuits maintain This shown

in the piping

should tank

circuits

are needed,

the trace heating circuit by the heated three trace heating

If circuit
should the tluid it would

No.

I

and circuit when

No. 3 are not needed. there is static, is flow

the

piping

be heated

u, the main

with separate controls are necessary to the piping system at its desired maintenance When the heated product No. flows from is pipe A, circuit

in the bypass

if not separately

controlled.

cool to the ambient

temperature.

temperature.

the tank through heating

1 and circuit
energized.

These are two examples the circuit design and manifold of the trace controls.
XOLD END TERMINATION

of piping require

systems for which Dead legs arrangements associated

No. 2 are de-energized, the non-flowing

and circuit

No. 3, which

needs close attention. careful devices and their

line, remains

systems heating

If all three circuits one control,

are combined

into one, using only and

the non-line

A or B is de-energized

TEMPERATURE SENSOR

HOT END TERMINATION 7

%IRC"IT NO.1 2i$

\

P,PEA

CIRCUIT NW?

PIPE B
L CIRCUIT NO. 3

FIG. 3

HEATED

TANK

EXAMPLE

COLD END TERMINATION CIRCUIT NO. 1 HOT END TERMINATION

CIRCUIT NO. 1

I CIRCUIT NO. 2

TEMPERATURE SENSOR FIG. 4 BYPASSEXAMPLE

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000

6.13 Dead-Leg

Control

Technique

7.2 Mechanical
Mechanical two

Controllers
such as thermostats. a bimetallic utilize or

This is a technique that is sometimes used for the temperature control of very complex piping networks and manifold systems. It can also be used where the total number of tern_perature controllers are to be kept to a minimum The technique at the expense of some energy savings. consists of locating of fabricating that: a

controllers,

alternative

principles:

element

the expansion of a fluid confined within a bulb or a bulb and capillary. Changes in temperature result in positional which displacement actuating electrical contacts make or break the circuit. controllers calibration are rugged; however or panel is cumbersome. type thermostats approved for appropriate should be the short mounted,

section of pipe such as a dead-leg a) b) has static flow condition

Mechanical at all times; sensing and tield Capillary of flow conditions, all contained hazardous installation. has the same heat loss as the other piping to be controlled. Then, regardless

element

is not grouped

and bimetallic in a housing area

use in the to the

sections will be heated. All sections that have static flow conditions at the same time will have the proper amount of heat required as the ambient temperature varies. Pipe sections that have flow may be heated unnecessarily. in energy using this savings technique against be with section The merits of the dead-leg approach lie mainly in the trade-off savings exercised temperature on initial when costs. Caution products. should

classification

Selection of the temperature mechanical controller should maximum component temperature parts. rating

sensor used with a take account of the of the sensor and its

7.3 Electronic Electronic temperature resistance

Controllers
typically (PRTs), use resistance

sensitive

controllers thermometers

detectors (RTDs), also known as platinum thermistors,

Care should be taken that first, the dead-leg

for control is long enough that its temperature is not affected by flow in the adjoining piping, and second, that the temperature that is thermally 6.14 Chimney Long, vertical sensor is located on the portion of flow conditions. independent

thermocouples (Tics), or other temperature sensing devices. The controllers can therefore be located several heating hundred system, metres away from the electric and are often panel-mounted and maintenance process trace and access.

Effect
piping runs, where close temperature

located for ease of operator These controllers signal

electronically

the sensor relay Field process

control is needed, may need two or more control circuits. Due to the convective circulation of the hot fluid, a substantial temperature difference from the bottom to the top of the vertical control circuit length run may occur. The for a long, vertical maximum

in order to switch is similar

an electromechanical for standard

or solid state device for on-off or phase control. calibration instruments. 7.4 Application to that

Suitability
protection systems having a process

run depends on the maintenance temperature tolerance and the fluid characteristics inside the pipe. 7

7.4.1

Freeze

CONTROL EQUIPMENT 7.1 General
A control which hazardous for various criticality

AND MONITORING

tempeature accuracy requirement Type I may only require a simple ambient air sensing control system. For improved alternative controls 7.4.2 energy conservation, accuracy Type for instance a 111, process temperature II or Type

and monitoring the minimum area classification

system defined

should

be used, for the

or additional

air sensing or pipe sensing

meets

requirem'ents

should be considered. Most process temperature _thermostat. applications within such or where temperatures band (Type III), low failure process may be and applications require

in this standard considerations to the degree of

and is appropriate

to the application

sensing of pipe temperature mechanical 7.4.3 alarm

and often use at least a

process types according and process temperature

accuracy as defined

in 4.3 and 4.4. Such control overcurrent isolation that any and monitoring protection, and temperature additional specified equipment current for limitations. may provide protection, particular system It is essential

For critical functions When

are to be controlled residual requirements temperature required. require controlled electronic 11 applications

a narrow circuit

as high

and trace heating conditions controls a narrow

or the job should band

specification be used. For has to be 111) by

it, electronic in which within controls,

applications, designer

by the trace heating

the temperature

for the system, also fully

meet operational

(Type

and safety requirements.

the controllers

may be grouped

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000
in a common cabinet conforming to the requirements 7.7.3 Temperature Temperature functions:

Alarms
the following

of the hazardous area classification. Such systems may also have high and low temperature, continuity, earth fault limit 7.4.4 limit and system-diagnostic switching. control operate devices, the highcircuit area. alarms and hightemperature

alarms are used to perform

Low-temperature
piping system temperature operating device.

alarm and hence

This the

indicates process

that the material and acceptable

When using solid-state signals may alarm or device. Consideration outside

has fallen below cooling design criteria.

a pre-set minimum

that subsequent

may be beyond The alarm or fitted

protection grouping

should be given to the hazardous

is incorporated as a separate

the controllers

with a temperature

controller

7.5 Location

of Controllers

Where possible, temperature controllers should be sited to allow free and easy access to make them convenient for maintenance or calibration. 7.6 Location 7.6.1 The

High-temperature
has exceeded that subsequent operating alarm, the alarm controller

alarm -

This

indicates

that the and

piping system and hence process material a pre-set heating maximum may be beyond with

temperature acceptable

temperature

of Sensors
number and location of sensors is

design criteria.

As with the low temperature a temperature

is incorporated

determined classification 7.6.2 inside

by the requirements

of the hazarouds area

or fitted as a separate device.

and design criteria. heating circuit runs through (such as sensors to properly two

7.7.4 Other Alarms Other available to) the following alarms include (but are not limited

Where a pipeline different and outside

areas with

ambient

temperatures

devices:

a heated building),

Auxiliary
indicate

contact
when

alarm -

The alarm is closed to

is used to is It provides proper

and associated controls may be required control pipeline temperatures. 7.7 Alarm Consideration

a contactor to the

and power

being supplied to the trace heating circuit. information operation operation contactor continuity. operator of the contactor, is open

confirm

but does not ensure proper circuit if a secondary heater has lost

7.7.1 Geizral
The primary function of an alarm circuit is -to alert operating personnel that the trace heating system may be operating outside the design limits and should therefore be checked for possible corrective action. The type and function of the various alarm systems depend on the requirementes of the process (see 4.3 and 4.4). Any, or all of the alarm may be incorporated in data-logging equipment. The most common devices are listed in 7.7.2 to 7.7.4. 7.7.2 Trace Heating A trace heating circuit current, voltage, circuit, and includes following devices: Current heater sensing current device,

of the trace heating

or if the trace

Residual current protecive
nominal with 120/240 single selected current alarm contacts. trip

devices level,

Devices with a voltage, monitor and a the

V a.c. operating These devices

are also available

electrical circuit earth leakage current. If the total exceeds the selected device's trip current, the device will trip, indicating a failure and interruption of the power to the circuit. Additionally. these monitoring devices are available with an alarm only function.

Circuit Alarm
alarm is used to detect loss of of the trace heating is not limited to) the (but

Switch-actuated
initiated controller.

alarm

-

The

alarm

is usually

or continuity

by an auxiliary

contact

on the temperature

Current-sensings
which monitors the trace an alarm if the current

apparatus -

The apparatus consists an

and signals

of a temperature control bypass switch and ammeter; or current-sensitive relays and alarms.

drops below a pre-set minimum switch is closed. Voltage sensitive device, which

whilst the temperature

Diagnostic
signalling processing

alarm failure

This

alarm

is initiated control

by a

diagnostic-circuit monitors voltage at a parallel type

within

the electronic

controller, or data

of an internal

the end of the trace heater (usually heating cable) or monitors voltage installed within the trace heater. Resistance or continuity sensing

logic circuit.

on a return wire

7.7.5 Integrated

Control

devices,

which

Trace heating system control and alarm circuitry may need to be integrated with a central (master) control and monitoring be given compatible 12 system. Careful the control consideration and has to which supervisory is in the selection in both of equipment

monitor the trace heating circuit when the system is de-energized. Usually a low voltage signal or pulse is transmitted into the trace heater and monitored.

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 functions transfer. to ensure successful and reliable data similar to that in Table 2. a> FOR AND Trace heaters should be visually checked for damage. Continuity and insulation checks should be made as a final check. Insulation resistance should be measured in accordance with 8.5.2. Individual controls should be tested to ensure correct calibration including, but not limited to, set points, operating temperature range and span. Vendor fabricated and assembled control panels should include documentation certifying that all wiring, layout, and functions are correct and have been tested. Upon receipt of the control panels at the work site, a general inspection should be made to also confirm that no damage has occurred in transit. Checks

8 RECOMMENDATIONS INSTALLATION, TESTING MAINTENANCE 8.1 Introduction

Electric trace heating systems are designed to match the requirements of the process and plant. The system comprises a number of components integrated at site and it is therefore necessary to ensure that the plant parameters used in the design are still valid when the trace heating system is installed and that the components are installed correctly. Appropriate testing and maintenance are also essential to ensure satisfactory performance and safety. 8.2 Scope This clause makes recommendations for the installation, repair, maintenance and testing of trace heating systems in hazardous locations, but not in those classified as zone 0. It does not cover devices that operate by induction heating, skin effect heating or direct pipeline heating, nor those intended for stress relieving. 8.3 Preparatory 8.3.1 General It is essential that the work should follow the design scheme and no item wherein listed should be allowed to pass unchecked. 8.3.2 Personnel Persons involved in the installation, testing and maintenance of electric trace heating systems should be suitably trained in all special techniques required, as well as in general electrical work. All work should be monitored by trained supervisors. 8.3.3 Receiving `Materials Work

b)

c>

8.3.6 Pre-Installation

Before starting installation work, the check list given in Table 2 should be used to determine whether the design matches the installation conditions. 8.3.7 Scheduling of Installation

The installation of the trace heating systems should begin only after all piping and equipment have been pressure tested, and all related instrumentation has been installed. Thermal insulation should not be installed until the completion and testing of the electrical trace heating circuit or sub-circuit. 8.3.8 Surface Preparation

The surface to which the trace heater is to be installed should be free from rust, grease, oil, etc. Any sharp protrusions such as weld splatter, cement splash, etc, should be removed. Care should be taken to ensure that all coatings or finishes applied to the surfaces to be traced are suitable for the intended duty. 8.3.9 Component Substitution components of a trace with the following:

Upon receipt of trace heating components, a general inspection should be conducted including a confirmation of the correct type and quantities of materials and documentation. All trace heaters should be checked to verify catalogue type, power rating, voltage rating, quantity and special instructions. 8.3.4 Warehousing and Handling

It is acceptable to substitute heating system in accordance

4

Components specifically listed in the supplier's installation or maintenance instructions should not be replaced with similar parts unless the trace heating supplier is consulted and agrees to the substitution. Generic components specified in the supplier's installation or maintenance instructions may be replaced with any suitably rated component. Components which are part of a wiring system that supplies power to the trace heater may be replaced with any' suitably rated component acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction.

Materials should be stored in protected, dry areas. Materials are to be released only as required on the jobsite to avoid unnecessary handling and inadvertent damage. 8.3.5 Pre-Installation Testing be performed and check list and record 13

b)

c)

The following tests should documented on a pre-installation

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 Table 2 Pre-Installation
(Clause

Checks -

83.6)
Remarks

SI

No.

Item Is the plpework support eddges. removed? fully

to be Checked erected and tested and all temporary free from sharp Any welding could damage (see 8.3.8 normal or pressure the device.

0

testing

atier the installation

of a trace heater

Is the surface

to be heated

weld spatter which

and rough surfaces? the trace heater IS to be applied

and 8.4.1) is of polished stamless steel. very thin-walled
may

ii)

Is the surface

If the surface non-metallic

pipe or

steel or non-metallic? iii) Do the items to be heated with the design? Iv) Has an inner application v) vi) foil been specified to be installed before the correspond in size, position. etc.

of any kind. special precautions
diRc+llt line numbering to provide system an earth

be necessary. pipe is being

It is sometimes heated `This A suitable may

to be sure that the correct

may bc of assistance. path and/or to aid heat

be used

of the trace heater? foil been specified to be installed after the

distribution. This may be used to prevent laggm, 0 from surrounding the trace

Has an inner application Can flow reach

of the trace heater? of product under greater normal or abnormal conditions heater

heater~so increasing This Mould discussion normally that the trace

its temperature. be covered in the design stage: however. further

temperatures

than 4iose

with staffat

the plant may show that incorrect

or out-of-

can withstand? vii) Are the trace heating designs. available? viii) Can pipe or surface expand and contract so as to cause stress and the system designer's working drawing instruction or

date mformation No change heating safe operation manufacturer's installation

has been used. be contemplated as caretill without calculations rcfcrcncc to the trace to ensure

should

system designer,

arc ncccssary

In this case precautions

are necessary

to avoid

damage.

on any part of the trace heating 1x) Can sensors of temperature influences? x) xi) Is the trace pipework, Are cold heater according leads, when

installation? be affected by extemal An adjacent heating circmt could atfect the sensor

controllers

to be spiralled to the design? fitted.

or zig-zagged

on to the

Check

design

loading

per unit length application

of pipe

(or surface

area)

to

determine for contact with the

if spiral or rig-zag

neccssar). it has to bc able to

suitable

If the cold lead is to bc buried withstand the temperature. case special

under the lagging.

heated xii)

surface? hung from a pipe rack?

Is the pipework

In

this

precautions

are

required

to

ensure

the

weatherproofing xiii) Does pipework have its full complement of supports?

of the lagging

at points of suspension

The addition ofintermedlate the heating system These as could obstruct

supports

at a later stage could

damage

xiv)

Are sample lines/bleed

lines. etc

on

plant but not

011 drawing9

or prevent

the fitting designer

of the trace

heater,

and

reference xv) Are other parameters specified xvi) by the design used
III

to the trace heating

system

may be necessary.

the design of the equipment

documentation? controllers, junction boxes, switches, as and

Are the trace heaters, and the environmental necessary particulate against matter?

cable glands, etc, suitable

for the hazardous conditions~and

area classification of liquids

are they protected

corrosion

and the ingress

8.4 Installation 8.4.1 General
The installation be co-ordinated and instrument completion date.

of Trace Heating

Systems

and equipment or vibration.

resulting

from expansion,

contraction

of the trace heating with the piping, disciplines to ensure

system should insulation, a scheduled

The

supplier

of the trace instructions

heating

system

should types of and

thermal

provide

specific

for the various

system components. trace heaters suitable and hazardous

Instructions

for components

and intended for trace

for unclassified be clearly with and and heaters

Trace heaters should be installed portion of the equipment. at flanges, valves heaters in such a manner sharp nor jagged to ensure that impact, abrasion or vibration. the cable, lead(s) can accommodate and other

on a clean, smooth to orient damage trace from

location

use should

Special care should be taken fittings as to avoid

identified. without clearly

Instructions an outer jacket

should also be provided

identified.
to Earth

surfaces, as well

as damage due to and cold of the piping

8.4.2 Bonding Trace heater

A check should be made termination(s) should always be connected to an established earth terminal.

any movement

14

IS 14774 (Part

2) : 2000
to seal the

8.4.3 Terminations It is essential
terminated worksite instructions. terminated that all types of trace follow the heaters are

against

a compressible

sealing

washer,

gland in the enclosure. 8.4.7 Conductor Cold leads should should

correctly. should When at the job

Terminations mineral to prevent equipment

completed

at the are be

Terminations
be terminated be of sufficient in a safe and neat equipment. to srze and rating

carefully

supplier's cables

insulated

manner in the junction Terminals accept the conductors, insulation to avoid

box or associated

site, the cut ends should any moisture are complete,

sealed immediately Factory terminated

ingress. properly

which may be solid or stranded back the conductors. or ferrules should be of type for the be tools should

should be inspected to to 6 of IS 14774

ensure that such terminations tagged and/or marked (Part 1). Series installed loading. resistance should For parallel trace

wires or foils. Care should be taken in stripping damaging

in conformity

Compression heaters intended to ensure for site the correct conductor

type connectors

size and of an approved concerned. Compression

termination

be checked circuit not

that the

lengths correspond

to the design length and trace heaters, the total exceed the supplier's

of the ratchet type specific to the fittings in good condition. Cable ends that are not finally after cutting moisture pending should and should terminated

used and be

circuit length should recommendations. 8.4.4 Chid Leads

immediately ingress of damage from

be sealed to prevent be protected af the termination.

completion

Checks should be made to ensure that the joints wateroroof. is valid. from where applicable, .. thermal Cold leads, if used, should or other insulation. always

are

and the bond to earth emerge is insulation in such a where

_ 8.4.8 Terminal End Fittings
The terminal securely instructions end fitting and of a trace heater should with to avoid mechanical be

the surrounding Cold

fitted

in accordance protected

the supplier's

way that ingress of water not possible. they exit through thermal

contaminants

leads should

be protected

damage and the ingress of water or other contaminants which may adversely 8.4.9 Jointing, Jointing, should designer hazardous certificate the work instructions Thisapplies affect its use or suitability.

Cold leads should be fitted or modified on site only in strict accordance with the supplier's recommendations. Any such work carried out in hazardous areas will invalidate the use of the trace heater unless carried supplier out in strict accordance written with the specific by the instructions and upon acceptance

Splicing

and Modlficutions
to the trace heater with the in a area with the supplier's heaters the hazardous

splicing and modifications be done at site only Any such work invalidate and in strict accordance area will

by agreement on trace

instructions.

of the trace heater. to metal sheathed or brazing, neither be bent

Where cold leads have been jointed trace heaters by means of soldering the trace heaters nor the cold within the proximity

unless the supplier has been consulted and carried out in strict accordance with incorporated particularly in the certificate to any modifications schedule. to trace

lead should

of the brazed joint.

8.4.5 Junction

Boxes
should junction be connected boxes which into have

heaters where any change in unit length will alter the power density of the heater and affect the sheath temperature. Modifications should be recorded in the system documentation. 8.5 Installation 8.5.1 General Trace heaters should equipment in be attached with to the piping the and

Trace heating circuits appropriately certified suitable located as closely

ingress protection.

Junction

boxes should be Junction

of Trace

Heaters

as possible to the trace heater exit for any pipe expansion.

point whilst allowing

box lids should not be left open at any time. 8.4.6 Cable Entries and Glands Trace heaters should be provided with seals and/or

accordance

supplier's

instructions. Care should be taken to avoid high halide content thermal insulation materials over trace heaters with a stainless steel sheath or braid. 8.5.2 Field (Worksite)

glands certified appropriately to the hazardous area. Glands should be fully screwed into the box and compression applied to provide a complete seal. Unused entries should sufficient be blanked clearance off with suitable plugs. If unthreaded should provide entries are used, the entry size for the threaded

Tests
on all trace heaters

These tests should be conducted after they have beer. installed. Prior to the application resistance.

of thermal measured

insulation. in

the

section of the gland, with the gland -backnut tightened

insulation

accordance

1.5

IS 14774 (Part

2) : 2000
NOTE slieath maintain Metal contact bands should only be sued to fix solid metal to trace heaters the tract to pipe heater. and equipment. to be heated. and tightened Over-tightening

with 5.1.3 of IS 14774 (Part l), under normal dry conditions and before connection of the trace heater to the associated wiring or control equipment, should be not less than 20 M measured at 1 000 V d.c.

with the surface

may damage

8.5.6 Additional
The insulation after thermal resistance of the entire branch circuit, insulation is complete, should not be Additional

Heat Loss Compensations

lengths of trace heater should be allowed for the additional in accordance with heat the flanges, strainers, be applied pumps, etc. These

less than 10 M measured 8.5.3 Thermal A trace intimate surface heater

at 1 000 V d.c.

in the design to compensate
losses at valves, lengths should

Contact
should be installed Where to provide possible as as is reasonably to the is not

supplier's

instructions.

a contact

to be heated.

such contact

8.5.7 Protection ,fiom Leaks Where trace heaters cross possible for example, minimize flanges, they should contact with the leaking sources of leaks, be positioned medium. to

possible, such as on valves, a suitable heat sink of temperature rated metal foil or heat conducting materials may be used. A constant should not be overlapped. 8.5.4 Laying 8.5.4.1 wattage tracer

8.5~8 Damage Precautions and avoid or touch itself unless this is installed `nsulation. insulation insulation installation horizontal runs of

Protection
be taken to protect of mechanical trace heaters damage and of thermal with after the the the thermal

General

should

the possibility and prior

The trace heater should not be fold, twisted, or allowed to overlap, cross permitted specifically Attention bending in the supplier's instructions. minimum

hazard to personnel The

prior to and after they have been to the application should liaise that to ensure installer

should be given to the supplier's radii.

contractor is applied

as soon as possible

8.5.4.2 Straight

tracing runs
on straight, on the lower l8Oo segment

and testing of trace heaters. of Control and Monitoring

Trace heaters installed piping

8.6 Installation Equipment 8.6.1 General

should be located

of the pipe or equipment to maximize heat transfer and minimize ingress of water. Special consideration should be given when applying vertical runs. Multiple straight be equi-spaced trace heaters in long trace heaters should of the pipe.

The installer is usually responsible control and monitoring and distribution will as a minimum provide

for fixing the panels. These and earth

around the circumference

over-current

8.5.4.3 Spiral tracing Spiral.pitch equipment spiral, applied. pitch maintaining marking before

runs
should be made on the pipe and the cable supply in a uniform point and

leakage protection and means of isolation. Some form of temperature control or limitation is usually provided to ensure safe temperatures or for energy effiiciency purposes. 8.6.2 Sensor The sensor should

applying at the

starting

power

slight tension

in the trace heater as it is to be heated, to retain a exists, the spiral with the design.

Coiwiderations
should be installed and positioned in

If, at the end of the section trace heater be shortened

excess or insufflcient should uniform

or lengthened

accordance with the supplier's not be situated

instructions.

The sensor radiant or close to a to ensure the conditions

spiral in general accordance

in areas of external

In no circumstances should the spacing be less than the minimum declared by the supplier.
NOTE runsm While spiral tracing may be more convenient multiple straight tracing and maintenance. on short
~IIIS may

heat, solar gain, process heat discharge, heat building. sensor Care should be exercised temperature senses appropriate

piping

and equipment,

be preferred

for ease of installation

within a trace heated zone and away from the end of a pipe or a pipe support. Ambient temperature sensing controllers position should be sited in the most exposed for the installation.

8.5.5 Fixing Fixing

and Banding
should be suitable and the for the maximum environmental

material

8.6.3 Sensor

lnsrallalion

exposure

temperature

conditions. For straight tracing runs, they should be located at ir:tervals not exceeding 3UO mm, and for 2 000 mm. spiral tracing runs. not exceeding Additional fixings should be applied at bends, lfanges and other obstructions.

The sensor should be strapped in good thermal contact with the pipe or equipment and protected so that thermal insulation cannot be trapped between the sensor and the heated surface. Care should be taken not to damage the capillary tube, thcrn?ocouple OI

16

IS 14774 (Part RTD leads, or to distort calibration error. the sensor and thereby cause should be confirmed. a) Verify selection b) Temporary provided installation trapped that the type, agree with inside the

2)`: 2000

diameter, values used

and in

8.6.4 Protection Excess capillary insulation which

Against

Damage

thickness

tube may be run under the thermal length adversely. exceeds

of the trace heater(s). weather protection should be storage. handling and during to avoid the risk of moisture being insulation coating beneath or -jacket. its protective

unless the overall

1 m, in

case the volume

of the capillary

may be such

as to affect the calibration 8.6.5 Exit of Sensor from Care should be taken

Thermal Insulation
that the capillary from the not allow

in the thermal

final weather 8.7.3 Installation

to ensure

tube, thermocouple thermal insulation

or RTD

leads emerge that will

qf the Thermal Insulution

in a manner

Materids
Thermal insulation should be applied including to all sections flanges. valves,

the ingress of moisture. 8.6.6 Controller Water leading closed

Housing
vapour intrusion are factors The except

of the pipe and equipment,

and corrosive to the failure before, during

pipe supports, bends, T-junctions, etc. If expansion joints or bellows are installed in the system, provision should be made for their thermal manner that it does not impair of the trace heating Oversized thermal covered. system. insulation may be required in order are insulation in such a efficiency the thermal

of temperature and after

controllers.

cover or lid of a controller when required The controller for access. and

housing should always be installation

sensors

shall

be certified

in

to ensure adequately

that the trace

heater

and equipment include:

accordance The

with an appropriate should be

type of protection. set to the required

Other considerations should

controller

a> All

penetrations

be sealed to prevent Wherever insulation. possible, 180"

temperature check should setting until trace heater.

and recalibrated the controller

if necessary. A function the temperature the is seen to energize

the ingress of moisture. penetrations should segment of the thermal

be made by adjusting

be in the lower

b)
Temperature
controllers

8.6.7 Process If additional reasons, located example

Controllers
are indicated be surface for process or for

The thermal insulation should be cut and fitted to avoid air gaps. Stagger segment joints on the horizontal heat loss. plane to minimize convective

the sensors should in thermowells

mounted positions,

sited at suitable

c>

The use of metal foil should be considered covering irregularly thermal the trace heater insulation
on

fol the

above sludge levels in vessels.

valves and other to prevent the trace

8.6.8 Other Equipment Ail other equipment in accordance 8.7 Installation (see atso 5) 8.7.1 General Installation national insulated provide of the trace of thermal heating insulation system after should conform to should be installed and checked

shaped equipment

from surrounding

heater. 8.7.4 C/dding Where metal cladding is specified, particular care

with the instructions of Thermal

provided. System

Insulation

should be taken to ensure that bare edges of metalwork cannot come in to direct contact with the trace heater or its components. Areas of greatest risk are as follows:

standards and local regulations. should immediately mechanical

Each section be thermally to Prior to

it has been installed protection. insulation,

a>

Flanges the exposed

Metalwork

should be cut back and insulation non-absorbent

face of the thermal a suitable

and weather

the installation

of any thermal

the installed in accordance

finished with compound.

trace heating shall have been tested with 5 of IS 14774 (Part 1). 8.7.2 Preparatory Before starting the

b)

Valves-pipework

A preformed cladding. "1, ",jitfi~g

insulatingjacket

should

be overlength

and carried

on to adjacent

Work
installation, it is recommended insulation

cl

BL'MCIS, pi/~

or tees -- Crire should

that site engineering the trace heating contractor. The

should establish a liaison between installer and the thermal checks and procedures I7

be taken not to foree the ad.jacent straight pipe section of cladding into the bend and thereby risk damage to the trace heater.

following

IS 14774 (Part Bends with

2) : 2000 edge interlocking sections are mately 1 000 Hz should be used to inject a

rolled

preferred. A non-setting sealer should be used between the overlapped sections of metallic weather barriers of jackets. screw used When is not rivets long or self-tapping enough insulation screws are or the the b) used, care should be taken to ensure that any drill to penetrate and damage it. to c) thickness of the thermal

signal into the electric trace heating device and the route of the device should be followed by the audible signal obtained from the instrument. The type of fault should instance, open circuit be determined, for

trace heating Advisory beneath

system installed

beneath

or leakage to earth. or low resistance to 500 . ... a pulse can be used with instrument

labels should be afixed the thermal insulation.

to the cladding

If there is an open circuit echo or reflection a considerable employing thereof.

advise that an electric trace heating system is installed

earth of less than approximately instrument

degree of success. Other faults loop test' or variation

8.8 Commissioning 8.8.1 Pre-Commissioning

should be traced using a bridge-type

Test
trace heating system is

a `Murray

Before any part of an electric

energized by connection to the electrical power supply, the test procedure given in 8.52 guide should be performed and the results recorded as part of the check and retained. system documentation. The pre-commissioning

8i9.3 Fault Rectifkwtion Having should located the fault, the defective component with be in

be replaced that

or repaired have been

in a~tcordance disturbed should

the requirements installation checked accordance

of this standard.

Those parts of the

list given in Table 3 should be completed 8.8.2 Trace Heating The trace heating after the thermal the heater which

Commissioning
should be commissioned has been installed, record given and retained. using

in accordance

with Table 4 and recorded

with Table 5.

system(s) insulation

8.10

Repairs

commissioning

in Table 4,

8.10.1 General
NOTE ~When a fault occurs in an elcctricai the
cause.

should be completed

tract Most

heating faults are or ingress

8.9 Maintenance 8.9.1 General

system cawed

it is necessary by mechanical

first to determine damage.

corrosion.

overheating

of moisture.

It is recommended
given in Table

that

the maintenance be undertaken

schedule at intervals

Only when the cause has been eliminated defects be rectified repair should be carried conditions are satisfied: out only

should the Site

5 should

by site repair or replacement.

not exceeding one year. More frequent and/or more detailed inspection may bc necessary in corrosive or other hostile risk of frequent operational user/occupier All environments or where The be there is a high need for more by the determined with mechanical inspection experience damage. should

if the following

a>
b)

The repaired

component

will

perform

its

and by consultation

designated function without electrical characteristic. Design and construction component mechanical

undue change in

of the plant. activities should be recorded in Table in a 5),

characteristics

of the

maintenance

are maintained, strength and water

for example resistance. by the trace special by him/her. out

maintenance and retained

log (such

as that

shown

in the system documentation.

c>
4
e)

A method of repair is recommended heating system designer materials and tools are specified

and any

8.9.2 Fault Location Specialized by thermal methods insulation of fault and location metallic are necessary cladding and

No local hazard will be created in carrying the repair. It does not invalidate apparatus. used in hazardous the certificate areas should any specific designer

to $ind faults in electric trace heating systems covered advice should be sought from the electric trace heating system designer. A brief outline given below: a) The exact layout of the electric trace heating of the steps that may be necessary is

for certified apparatus in the be be strictly instructions

Any repairs to certified with

accordance incorporated trace heating consulted.

in the certificate system

schedule; should

system should be determined

from the system

documentation. If this proves inadequate, an `induction' instruiiient operating at approxiI8

Where any of these conditions cannot replacement component should be fitted.

be met,

a

IS 14774 (Part

2) : 2000 are given methods and

8.10.2 Practicability Heaters 8.10.2.1
NOTE

of Repair to Electric

Trace

General in this

procedures sub-clause,

that should be adopted however, only those

Mechanical
damage

damage
has not previously in breakdown or ingress been energized in electrical should has resulted

recommended only materials

by the supplier

should be adopted

or tools recommended

by the supplier

If the trace heater severed conductors be

should be used. 8.10.3.2 The

and mechanical insulation, normally

ofmoisture, repair

possible. is four&only after electrical to a small connection area, visual

In-line Splice
of a damaged differing section of heating

If the fault inspection of the fault the electrical point

removal

and the damage

is confined

conductor from

should not alter the resistance by more design value.

of the trace splice is be for

of the trace heater for 1 m on either side should be undertaken is affected damage. to show whether other than at the insulation

heater to a value its original to operate

than 5 percent care should

If an in-line

at elevated

temperatures,

of mechanical

taken to ensure that the repaired joint to stresses in operation. example, of the joint workpiece, by providing side of the joint. an expansion I50
IIIIII

is not sub_jected loop
on on

8.10.2.2

Damage

due to corrosion

This may be achieved.

either to the

NOTE - Where breakdown results from corrosive actioll and the damage is limited 10 a small area. a repair should normally be possible.

The section

either side

should not be bent when re-applied and good contact should

be ensured.

If the electrical

trace

heater

has been damaged

at 8.10.3.3

more than one point or the damaged area is extensive, it should be replaced.

Series connection

via ,junction

box
of the trace

The repair should not alter the resistance If the cause of corrosion heater should withstanding 8.10.2.3 either cannot be removed, the trace of heater to a value from its original the trace heater when damage is reaffixed box differing by more be replaced by one capable design value.

than 5 percent

Where cold leads are be firmly contact.

the corrosive

effects, or be re-routed.

applied to the ends of the severed heating conductors, and repair _joints should to ensure good with to the workpiece

Damage

due to overheating
be carried out only

Repairs should limited

to a small area.

Fitting of cold leads and terminations should be in accordance instructions. 8.10.4 Earthing

into the junction the supplier's

If a system design fault is suspected, the trace heating system designer 8. IO.3 Repair should be coniulted.

Techniques ,fbr Electrical

Trace
Where trace heaters are earthed by means of a metal braid, metal sheath or foil screen. the integrity and by the

Heaters 8.10.3.1
NOTE heaters thcrcfore methods.

General
Techniques vary with outside the employed scope
III the

repalr

of electrical
to detail

trace It is actual

the type of heater of this

and its manufacturer. standard

continuity repair. 8.10.5

of the earth should not be impaired

Testing
trace heater(s) shall be subjected re-installation. to the

Generally

the repair of an electrical box.

trace heater will

The repaired tests described

take the form of an in-line splice or a series connection via a junction

in 8.5.2 before

19

IS 14774~(Part 2) : 2000 Table 3 Pre-Commissioning Checks and Heater Installation (Clause 8.8.1) Record

Location

SYStelll

Prqject

Manager

Refercncc

drawin:

Line number Panel number Heater Mcpohm Megohm Multimeter HEATER manufacturer meter nianufacture/lnodel meter date of last calibration manufacture/mode! TESTING

Heater Location Heater

number

Area classification Circuit number unit Icngth/voltage

T-Clawlication Circuit rating Accuracy/litll scale anipivolta~e

model

I leater wattage Voltage settinp

Ohm

setting

Accuracy/titll Date acceptable test voltage

scale
lllltlnls

Test~value/remarks shall be 20 M. Minimum
cables.

NOTE - Minimum acceptable insulation resistance d c. recommended for Ml 2 500 V d.c for polymeric
1)

is I 000 V d c

1lo\\cver

I 000

Receipt Continmty Insulatmn

of material

on reel

(

test on reel reststance test on reel
to start heater installation)

I
2)
3) 4)

1'1p1ng completed Atier Heater Heater Heater Installation mstalled correctly correctly

(approval

I

I
-1

I

(approval installed installed

to start thermal

insulation

installation)

I I I I I

I I
I

on pipe, vessel or eqmpnient at valves. pipe supports, other heat sinks
tee,

Components Installation Thermal Continuity Insulation S\STEhl 6)

correctly

installed

and terminated

(power.

end seal) design

I

I

I

I

I

agrees with manufacturers insulation test resistance test mstallatlon complete

instructions

and circuit

INSPECTED tagging ell`ectively and idrntilication earthed -____ properly installed and set points verified complete [see 6 of IS 14774 (Part I)]

Marking. Heater

7)
8) 9)

Temperature .lunction Thermal

controls

boxes all certiiied insulation weather splices

and closed tight (all penetrations marked marked on insulation as-built
Colllpan~ Date

10)
11) 12)

sealed) outer cladding l_

End seals. covered Drawings. Performed Witnessed Accepted Approved

documentation by: by: by. by:

Colllpall~

Da1c

Colllpally

l)atc

C'olnpan~

I)atc

20

IS 14774 (Part Table 4 Heater Commissioning
m7d

2) : 2000

Record

(Cluz,ses 8.8.2

8.9.;)

Location Line number Panel number Heater manufacturer

System Heater number

Prqject

Manager

.--I_ -.-._-

Area classllication Circuit number

Rcfercnce .:r-a\\mg(s) -.. I'-(`las\~licatloti C`ircun
illll~7iVOlttl~C

Location Heater model

Heater wattage unit length/ voltapc rating + 1

HEATER INFORMATION:
Heater total design length Thermal insulatton Nomtal type

---_
Heater total mstalled Icngth ____ Tbemlal Maintain record) insulatton tbtckncss _____. -__ -___.. ___ --_._. ---.___--

pipe temperature

pipe temperature

HEATER TESTING: (data from heater installation
Electrical Electrtcal resistance (continurty) msulatton test in ohms

resistance test in megohms -___ Volts a.c Current in amperes

____...__

Test ambtent temperature

PERFORhlANCE DATA :
Panel

~.Field I Phase Line 3 Phase A Phase B phase C Pliasc __...__ Neutral

Startup After 10 mm _-. temperature at time of test oftest After 4 II After 4 II

After 4 h Ambient

Pipe temperature Calculated

at beginning

watts per unit length (volt x amp/length)

TEMPERATURE CONTROL: Type
Heater controller Heater limit controller Heating controls calibrated Heating controls operation verilicd Type High setting IHigh setting Low setting Low setting Setting Operation vcrrlictl Ambient Type sensing Pipe sensing Location Tcmpcraturc kmpcraturc ~ctpornt sctpornt

__-

ALARMS/MONITORING:
Temperature Heater current Residual current Loss Other

Operatron ver~licd Operation Operation vcri tied veriticd

of voltage

Opcra:~on vcrilicd

RCD PROTECTION: Type
Settin Performed by: Wintnessed by. Accepted Approved by. by: Measured current
Compall~

Tested in opcratton
rxtc

Conlpally Company Company

Date

rhk
Date

21

IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 Table 5 Maintenance Schedule and Log Record (C/mm 8.9.1 and 8.9.3)

)

Location

I

System

1

Reference

drawing(s)

I
I

I
IHeater Cat No. Power connection Tee connection Splice Heater connection controller

CIRClIlT INFORhlATION
Circuit Design Residual Residual length voltage current current protection trip setting (type) Brcakcr Rrcakcr panel No. pole(s) No.

I
-__Circuit Date Initial No.

I
VlSllAL

-_

-

Thermal

insulation

Water

seal good missing

___-

Insulation/lagging Presence Heating

of nio1sture system components boxes sealed of moisture
corrosion

Enclosures. Presence Signs of Heater Heating Operating r

lead discolouration and/or high limit controller

property

I

I

I

I

I

Heater

circuit

current

reading

Amps reading at 2 to 5 min Amps readmg after 15 mill Ground-fault current

Comments and actions Performed by: by:
Colllpany Colllpall)

Date

I

L-

Approved

22

Bureau

of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade ~designations. Enquiries relating toscopyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. ETD 22(5075),
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 013 1,323 3375,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
:

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41
t

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELI-II 110002 l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

:

337 84 86 99,337 91 85 20 61 26,337 { 60 38 20 43 25

: :

C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 1 235 02 15 19,235 16,235 23 04 42 15 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHIJBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRWANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

:

1 832 92 78 95,832 78 92 58 91,832

:

