**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 3600-4 (1984) : Method of Testing Fusion Welded Joints 
and Weld Metal in Steel, Part 4: Longitudinal tensile test 
on cylindrical weld metal test pieces on butt welds [MTD 
11: Welding General] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i img*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



udc 621-791-55-053*6 : 6691 4 : 6201 72 ( First Reprint OCTOBER 1990) IS : 3600 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 



Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

METHOD OF TESTING FUSION WELDED 
JOINTS AND WELD METAL IN STEEL 

PART 4 LONGITUDINAL TENSILE TEST ON CYLINDRICAL ALL 
WELD METAL TEST PIECES USING BUTT JOINTS 

( Second Revision ) 



1. Scope — Specifies sizes of test pieces and testing procedure for carrying out longitudinal tensile 
test on cylindrical test piecefs in order to determine one or more of the following mechanical properties 
of weld metal in a fusion welded butt joint : 

a) Tensile strength, 

b) Yield stress and/or stress at proof limit, 

c) Percentage elongation after fracture, and 

d) Percentage reduction of area. 

2. Field of Application — This standard applies to ferrous materials, with butt joints made by any 
fusion welding process having joint sizes sufficient to obtain cylindrical test pieces having the 
dimensions specified in 5.3. 

3. Principle — Application of a tensile load to break a cylindrical test piece taken longitudinally 
from the weld metal in a welded joint. 

3.1 Unless otherwise specified, the test is made at room temperature. 

4. Taking of Test Pieces — The test piece shall be taken from apart of a welded fabrication or 
from a welded test assembly, longitudinally to the welded joint, in such a way that after machining 
the calibrated part of the test piece consists wholly of weld metal at a suitable distance from the weld 
boundries (see Fig. 1 ). 




a) An all weld metal 
test piece for elect- 
rode classification 

FIG. 1 



b) A test piece from 
a joint welded from 
one side only 

EXAMPLES OF TAKING TEST PIECES 



c) Test piece from 
a joint welded from 
both sides 



Note 1 — 'Test assemblies' are welded joints which do not belong to a fabrication, but are made for purpose of 
approval ( for example procedure qualification ), control ( for example production test coupons ) or studies and 
research. 

Note 2 — For the purpose of correctly positioning the test piece in the joint, macro-etching of the joint cross- 
section at both extremities of the test piece can be made. 

4.1 Each test piece shall be marked in such a way that after its removal it is possible to identify its 
exact position in the part of the fabrication or in the test assembly from which it has been taken. 
No heat treatment shall be applied to the test assemblies unless it is specified are allowed by the 
application standard regarding the welded joint or the weld metal to be tested. Heat treatment sKould 
be done before machining the calibrated part of the test pieces. Details of any heat treatment shall 
be recorded in the test report. 

4.2 The test piece shall be taken by appropriate means (shearing excluded), if thermal cutting or other 
methods which could affect the cut surface are used, the cuts shall be m3de at a distance from the 
calibrated part of the test piece greater than or equal to 8 mm. 



Adopted 2 January 1984 



© April 1984, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS :3600( Part 4) - 1984 

5. Machining of the Test Piece — The test piece shall be machined on a Jathe, suitable precautions 
being taken to avoid superficial strain-hardening or excessive heating of the material. 

5.1 Unless stated otherwise in the particular application standard concerning the welded joint under 
examination, the test piece shall be taken as close as possible to the weld face. In the case of very 
thick or double sided welded joint, more than one test piece may be taken at different locations 
through the thickness ( see Fig. 1 c ), in which case the position of each test piece in the joint cross- 
section shall be identified. 

5.2 The round proportional test specimen shall be used. The form and dimensions of the test speci- 
men shall be in accordance with Fig. 2 and Table 1 . The tolerances on the dimensions qfjlhe specimen 
shall be as specified in IS : 1608 - 1972*. The gauge length L corresponds to 5'65y^s 0r where So is 
the original cross-sectional area of the test specimen. 




FIG. 2 DIMENSIONS OF TEST PIECE 



Cross- 
Sectional 
Area 

So 

(D 

mm a 

400 

200 

150 

100 
50 
25 
12*5 



TABLE 1 DIMENSIONS OF ALL-WELD METAL TEST SPECIMEN 

( All dimensions in millimetres ) 

Gauge 
Length 



Diameter 

d 

(2) 

2256 
15*96 
13'82 
11*28 

7'98 

5"64 

3*99 



U 

(3) 

113 
80 
69 
56 
40 
28 
20 



Minimum 
Parallel 
Length 


Minimum 

Transition 

Radius 


L = 5*5 d 


R 


(4) 


(5) 


124 


235 


88 


15 


76 


13 


62 


10 


44 


8 


31 


5 


32 


4 



Note 1 — The gauge length is given to the nearest 1 mm and the minimum parallel length is adjusted accordingly. 
Note 2— Test pieces other than those given in this table may be used provided that the gauge length 
Lo - 5'G5v%. 

5.3 The gripped ends of the test piece sh3ll be whatever shape and size are appropriate to the tensile 
testing machine used. 

6. Method of Testing — The specimen shall be tested in tension in accordance with IS : 1608-1972*. 
The test piece shall be gradually and continuously loaded along its axis until rupture. Unless other- 
wise stated in the application standard, the speed of loading shall conform to IS : 1608-1972* and be 
as uniform as possible; in any case possible variations of loading during testing shall be progressive 
and without abrupt changes. 

7. Results 



7.1 Tensile Strength — The tensile strength shall be calculated as the ratio between the maximun 
load carried by tha test piece during testing and the initial cross-sectional area of the test piece in 
the calibrated length, expressed in mega pascals (MPa). 



'Methods for tensile testing of steel products ( first revision ). 

2 



IS: 3600 ( Part 4) - 1984 

7.2 Yield Strees andjor Stress of Proof Limit — According to the requirements of the application 
standard concerning the welded joint under examination, the values of the upper or lower yield point, 
or the strees at proof limit or other conventional parameters shall be determined during the tset in 
accordance with IS : 1608-1972*. The results shall be expressed in MPa. 

7.3 Percentage Elongation After Fracture — The percentage elongation shall be determined in 
accordance with IS : 1608-1972*. 

1 A Percentage Reduction in Area — The percentage reduction of area shall be determined in accor- 
dance with IS : 1608-1972*. 

7.5 Fracture Examination — After breaking the test piece, the fracture surfaces and gauge length 
shall be examined and the existence of any defects shall be recorded, including their nature and 
extent. 

7 & Interpretation of Results — Interpretation of the results shall be made in accordance with the 
appropriate application standard for the welded joint under examination. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1966 and was revised in 1973 covering various tests on 
fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel. In view of the experience gained and in order to bring 
the test and test requirements in line with other international standards published so far, it has been 
decided to revise this standard in the following parts : 

Cruciform fillet weld tensile testt 

Beam impact ( Charpy V-notch ) testt 

Transverse tensile test on butt welds 

Longitudinal tensile test on cylindrical weld metal test pieces 
on butt welds 

Transverse root and face bend test on butt welds 

Transverse side bend test on butt welds 

Longitudinal root and face bend test on butt weidsf 

Nick break test and fillet weld fracture testt 

Macro and micro examinationt 

In this revision free-bend test has been deleted as the ductility of the weld zone is being 
assessed more and more by other bend tests. Special tests such as tests for the susceptibility to 
lamellar tearing, reheat cracking, brittle fracture and creep fatigue will be covered in separate 
standards. 

The main purpose of this standard is to recommend test procedures and test specimens that 
should be quoted or incorporated in engineering application standards that deal with welded construc- 
tions primarily for the qualification of welding procedures and operators. Where differences still 
exist between application standards, the methods of test given in this standard should be preferred. 

A general indication is given of the purpose served by the tests specified in this standard but 
this standard does not indicate the choice of test methods for a particular application nor the number 
of specimens to be tested or the repeat tests to be allowed in the event of failure. Such requirements 
are matters to be dealt with in the particular application standards where they exist or to be agreed 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

It should be realized that variations in welding procedure and the preparation of test specimens 
can give rise to variations in the test results. 

In preparing this part of the standard assistance has been derived from ISO/DIS 5178 'Fusion 
welded butt joints in steel-longitudinal tensile test on cylindrical weld in metal test pieces of the 
International Organisation for Standardization. 



Part 1 




Part 2 




Part 3 




Part 4 




Part 5 


(ISO 5173-1981 ) 


Part 6 


( ISO 5177-1981 ) 


Part 7 




Part 8 




Part 9 





•Methods for tensile testing of steel products ( first revision ). 
tUnder preparation. 



Printed at the Central Electric Press, A 12/1 Naratna indt Area, New Delhi 



