**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12199 (1987) : Pneumatic-wheeled Animal Drawn Vehicle 
[FAD 21: Farm Implements and Machinery] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



FEAFRFIMED 



UDC 629-112-012-55 



DEC 2004 

13:12199-1987 



CO 
1^ 
OQ 
CM 

O 

O 

o 



o 
o 
o 



o 
o 



E 
E 
o 
u 

o 






Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
^ PNEUMATIC-WHEELED ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLE 

1. Scope — Specifies material, and constructional and other requirements of animal drawn 
vehicle fitted with pneumatic tyres. 

1.1 This standard covers requirements of four wheel cart up to 3 t and two wheel cart up to 2 t 
capacity. 

2. Type — The animal drawn vehicles shall be of following two types: 

a) Four Wheei Cart ( Double Ax!e ) ( see Fig. 1 ), 




FIG. 1 FOUR WHEEL BULLOCK CART 
b) Two Wheel Cart ( Singie Axle ) ( ^ee Fig. 2 ). 




C__J 



^.^ 



> 



p n n 



j | Jf f i 






r=JG- 2 TWO WHEEL BULLOCK CART 



Adopted 30 October 1987 



© May 1988. BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



13:12199-1987 



2.1 Two wheel cart may be fitted with fixed or tipping platform. 

3. Material — The material for axle assembly shall be as given in IS : 4930-1985 'Specification for axle 
assembly for pneumatic-wheeled animal-drawn vehicles ( first revision )'. The materials for some of the 
components shall be as given in Table 1 for steel and wooden cart respectively. 





TABLE 1 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPONENTS OF ANIMAL CART 








( Clause 3 ) 




SI 


Components 


Material for 


Material for 


No. 




Steel Cart 


Wooden Cart 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


i) 


Chassis 


Mild steel 


Hardwood 


ii) 


Cross members 


Mild steel 


Hardwood 


iii) 


Drawn arrangement 


Steel and wood 


Hardwood 


iv) 


Platform 


Soft or Hardwood 


Soft or Hardwood 


V) 


Sides 


Soft or Hardwood 


Soft or Hardwood 


vi) 


Axle support 


Mild steel 


Hardwood 


vii) 


Side pillars 


Mild steel 


Hardwood 


viii) 


Yoke 


Hardwood 


Hardwood 



4. Capacity — The capacity of the animal cart shall be its gross load and shall be 1, 1-5, 2, 2'5 
and 3 t. The gross load along with the pay load shall be declared by the manufacturer. The declared 
capacity shall not vary by ±5 percent. 

4.1 The capacity of single axle and double axle cart shall be not more than 2 1 and 3 1, respectively. 

5. Dimensions — The dimensions given in 5.1 to 5.8 shall not in any way infringe the rules and 
regulations of the local transport authority. 

5.1 The overall width of the animal carts measured between the extreme points shall not exceed 
1 .6 m ( see A in Fig. 1 and 2 ). 

5.2 The overall length of the platform ( see B in Fig. 1 and 2 ) shall not exceed the following: 

a) 2-5 m for the two wheel cart, and 

b) 30 m for the four wheel cart. 

5.3 The height of the animal cart ( see C in Fig. 1 and 2 ), with tyres inflated at the recommended pressure, 
when measured from the level supporting surface to the platform, shall not be more than 1 m. 

5.4 The height of the cart, with tyres inflated at the recommended pressure, when measured from the 
level supporting surface to the top of the side boards ( see D in Fig. 1 and 2 J, shall not be more than 1 .8 
m. 

53 In case of the four-wheeled cart, the distance from the front edge of the platform to the 
centre of the front wheel ( see E in Fig. 1 ) and from the rear edge of the platform to the centre 
of the rear wheel ( see Fin Fig. 1 ), shall not be more than 0-8 m. 

5.6 The distance from the front edge of the platform to the centre of the yoke or the drawn attachment 
{ see G in Fig. 1 and 2 ) shall be between 2 to 2-4 m. 

5.7 In case of single axle cart of 1 , 1 5 and 2 1 capacity, the axle position should be fixed by keeping the 
ratio of the height of the yoke from the ground ( see Kin Fig. 2 ) to the horizontal distance between the 
yoke and the centre of the axle ( see H in Fig. 2 ) as 04, 035 and 03 respectively. 

5.8 Ground clearance shall not be less than 300 mm. 

6. Constructional Requirements 

6.1 The loading platform may be plain or provided with hinged or fixed side boards. 

6.2 The animal cart shall be provided with lashing hooks for tying down the load. 



13:12199-1987 

6.3 For single axle cart, drawn attachment should be fitted with such an angle according to the 
height of the animal so that the platform remains parallel to the level surface and the load could 
not be transferred to the animals. Inclination of the draw bars ( e ) depending upon the height 
of the yoke ( see K in Fig. 2), the platform size ( loading size ), the vertical distance of the draw 
bar end fixed with platform ( see L in Fig. 2 ), the wheel cjia meter ( N ) and the horizontal 
distance between the yoke and the centre of the axle ( see H in Fig. 2 ) shall be calculated on the 
basis of the following formula: 

Tan e .K-^m + L) 

ri 

6.4 For double axle animal cart, the front axle shall swivel about the vertical axis up to a maximum of 1 80° 

6.5 The animal cart shall be fitted with suitable pneumatic tyres, tubes and rims of adequate load 
carrying capacity. 

Note — Indian Standards on tyres, tubes and wheel rims are under formulation. Till the publication of these standards, it is 
suggested that the recommendations of Indian Tyre Tube Advisory Committee ( ITTAC ) may 
be followed. 

6 6 The axles shall conform to IS : 4930-1985. 

6.7 The cart may be provided with brakes. 

6.8 Tipping angle of the body in case of tipping type shall be 42 to 60°. 

6.9 Yoke shall be provided with suitable padding material which would give comfort to the animal 

7. Other Requirements 

7.1 The animal cart shall be fitted with two red coloured reflectors at rear side and two red coloured 
reflectors on the front side at a distance of not more than 150 mm from the extreme ends to the centre of 
the reflectors. The reflectors may be round or rectangular with not less than 3 000 mm^ area. 

7.2 The single axle cart shall be provided with suitable arrangement in the front and the rear side for keeping 
the cart levelled when detached from the animal. 

7.3 All the parts requiring lubrication shall be provided with suitable arrangement which should be easily 
accessible. 

7.4 In case of single animal cart (tipping type ), provisions shall be made for tilting the platform without 
disturbing the animal. 

7.5 Suitable size tool box may be provided. 

8. Workmanship and Finish 

8.1 All sharpness of edges and comers shall be rounded off. 

8.2 Welding shall not be porous. As far as possible, it should be done in accordance with IS : 816-1969 
'Code of practice for use of metal arc welding for general construction in mild steel ( first revision)'. 

8.3 All wooden and metal surfaces shall be covered with a coat of suitable preservative. The metal parts 
should be derusted, treated with anticorrosive material and ah appropriate primer 

before painting. 

9. l\/larking — The animal cart shall be marked with the following particulars: 

a) Manufacturer's name and registered trade-mark, if any; 

b) Unladen mass; 

c) Capacity; and 

d) Batch or code number. 

9.1 Certification IVIarking— Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



13:12199 - 1987 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Animal drawn vehicles fitted with pneumatic tyres are very popular for handling operations and for 
moving produce from farm to market. These vehicles have considerable advantages on paved tracks/roads, 
sandy tracks, etc. Since the manufacture and use of these vehicles is increasing, a need was felt to formulate 
standard for the guidance of the manufacturers and the users. In this standard, the requirements for 
vehicles operated by bullocks and buffaloes are covered. The requirements relating to the vehicles drawn by 
other animals, like camels, would be added at a later stage. 

The figures given in the standard are intended to serve only as illustrations and should not be considered 
as suggestive of any standard design. 

It is also intended to bring out Indian Standards on various components of the animal drawn vehicles 
such as tyres, tubes and wheel rims. As and when these standards are issued, they shall be 
complementary to this standard. 

The dimensions of the vehicle and its accessories shall not, in any way, infringe the rules and regulations 
of the Local Transport Authority in force from time to time. 



Printed at Printograph, New Delhi, India 



