URAT AAP IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


faya Ar tex — fares 
UNT 1 Wea, II SIR TeT 
( TECH FRI) 


Electrical Moisture Meters — 
Specification 
Part 1 Food Grains, Seeds And Flour 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.260 


© BIS 2022 


UR WAH 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
TB HAF, 9 JET Ve VHX HPT, Ag facet - 110002 
MAY MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 


www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 6 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agriculture 
and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


Moisture meter is used for measuring the moisture present in the grains. Based on the moisture percentage the 
farmers get the price for their produce. This is mainly used by the procuring agencies in the mandis. Electrical 
moisture meters are a direct, quick and convenient means of determining the moisture content. Electrical moisture 
meters are commonly used for determination of moisture content of materials, such as foodgrains, cereals, oil 
seeds and pulses. Variety of designs of reliable instruments are available for making spottests of these materials. 


This standard was first published in 1978. The first revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. In this revision following major changes have been made: 


a) The scope has been modified; 

b) Terminologies has been updated; 

c) Measurement uncertainty range has been provided; and 

d) Construction features with material table has been provided. 


The standard is issued in two parts. The second part of the standard is as under: 
Part 2 For jute (conductivity type) 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is placed at Annex A. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 


2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


Indian Standard 
ELECTRICAL MOISTURE METERS — SPECIFICATION 
PART 1 FOOD GRAINS, SEEDS AND FLOUR 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements and test 
method for electrically-operated and battery- 
operated moisture meters used for the determination 
of moisture content of food grains like cereals, 
pulses, oil seeds, vegetable seeds, fodder seeds and 
other granular agricultural produce like coffee 
beans, oats grain and various types of flours. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


IS No. Title 

IS 4333 (Part Methods of analysis for 
2):2017/ISO foodgrains: Part 2 Determination 
719 : 2009 of moisture content (second 


revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.0 For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Accuracy 


Accuracy is the ability of the instrument to measure 
the accurate value. In other words, it is the closeness 
of the measured value to a standard or true value. 


3.2 Compression Unit 


The device used to compress grains/seeds/flour (to 
bring it to a uniform state and to minimize the 
porosity effect). 


3.3 Electrical Moisture Meter 


The type of moisture meter which works on the 


principle of electrical output such as change in 
resistance, capacitance and inductance. 


3.4 Electrode 

An electrical conductor used to make contact with 
the non-metallic circuit part of a circuit. 

3.5 Flour 


A very thin powder made from grains/seeds. 


3.6 Grain 

The small, hard and dry seed harvested for human or 
animal consumption. 

3.7 Moisture Meter 

The instrument to measure the moisture content of 
the grains/seeds. 

3.8 Oil Seed 


The kernel seeds extracted from crops yielding oil. 


3.9 Probe 


A physical device connecting to the electronic 
measuring instrument which is used to measure the 
parameters to be tested. 


3.10 Ratchet Mechanism 


The mechanism used for  grains/seeds/flour 
compression and slips when desired compression is 
achieved. 


3.11 Repeatability 


Precision in measurements under conditions that 
include the same measurement procedure, same 
operators, same measuring system, same operating 
conditions and same location, and replicate 
measurements on the same or similar objects over a 
short period of time. 


3.12 Seed 


The agricultural grains having standard germination 
ability and varietal genetic purity to give rise to 
Agricultural plants and used for multiplication of 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


varietal identity plants. 


3.13 Test Cup 


Container for grains/seeds/flour whose 
moisture percentage is to be tested. 


3.14 Thermo Gravimetric Principle 


The weight loss of mass that occurs as the material 
is heated. The sample weight is taken prior to 
heating and again after reaching a steady-state mass 
subsequent to drying. 


3.15 Uncertainty 


The expression of the statistical dispersion of the 
values attributed to a measured quantity. 


4 TYPES 


4.0 Depending upon the operating principles, the 
electrical moisture meters shall be one of the 
following types: 


a) Type 1 — Conductivity/Resistance type 
moisture meters 

b) Type 2 — Capacitance/Dielectric type 
moisture meters. 


4.1 Type 1 — Conductivity/Resistance Type 
Moisture Meters 


4.1.1 Portable Model 


These conductivity meters are used for measuring 
moisture at field level (in situ measurement), as it is 
easier to carry the moisture meter by single person. 
The volume of sample in conductivity/resistance 
meters shall be minimum of 10 cm’. The test cup 
shall be of non-corrosive material. As per the design 
of manufacturer, if required moisture meter should 
also have special facility to grind the sample of 
seeds/grains without appreciable development of 
heat. In order to minimise the porosity effect the 
sample shall be compressed. 


4.1.2 Table Top Model 


These meters are used as stationary meters in the 
laboratory/procurement/storage centre to measure 
moisture in the grains. The test cup shall be of non- 
corrosive material. The volume of sample shall be 
minimum of 10 cm’. As per the design of 
manufacturer, ifrequired moisture meter should also 
have special facility to grind the sample of 
seeds/grains without appreciable development of 
heat. In order to minimise the porosity effect the 
sample shall be compressed. 


4.2 Type 2 — Capacitance/Dielectric Type 
Moisture Meters 


4.2.1 Portable Model 


These moisture meters are used in in-situ 
environment. 


4.2.2 Table Top Model 


These meters are used as stationary meters in the 
laboratory/procurement/storage centre to measure 
moisture in the grains. 


5 OPERATING PRINCIPLES 


5.1 Conductivity/Resistance Type Moisture 
Meters 


These meters work on the principle of electrical 
conductivity of the material. The electrical 
conductivity is dependent on the moisture content of 
the material, which is subjected to compression in 
test cup (as per the recommendation of the 
manufacturer). Moisture is determined by the 
measurement of electrical conductance of the 
sample when it is held in a test cup/electrode vessel. 


5.2 Capacitance Type Moisture Meter 


The basic operating principle ofthe capacitance type 
meter is based on the change occurring in the 
dielectric constant of a material, between its moist 
and dry condition. Moisture is determined by the 
measure of capacitance of the sample. The sample 
size in such meters shall be precise by either volume 
or weight (preferably by weight) based on the 
manufacturers design. Grains shall not be less than 
250 g (wheat basis) loaded in measurement cell. The 
measuring frequency and amplitude shall be 
stabilized. The stabilization circuits shall be 
provided to make stable and sound moisture 
measurement with minimum variation. The 
temperature ofthe grain shall be measured precisely. 
Uniform feeding is required to these meters for 
accurate measurement of moisture of grains. This 
requires a minimum distance of at least 25 mm to 
allow the crops to fall evenly in the measuring cell. 


6 GENERAL AND CONSTRUCTIONAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 General 


Moisture Meters shall be sturdy and compact. 


6.2 Temperature Compensation 


Moisture Meters shall have a built-in temperature 
compensation circuit to avoid the error due to 
ambient temperature change. The stabilization 
circuit is provided to make stable and sound 
moisture measurements without variation with 
temperature of samples. 


6.2.1 Initial Grain Calibrations 


The manufacturers initial setting of grain 
calibrations need to be made with reference method 
traceable to national standards. The calibration 
tables in the meter shall be made against reference 
method at moisture intervals of around 2 per cent by 
the manufacturer or his authorized lab at 24 + 2°C 
and relative humidity (30-70) percent under 
laboratory condition. Manufacturer shall have an in- 
house moisture testing lab as per reference method 
and its instruments shall be traceable to national 
metrological lab. The reference method shall be 
standard oven method as per IS 4333 (Part 2). 


6.2.2 Routine Calibration/Readjustments 


The electrical moisture meter shall be provided with 
an arrangement for readjusting the readings to initial 
set readings. This may be done using standard 
resistance box, capacitance box/multi meters may be 
traceable to national standard or dedicated jigs etc. 
These electrical moisture meter may also be 
calibrated using reference material. Standardized 
readjustments are those physical adjustments or 
software parameters, which make the meter respond 
identically to the initial settings of the grains being 
measured. This may be done in the field without 
possibility of tempering. 


In case verification of initial calibration with 
reference method is required than it shall be done at 
most common moisture content percentage for the 
most used grain in a controlled lab at 24 + 2°C. 


6.2.3 Additional/Updation of Calibration 


The calibrations tables may change due to changes 
in electrical characteristic of crops with change in 
crop variety or crop year or the area they come from. 
In case there is a need to make new tables, the meter 
shall have a provision to re-program calibration 
tables made with reference method by the 
manufacturer or his authorized lab. This does not 
preclude the possibility of the operator doing the 
calibration under the instruction of the manufacturer 
as per his procedure, however ensuring calibration 
security. 


6.3 Display 


Moisture Meters shall have a facility to show 
percentage of moisture content with a least count of 
0.1%, temperature, date, time and crop name on a 
wirelessly connected smart device or in a built-in 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


system. It may have customer name, location, truck 
number, lot number etc. 


6.3.1 Data Storage 


Provision shall be there to store the above 
information on cloud server safely and securely to 
give facility to see data remotely and avoid any 
manipulation of results. 


6.4 Supply Voltage 


The Moisture Meters shall be designed for operation 
either on DC source, battery, AC supply or 
rechargeable battery. Manufacturer shall describe its 
safe applicable limit. There shall be low battery 
indication for error free measurement. 


6.5 Accessories 


The required accessories for operating the moisture 
meters shall to be provided by the manufacturer. In 
the resistance/capacitance type moisture meter, 
volume cup, handle, adapter, battery, cleaning brush 
etc. shall to be provided. In table top capacitance 
type moisture metre weighing scale shall be 
provided in case it does not have a built-in scale. 


NOTE - Battery will be optional for export purpose and 
battery specification to be provided in view of 
transportation constraint. 


6.6 Carrying Case 


The meter shall be provided with a suitable carrying 
case. It shall also accommodate all the accessories. 


6.7 Record of initial calibration data shall be 
maintained with the manufacturer. The 
manufacturers shall keep the record of the variety 
used and also need to maintain the relevant samples 
for a period of two months from the date of initial 
calibration. All equipment used by manufacturer 
shall be traceable to national standards. 


6.8 The ground or ungrounded sample is compressed 
(to bring it to a uniform state and to minimize the 
porosity effect on the electrical conductivity), placed 
under the plunger and insulated test cup both of 
which act as electrodes or as per recommendation of 
the manufacturer. A constant mass/volume of 
material is taken and compressed as per 
manufacturer design. As per the design of the 
manufacturer if required, a suitable mechanism for 
grinding without much generation of heat shall be 
provided. 


6.9 Constructional Features of 
Conductivity/Resistance Type Moisture Meter 


Conductive type moisture meter employs a 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


compression unit and two electrode plates for 
measurement of sample resistance. This is detailed 
in 6.9.1 and in Fig.1. The electronics is elaborated in 
6.9.3. The sample volume and stabilize measuring 
voltage affect the measurements. 


6.9.1 Compression Unit 


The compression unit shall be able to withstand 
compression for all grains/seeds/flour for which the 
moisture meter is calibrated. The test cup shall be a 
combination of metal and suitable insulation 


material like plastic. The volume of sample shall be 
minimum 10 cubic centimetres. There shall be an 
indication for the customer to know that 
compression has been achieved. It shall have an 
arrangement for compression of all crops as per 
manufacturer’s design. An indicative list of raw 
materials for different parts of compression unit is 
listed in Table 1. 


Table 1 Raw Material for Different Parts of Compression Unit 
(Clause 6.9.1) 


SINo. Compression Unit Material 
Parts 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Body/Housing Metal/any other suitable strong material like glass filled 
plastic 
ii) Test Cup Combination of metal and suitable insulation material like 
plastic 
111) Plunger Metal 


6.9.1.1 Power source 


DC  adapter/batteries 
manufacturer. 


as specified by the 


6.9.2 A typical arrangement of conductivity 
moisture meter or as per manufacturer design is 
shown in Fig. 1. 


6.9.3 Electronic/Electrical Unit 


The electronic printed circuit board (PCB) is 
provided in the moisture meter body to measure the 
conductivity, temperature and any other required 
parameters with precision and transfer data to 
mobile device wirelessly. 


MEASURING 
/ CIRCUIT 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


(RATCHET MECHANISM 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF GRAIN MOISTURE METER (CONDUCTIVITY TYPE) 


6.10 Constructional Features for Capacitance 
Type Moisture Meter 


Capacitance type moisture meter employ two 
parallel/cylindrical plates with sample between them 
to act as dielectric. This is detailed in 6.10.1 and Fig. 
2. Sufficient mass/volume of sample and stabilized 
signal is required for accurate measurement as 
elaborated in 6.10.3. 


6.10.1 Measurement cell is made of two conducting 
parallel/cylindrical plates for measuring dielectric 
constant. Grains shall not be less than 250 g (wheat 
basis) loaded in measurement cell. The uniform 
feeding mechanism shall be present for 
measurement of accurate moisture of grains. A 
minimum distance of at least 25 mm uniformly 
along the length of measuring cell shall be present, 
to allow the crops to fall evenly in the measuring 
cell. Weighingis must in table top model and it can 
be integrated or provided separately to load a 
defined mass of sample depending on the density of 


crop. In the table top model suitable mechanism 
shall be provided for loading and unloading of the 
sample in the measurement cell. 


6.10.1.1 Power sources 


Mains operated 230 V AC + 10 V or DC 
adapter/batteries as per specification provided by the 
manufacturer. 


6.10.2 A typical arrangement of Capacitance Type 
moisture meter is shown in Fig. 2. 


6.10.3 Electronic/Electrical Unit 


The electronic printed circuit board (PCB) shall be 
provided in the moisture meter body to measure the 
dielectric constant, temperature and any other 
required parameters with precision and transfer data 
provision to mobile or any suitable electronic device 
as per the recommendation of manufacturer. 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


6.11 The moisture meter shall be so designed as to 
perform satisfactorily from 10 to 40°C continuously 
and at a maximum humidity of 30-70 percent. The 
storage temperature range shall be 0 to 55°C at 
maximum relative humidity of 90 percent. 


LEVER OPEN THE FLAP AT THE BOTTOM 
OF HOPPER FOR UNIFORM FEEDING 
(MANUAL OR ACTUATOR OPERATED IN AUTOMATIC MODEL) 


MEASURING CIRCUITRY 
& 


DISPLAY SECTION 


DRAIN SYSTEM 
OR 


COLLECTING BIN 


SIDE VIEW 


DI IS SS ISSN NSS SS SS SV 


WHEE 


NOTE - An appropriate error message should be 
displayed/conveyed when the moisture meter is outside the 
range of temperature. 


WEIGHING SYSTEM 


oR 
LOAD CELL ARRANGEMENT 
(OPTIONAL IN AUTOMATIC 
SYSTE 


CAPACITANCE CELL 
(MADE OF NON COROSION MATERIAL) 


DRAIN SYSTEM 


OR 
COLLECTING BIN 


©) 


FRONT VIEW 


LEVER OPEN FLAP AT BOTTOM OF MEASURING CELL FOR DRAIN 
(MANUAL OR ACTUATOR OPERATED IN AUTOMATIC MODEL) 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF GRAIN MOISTURE METER (CAPACITANCE CELL) 


7 TEST RESULTS 
7.1 Repeatability Measurement 


7.1.1 Method to Verify Repeatability — Repeat 
measurements with same source, operator, 
equipment procedure and environmental conditions 
within a short period (preferably within 3 hours) of 
time for minimum three replications. Calculate 
standard deviation ofthe measured data. 


7.1.2 The repeatability of the test result shall be as 
below, if 0.02 x M < 0.2 then + 0.2%, else it shall 
be + 0.02 x M (M is moisture percent). 

Readings have to be taken within shortest period of 
time on the same moisture meter and same type of 
commodity. Standard deviation of the readings is 


called as repeatability. 
7.2 Uncertainty Measurement 


7.2.1 The measurement uncertainty of the moisture 
meters shall be checked at 24 + 2°C under laboratory 
condition. For different grains the accuracy shall be 
as below when compared with the reference 
method. If 0.04 x M < 0.5 then + 0.5%, else it shall 
be + 0.04 x M (M is moisture percent) or as 
declared by the manufacturer depending on the 
commodity type (M is moisture percent). 


8 MEASURING RANGE 


The measuring range of moisture shall be from 4 to 
40 percent depending upon crop type. The 


measuring range shall be declared by the 
manufacture crop wise. 


9 PACKING AND MARKING 
9.1 Packing 


The moisture meter shall be packed in suitable 
container in which it could conveniently and safely 
be transported. 


9.2 Marking 


9.2.1 The Display plate of the moisture meter shall 
be clearly and indelibly marked with the following 
information: 
a) Manufacturer's name or trade mark; 
b) Type of Meter (see 4) ; 
c) Model, ifany; 
d) Serial number; 
e) Supply voltage (to be declared by the 
manufacturer); 
f) Country of manufacture; and 
g) Contact address, Customer care number 
and email. 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


9.2.2 The manufacturer shall provide a manual 
which shall have information regarding the moisture 
percentage range for various crops in the measuring 
range of moisture content that can be determined by 
the moisture meter. The manual shall also cover all 
the necessary precautions and operating instructions 
for all types of conductivity and capacitance type 
moisture meter. 


9.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The moisture meter may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


9.3.1 The product(s) conforming to the requirements 
of this standard may be certified as per the 
conformity assessment schemes under the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulations framed 
thereunder, and the products may be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (8/22, 5th Cross Ramalinga Nagar 
South Extension Triuchirappali-620017) 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturers Association, Pune 


CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar 


Essen Multipack Limited, Rajkot 


ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal 


ICAR - Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, Bengaluru 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and 


Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR - Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology, Thanjavur 
Indosaw Industrial Products Private Limited, Ambala Cantt. 


Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture, New 
Delhi 


National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in 
Horticulture,New Delhi 
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and 


Management,Sonipat 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing 
Institute, Hisar 


Osaw Agro Industries Private Limited, Ambala 


Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


In Personal Capacity (320 Ist E cross HRBR layout 3rd block 
St Thomas Town Post, Bangalore 560084' 


Representative(s) 


DRK. ALAGUSUNDARAM (Chairperson) 


DR SURENDRA SINGH 
SHRI KASHINATHSA V. KABADI (Alternate) 


DR RAVI GUPTA 


SHRI SHAILDIP WAGH 


DRS. K. GIRI 


DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Alternate) 


DR A. CAROLINA RATHINA KUMAR 


DR S. BHUANESWARI (Alternate) 


DR SANDEEP MANN 


DRR.K. VISHWAKARMA (Alternate) 


DR V. G. ARUDE 


DR KANCHAN K. SINGH 


DR PANNA LAL SINGH (Alternate) 
DR S. BHUVANA 
DR VINOD H. KALBANDE 


SHRIC. R. LOHI 


SHRI P. K. CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 


DRP. K. NEMA 


SHRI MUKESH JAIN 


SHRI JAGDISH SINGH 


DR R. THIRUPATHI 
DR P. RAJKUMAR (Alternate I) 


DR P. SUDHA (Alternate II) 


SHRI JIX ANTONY 


IS 8824 (Part 1) : 2022 


In Personal Capacity [CD 223, Ansal Golf Link I, Greater SHRI PITAM CHANDRA 
Noida 201315 G B Nagar (UP)] 

In Personal Capacity [MIG - 154, E-7 Sector Aerea Colony, SHRI S. D. DESHPANDE 
Bhopal 462061 (M.P)] 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar,A Block DR R. VISVANATHAN 
Civil, Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore -641014, Tamil Nadu) 


BIS Directorate General Head (FAD) SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST “E” 
AND HEAD (FAD) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
SHRI DEBASISH MAHALIK 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (FAD), BIS 
Panel on Electrical Moisture Meters Part 1 Food Grains, 


FAD 20/P-11 


CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi DR DILIP DHONDIRAM SHIVAGAN (Convener) 
ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and DR SANDEEP MANN 

Technology, Ludhiana 

Indosaw Industrial Products Private Limited, Ambala Cantt Dr VINOD H. KALBANDE 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 20 (18585). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


