( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard MECHANICAL AFFECTING VIBRATION AND SHOCK MAN - VOCABULARY (First Revision)

ICS 13.160

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN,

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR . MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October 1999

Price Group 5

Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, LM 04

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) which is identical with IS0 5805:1997 `Mechanical vibration and shock affecting man - Vocabulary', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1992. This first revision has been taken up to align with the latest version of IS0 5805 which has been technically revised in 1997. The text of IS0 Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used `in Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard, reference appears to one International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. Ttie corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: In ferna tional Standard IS0 2041 :1990 Vibration and shock - Vocabulary Corresponding Indian Standard IS 11717:1999 Vibration and shock - Vocabulary(first revision) Degree of Equivalence Identical

IS

13281

Indian Standard MECHANICAL AFFECTING

IS0 5805

: 1999 : 1997

VIBRATION AND SHOCK MAN - VOCABULARY (First Revision)
sensed or detectable by man, in or on a building, bridge or other fixed structure
NOTE - Building vibration disturbing to man is very often associated with airborne sound, and many people have difficulty in distinguishing vibratory disturbances from acoustical disturbances in buildings.

1

scope

This International Standard defines terms relating to human biodynamics or which are used in specific contexts in other standards pertaining to the evaluation of human exposure to mechanical vibration and shock. It provides standard definitions of terms and supplements IS0 2041 but does not contain general terms readily found in dictionaries.
NOTES 1 A few synonyms are included among terms defining directions of vibration or shock affecting man, where widespread use of the synonym in the literature on biodynamics or the evaluation of human exposure to mechanical vibration and shock is still current. However, use of the primary standard term (listed first) is preferred, and the use of ambiguous terms is deprecated. References to "shock" in the context of biodynamics are to be understood in the mechanical, and not the medical sense. Mechanical shock (commonly called "impact" when applied to man) is defined in IS0 2041. 2 References to "man" should equally to man or woman. be interpreted as applying

3.2 footfall mechanical vibration, shock motion or noise generated by people moving about in buildings 3.3 indirect vibration mechanical vibration which disturbs man without entering the body EXAMPLE Visible oscillation of objects in the field of view. 3.4 limb vibrator segmental vibrator vibration machine (usually small) for applying vibration topically to a human limb or other segment of the body for experimental or therapeutic purposes 3.5 ride measurable motion environment (including vibration, shock, translational and rotational accelerations) as experienced by people in or on a vehicle
NOTE - Some inside a moving particularly where generally adverse or sources (e.g. vehicles). authorities regard associated noise heard vehicle as part of the ride environment, a composite vibroacoustical environment to man is generated by a common source fork-lift trucks, helicopters, ships, space

3 The numbers appearing before each term are arbitrary within each categorical section: they are used solely for reference purposes, including the facilitation of cross-reference in translation of the primary term between the languages of IS0 and its member bodies.

2

Normative

reference

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 2041: 1990, 3
Vibration and shock - Vocabulary.

General terms

3.1 building vibration [shock] mechanical vibration [shock] affecting man, or 1

3.6 self-applied vibration mechanical vibration applied to one's own body for therapeutic, recreational or pleasurable purposes

IS 13281 : 1999 IS0 5805 : 1997 3.7 self generated vibration <biodynamics> endogenous vibration, that is, vibratory or oscillatory motion of or within the body induced by muscular activity (e.g. walking, dancing, rocking) or the involuntary action of organs (e.g. the beating of the heart, neuromuscular tremor) 3.8 vibration [shock] limit quantitative expression of the maximum intensity or severity of mechanical vibration [shock] recommended for human exposure according to a specified criterion (for example, a boundary of safe exposure when the criterion is the prevention of injury or disease)
NOTE - Standards on human exposure to vibration and shock commonly define evaluation methods for human response, and, in some cases, specific dose-response relationships are given or implied. As a general rule it is not properly the function of International Standards to prescribe `absolute exposure limits. In some member countries, vibration [shock] limits are sometimes set by legislative or regulatory authorities. Where that is done, the use of evaluation methods and data ratified in international or cognate national consensus standards should be encouraged.

4 Terms characterizing mechanical vibration [shock] affecting man 4.1 directional vibration [shock] translational or rotational mechanical vibration [shock] acting upon man as a whole or upon parts of man (e.g. hand, head or limbs) See note 6 in 5.2. 4.2 x-axis vibration [shock] for-and-aft vibration (deprecated) surge (deprecated) shunt (deprecated) transverse vibration (deprecated) longitudinal vibration (deprecated) translational mechanical vibration [shock] in the direction of the x-axis of the anatomical coordinate system of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand)
NOTES 1 Surge is used for ships and shunt

is used for trains.

3.9

2 In a right handed orthogonal coordinate system, the direction of the x-axis is deemed by convention to polnt from the subjects back towards the front (see IS0 8727).

vibration [shock] criterion expression of the purpose (e.g. to preserve health, working efficiency) of establishing a vibration [shock] limit or boundary
Fully expressed, NOTE the fraction or percentage protected. the criterion should of the population specify to be

4.3 y-axis vibration [shock] side-to-side vibration (deprecated) sway (deprecated) transverse vibration (deprecated) translational mechanical vibration [shock] in the direction of the y-axis of the anatomical coordinate system of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand)
NOTE In a right-handed orthogonal coordinate system, the direction of the y-axis is deemed by convention to point from the subject's right to left side (see IS0 8727).

3.10 vibration rating <biodynamics> subjective estimation of vibration severity or intensity using a rating scale or corresponding numerical assessment obtained by methods of psychological testing
NOTE - Vibration rating is in several respects analogous to the scaling of loudness or perceived noisiness of audible sound.

3.11 vibratory communication communication with a person by means of the vibrotactile sense using vibratory signals, coded by location and other parameters, applied to the body mechanically or induced electrically 2

4.4 z-axis vibration [shock] vertical vibration (deprecated) heave (deprecated) longitudinal vibration (deprecated) translational mechanical vibration [shock] in the Direction of the z-axis of the anatomical coordinate system of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand)

IS 13281 : 1999 IS0 5805 : 1997
NOTES 1 It is important to appreciate that z-axis vibration of man is not necessarily vertical vibration; geocentrically speaking, it depends on the body's orientation with respect both to the true or notional vertical and to the direction of the vibration. 2 In a right-handed orthogonal coordinate system, the direction of the z-axls is deemed by convention to point from below the subject towards the head (see IS0 8727).

EXAMPLE The total duration of exposure deemed to have been undergone by a worker in a vibration environment during the working day.
.
NOTE-A notional aggregate exposure time can be computed even in cases when the vibration has been intermittent, interrupted or of varied intensity, as when making several trips in different vehicles or using a power too between periods of other work during the period of evaluation. 5

4.5 multidirectional translational vibration [shock] translational mechanical vibration [shock] acting in more than one direction upon the human body or upon a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 4.6 roll rotational mechanical vibration about the x-axis of the anatomicai coordinate system of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand)
NOTE - Vehicular roll, pitch and yaw axes do not necessarily (and commonly do not) intersect: indeed, in ships and other large mobile structures, one or more of these axes may lie outside the hul! or any space occupied by man, requiring computational transformation of data when evaluating human inputs.

Terms relating to biodynamics

5.1 basicentric coordinate system right-handed orthogonal coordinate system originating at a point (or related to) a contact surface or a structure (for example, the floor of a vehicle) from which mechanical vibration [shock] is considered to enter the human body
NOTE - Such a coordinate system at some identifiable point (e.g. the vehicle or a ship) to whir3 the biodynamical concern may reliably be transformation. may originate remotely, centre of gravity of a measured motion of related by computational

4.7 pitch Rotational mechanical vibration about the y-axis of the anatomical coordinate system of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 4.8 yaw rotational mechanical vibration about the z-axis of the anatomical coordinate system of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 4.9 multi-axis rotational vibration [shock] rotational mechanical vibration [shock] about more than one axis of the anatomical coordinate system of the human body or of a part of the body (e.g. a hand) 4.10 exposure time actual or notional duration (derived by a prescribed standard computational procedure) of human exposure to mechanical vibration (or repeated shock motion) treated as continuous in nature 3

5.2 anatomical coordinate system right-handed orthogonal coordinate system having an origin located within the human ci human analogue body, and an orientation defined by fixed (skeletal) anatomical landmarks
NOTES

1 The term `biodynamic coordinate system* is sometimes used with the same meaning (and was so defined in the first edition of this International Standard). However, that term now has a generic meaning appfying to any coordinate system, whe!her body-centered or not, that is used in biodynamics. "Anatomical coordinate system" is the preferred term for a coordinate system originating specifically within the human body or one of its parts (e.g. a hand) or human analogue body.
2 The region or segment of the body for which an anatomical coordinate system is defined should be designated in parentheses whenever reported: for example, `anatomical coordinate system (hand)`, `anatomical coordinate system (head)`. 3 Anatomical coordinate systems originate and are fixed in the corresponding body segment with respect to bony reference points, and so (unlike basicentric systems) move with that body segment during changes of body orientation or posture. Within this context, body segments are deemed to be anatomical elements acting in conformity with the laws of rigid-body mechanics to a derronstrably reasonable approximation (see IS0 8727). 4 It is implicit in the definition of any anatomical coordinate system that the origin can be described in a precise

IS 13281 : 1999 IS0 5805 : 1997
anthropometrical manner, with reference to identifiable skeletal reference points. 5 The use of ill-defined, freely mobile or deformable parts of the body, such as the heart or the buttocks, as origins for anatomical coordinate systems leads to a lack of precision and repeatability in measuring vibration and shock motion of the body, and is accordingly aeprecated. 6 Mechanical vibration and shock inputs to the human or human analogue body may be described with reference to either an anatomical and/cr geocentric or a basicentric coordinate system, depending on which is most appropriate to the measured response or to the evaluative procedure. As a general rule, however, the use of anatomical coordinate systems is preferred. anthropomorphic dummy or manikin simulates the general appearance and external anatomical features (although not necessarily the innate properties) of the human body, an anthropometric dummy is constructed to reproduce the dimensions and ranges of posture of the human body (at a specified percentile of size or mass), an anthropodynamic dummy or manikin simulates with varying degrees of fidelity the dynamic characteristics of the body or its major segments in one or more axes, while a kinematic dummy simulates certain of the ballistic properties of the body (e.g.) the ranges or inertial movement of the limbs flailing under severe impact or aerodynamic loads) without necessarily reproducing at all realistically the human form or visible anatomy, or internal dynamic response.

5.3 biodynamics science of the physical, biological and mechanical (inertial) properties and responses of the human or human analogue body, its tissues, organs, parts and systems, either with reference to external forces (external biodynamics), including selfgenerated vibration or in relation to the internal forces, produced by an interplay of external forces and the body's own mechanical activity (internal biodynamics)
NOTE The term biomechanics is sometimes used synonymously with biodynamics (etymologically, biodynamics is properly a subset of biomechanics). As a general rule, however, biomechanics in practice has come to mean mainly the science of the static physical properties (e.g.) material strength, elasticity, ranges of motion of tissues, organs and structures within the body, not necessarily with any consideration being given to the dynamic response.

5.6 hand-arm system human forelimb, considered as a vibration [shock] receiver 5.7 whole-body vibration [shock] WBV mechanical vibration [shock] transmitted to the body as a whole, usually through areas of the body (e.g. buttocks, soles of the feet, back) in contact with a supporting contact surface that is vibrating (or subjected to shock motion) 5.8 segmental vibration [shock] regional vibration (deprecated) local vibration (deprecated) topical vibration (deprecated) mechanical vibration [shock] applied or transmitted to a particular segment, area or region of the human body (usually distinguished from a whole-body input) such as the hand-arm system or the head
5.9

5.4 contact surface surface or area (interface) through which mechanical vibration [shock] is considered to enter the human body or one of its parts (e.g. a hand) or human analogue body
NOTE - The principal mechanical driving point of impressed vibratory or shock motion may for many practical purposes be deemed to lie at the centre of a plane circumscribing the contact surface.

5.5 dummy anthropometric dummy manikin test device or mechanically realizable human analogue model that simulates one or more of the anthropometric, ballistic and dynamic characteristics of man
NOTE Various qualifying words are used to indicate the purpose or nature of dummies. For example, an

hand-transmitted vibration [shock] HTV hand-arm vibration HAV mechanical vibration [shock] directly applied or transmitted to the hand-arm system, commonly through the palm of the hand or through the fingers gripping a tool or workpiece 6 Terms describing human reactions to vibration [shock] 6.1 comfort <biodynamics> subjective state of well-being or absence of mechanical disturbance in relation to the induced environment, (mechanical vibration or repetitive shock) 4

IS 13281 : 1999 IS0 5805 : 1997
NOTE Comfort connotes the absence of significantly disturbing or intrusive physical factors. It is a complex subjective entity depending upon the effective summation of all the physical factors present in the induced environment, as well as upon individual sensitivity to those factors and their summation, and such psychological factors as expectation. (For these reasons, for example, the same values of vibration that might be judged by most riders to be uncomfortable in a limousine may be judged acceptably comfortable in a bus.).

vehicle is perceived and rated as favourable or unfavourable by passengers or operators 6.7 sopite syndrome inordinate sleepiness, lassitude or drowsy inattention induced by vibration, low-frequency oscillatory motion (e.g. ship motion) or general travel stress 6.8 vibration [shock] [impact] tolerance maximum severity of mechanical vibration [shock] [impact] tolerable by an individual or, on the average, by a specified group or population according to a specified vibration [shock] [impact] criterion 6.9 vibration white finger VWF vibration-induced white finger Raynaud's phenomenon of occupational origin traumatic vasospastic disease (deprecated) disturbance of the finger skin blood-flow, usually lasting as long as the inducing factor or factors are present and possibly progressing during this period, in some workers exposed to vibration from hand-held power tools and workpieces. In this disorder, after a latent interval following the beginning of the exposure, characteristic symptoms occur in one or more fingers. Their distribution generally agrees with the strongest vibration exposure, and the larger the exposure does the more flingers tend to become affected. The typical manifestation of the disorder is attacks of welldemarcated, local blanching and accompanying numbness of parts of the finger skin in response to hand or whole-body exposure to cold
NOTE - This is also known in the medical community as "occupational Raynaud's". Many more picturesque, names are given to the affliction popularly by workers who daily use hand-held vibration tools (e.g. "dead hand", wax finger").

6.2 equal vibration sensation contour values of equal vibration sensation magnitude expressed as a function of frequency of vibration 6.3 habituation acclimatization (deprecated) adaptation (deprecated) <biodynamics> reduction or inhibition of a psychophysiological reaction (for example, motion sickness) to motion, vibration or shock as a result of continued or repeated exposure to the stimulus
NOTE - Popularly referred to, in the case of sea sickness, as "getting one's sea legs".

6.4 motion sickness kinetosis motion sickness syndrome (deprecated) vomiting (emesis), nausea or malaise (usually preceded by a variety of premonitory symptoms and clinical signs mediated by the autonomic nervous system) provoked by actual or perceived low-frequency passive motion of the body
NOTE - The malady popularly takes a variety of names according to context, for example sea sickness, air sickness, car sickness. Recently, the term space (motion) sickness has been applied to nausea and vomiting experienced by astronauts and cosmonauts during weightless orbital flight. However, it remains debatable whether this condition is physiologically the same as motion sickness experienced in earthbound situations.

6.5 motion sickness incidence MSI fraction (usually expressed as a percentage) of a group or population who succumb to motion sickness (usually defined as frank emesis) within a specified period or in specified conditions of provocative motion 6.6 ride quality degree to which the whole subjective experience (including the motion environment and associated factors) or a journey or ensemble of journeys by 5

6.10 hand-arm vibration syndrome HAVS set of symptoms occurring in some workers using hand-held vibrating power tools; this syndrome is considered to comprise:

4 blood circulatory disturbance in the finger skin
white (vibration phenomenon); finger, Raynaud's

IS 13281 : 1999 IS0 5805 : 1997

4

neurological disturbance in the hand and forearm (pain, paresthesia; elevation of sensory thresholds in the hands);

c) disturbance in the locomotor apparatus (pain
and reduction of muscular strength in the hand and forearm; elbow and wrist arthrosis with very low prevalence).
NOTE - In its classical manifestation, the diagnosis of HAVS is made based on a history of blanching of one or more digits - often in response to cold - in workers using handheld vibrating tools.

7.3 pushing force force applied by the worker's hand to the stock or other part of a vibration- [shock-] generating tool or workpiece to guide or advance it 7.4 hand-arm mechanical impedance
hand-arm impedance

complex ratio of force to velocity measurable at a point of vibration (usually the driving-point) of the hand-arm system
NOTE - This term commonly means the mechanical driving point impedance of the hand-arm system as a function of harmonic vibration frequency. Whenever reference is made to a hand-arm system transfer impedance, the distinction should be clearly made or implied.

7 Various terms 7.1 fatigue/decreased proficiency <biodynamics> fatigue and/or impairment of human activity or task performance caused by mechanical vibration [shock]
NOTES 1 This term is retained in the vocabulary for the time being because, while it is a concept not universally recognized or accepted by experts in the psychology of human task performance, it has been embodied in International Standards and cognate literature. The world "proficiency" in this term was in some respects an unfortunate choice, because, as normally used in English, it properly connotes not necessarily the efficiency with which a task in hand is accomplished (which may at the time be degraded by vibration or shock motion), but acquired skill or expertise, which is essentially retained by a trained individual regardless of the action of temporarily adverse environmental factors. 2 This term is widely rendered incorrectly, in scientific literature and even in some English-language editions of biodynamic standards, as "fatigue-decreased proficiency'. (This alternative form is deprecated.) Use of this hyphenated form wrongly implies that all task performance is impaired by "fatigue", that is, by timedependent adverse physiological effects or vibration or shock motion. In fact, many kinds of human activity and task performance are degraded instantaneously by the mechanical interference directly caused by vibration or shock motion, in a manner not necessarily related to any subsequent onset of physiological fatigue during continued exposure.

7.5 human anaiogue human anaiogue model human surrogate (deprecated) <biodynamics> dynamically representative substitute for, or model of, specified inertial properties of the human body
NOTES 1 a) Human analogues may be:

animals whose major anatomical features and inertial responses to mechanical vibration and shock (particularly in the trunk, head and neck) simulate those of man and can be equated with human inertial characteristics by appropriate scaling data derived empirically; human cadavers used, for example, in vehicle crash tests to simulate live human injury effects and kinematic mechanisms during severe shock motion (impact); mechanical dummied (manikins); or of

b)

c) d)

mathematical models (including computer simulations) human dynamic or kinematic responses.

7.2 grip force
gripping force

2 The term human analogue is sometimes extended to include any physical representation of the dimensions, geometry of material properties of the human body. Circumspection must be exercised, however, when interpreting data from tests using such analogues for biodynamic purposes, lest the verisimilitude of the model's representation of the dynamic properties of the living body be fallacious. (Even human cadavers, while visibly human material, may lack certain of the living body's elastic and other inertial properties and hence provide an inexact or unrepresentative simulation of the living human biodynamic response to force and motion inputs.)

gripping pressure (deprecated) strength of the grip applied by the worker's hand to a vibration [shock] generating hand-held tool or workpiece or any hand-held vibrating surface, e.g. a vehicle steering wheel 6

7.6 impulsive vibration <biodynamics> quasi-steady-state or sustained transient vibration generated by rapidly repetitive

IS 13281 : 1999 IS0 5805 : 1997 shock motion, when the duration of each shock and the intervals separating the shocks are short in comparison with the damped transient response or the natural periods of vibration of the receiver
NOTES 1 Impulsiveness, as defined here, is commonly characteristic (as often is strong poriodicity) of hand-transmitted vibration generated in hand-heid reciprocating power tools designed to deliver a high-frequency series of impacts to a workpiece (e.g. chipping hammers, concrete breakers, pneumatic nailers). 2 In many situations, the distinction between impulsive vibration and repetitive shock may be debatable and a mater of semantic usage. This is so particularly when a repetitive shock excitation is strongly periodic and when the repetition frequency falls within a relatively high frequency range of concern with regard to the human receiver. The latter term (see 7.13) generally implied human whole-body exposure (e.g. when riding along a continuously bumpy road or flying through small-cell air turbulence), whereas, as mentioned in note 1 of subclause 7.6, the term "impulsive vibration" is usually applied to the hand-transmitted mechanical output of high-speed reciprocating power tools. 97'
1.1

z-axis, defined by the anatomical coordinate system (pelvis), is rotated posteriorly to an angle between 15" and 75" from the geocentric or notional vertical 7.11 recwmbent lying (deprecated) <biodynamics> reference posture in which the whole body anatomical z-axis is rotated between 75" and 90" from the vertical in any direction (e.g. supine, lateral, or prone)
NOTES 1 The term "lying" is deprecated because of its amoiguous

meaning in English. 2 In recumbent postures, substantial fractions of the weight of the person may be distributed through the upper body and the limbs, but the impressed vibration or shock may nevertheless be deemed still to act through the pelvis or the body's centre of mass.

interrupted exposure discontinuous exposure human vibration exposure, of quasi-steady-state or continuous vibration exposure (usually involving hand-transmitted vibration in an occupational context), which is interrupted by vibration-free periods having a specified time-course (times of occurrence and duration)
NOTE The antonym continuous) exposure. of this term is uninterrupted (or

7.12 reference posture <biodynamics> notional orientation and posture of the body considered as the receiver of whole-body mechanical vibration [shock] 7.13 repetitive shock repeated shock <biodynamics> series of brief (less than one second) shock motions or bursts of quasi-steadystate vibration affecting man See also 7.6.
NOTES 1 Shocks repeated regularly and more frequently than once per second may for many purposes be regarded and analysed for biodynamic purposes as a form of continuous vibration. 2 Shocks may be symmetric axis. or asymmetric about the time

7.8 latent interval latent period latency interval (which may range from a few weeks to many years) between a person's first exposure to a hazardous agent and the first manifestation of symptoms related to exposure
7.9

long-duration vibration [repetitive shock] exposure <biodynamics> continuous vibration [repetitive shock] affecting man and lasting for more than one hour 7.10 reclining <biodynamics> reference posture, between seated and supine, in which the whole-body anatomical 7

7.14 weighted acceleration weighted vibration weighted acceleration level weighted vibration level (deprecated) <biodynamics> value or set of values of vibrational or repetitive shock acceleration affecting man that has been subjected to a computational or signalconditioning operation to reflect human response characteristics as a function of vibration frequency or exposure time

IS 13281 : 1999 IS0 5805 : 1997
NOTE - When the world "level" is included in the term, reference to a standard acceleration reference value is implied (see IS0 1683). one hour and repeated on a daily or regular working basis, or continuous periods or exposure lasting one or more days, in which the person affected necessarily spends resting, sleeping and other living time as well as working time in vibroacoustic environment (for example, abroad sea-going ships, space missions, long-range aircraft, off-shore rigs, and in institutional or other buildings constantly exposed to traffic or aircraft noise).

7.15 burst of mechanical

vibration

affecting man

discrete and continuous (but usually short-lived series of reversed of vibration at a driving-point of the human body or a body segment
NOTES 1 A burst of vibration affecting man may typically contain a quasi-harmonic vibration of exponentially decaying amplitude (popularly, "ringing") following a shock input to a resonant system impinging on man, a fusiform envelope of rising and falling amplitude (for example, vibration of bridge deck excited by the passage of a heavy vehicle), or a short-lived random motion such as the response of an aircraft to an isolated gust of air turbulence, or of a ship's hull due to the motion in heavy seas. 2 A burst as a rule is of short duration in relation to most human relations, The point at which a burst of vibration is of sufficient persistence to be treated as a continuous vibration of short duration will depend upon the circumstances and the human response elicited.

7.18 equivalent

torque

<biodynamics> torque generated between anatomical segments that is consistent with the mass distribution properties of the segments, the location of the articulation between the segments, and the kinematic motion of the segments
7.19 occipital condylar point

mid-point on a line tangent to the most inferior prominences of the occipital condyles
NOTE - The tangential positions of this imaginary line are usually determinable from radiographical anthropometry.

7.16 intermittent

vibration

affecting man

repeated periods of continuous vibration separated by intervals in which the vibration ceases or varies substantially in magnitude and/or character
NOTE - The term frequently (but not necessarily) connotes conditions in which the resumption of vibration is abrupt or irregular, and accordingly may induce startle or annoyance in the human receiver.

7.20 human impact impact acceleration crash (force)

short-duration acceleration (deprecated) <biodynamics> shock or shock motion applied to man
NOTES 1 2 "Shock" and "Shock motion" are defined in IS0 The term human impact as used in biodynamics a severity of shock excitation 2041. usually

7.17 vibroacoustic

connotes

of the human frame

habitability

the acceptable freedom, or mainly large vehicles or structures occupied for extended periods or continuously by man, from adverse conditions of combined acoustical noise and mechanical vibration
NOTES 1 Vibroacoustic habitability may be evaluated according to the criteria of subjective disturbance, interference with human activity or performance, occupational safety and health, or any combination of these. 2 Extended periods may as a rule be deemed to be periods of exposure (especially occupational exposure) lasting at least

of sufficient magnitude to cause pain, injury or significant physiological distress in the single event, of the kind caused by accidents distinguished or military action. It may accordingly be from mild and/or repetitive shocks of moderate

magnitude (bumps) mostly experienced in vehicle ride or as structure-borne disturbances in buildings, and associated with transient discomfort, annoyance or interruption of human living and working activities of an everyday kind. A domain of intermediate severity and hazard may also be distinguishable, including repeated mechanical assault of the kind affecting people abroad rough-riding vehicles and carrying a risk of cumulative damage in the course of chronic occupational exposure drivers, mobile heavy equipment recreational beats, exposure snowmobiles). (e.g. of tractor and truck operators) or excessive power-

(e.g. aboard off-road vehicles,

IS 13281 : 1999 . IS0 5805 : 1997

Annex A (informative) Bibliography

[l]

IS0 1503:1977, Geometrical orientation and directions of movements.

[6] IS0 5982:1981, Vibration and shock Mechanical driving point impedance of the human body. [7] fs!S~c~962:1987, Mechalrical vibration and - Mechanical transmissibility of the human body in z direction. [8] IS0 8727: -*), Mechanical vibration and shock - Human exposure - Biodynamic coordinate systems. [9] IS0 9996:--", Mechanical vibration and shock - Disturbance to human activity and performance - Classification.

[2] IS0 1683:1983, Acoustics - Preferred reference quantities for acoustic levels. [3] IS0 2631-1. .-l), Mechanical vibration and shock - Evaluation of human exposure to whole-body vibration - Part 1: General requirements. [4] IS0 5349:1986, Mechanical vibration Guidelines for the measurement and the assessment of human exposure to handtransmitted vibration. [5] IS0 5353:1995, Earth-moving machinery, and ,tractors and machinery for agriculture and forestry - Seat index point.

I) To be published. (Revision of IS0 2631-1:1965) E, To be published.

9

Is lsm: IS0 saos

1909 : 1997

Alphabetical index

A acclimatization 6.3 adaptation 6.3 anatomical coordinate system anthropometric dummy 5.5 B oasicentric coordinate system biodynamics 5.3 building vibration Ishockl 3.1 burst of mechanical vibration affecting man 7.15
C

5.2

human human human human

analogue 7.5 analogue model impact 7.20 surrogate 7.5

7.5

repetitive shock 7.13 ride 3.5 ride quality 6.6 roll 4.6 S segmental vibration (shock] 5.8 segmental vibrator 3.4 :elf-applied vibration 3.6 self-generated vibration 3.7 side-to-side vibration 4.3 shortduration acceleration 7.20 shunt 4.2 sopite syndrome 6.7 surge 4.2 sway 4.3 T topical vibration 5.8 transverse vibration 4.2, 4.3 traumatic vasospastic desease

5.1

impact acceleration 7.20 impulsive vibration 7.6 indirect vibration 3.3 intermittent vibration affecting man 7.16 interrupted exposure 7.7 K kinetosis 6.4

comfort 6.1 contact surface crash 7.20

5.4 latency 7.8 latent interval 7.8 latent period 7.8 limb vibrator 3.4 local vibration 5.8 long-duration vibration [repetitive shock1 exposure 7.9. longitudinal vibration 4.2, 4.4 lying 7.11 M manikin 5.5 motion sickness 6.4 motion sickness incidence y$ion,stkness syndrome 7.1 multi-axis rotational vibration Ishockl 4.9 multidirectional translational vibration Ishockl 4.5

6.9

D directional vibration [shock] 4.1 discontinuous exposure 7.7 dummy 5.5 E equal vibration sensation contour 6.2 equivalent torque 7.18 exposure time 4.10 F fatigue/decreased proficiency footfall 3.2 fore-and-aft vibration 4.2 G grip force 7.2 gripping force 7.2 gripping pressure 7.2 H habituation 6.3 hand-arm impedance 7.4 hand-arm mechanical impedance 7.4 hand-arm system 5.6 hand-arm vibration 5.9 hand-arm vibration syndrome hand-transmitted vibration [shock] 5.9 HAV 5.9 HAVS, 6.10 heave 4.4 HT-V 5.9

v
vertical vibration 4.4 vibration lshockl criterion 3.9 vibration-induced white finger 6.9 vibration [shock] limit 3.8 vibration rating 3.10 vibration [shock] [impact] tolerance 6.8 vibration white finger 6.9 vibratory communication 3.11 vibroacoustic habitability 7.17 VWF 6.9 W WBV 5.7 weighted acceleration 7.14 weighted acceleration level 7.14 weighted vibration 7.14 weighted vibration level 7.14 whole-body vibration Ishock) 5.7 X

6.5 6.4

0

occipital condylar point

7.19

P pitch 4.7 pushing force 7.3

x-axis vibration [shock] Y r-axis vibration lshockl yaw 4.8
-9

4.2

4.3

R 6.10 Raynaud's phenomenon of occupational origin 6.9 reclining 7.10 recumbent 7.11 reference posture 7.12 regional vibration 5.8 repeated shock 7.13 10

z-axis vibration (shock]

4.4

Bureau of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. LM 04 (0392).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No., Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 01 31,323 3375,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 { 337 84 86 99,337 26,337 91 85 20 61

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/i 4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi

CALCUTTA
: SC0 335336,

700054 Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

{ 603843 60 20 25
: Cl.?`. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI : Manakalaya,

600 113 t 235 02 15 19,235 16,235 04 23 42 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91, 832 78 92

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTIHAPURAM.

: AHMADABAD.

COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. PATNA. PINE.

Printed at Slmco

Printing

Press,

Delhi

