( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 6748 ( Part I ) - 1973

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR WATERSHED MANAGEMENT RELATING TO SOIL CONSERVATION
PART Catchment
Chairman
SHRI

I

AGRONOMIC Sectional

ASPECTS Committee,
& Power,

Area and Reservoirs
Ministry

BDC 48
New Delhi

Representing of Irrigation

S. K. BANERJEE Members

SHRI M. M. ANAND
SHRI SHRI K. S. S. SAHI ( ~kWUZte )

Irrigation & Power Punjab Bhakra Land Dams

Department,

Government

of

K. CHAU~HRY SHRI R. N. HOON (Alfemale) DIRECTOR DR S. R. SEHCAL (Alternate)
DIRECTOR ( HYDROLOGY ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( HYDROLOGY ) ( Allernnb ) DIRECTOR ( INTERSTATE & DESIGNS ) SHRI P. V.RAO SHRI D. DODDIAH SHRI R. L. GUPTA

Organization,

Nangal

Township Research

Reclamation, Irrigation Institute, Amritsar Water & Power

& Power

Central

Commission,

New Delhi

Public Works Pradesh

Department,

Government

of Andhra

( AItcrmlc)
Central Board of Irrigation Public Works Department, Pradesh & Power, New Delhi Government of Madhya

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER, DESIGNS( Alternate ) Geological Survey SHKI B. M. HUKKU Soil Conservation JOINT COMMISSIONER ( SOIL CONSERVATION )

SHRI N. V. KHURSALE SHRI R. D. GUPTE ( Alternate) SHRI S. K. IMOORTHY SHRI K. N. TANE~A ( Alternate ) SHRI B. N. MURTHY

Agriculture, Cooperation ) Irrigation Department, National Projects Delhi Damodar Valley Dhanbad

of India, Calcutta Division (Ministry of Community Development Government

Food, &

of Maharashtra Corporation, New

Construction

Corporation,

Maithon

Dam,

( Continued on page 2 ) @ BUREAU OF Copyright 1973 INDIAN STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the I&inn Copyri$ Act ,( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with wrltten permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS I 6748 ( Part I ) - 1973
( Cantinuedfrom page 1) Members SHRI H. R. PRAMANIK DR S. P. RAYCXAUDHURI SECRETARY SxRl G. S. %ilVANNA Representing Irrigation & Waterways Department, Government of West Bengal In personal capacity ( E. C. 9, Inder Puri, New Delhi 12) Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Public Works Department, Government of Mysore Irrigation & Power Department, Government of Orissa Director General, BIS ( Ex-oBcio Member)

SXRI BIJAYANANDA TRIPATHY

SHRI D. AJITHA SIMXA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Secrefury

SXRI K. RACHAVENDRAN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

2

IS:6748(Part I).1973

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR WATERSHED MANAGEMENT RELATING TO SOIL CONSERVATION
PART i AGRONOMIC ASPECTS

0.
0.1This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 2 April 1973, after the draft finalized by the Catchment Area and Reservoirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Sedimentation of reservoirs is a matter of vital concern for any project whether irrigation, hydro-electric power, flood control etc, since it adversely affects the life and functions of the reservoirs. For this, effective measures of soil conservation in the watershed are essential. 0.3 Soil conservation is an integrated approach of three disciplines namely, engineering, agronomy and forestry and involves -a co-ordinated effort of these disciplines for a comprehensive and composite programme of development and management of watersheds. Some of the broad aspects of these three disciplines are given below: a) Engineering - Bank protection abutment, spurs, check-dams, concrete water disposal system, and roadside control measures, gully plugging, masonry or etc.

b) Agrononly - Retirement of severely eroded land to permanent protection of vegetation, pasture development, vegetative waterways, contour farming,~strip cropping, crop rotation, etc. c) Forestry - Like forest conservancy and forest plantation, etc. management and protection

management 0.4 A standard for the engineerin g aspects of watershed ( IS : &j18-1972* ) has already been published. This standard deals with the agronomical aspects with regard to watershed management and the forestry aspects are proposed to be covered in Part II of this standard. _. .._.__ ____--*Cod& practice for control of sediment in reservoirs. 3

IS : 6748 ( Part I ) - 1973 0.5 for has the In the formulation of this standard due consideration has been given relating this standard to the practices in the field in this country. This been met by deriving assistance from the Soil Survey Manual, 1970 of All India Soil and Land Use Survey Organization, IARI.

I. SCOPE
( Part I ) covers the recommendations on the agronomlcal aspects for soil conservation in the catchment area and the appropriate method(s) to be adopted. 2. IDENTIFICATION

1.1 This standard

TION

MEASURES

OF AREAS REQUIRING ON PRIORITY BASIS

SOIL CONSERVA-

2.1 For achieving maximum benefit of soil conservation and covering as much critical areas as feasible in minimum possible time, one should know the pockets of sediment contributing areas and the amount of sediment contributed by them and then have a comprehensive plan to tackle these areas in the order of priorities taking sub-watershed as a unit of management.
2.2 Quick erosion survey by soil survey parties or by collection of available sediment data and aerial photo interpretation should be carried out to determine the pattern of present land use and degree of erosion in order to fix priorities for soil conservation measures. 3. CLASSIFICATION OF LAND ON THE types: BASIS OF LAND USE

3.1 Land is classified into the following
a) Suitable for cultivation, and b) Unsuitable for cultivation.

These are further subdivided and the details are given in Appendix based on IS : 5510-I 969 * with additions in Classes VI and VII. 4. AGRONOMIC 4.1 The following PRACTICES are.

A,

agronomic practices in respect of soil conservation and they are described in detail in 4.1.1 to 4.1.11: of severely by vegetation, eroded cultivated land for

the

a) Retirement protection b)

permanent plants for

Planting severely erodible rehabilitation of wild life,

aseas with

feed and cover

*Guide for soil surveys for -river valley projects. 4

IS : 6748 ( Part I ) - 1973

C) Pasture

development

and their

protection,

4 Construction of small water e) Vegetated waterways, f 1 Contour farming by bunding d Strip-cropping, h) Modified strip cropping, 3 Stubble mulch farming, k) Seasonal cover crops, and 4 Crop rotation.

storages, and terracing,

All these aspects are to be simultaneously taken note of for minimizing the erosion and appropriate method(s) should be adopted. 4.1.1 Retirement of Severely Eroded Cultivated Landfor Permanent Protection by Vegetation-Gullies tend to form wherever runoff is concentrated in Once started they increase in size, unprotected depression channel ways. and unless checked, ultimately develop into deep, spreading chasms which ruin the land. The best method of treatment of severely eroded cultivated land is to provide permanent vegetal cover. 4.1.2 Planting Severely Erodible Areas with Feed and Cover Plants for Rehabilitation of Wild Lzfe - In severely erodible areas wild life plantings This is because the plant offer the best solution of the erosion problem. species adapted to wild life succeed under the ecological conditions imposed by such sites and also because the areas are too-small or too inconveniently located for the profitable production of economical plants even if they The plantings may be trees, shrubs, vines, thrive under such conditions. The ideal condition to be realized is adequate food and cover or grasses. at all times. 4.1.3 Pasture Development and Their Protection - One of the chief causes of soil deterioration on grazing land is the loss of plant cover due to overgrazing and poor management practices that expose the ground to wind Properly prepared and managed pastures produce several times and rain. more than ill-managed grazing ground. It has been found that an abundance of high quality forage is the very faundation of any type of Three aspects essential in pasture development are: livestock farming. a) addition b) c) controlled of lime and fertilizers grazing. according to soil test; and use of proper seed rates and mixtures;

4.1.4 Construction of Small Water Storages - Small dams for use in farm and grazing lands are usually not expensive, yet they add considerably to 5

IS:674S(PartI)-1973 the value of dry land farm or grazing lands. Besides supplying water and some recreation facilities, they play a part in controlling floods. The size and cost of such dams are largely governed by the terrain. are waterways protected by vegetation 4.1.5 VegetatedWaterways -These to prevent conversion into gullies. Natural drainage depressions, seeded with adaptable grass-legume mixture, often may be utilized as satisfactory water channels and meadows at the same. time. The vegetated waterways should not be less than 6 m wide. Seeding should not only cover the channel but extend well back on the shoulders. 4.1.6 Contour Farming by Bunding and Terracing - Contour farming is preparing, planting or drilling and cultivating of crops along and parallel to level lines that have been laid out across the field slope. When farming contour strip-cropped fields, terraced fields, fields with diversions and contour orchards, cultivation should be parallel to guidelines. 4.1.6.1 Contour cultivation iseffectivein controlling erosion by surface flow. When carried out properly, it is one of the most effective mechanical control measures for cultivated crop land. It is effective in increasing crop yields, reducing runoff and scour-erosion losses. When contour farming is used alone, new guidelines should be established each time the crop is planted, unless erosion is made to maintain original lines by contour hedges, back furrows or other means. 4.1.6.2 Contour bunding consists of the construction of small bunds across the slope of the land along contours so that the long stretch of slope is cut into a series of small ones and each contour bund acts as a barrier to the flow of water. This practice is generally followed in gently sloping lands. 4.1.6.3 Terraces may be of bench type or graded channel type which are designed to intercept and divert runoff at non-erosive velocities. This practice is generally followed in hill slopes. 4.1.7 Stri#-Groj$ing - Strip-cropping is the practice of growing crops in a systematic arrangement ,of strips or bands which serve as vegetative It includes the utilization of crop rotation, contour barrier to erosion. cultivation, proper tillage, cover crops and other related practices. The arrangement of crop in strips should be such that erosion- and semi-erosionresistant crops are alternated with clean cultivated crops that are conducive to erosion. 4.1.7.1 In choosing any system of strip-cropping principles should be kept in mind: a) Strip-cropping the following guiding

should be made to fit into the farm management;

b) Strip should be laid out as nearly on the contour as possible; and 6

IS:674S(PartI)-1973

cl

Consideration should be given to the degree of erosion, the percentage of slope, the length of the rotation and the ratio of erosion resisting and erosion permitting crops.

4.1.8 Modi'ed StriP_CroPging - Field stripping is a modified form of contour strip cropping under which strips are laid parallel and across the general slope but not exactly on the contour, This system is best suited to land of uniform slopes and to gentle slopes with minor surface irregularities that make accurate strip-cropping impracticable. Field `stripping is very beneficial for checking wind and water erosion. If strips deviate from the contour fbr only short distance, not more than 30 m, little damage may result especially on soil of high erodibility. However, if the deviation should be more than 3 percent, and the distance.of such deviation greater than 30 m, field stripping should give way to contour stripping.
4.1.9 Stubble Mulch Farming - Leaving stubble in the surface in sufficient quantity is one of the surest ways to prevent wind erosion and conserve moisture and also add organic matter to the soil. Subtilled stubble mulch gives high yields. 4.1.10 Seasonal Cover Crops - Seasonal cover crops are very important in protecting fields from erosion. They also serve to absorb plant nutrients that otherwise would be lost by leaching and thus aid in their preservation for subsequent crop use. Green manure crops are included under cover Other examples of cover crops are catch-crops of various kinds, crops. which leave the soil exposed to erosion for a minimum period during the year and protect the soil when the regular cultivated crops are off the ground.

4.1.11 Crop Rotation - Crop rotation reduces runoff and soil loss, both of which~are important in maintaining yields. Crop rotation refers to the growing of different crops in a regular succession on the same land. For erosion control a rotation should embody the principle of alternating cultivated crops with erosion-resistant and organic matter building crop. Methods of increasing the erosion control value of a rotation are:

a) b) cl 4

increasing improving adequate addition field.

the number

of years of hay and pasture, to include legumes,

the seed mixture fertilization, of cover and

crops

to provide

a contmuous

cover

on the

The capability of the land limits mended on any field. 7

the kind of rotation

to be recom-

IS :Q748 ( Part I ) - 1973 5. GENERAL TYPES OF USES RECOMMENDED FICATION CONSERVATION ON THE BASIS PRACTICES AND OF LAND CLASSI-

5.1 The recommended type of conservation practice for various categories of land on the basis of cultivation is given briefly in Appendix B.

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.1 )
CLASSIFICATION A-l. LAND SUITABLE is categorized

A

.
BASIS OF

OF LAND ON THE CULTIVATION

FOR CULTIVATION under four different classes as given in A-l.1

A-1.0 Land to A-1.4.

A-l.1 Class I Land-This is very good land that may be cultivated safely with ordinary good farming methods. It is nearly level land ( slope less than one percent ) and has deep, productive, easily worked soils and is It is well drained and is suited for intensive subject to only slight erosion. For continued The land is suited for a wide variety of crops. cropping. this land requires the use of fertilizers, green manure good production, crops and crop rotation. A-1 .`J @lass II Land - This is good land that may be cultivated with Some of the limitations of this class of land are easily available practices. gentle slope, moderate susceptibility to erosion, moderate depth, moderate Each of these limitations requires special overflow and moderate wetness. methods for correction, such as contour bunding, strip cropping, contour tillage, crop rotstions that include grasses or legumes, drainage and the application of fertilizers and manures. A-1.3 Class III Land - This class of land has restricted use for The lancl is moderately good and may be used for cropping cultivation. This kind of land is provided intensive management measures are taken. characterized by one or more of the following limitations:

a) b) cl
d)

Moderate steep slope, High susceptibility to erosion, Moderate overflow, Slow sub-soil permeability, Excessive wetness, 8

4

IS : 6748 ( Part 1) - 1973
f) Shallow depth, with low moisture capacity, and

g) Hard pan or clay pan, h) Sand or gravelly j) Low inherent fertility.

A-l.4 Class IV Land -This class of land has very restricted use for The cultivation and needs special care in handling and management. variety of crops that may be grown is limited. Its cropping use is restricted by slope, erosion, unfavourable soil characteristics and adverse .&mate. A-2. LAND UNSUITABLE is FOR CULTIVATION under four different classes as given

A-2.0 The land in A-2.1 to A-2.4.

categorized

A-2.1 Class V Land - This laud is not suited for cultivation, but is suited for pasture and grassland. Cultivation may not be feasible because of one or more factors, such as wetness, stoniness or some other limitations. Land is nearly level and not subject to more than slight wind or water erosion. It occurs in many swampy areas that may not be drained easily. A-2.2 Class VI Land - This land is subject to moderate limitations under grazing or forestry use or orchards and plantation crops under suitable geographical and climatic conditions. It is too steep, subject to erosion, shallow, wet or dry but with careful management may be made suitable Gullies in such areas should be controlled either for grazing or forestry. by diversion of water, provision of contour furrows or ridges. A-2.3 Class VII Land - This land is very steep, eroded, stony, rough, shallow, dry or swampy and is recommended particularly in humid regions onlv for forestry and wood land and not pasture, but the grazing has to be very limited. Land - This land includes such areas as marshes, A-2.4 Class VIII and very steep, rough, stony, deserts, deep gullies rocky escarpments It is suited only for wild life, recreation or watershed `protecbarren land. tion uses.

9

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.1 )
GENERAL TYPES

B

OF CONSERVATION PRACTICES AND USES RECOMMENDED ON THE BASIS OF LAND CLASSIFICATION
A. LAND SUITABLE FOR CULTIVATION

LANLJ CLASSIFICATION
CLASS

SUBCLASS ( DOMINANT KIND OFLAND) Deep nearly level productive valley land

SUITABLE FOR(ONLY THE MOSTINTENSIVE SAFE USE IS ME~VTIONED ) Intensive cultivation to all climatically adapted crops

SPECIAL NEEDS OR PRECAUTIONS No special difficulty in farming usual goed farm@ practices to maintain soil fertility and conserve water Protection from erosion, use conservation irrigation methods

1

\-my

good cultivable land

0'

II GP,","~ cultivable

He-Good soil on gentle subjrct to slopes water erosion or wind erosion on sandy soils IIw - Good soil, slightly wet or subject to overflow
11s-

Cultivation with precaution

Cultivation with management of excess water and selection of crops adapted to wet conditions Cultivation with selection of crops adapted to soil limitations

Drainage improvement flood protection

or

Soil with minor soil problems such as clay or sandy texture, modeqatc depth, or slight alkali

Treatments to offset soil limitations and to conserve irrigation water

III

Moderately good cultivable land

IIIe - Good soil on moderate to slopes subject water erosion, or sandy soil subject to wind erosion

Cultivatibn with precautions against permanent land damage

Special attention to erosion control and conservation irrigation

111~ -

Good soil, moderately wet or subject to overflow

Cultivation careful with management of excess water and selection of crops adapted to wet conditions

Intensive drainage, improvement or protection from flooding

Ilh

-

Soil with moderate problems due to moderate depth, gravels, or alkali

with Cultivation selection of crops to soil limitations

careful adapted

Intensive treatment to offset or overcome soil limitations irrigation and conserve water

IV

Fairly good land, suited for occasional limited cultivz tion

IVe -Moderately steep land to serious subject erosion, or water sandy soils subject to wind erosion

cultivation in Occasional rotation with hay or pasture, or orchards protected by permanent cover crops

Intensive erosion when in cultivation

control

IVw-

Bottom land that is very wet or subject to severe overflow

Cultivation to special summer orops, hazard of crop failure is always present

Intensive drainage, special attention to seeding and harvest dates, to minimize crops failure on overflow land

IVW

Fairly good land with limitations due to shallowness, gravel, atone, or strong alkali

Occasional cultivation in rotation with hay or pasture

Very intensive treatment to overcome soil limitations, careful selection of crops

WC-Good soil with just enough rainfall or crops in favourable years

Cultivation during wet years, frequent crop failure, better in permanent vegetation

Conserve all rainfall, develop water for irrigation or convert to pasture or grazing use

B. LAND CLASSIFICATION
CLASS

LAND

UNSUITABLE

FOR

CULTIVATION SPECIAL NEEDS OR PRECAU'~~ONS

SUBCLASS ( DOMINANT KIND OF LAND )

SUITABLEFOR ( ONLY THE MOST INTENSIVE SAFE USE IS MENTIONED ) Grazing and wild hay production of

V Very well suited fur grazing, not arable

VW -

Good productive mountain meadows that are wet and have short growing season Steep land subject to erosion if cover is depleted

Proper season of use and rate of stocking; protect from gullying

VI

Well suited for grazing or forestry, not arable

VIS -

Grazing or forestry of both

Manage grazing and logging to maintain sufficient residue and litter on the soil for soil and moisture conservation, fire protection Manage grazing to prevent soil puddling, and to favour desire forage plants

VIw -

Ft;tnd,

qccasionally saline salts, permanently det or subject to overflow sloping stony, or alkali

Grazing

VIs -

Fza;zwgently gravelI;, land

Grazing or forestry or both

Good range and forestry management practices, fire protection

VIc -Good or fairly good soil not enough moisture for cultivation steep land subto erosion if ject cover is depleted

Grazing primarily, some forestry, could be cultivated if water were available Grazing or forestry or both

Good range and forestry management practices, fire protection Carefully manage grazmg and logging tq maintain enough plant litter for soil and moisture conservation, fire protection

VII

Fairly well suited for grazing or not forestry, arable

VIIe

-Very

VIIw -

Flat, permanentlray; overflow or along stream, tidal marsh areas

Limited grazing

Range grazing to desirable plants

favour

VII5 -Very shallow, stony, or strbng alkali land VIIc Fairly good aoil, not enough moisture for cultivation

Grazing or forestry or both

Good range and forestry management, fire protection Good range management, tion and forestry fire protec-

Grazing or forestry or both

VIII

Suited ohly for VIIie -Highly erodiblewild life, recreagullies, bad lands, tion and protecand sand dunes tion of water supplies VIIIw VIIIrTidal land, strealh channels and swamps Barren mountain topg, hst160r no sol1

Watershed and wild life

Maintain maximum cover for erosion control

L

w

Wild life, recreation, water spreading Recreation and watershed

and

Improve for recreation Improve for recreation

wild wild

life and life and

Nm

-T&se

symbols denote subiclauees:

e - erosion and runoff w-excess water s -root-zone limitations c - climatic limitation

