NAT HA IS 17387 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ICH sreferen TUT SAT TAT TAT Wet 
HaHa sree 


General Safety and Performance 
Requirements of Battery 
Management Systems 


ICS 29.120.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, 4$ freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2020 Price Group 6 


Electrical Energy Storage Systems Sectional Committee, ETD 52 


FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Electrical Energy 
Storage Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

This standard specifies the safety and functional requirements of Battery Management System (BMS) used in 
Electrical Energy Storage Systems (EESS). 


The BMS plays an important role for the health, effective usage and maintenance of batteries. BMS is significant 
to identify and to avoid battery failures. It also plays an important role in ongoing maintenance in unmanned 
remote locations of EESS. 


This standard is a guide for all the users involved in design and development of EESS and primarily focuses on 
the aspect of safety, protection mechanism of cells, imbalance of cells, testing and communication. 


Considerable assistance has been obtained from UL-2271, UL2580, UL1973, IEC 61508 in preparation of this 
standard. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


Indian Standard 


GENERAL SAFETY AND PERFORMANCE 
REQUIREMENTS OF BATTERY 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


1 SCOPE 
This standard deals with safety, performance 
requirement and control parameters of Battery 


Management System (BMS) for safe working of 
battery electrical energy storage system and defines 
testing methods for safety, performance and control 
functioning of BMS for intended application. The 
control parameters defined in this standard are basic 
minimum requirements and system can include control 
parameters in addition to these. 


1.1 This standard is applicable to stationary application 
with power generation system, such as photovoltaic 
power plant, wind turbine power plant and others. 


1.2 The battery pack level battery management 
system shall conform to this standard. This standard is 
applicable to BMS connected to any number of battery 
system in series and parallel. 


1.3 This standard does not address the safety 
requirements of any specific battery chemistry. Safety 
and functional requirements for BMS, based on battery 
chemistry has to be considered additionally. 


1.4 This standard does not specify the controller 
logic, technology and communication protocol for the 
battery management system. The battery chemistry 
and technologies are out of scope of this standard. The 
applications other than the one covered in this standard 
are out of scope. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standard are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 


IS 17387 : 2020 


of applying the most recent editions of these standards 


indicated below: 


IS No. 
3043 : 2018 


11137 (Part 2) : 
2012 


13252 (Part 1): 
2010 


14700 


(Part 3/Sec 2) : 


2018 


14700 


(Part 4/ Sec 1): 


2019 


17092 : 2019 


IS/IEC 60529 : 
2001 


IS/IEC 60730 — 
1: 1999 


IS/IEC 61508 
(all parts) 


Title 


Code of practice for earthing 
(second revision) 


Analysis techniques for system 
reliability: Part 2 Procedure for 
failure mode and effects analysis 
(FMEA) (first revision) 


Information technology 
equipment — Safety: Part 1 
General requirement 


Electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC): Part 3 Limits, Section 
2 Limits for harmonic current 
emissions (equipment input 
current 16 A per phase) (second 
revision) 


Electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC): Part 4 Testing and 
measurement techniques, 
Section 1 Overview of 
the IEC 61000 - 4 series 


(second revision) 


Electrical energy storage 
systems: Safety requirements 


Degrees of protection provided 
by enclosures (IP Code) 


Automatic electrical controls for 
household and similar use: Part 1 
General requirement 


Functional safety of electrical/ 
electronic/programmable 
electronic safety-related systems 


IS 17387 : 2020 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 17067 (Part 1) in addition to the following shall 


apply. 


3.1 Battery Pack — Batteries that are ready for use, 
contained in a protective enclosure, which may or may 
not contain protective devices, cooling systems and 
monitoring circuitry. 


3.2 Cell — The basic functional electrochemical unit 
(sometimes referred to as a battery) containing an 
electrode assembly, electrolyte, separators, container, 
and terminals. It is a source of electrical energy by 
direct conversion of chemical energy. 


3.3 Charging — The application of electric current to 
battery, which results in a Faradic reaction that takes 
place within the battery that leads to stored electro- 
chemical energy, due to electrical charge being stored 
without a chemical reaction taking place. 


3.3.1 Charging, Constant Current (CC) — Charging 
mode where current is held constant while charging 
voltage is allowed to vary within defined parameters. 


3.3.2 Charging Constant Voltage (CV) — Charging 
mode where voltage is held constant while charging 
current is allowed to vary within defined parameters. 


3.4 Rated Capacity (Ah) — The total number of 
ampere-hours that can be withdrawn from a fully 
charged battery at a specific discharge rate to a specific 
end-of-discharge voltage (EODV) at a specified 
temperature as declared by the manufacturer. 


3.5 Dut — Device under test. 


3.6 Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) — 
A battery pack, electrochemical capacitor pack or 
combination battery/electrochemical capacitor pack 
that provides electric energy for grid interactive energy 
storage system. This assembly can include the cooling 
and ventilation systems and battery management 
systems (see Fig. 1). 


3.7 End-of-Discharge Voltage (EODV) (Cell) — 
The voltage, under a specified load, of the cell at the 
end of discharge. The EODV may be specified by the 
manufacturer, as in the case of a voltage-terminated 
discharge typical for lithium ion chemistries. 


3.8 EODV Monitoring (Cell) — EODV monitoring is 
typically provided at the pack/electric energy storage 
assembly level by the battery management system. 


3.9 Fully Charged — An electric energy storage 
assembly, pack, module or cell which has been charged 
to its full state of charge (SOC) as specified by the 
manufacturer. 


3.10 Fully Discharged — An electric energy storage 
assembly, pack, module or cell, which has been 
discharged to its end-of-discharge voltage (EODV) as 
specified by the manufacturer. 


3.11 Hazardous Energy — Available power level of 
240 VA or more, having a duration of 60 s or more, or 
a stored energy level of 20J or more, at a voltage of 2 
V or more. 


Key - Boundary Types 
< Physical 
----w Material 

Data" 

> Energy 


* Data & Energy indudes physical 
input & output of cable and connector 


P 


Fic. 1 Bess BLock DIAGRAM 


3.12 Hazardous Voltage — Voltage exceeding 30 V... 
/42.4 Vac or 60 V de. 


peak 


3.13 Battery Management System (BMS) 
Any electronic system that manages a rechargeable 
battery (cell or battery pack), such as by protecting 
the battery from operating outside its Safe Operating 
Area, monitoring its state, calculating secondary 
data, reporting that data, controlling its environment, 
authenticating it and balancing it. 


3.13.1 Master BMS — The BMS which controls and 
protects the entire battery pack of energy storage 
system which consist of sub battery packs connected in 
series or parallel in the energy storage system. 


3.13.2 Slave BMS — The BMS which controls and 
protects the individual sub battery pack or a cluster of 
battery packs which are connected in series or parallel 
in the energy storage system 


3.14 Normal Operating Region — That region of 
voltage, current and temperature within which a cell 
can be safely charged and discharged repetitively 
throughout its anticipated life. The manufacturer 
specifies these values, which are then used in the safety 
evaluation of the device and may vary as the device 
ages. The normal operating regions will include the 
following parameters for charging and discharging as 
specified by the manufacturer: 


a) Charging Temperature Limits — The upper 
and lower limits of temperature, specified by 
the manufacturer for charging of the cell. This 
temperature is measured on the casing. 


CUSTOMER 
CONTROL ROOM 


ESS (Energy Storage System) 


grsnsunsnsssssssssnsnsssssssssnsusesssususensssssssasuuen 


Real Time P, Q, V. I 


POD 
(Power on 
Demand) 


LCL 


AFE INVERTER 


IS 17387 : 2020 


b) Discharge Temperature Limits — The upper 
and lower limits of temperature, specified by 
the manufacturer for discharging the cell. This 
temperature is measured on the casing. 


c) Maximum Discharge Current — The maximum 
discharging current rate at a specified temperature, 
which is specified by the cell manufacturer. 


d) Maximum Charging Current — The maximum 
charging current in the normal operating region, 
which is specified by the cell manufacturer. This 
value may vary with temperature. 

e) Upper Limit Charging Voltage — The highest 

charging voltage limit in the normal operating 

region specified by the cell manufacturer. This 
value may vary with temperature. 


3.15 State of Charge (SOC) — The available capacity 
in a battery system, pack, module or cell expressed as a 
percentage of rated capacity. 


4 CONSTRUCTION 


A BMS should consist of electronic control circuitry 
with sensors, data acquisition system, controls system 
with built in software to control safety functioning of 
the BESS. Fig. 2 is the typical construction of grid 
interactive battery based energy storage system with 
BMS. 


BMS shall be enclosed in a protective outer cover 
that provides mechanical protection to the system's 
contents. The enclosure shall be of nonflammable 
construction and shall be ingress protection level of IP 
52 when tested as per IS/IEC 60529. 


SUPERVISORY 


{Supervisory Control and 
¡Data Acquisition 


GATEWAY/ 
FIREWALL 


¡Programmable 
¡Logic Controller 


m—————————————— 


(Active Front 
End Inverter) 


[EMI FILTER| 


Electromagnetic 
Interference Filter 


——————Ó——M 


BRAKING CHOPPER 


Management 
System) 


BESS 
(Battery Energy 
Storage System) 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL CONSTRUCTION OF GRID INTERACTIVE BATTERY BASED ENERGY STORAGE 
SYSTEM WITH BATTERY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. 


IS 17387 : 2020 


4.1 Electrical Spacings 


Electrical spacings in circuits shall have the minimum 
over surface and through air spacings as in Table | or 
the spacings requirements outlined in 2.10 of IS 13252 
(Part 1). 

Table 1 Electrical Spacings 


( Clause 4.1 ) 


SI Electrical Spacing Voltage Through Over 
No. Air Surface 
V mm (in) mm (in) 
Q) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Live parts and dead 0 - 50° 1.6 1.6 
metal parts that (1/16) (1/16) 
are separated bY Go ate) 48 
functional or basic 
: i (3/16) 
insulation 
131-300 6.4 (1/4) 9.5 (3/8) 
ii) Accessible dead 0 - 50° 1.6 1.6 
metal parts and dead (1/16) (1/16) 
metal parts separated 51-130 3.2 (1/8) 48 
from live parts by 
as : (3/16) 
basic insulation only 
this ordinarily is a 131-300 6.4(1/4) 9.5 (3/8) 
spacing resulting 
from supplementary 
insulation 
ii) Live parts and 0 - 50° 3.2 (1/8) 3.2 (1/8) 
accessible dead E ME NE 
metal parts separated (3/16) 
by double insulation 
or by reinforced 131 - 300 12.7 12.7 
insulation (1/2) (1/2) 


* Spacings at these voltages may be decreased from those 
indicated in the table if it can be determined through test or 
analysis that there is no hazard (that is, circuits supplied by 
limited power sources as defined in IS 13252 (Part 1). 


4.2 Hazardous Voltage Path to Ground and Battery 
Isolation from Input Power 


The earthing grounding shall be provided for the 
complete battery system as described in IS 3043. 


5 BMS PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


The BMS shall be designed with controls for safe 
functioning of the battery pack and cells under normal 
and abnormal operational conditions so to cause 
no danger to persons or surroundings. These safety 
performance requirements are applicable for both slave 
and master BMS. 


The BMS shall provide: 


a) Protection against overcharge and over discharge 
of battery pack; 


b) Protection against over voltage and under voltage 
of battery pack; 


c) Protection against over current of battery pack; 


d) Protection against high temperature of battery 
pack; 


e) Protection against low temperature of battery 
pack; 
f) Protection against imbalance of cells; 


g) Aid for physical disconnection of battery in case 
of fault condition; and 


h) Values for state of charge, charge current, 
discharge current, battery pack temperature and 
battery pack voltage. 


Safety limits of current, voltage, charge and temperature 
for cell and battery pack shall be as defined by the 
BESS manufacturer. 
NOTE — The potential hazards and limits shall be determined 
by manufacturer of BESS by events that could lead to a 
hazardous condition identified and addressed through design 
or other means including FMEA as defined in 1811137 (Part 2) 
and IS/IEC 61508 (all parts). 
The solid-state controls and software of BMS shall 
be evaluated to IS/IEC 60730-1 or IS/IEC 61508 
(all parts) as applicable based upon the design and 
complexity of the controls. The required severity level, 
performance level, or the class of control function 
shall be determined by the BESS manufacturer and the 
controls designed in accordance with one of the above 
functional safety standards. 
NOTE — If other than solid state circuits and software are used 
as primary safety protection of BMS then the conformance to 
IS/IEC 60730 or IS/TEC 61508 (all parts) is not necessary. 
The BMS shall be tested for electro magnetic 
compatibility /electro magnetic immunity testing and 
environmental conditions and conform to IS 14700 
(Part 4/ Sec 1) and IS 14700 (Part 3/ Sec 2). The tests 
shall be: 


a) Electrical fast transient/burst immunity test; 
b) Surge immunity test; 


c) Voltage dips, short interruptions and voltage 
variations immunity tests; 


d) Limitation of voltage changes, voltage fluctuations, 
and flicker; 


e) Electrostatic discharge immunity test (ESD test); 
and 


f) Limits for harmonic current emissions. 


5.1 Protection against Overcharge and Over- 
discharge of Battery Pack 


The BMS shall protect battery systems against 
overcharge and  over-discharge, resulting from 
anticipated use and abuse conditions including 
component faults in control systems, short circuit 
conditions and power surges as applicable to the 
intended battery system application and installation 
as determined by the manufacturer. If relied upon for 
maintaining the cells within their safe operating region, 
the battery management system (BMS) shall maintain 
cells within the specified cell voltage region from over- 
charge and over-discharge of the cell voltage. 


Additionally, it shall maintain batteries within the 
specified battery current region from over charge of 
current and prevent high rate discharge exceeding 
the cell specifications. When reviewing safety 
circuits to determine that cell operating region limits 
are maintained, tolerances of the protective circuit/ 
component shall be considered in the evaluation. 
Components, such as fuses, circuit breakers or other 
protective devices and parts determined necessary for 
safe operation of the battery system that are required 
to be provided in the end use installation, shall be 
identified in the installation instructions. 


The verification shall be done by testing as defined 
in 5.7. 


5.2 Protection against Over Voltage and Under 
Voltage of Battery Pack 


The BMS controls shall be designed to protect 
battery pack against built overvoltage and under 
voltage protection that is set at a voltage below the 
manufacturer’s recommendation of safe voltage limit 
and it shall also maintain cells within the specified 
cell temperature region providing protection from 
overheating and under temperature operation. 


Additionally, it shall maintain batteries within the 
specified battery current region from over charge of 
current and prevent high rate discharge exceeding 
the cell specifications. When reviewing safety 
circuits to determine that cell operating region limits 
are maintained, tolerances of the protective circuit/ 
component shall be considered in the evaluation. 
Components, such as fuses, circuit breakers or other 
protective devices and parts determined necessary for 
safe operation of the battery system that are required 
to be provided in the end use installation, shall be 
identified in the installation instructions. 


The verification shall be done by testing as defined 
in 5.7. 


5.3 Protection against High Temperature and Low 
Temperature of Battery Pack 


If safety limits as recommended by battery manufacturer 
are exceeded, the protective circuit shall shut down the 
charging or discharging to prevent excursions beyond 
safety limits. Compliance is determined through a 
review of the pack and cell data and through the testing 
of this standard. 


The temperature of other electronics protective device 
in close vicinity shall be lesser than the safe operating 
temperature limits of the component. 


The low temperature protection shall be set at a 
temperature higher than the value recommended by the 
manufacturer for safe charging and operation. 


The verification shall be done by testing as defined 
in 5.7. 


IS 17387 : 2020 


NOTE — If there is a master and slave type BMS, the master 
BMS has to be bypassed to test the slave BMS. 


5.4 Protection against Imbalance of Battery Pack 


The battery cells and battery pack must be maintained 
within specified operating parameters even when series 
connected cells become imbalanced. 


The verification shall be done by testing as defined 
in 5.7. 


5.5 Aid for Physical Disconnection of Battery in 
Case of Fault Condition 


Either one or both terminals of the battery must be 
open circuited automatically not relying on solid state 
devices for disconnection in case of fault condition. A 
manual override safety switch shall be provided for 
emergency disconnection of the complete system in 
case of any fault in the BMS to prevent battery system 
from affected by the failure. 


5.6 Communication Interface 


The BMS shall collect, monitor and communicate 
various parameters of batteries not limited to state of 
charge, charge current, discharge current, pack or sub- 
pack level voltage as well as. temperature. 


5.7 Tests Conditions 
The BMS shall be tested as below: 


The test shall be conducted on each BMS both master 
and slave BMS. The master BMS shall be tested with 
and without the presence of slave BMS to confirm that 
the master BMS is working as designed. 


5.7.1 Overvoltage protection test shall be carried 
out by charging at a current equivalent to maximum 
design charging current and set to a voltage that is 
representative of the highest voltage that the module 
will see if the slave BMS fails. This may be the voltage 
of the entire battery or the voltage of the battery pack. 
The maximum overvoltage limits shall be within the 
manufacturer’s specification. 


5.7.2 Under voltage protection test shall be carried out 
using the designed maximum continuous load and set 
to a low enough voltage that it will trigger the BMS 
under voltage protection. The under voltage limits shall 
be within the manufacturer’s specification. 


5.7.3 Overcurrent protection test shall be carried out 
by high impedance and low impedance short. High 
impedance short shall have a load value that is equal 
to or less than the internal resistance of the module 
for which the BMS is being tested, low impedance 
short shall be the resistive load that is higher than the 
manufacturer’s recommended maximum load but not as 
high as a short circuit load. The maximum overcurrent 
limits shall be within the manufacturer’s specification. 


IS 17387 : 2020 


5.7.4 Over temperature test shall be carried out 
by attaching a dummy cell to the BMS and increasing 
the temperature of the dummy cell to confirm that the 
over temperature control works. The high temperature 
cutoff limits shall be within the manufacturer’s 
specification. 


5.7.5 Low temperature test shall be carried out by 
attaching a dummy cell to the BMS and lowering 
the temperature while also providing a charging 
current to confirm that the charging current is cut 
off when the temperature falls below a certain value. 
The same can be done for discharge current also but 
the more important part is to prevent charging at low 
temperatures. The low temperature cutoff limits shall 
be within the manufacturer’s specification. 


5.7.6 Other tests that shall be conducted in conjunction 
with the above, is to record temperatures of the 
electronics parts that are close to the fault protection 
devices, (such as MOSFETs) and confirm that they are 
not overheating. 


5.7.7 Imbalance test shall be carried out by measuring 
individual cell voltages while charging and discharging 
at C5, C2 and maximum rated charge/discharge rates as 
mentioned by the manufacturer. 


5.7.8 An analysis shall be carried out to confirm that 
the components chosen for the BMS circuitry are all 
rated for the current and voltage that will be observed 
even when the BMS protective controls fail. The BMS 
design shall be such that a complete failure of BMS 


shall not have any effect on the battery system. 
NOTE — Annex A provides the test on BESS for reference. 


6 MEASUREMENT EQUIPMENT ACCURACY 


Unless noted otherwise in the test methods, the overall 
accuracy of measured values of test specifications or 
results when conducting testing in accordance with this 
standard shall be within the following values of the 
measurement range: 


a) + ] percent for voltage or + 5 mV whichever 
is lowest; 


b) +1 percent for current; and 


c) + 2°C for temperatures at or below 200°C and 
- 3 percent for temperatures above 200°C. 


7 MARKING, LABELS AND MANUALS 


A name plate of corrosion-resistant material shall 
be affixed on the BMS enclosure with the following 
details: 


a) Manufacturer’s name and address; 

b) Model number designation; 

c) Serial number; 

d) Ingress protection rating (if applicable); 

e) Voltage, current and temperature rating; and 
f) Electrical connection diagram. 


The installation and operation manual for the BMS 
shall be provided with installation instructions, safety 
precautions and diagnostics. 


IS 17387 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Normative ) 


TESTS ON BESS 


A-1 OVER CHARGE TEST 


This test is intended to evaluate BESS ability to 
withstand an overcharge condition under a single fault 
in the charging control circuitry that could result in an 
overcharge condition. 


A fully charged sample is to be discharged at a 0.2 C 
constant discharge rate or a higher discharge rate 
permitted by the manufacturer to the manufacturer’s 
specified end of discharge voltage (EODV). The 
equipment under test is then subjected to a constant 
current charging at the manufacturer’s maximum 
specified charging rate and under a single fault 
condition in the circuitry that directly controls the 
charging line of the BESS that could lead to an 
overcharge condition. 


The test is to be continued until the voltage has 
reached 110 percent of the maximum specified voltage 
limit and monitored temperatures return to ambient 
or steady state conditions and an additional 2 h have 
elapsed, or explosion/fire occurs. If the BESS under 
test is operational after the test, it shall be subjected 
to a minimum of one charge/discharge cycle at the 
manufacturer’s maximum specified values. The test 
shall be followed by an observation period of minimum 
Lh. 


As a result of the overcharge test, any of the following 
results in a) to g) below are considered a non-compliant 
results: 


a) E - Explosion; 

b) F - Fire; 

c) C - Combustible concentrations (if applicable to 
technology); 

d) R - Rupture (enclosure); 

e) L- Electrolyte leakage (external to enclosure); 


f) S-Electric shock hazard (resistance below isolation 
resistance limits or dielectric breakdown); and 


g) P- Loss of protection controls. 


A-2 SHORT CIRCUIT TEST 


This test evaluates a BESS ability to withstand a short 
circuit condition. 


A fully charged sample of the BESS is to be short- 
circuited by connecting the positive and negative 
terminals of the sample with a circuit load having a 
total resistance of less than or equal to 20 mQ. 


Samples are to be subjected to an external short under 
a single fault condition in the protection circuit of the 
BESS that could impact the external short. Protective 
devices that have been determined reliable may remain 
in the circuit and circuits that have been determined 
reliable may remain active without being faulted. 


The sample shall be discharged until the sample has 
returned to ambient temperature or fire or explosion 
occurs. Temperatures shall be measured on the BESS 
for monitoring purposes. 


If the BESS is operational after the test, it shall be 
subjected to a minimum of one charge/discharge cycle 
at the manufacturer’s maximum specified values. The 
test shall be followed by an observation period of 
minimum | h. 


As aresult of the short circuit test, any of the following 
results in a) to g) below are considered a non-compliant 
results. 


a) E - Explosion; 
b) F - Fire; 


c) C - Combustible concentrations (if applicable to 
technology); 


d) R - Rupture (enclosure); 
e) L- Electrolyte leakage (external to enclosure); 


f) S-Electric shock hazard (resistance below isolation 
resistance limits or dielectric breakdown); and 


g) P- Loss of protection controls. 


A-3 OVER DISCHARGE TEST 


The fully charged sample is to be subjected to a constant 
discharging current at the maximum discharging 
current specified by the manufacture under a single 
fault condition in the discharging circuit of the BESS 
that could lead to an over discharge condition. The 
BMS will remain in the circuit. Temperatures shall be 
measured on a cell/module for monitoring purposes. 


The test is to be continued until the sample is fully 
discharged to a near zero voltage state or protective 
devices remaining in the circuit operate, and the 
monitored temperatures return to ambient or steady 
state, or explosion and/or fire occurs. If the DUT 
is operational after the test, it shall be subjected to 
a minimum of one charge/discharge cycle at the 
manufacturer’s maximum specified values. The test 
shall be followed by an observation period of minimum 
1h. 


IS 17387 : 2020 


As a result of the over discharge test, any of the 
following results in a) to g) below are considered a non- 
compliant result. 


a) E - Explosion; 
b) F - Fire; 


c) C - Combustible concentrations (if applicable to 
technology); 


d) R - Rupture (enclosure); 
e) L- Electrolyte leakage (external to enclosure); 


f) S-Electric shock hazard (resistance below isolation 
resistance limits or dielectric breakdown); and 


g) P- Loss of protection controls. 


A-4 TEMPERATURE TEST 


This test is conducted to determine whether or not the 
modules and their cells are being maintained within 
their specified operating limits during maximum charge 
and discharge conditions of the BESS. During this 
test, it shall also be determined as to whether or not 
temperature sensitive safety critical components and 
temperature sensitive materials in the BESS are being 
maintained within their temperature ratings based 
upon the maximum operating temperature limits of 
the BESS. Temperatures on accessible surfaces, which 
may be contacted by the user, are also monitored. 


A fully discharged BESS ( that is, discharged to EODV) 
is to be conditioned within a chamber set to the upper 
limit charging temperature specifications of the EESA. 
After thermal stabilization in the chamber, the BESS is 
to be connected to a charging circuit input representative 
of anticipated maximum charging parameters. The 
BESS shall then be subjected to maximum normal 
charging while monitoring voltages and currents 
on cells/modules until it reaches the manufacturer’s 
specified fully charged condition. Temperatures shall 
be monitored on temperature sensitive components 
including cells and on any user accessible surfaces. 


While still in the conditioning chamber, and after 
allowing temperatures to stabilize, the fully charged 
BESS shall then be discharged in accordance with 
the manufacturer’s specifications down to the 
manufacturer’s specified end of discharge condition 
while monitoring voltage and current on cells/ 
modules until the BESS reaches its specified EODV. 
Temperatures shall be monitored on temperature 
sensitive safety critical components including cells and 
on any user accessible surfaces. 


The charge and discharge cycles are then repeated for 
a total of 5 complete cycles of charge and discharge. 


During the temperature test, the voltage and current 
during discharge and charging of the component cells 
is monitored to determine that they are not outside of 
the specified cell manufacturer’s operating region. 


The manufacturer's specified limits (voltage, 
current and temperatures measured) shall not be 
exceeded during the charging and discharging cycles. 
Temperatures measured on components shall not 
exceed their specifications as given in Table A-1. 


Table A-1 Temperatures on Components 
( Clause A-4 ) 


SI No. Part Maximum Temperatures 
on Components (Ta) 
°C 
(1) (2) (3) 


i) Synthetic rubber or PVC 
insulation of internal and 
external wiring 


ii) Without temperature 75 
marking 


111) With temperature Temperature marking 


marking 
iv) Components, insulation a 
and thermoplastic 
materials 
v) Cell casings b 
vi) DUT housing a b 


“The temperatures measured on components and 
materials shall not exceed the maximum temperature 
rating for that component or material. 


"The internal cell case temperature shall not exceed the 
manufacturer’s recommended maximum temperature. 


As aresult of the temperature test, any of the following 
results in a) to g) below are considered a non-compliant 
result. 


a) E - Explosion; 

b) F - Fire; 

c) C - Combustible concentrations (if applicable to 
technology); 

d) R - Rupture (enclosure); 

e) L- Electrolyte leakage (external to enclosure); 

f) S-Electric shock hazard (resistance below isolation 
resistance limits or dielectric breakdown); and 


g) P - Loss of protection controls. 


A-5 IMBALANCE TEST 


This test is to determine whether or not a DUT with 
series connected cells / parallel connected packs can 
maintain the cells within their specified operating 
parameters if it becomes imbalanced. 


A fully charged DUT shall have all of its cells with the 
exception of one or more cells/cell blocks discharged 
to its specified fully discharged condition. The 
undischarged cells shall be discharged to approximately 
50 percent of its specified state of charge (SOC) to 
create an imbalanced condition prior to charging. For 


this test, protective devices that have been determined 
reliable may remain in the circuit and circuits that have 
been determined reliable may remain active without 
being faulted. 


The DUT shall then be charged in accordance with 
the manufacturer's specified voltages at C5 rate. The 
voltage of the all cells shall be monitored during the 
charging to determine if its voltage difference limits are 
exceeded. 


The charge cycle shall be followed by an observation 
period of 1 h. The individual cell voltages will be 
monitored during this period for evaluation. After 
the observation period is elapsed the battery will be 
discharged at C5 rate. Individual cells voltages will be 
measured for imbalance detection. 


The above set of charge, observation and discharge 
cycles will be repeated at C2 rate and the maximum 
charge/discharge rate given by the manufacturer. 


After cycling through the tests at the varied discharge 
test, the battery will be charged at C2 rate to 75 percent 
of the rated capacity and shall be left idle connected 


IS 17387 : 2020 


to the DUT for 1 h. Individual cell voltages will be 
monitored during this period. 


As a result of the imbalance test, any of the following 
results in a) to h) below are considered a non-compliant 
result. 

a) E - Explosion; 

b) F - Fire; 

c) C - Combustible concentrations (if applicable to 

technology); 
d) R - Rupture (enclosure); 
e) L- Electrolyte leakage (external to enclosure); 


f) S-Electric shock hazard (resistance below isolation 
resistance limits or dielectric breakdown); 
g) P- Loss of protection controls; and 
h) I- Imbalance between cells with voltage difference 
of more than 250mV. 
The maximum voltage limit of the cells shall not exceed 
the manufacturer’s specifications. In addition, any of 
the following results in (a) - (h) above are considered a 
non-compliant result. 


IS 17387 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Electrical Energy Storage System Sectional Committee, ETD 52 


Organizations 
In personal capacity 
Amara Raja Batteries Ltd, Hyderabad 


BHEL, Bangalore 
Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Centre for Study of Science, Technology & Policy 
(CSTEP), Noida 


Electrical Research & Development Association, 
Gujrat 


Exide Industries, Kolkata 


GETCO, Gujrat 
IEEMA, New Delhi 


India Energy Storage Alliance (IESA), Pune 


Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 
India Smart Grid Forum (ISGF), New Delhi 


Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(IREDA) 


MNRE, New Delhi 
Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
NHPC, Faridabad 


National Institute of Solar Energy, Gurugram 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 

Okaya, New Delhi 

Panasonic, Gurugram 

Power Grid Corp of India Ltd, Gurugram 
Solar Energy Corp of India (SECI) 


Shreenath Smart Technologies Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI PANKAJ BATRA (Chairman) 


SHRI JASMEET SINGH 
SHRI ASHOK NEGI ( Alternate) 


SHRI SEETHARAMAN 
SHRI DEEPAK GEHLOT (Alternate) 


SHRI A.K.RAJPUT 
Ms SEEMA SAXENA (Alternate) 


Suri R. SUDHIR KUMAR 


Dr MRIDULA BHARDWAJ 
Ms VAISHALEE Dash (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHAT 
Dn Vinop Gupta ( Alternate) 


SHRI KIRAN KORALKAR 


SHRI SUBHANKAR CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. SHAH 


SHRI J. PANDE 
SHRI VIVEK Arora (Alternate) 


Dr RAHUL WALAWALKAR 
Suet Desi Prasan Dasu (Alternate) 


Dr ANIL VERMA 
SHRI ASHOK JHUNJHUNWALA 
SHRI REJI KUMAR PILLAI 


SHRI ABHILAKH SINGH 
Suni K. YEPTHO (Alternate) 


Dr P. C. PANT 

SHRI NARANG N. KISHOR 

SHRI I. P. RANJAN 

Dn RAJESH KUMAR 

Dr Sanjay Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIV SHANKER MISHRA 
SHRI DHIRENDRA JosHI (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. KAPUR 
SHRI DEEPAK Omer (Alternate) 


SHRI RANAJAY MALLIK 
SHRI AMIT SAKLAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBIR SEN SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI ManisH Tiwar! (Alternate ) 


Dr BHARATH Kumar REDDY Y. 
SHRI PRASHANT Upapuyay (Alternate) 


SHRI NAKUL PATEL 
SHRI RAHIL PATEL (Alternate) 


10 


IS 17387 : 2020 


Organizations Representative(s) 

Siemens Ltd, Mumbai Mr GAURANG DESAI 
Tata Power, New Delhi SHRI KANNAN NALLATHAMBI 

Ms PREETIKA SINGH (Alternate) 
TERI, New Delhi SHRI A. K. SAXENA 

Ms Asuwini G. Mupaa L. (Alternate) 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru Suri V. MANJUNATH 

SHRI SRIPARN SAURABH (Alternate) 
M/s Vision Mechatronics Pvt Ltd, Mumbai Dn RasHı GUPTA 
SAR Group (Livguard Technologies), Gurugram SHRI SANDIP GHOSH 
SRESTHA, Chennai SHRI SUJEET MISHRA 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ETD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms NEHA AGARWAL 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (ETD), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 52 (14901). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


