IS 10386 (Part 4) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


YRAR HAF 


set oat Rare ch faat, vare ik 
aun + fat gran fed 
am 4 favnet FI UE, ve AA FETT 
(TEA YS) 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
PART 4 HANDLING, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.230; 93.160 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 3 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


With large scale increase in construction activity of river valley projects, the number of major accidents has 
increased. Further, increased construction activity has created certain hazards for persons working on the projects. 
The degree of safety achieved in project constructions has a direct bearing on the amount of effort expanded to 
avoid accidents by those who control the conditions and practices on the project. In order to avoid accidents it 
should be the overall responsibility of the project authorities to provide measures for the safety of all persons 
working on the projects. 


There are number of aspects that need to be kept in mind when the safety norms of an entire river valley project 
are envisaged. To this end, various aspects that need consideration, from the viewpoint of safety, are dealt with in 
various parts of this standard. This standard covers the safety aspects to be kept in view during handling, 
transportation and storage of explosives. 


Explosives play a vital role in the construction of different components of modern river valley projects. Proper 
handling, transportation and storage of explosives is as essential from the view point of safety as selection and 
judicious use of proper kind and quality of explosive is for successful and efficient progress of every job. Hazards 
arising out of mishandling of explosives are likely to result in accidents which may endanger the life of workers 
and inhabitants in the vicinity and also endanger the safety of buildings and structures. 


This standard was first published in 1992, however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard 
decided to revise it based on the experience gained since then as well as considering technological development 
in the field. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10386 (Part 4) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
PART 4 HANDLING, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) lays down requirements 
regarding storage of different classes of explosives, 
selection of site for magazine, maintenance and 
operation of magazine, transportation of explosives, 
their handling, loading, unloading and inspection as 
well as precautions to be taken therein. 


2 GENERAL 


2.1 The use of explosives is very essential in hard 
ground tunneling, shaft sinking and other excavation 
operations of river valley projects. Selection and 
judicious use of proper kind and quality of explosive 
is very essential for safe and speedy execution of 
various components of such projects. All operations 
involved in transportation, handling and use of 
explosive should be as per the Indian Explosives Act, 
1884 and should also conform to the provisions made 
therein. 


2.1.1 No person other than authorized and competent 
one shall be allowed to handle explosives. The 
explosives shall be accounted for at all times. 


2.2 Proper storage of explosives and accessories is 
important to ensure that these materials are kept out of 
reach of unauthorized persons to reduce the hazard of 
accidental explosion and also to maintain them in good 
condition for use. 


2.3 Gelatine tends to stiffen, if exposed to low 
temperature for along duration. Therefore some times, 
it may be desirable to place explosives in a warm room 
for several hours before use to enable them to soften 
and make them easier to prime and tamp in bore holes. 
In no case should the gelatine be placed close to a fire 
to thin or soften it. 


3STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES, HANDLING AND 
TRANSPORTATION 


3.1 Effect of Storage on Explosives and Accessories 


Explosives and accessories are perishable goods which 
are liable to deteriorate after prolonged storage, 
especially if subjected to high temperature and 


humidity. If kept in a moist place the compounds 
contained in the explosives may lose their power. It is 
due to this reason that underground magazines are not 
preferred on river valley projects. On the other hand, 
explosives should also not be stored in a very dry place, 
because they may lose the moisture they naturally 
contain and thus their speed of explosion may change. 


3.2 The method of packing used by the manufacturers 
is designed to give maximum protection against 
moisture, provided the cases remain unopened. Stock 
should always be used in the sequence of the date of 
manufacture, which is marked on the cases. This avoids 
any accumulation of old stock and helps to make sure 
that the material is in the best condition. Once a case is 
opened, the contents should be used as early as 
possible, if all the explosives are not used during the 
same day, the original packing should be folded over 
and the case should be closed to give the maximum 
possible protection to the contents. The storage of 
explosives shall be done as per provisions of the Indian 
Explosives Act, 1884 and Rules made thereunder and 
conditions given in the license to be issued by the 
competent authority as laid down in the act. 


3.3 Selection of Site for Magazine 


The magazine should be kept away from residential 
buildings, railroads or highways, transmission lines, 
dams and their appurtenant works. 


3.3.1 The safe distance required under the Explosives 
Rules, 2008 depends upon the storage capacity of the 
magazine and should be carefully planned taking into 
account the rate of consumption and the frequency of 
replenishment. 


3.3.2 The best site for a magazine is on well drained 
sloping ground. The selected site should be accessible 
by road and it is advisable to make sure that the existing 
tracks are usable throughout the year. If there are 
overhead power transmission lines in the selected area, 
the distance between these overhead power 
transmission lines and the magazine building should 
not be less than 92 m. 


3.3.3 The construction and approval of the magazine 


IS 10386 (Part 4) : 2013 


shall be based on Standard Indian Practice as governed 
by the Indian Explosives Act, 1884 and Explosives 
Rules, 2008 as amended from time-to-time. 


3.4 Storage of Different Class of Explosives 


Under the Explosives Rules, the various explosives and 
accessories are classified under separate headings as 
below: 


a) Class I — Gunpowder 
b) Class 2 — Nitrate mixtures (GN/L, Power 
flow 1, Power flow 2, and Power 
flow 3) 
c) Class 3 — Nitro compounds 
Div. I — Blasting gelatine, special 
gelatines, opencast gelignite, 
permitted explosives, etc 
Div. 2 — Seismex, seismex primers, gun 
cotton, PETN, TNT, primex, etc 
d) Class 4 — Chlorate mixtures 
e) Class 5 — Fulminates 
f) Class 6 — Ammunition 
Div. 1 — Safety fuse, fog signals, igniter 
cord connectors, electric lighters, 
safety electric fuses, percussion 
caps, safety cartridges for small 
arms 


Div. 2 — Plastic igniter cord, detonation 
fuse, electric fuse, fuse igniters etc 


Div. 3 — Detonators, detonating relays, etc 
g) Class 7 — Fireworks 


Under the Explosives Rules the following can be stored 
together in the same magazine: 


a) Gunpowder Class 1 
b) Nitrate mixture Class 2 
c) Nitro compounds Class 3 
d) Chlorate mixtures : Class 4 


e) Safety fuse Class 6 Div. I 
f) Plastic igniter cord: Class 6 Div. 2 


g) Detonating fuse Class 6 Div. 2 


On no account, however, should detonators be stored 
together with explosives. Normally detonators are 
stored in a separate building at least 15.24 m away from 
magazine, but if the number of detonators does not 
exceed 44 000, it is permissible to store them in a 
properly constructed annexe attached to the magazine. 


3.5 Maintenance and Operation of Magazines 


The following precautions should be taken for 
maintenance and operation of magazines: 


a) The inside of all magazines should be 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


D 


k) 


m) 


n) 


p) 


scrupulously cleaned. The floor of the 
building should be cleaned with a brush on 
each occasion when the magazine is opened 
for delivery or receipt of explosives. 

The magazine-keeper should ensure that 
cigarettes and matches are not taken into the 
magazines. 

All the tools used in the magazines for 
opening of explosive boxes should be of wood 
or soft non-ferrous metal such as brass, copper 
or bronze. Iron and steel tools are prohibited 
as they may cause sparking. 


The area surrounding explosive magazines 
should be kept free from bushes and 
vegetation. 

Empty boxes, loose packing material or cotton 
waste should not be kept on the magazine 
premises. 

Explosive magazines should be well 
ventilated and it is advisable to keep the 
magazine open every day for a period of 1h. 


Detailed records of all outgoing and incoming 
stocks should be kept. Explosives should be 
used according to date of manufacture. 

All magazines should be securely locked, 
when not attended. 

Cases of explosives should be stacked on 
trestles clear of the floor and a 15 cm air space 
should be left between the cases and the walls 
to allow circulation of air. 


Care should be taken that repairs to magazines 
are attended to on priority basis. 


Every explosive magazine should prominently 
display general rules governing conduct in 
magazines indicating prohibition of smoking, 
carrying of matches and/or any other rules that 
may be required by the local licensing 
authorities. A copy of the license and 
lightening conductor test certificate should 
also be preserved in the magazine. 

On no account should the magazine be opened 
during or on the approach of a thunder storm 
and no person should remain in the vicinity 
of the magazine during such a storm. 

Under no conditions shall explosive caps or 
fuse be stored in the same place or kept in the 
same container with other explosives. A make 
up house shall be provided at each working 
place in which cartridges shall be made up 
by experienced power men as required for the 
immediate work. This make up building shall 
be completely without any internal source of 
heat and only battery powered illumination 
should be used. 


q) The magazine should be guarded at all times. 

r) The area around the magazine should be 
properly fenced, provided with one entrance 
gate and should have adequate lighting 
arrangement. 


3.6 Handling and Transportation of Explosives 


3.6.1 Explosives are transported in specially fabricated 
and licensed explosive vans conforming to the 
specifications prescribed in Explosives Rules, 2008. 
The van bears the inscription ‘EXPLOSIVE VAN’ so 
as to warn the workers and public. The explosive van 
shall have a tight, wooded or non-sparking metal 
(copper, brass, etc) floor with sides and ends high 
enough to prevent explosives from sliding and falling 
off from the vehicle. Before transporting from the 
magazine to the site of work it should be ensured that 
the entire cargo is securely loaded. 


Metal tools, oil, matches, electric storage battery, acids 
or corrosive compounds, etc, are not to be carried in 
the body of the transporting vehicle. The van should 
be equipped with extinguishers. At the back of van, 
there should be two metallic chains hanging from the 
body in such a way that they are in contact with the 
ground all the time to provide necessary earthing for 
safety against lightening strike or the vehicle being 
short circuited. In addition to the above, all the 
provisions of Indian Explosives Act, 1884 should be 
fully complied with. 


3.6.1.1 For carrying higher quantity (more than 5 kg 
explosive), specially designed insulated containers 
shall be used. These containers shall be constructed of 
finished wood not less than 50 mm thick or plastics 
not less than 6 mm thick or pressed fibre not less than 
10 mm thick. 


3.6.2 Explosives should not be transported on the site 
of operations except in suitable cases or canisters which 
are So made as to prevent any escape of explosives and 
are without danger of sparks or other sources of ignition 
during conveyance. No explosive should be removed 
from such cases or canisters except when it is to be 
used forthwith for purpose of work. 


3.6.3 No explosive should be transported in a 
mechanically propelled vehicle unless such a vehicle 
is locked and is of a type approved in writing by the 
Chief Inspector of Explosives. The following rules 
should also be observed: 


a) Vehicles should have springs under the body. 
Unsprung country carts should not be used. 

b) Detonators and igniters should not be carried 
in the same vehicle together with explosives. 


c) The speed of the vehicles should not exceed 
25 km/h. 


IS 10386 (Part 4) : 2013 


d) Besides the driver, only one more helper 
should be accommodated in the vehicle. The 
vehicle carrying explosives should not be used 
to transport workmen or other materials to 
work sites although there may be enough 
space for men or materials. 

e) Drivers should not leave the vehicle 
unattended while transporting explosives. 

f) All vehicles transporting explosive should be 
marked or placarded on both sides and ends 
with the word ‘EXPLOSIVES’ in white letters 
not less than 76 mm high on a red background. 


g) The motor vehicles carrying explosive should 
not be refueled except in emergencies and no 
other vehicle should be allowed at the 
refueling station when the vehicle carrying 
explosives is being refueled. Refueling should 
be done at a fueling station located outside 
the city limits. Such vehicles should invariably 
have at least two fire extinguishers placed at 
convenient points. 

h) All vehicles transporting explosives should 
never be taken into a garage, or repair shop, 
or parked in congested areas, or parked 
overnight or at any other time in a public 
garage or similar building. 

j) Explosives should not be transported on a 
public highway during hours of darkness 
except in an extreme emergency and only 
with the written approval of the project 
authorities. 

k) Explosives should not be transported in any 
form of trailer, nor should any trailer be 
attached to a motor truck or vehicle hauling 
explosives. 


m) No transfer of explosives from one vehicle to 
another should be made on any highway 
except in case of an emergency. 

n) Persons employed in the transport or handling 
of explosives should not carry with them, or 
in the vehicle, matches, fire arms or any flame 
producing devices. 

p) Smoking should be prohibited during 
handling and transport of explosives. 


q) Asa special precaution at unmanned railway 
crossings, the vehicle should be brought to a 
complete halt and the journey be proceeded 
with only after ensuring clear way. 

r) All accidents should be reported to the Chief 
Inspector of Explosive and others as specified 
in the Indian Explosives Act, 1884. 


3.6.4 Vehicles used for transporting explosives should 
conform to Explosives Rules, 2008 and should be 
carefully inspected daily to determine that, 


IS 10386 (Part 4) : 2013 


a) fire extinguishers are filled and are in place; 

b) theelectric wiring is well insulated and firmly 
secured; 

c) chassis, engine and body are clean and free 
from surplus oil and grease; 


d) fueltank and feed lines are not leaking; 

e) lights, brakes and steering mechanism are in 
good working order; 

f) tyres are properly inflated and in good 
condition; 

g) vehicle is in proper condition in all respects 
for the safe transportation of explosives; and 

h) an instruction chart shall be available in the 
vehicle containing "What to do’ in case of 
emergency. 


3.6.5 Boxes of explosives should not be handled 
roughly or allowed to fall. Containers of explosives 
should be opened only by means of non-sparking tools 
or instruments and by authorized persons only. 


3.6.6 After loading at the section to be blasted, all 
excess explosives and detonators should be removed 
to a safe location or returned at once to the storage 
magazine, observing the same rules as when being 
conveyed to the blasting area. The used and unused 
explosives should be properly accounted for. When 
next blasting cycle is to be performed early at odd hours 
in shifts and it is not possible to return and bring back 
the explosives and detonators from magazine in time 
or when drill holes are not ready for loading, they shall 
be stored in insulated container/securely locked box 
type magazine located at a safe distance from the 
working face. 


3.6.7 Containers for detonators should always be used 
for storing detonators only. 


3.6.8 Place of Loading and Unloading 


3.6.8.1 Loading and unloading of explosives should 
be done at a safe distance from dwelling houses, power 
house buildings, transmission towers, stores of 
petroleum, timber or any other flammable material. 


4 DONT’S 
4.1 For the purposes of this list of DONT’S the terms 


contained therein shall be as follows: 


The term ‘Explosives’ shall signify any or all of 

the following dynamite, black blasting powder, 

pette powder, blasting caps and electric blasting 
caps, etc: 

a) DON’T purchase, possess, store, transport, 
handle, or use explosives except in strict 
accordance with organizational regulations. 

b) DON’T store explosives anywhere except in 
a magazine which is clean, dry, well 
ventilated, properly located, suitably 
constructed, securely locked, fenced, guarded 
and properly earthed. 


c) DON'T leave explosives lying around the 
work site where workmen can get them. 

d) DON’T allow leaves, grass, bush, or debris 
to accumulate within 8 m of an explosive 
magazine. 

e) DON’T smoke or have matches, open lights, 
or other fire and/or flame producing devices 
in or near an explosives magazine, or have 
them nearby while handling or loading 
explosives. 

f) DON’T shoot into explosives with any fire 
arm, or allow shooting in the vicinity of an 
explosives magazine. 

g) DON’T store any metallic tools or implements 
in an explosives magazine. 

h) DON’T drop, throw, or slide packages of 
explosives or handle them roughly in any 
manner. 


j) DON’T open wooden cases of explosives with 
metallic tools. Use a wooden wedge and 
wooden, rubber, or fibre mallet. Metallic 
slitter may be used for opening fibre board 
cases, provided that the metallic slitter does 
not come in contact with the metallic fasteners 
of the case. 

k) DON’T store blasting caps or electric blasting 
caps in the same box, container or magazine 
together with other explosives. 

m) DON’T handle explosives during the 
approach or progress of an electrical storm. 
All persons should retire to a place of safety. 


IS 10386 (Part 4) : 2013 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects 
Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


Organization 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 
Irrigation Department, Government of Kerala, Thirunvanthapuram 


Irrigation & CAD Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, 
Hyderabad 

Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Government of Uttarakhand, Dehra Dun 

Jaiprakash Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, Bangalore 


Larsen & Toubro, Chennai 
NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 


National Projects Construction Corporation Limited, Faridabad 


North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, Shillong 


Saradar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhi Nagar 
Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, Shimla 


Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai 

THDC India Ltd, Rishikesh 

Tungabhadra Steel Products Ltd, Tungabhadra Dam 

Water Resources Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, 
Bhopal 

In personal capacity [Institution of Fire Engineers (India), 


Genmala High School Road, Venmala 682028, Cochin] 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 

Suri V. K. Gupta, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 

(Hypro-ENGG) (Chairman) 
MEMBER (IRRIGATION) 

Director (DAM SAFETY) (Alternate) 
SHRI A. C. GUPTA 

Suri N. K. Buara (Alternate) 
SHRI Manos SIKDAR 

SHRI Manos TRIPATHI (Alternate) 
Director (DSM) 

Director (DSR) (Alternate) 
Suri N. BHATTACHARYA 

Suri C. PAUL (Alternate) 
Dr GoPAL CHAUHAN (WRDM) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (IDRB) 

Director (DesiGNS, IDRB) (Alternate) 
Suri I. S. N. Raw 

SHRI S. PANDURANGA Rao (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (RSDD) 

Director Dams (RSDD) (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (GANGA VALLEY) 

SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (MB Dam) (Alternate) 
Suri D. G. KADKADE 

SHRI NARENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 
CHIEF ENGINEER (CIVIL DESIGNS) 

PROJECT ENGINEER (CIVIL DEsicns) (Alternate) 
SHRI N. RAGHAVAN 
SHRI A. K. JAIN 

SHRI KAJAL SAHA (Alternate) 
SHRI S. BASAK 

Suri A. K. Gupta (Alternate) 
Suri A. C. BORAH 

Suri K. G. MITTAL (Alternate) 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (D&P) 
Suri R. K. SHARMA 

SHRI V. S. UPADHYAYA (Alternate) 
Suri K. Gora 

SHRI V. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 
Suri R. K. VIsHNnor 

SHRI MANOJ SARDANA (Alternate) 
SHRI HUSSAIN BIN ALI 

SHRI Y. S. CHANDRA SHEKAR (Alternate) 
Suri K. K. TIWARI 

Suri R. K. Jam (Alternate) 
SHRI G. B. MENON 


Suri J. C. Arora, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (WRD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Dr R. R. DasH 


Scientist ‘C’ (WRD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue” and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 21 (493). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


