**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9001-12 (1979) : Guidance on Method of Mounting of 
Electronic and Electrical Items for Dynamic Tests 
(Redesignation of IS 8456) [LITD 1: Environmental Testing 
Procedure] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 9001 (Part 12): 1977 
(Redesignating IS:8456»1977) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART 12 MOUNTING OF ELECTRONIC AND 
ELECTRICAL ITEMS FOR DYNAMIC TESTS 



Fourth Reprint DECEMBER 2001 
( Incorporating Amendment No 1 ) 



UDC 621.38.038-218:620.178.3 



© Copyright 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110 002 



Gr 4 September 1977 



IS 9001 (Part 12): 1977 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART 12 MOUNTING OF ELECTRONIC AND 
ELECTRICAL ITEMS FOR DYNAMIC TESTS 

Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, LTDC 2 

Chairman Representing 

Brio D. Swaroop Instrumentation Ltd, Kota 

Members 
Shri H. R. Bapu Sebtharam Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri P. S. K. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. Bhaduri National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. P. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Brio N. Dayal Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri G. R. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Director Standards ( S & T ) Research, Designs & Standards Organization, 

Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 
Joint Director Standards 
( S & T )-I ( Alternate ) 
General Secretary Society of Environmental Engineers, Bangalore 

Shri T. G. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ghasita Sinoh Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ) v Pilani 
Shri J. G. Jain Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers* 

Association, Bombay 
Central Standardization 
Officer ( Alternate ) 
Shri John Francis Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi 

Shri S P. Kulkarni Philips India Limited, Bombay 

Dr P*. K. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. A. Murari Lucrs-TVS Ltd, Madras 

Shri B. K. Bansbjsb ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. V. Petear Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay 

Shri C* V* Raohuraman National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K Raman Directorate General of Observatories ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
Shri P. Sandell AH India Instrument Manufacturers* & Dealers* 

Association, Bombay 

Dr Y™ Somayajulu National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri P. Subyanabayana ( Alternate ) 

( Continued an page 2 ) 



© C^pight 1977 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication it protected under the Indian Copyright \ A*t (XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright* under the said Act. 



IS 9001 (Part 12): 1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shiii T. V. A. Subramanian Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shu i G. C. Saxtcka ( Alternate ) 
Simi 1>. Sitbramanvan Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

S ii at A. Sathvanarayaka ( Alternate ) 
Shri K, N. Tiwaw Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shut P. K. Shukla ( Alternate ) 
Sum N. Shi.viva*an, Director General, IS! ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) ( Secretary ) 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 

Indian Standard 

GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING 

PART 12 MOUNTING OF ELECTRONIC AND 
ELECTRICAL ITEMS FOR DYNAMIC TESTS 



0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by Indian Standards Institution 
on 22 April 1977, after the draft finalized by the Environmental festing 
Procedures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics 
and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 This standard has been largely based on I EC Document 50A 
( Central OlHce ) 141 * Draft — Mounting of components, equipment and 
other articles for dynamic tests, issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard deals with method of mounting of electronic and 
electrical items for dynamic tests, such as shock, bump, vibration and 
steady state acceleration. 

2. GENERAL 

2.1 The method of mounting of electronic and electrical items for 
dynamic tests shall be specified in the relevant specification. Where 
these details are not specified, one or more of the standardized methods of 
mounting given in this standard may be adopted ( see also Appendix A ). 

2.1.1 An attempt should be made, in the first instance, to categorise 
items into either component or equipment types and then to proceed 
accordingly. If this is not possible, for example, for packages, this 
standard may still be relevant, but shall be related to the package and 
not to the contents. 

•Rule* for rounding off numerical values ( rtvised). 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 

2.2 The relevant specification shall state whether the effect of gravita- 
tional force is important. If so, the item shall be so mounted that the 
force acts in the Same direction as it would in use. Where the effect of 
gravitational force is not important, the item may be mounted in any 
attitude, 

2.3 The relevant specification shall state, if significant, the temperatutt 
to which the item should not be subjected during the test, for example, as 
a result of temperature increases in the vicinity of the vibration generator 
table, and the maximum level of magnetic interference which may be 
imposed upon it during the functioning of vibration equipment. 

3. MOUNTING OF COMPONENTS 

3.1 The mounting method to be used shall be stated in the relevant 
specification. 

3.2 Where the method of mounting is not specified but is obvious from 
the design as in Fig. 1, this method shall be used. Where it is not 
obvious, the mounting method shall, whenever possible, be chosen in 
accordance with the principles as shown in Fig. 2, 3 or 4, bearing in 
mind whether the intention is to load dynamically the leads and/or the 
body or to determine the internal robustness. 

3.3 When the item is to be tested with additional leads attached, these 
should be so arranged that they impose similar restraint and mass to that 
when the item is used in its normal manner. 

3.4 In all cases, components shall be suitably clamped to a rigid test 
fixture or directly to the mounting surface of the test apparatus. 

Not« — Thfc term 'clamping* implies an approved method of attaching the 
component or the component leads to the test fixture. This may be cither by 
soldering, physical clamping between appropriate sui faces or by securing with a 
suitable adhesive. 

4. MOUNTING OF EQUIPMENT AND OTHER ARTICLES 

4.1 The item shall be mechanically connected to the mounting surface of 
the test apparatus either directly or by means of a rigid test fixture, as 
stated in the relevant specification. 

4.2 In cases where the normal mounting structure for the equipment is 
available, the relevant specification shall stale if it shall be used. 

4.3 Any additional stays or straps should be avoided. Any connections 
to the item, such as cables, pipes, etc, should be so arranged that they 
impose similar restraint and mass to that when the item is installed in its 
operational position. In order to achieve this, it may be necessary to 
fasten the cables, pipes, etc, to the fixture. 



IS 9001 (Fart 12): 1977 

4.4 Items intended for use with isolators should normally be tested witjh 
their isolators. If it is not practicable to carry out the test with the 
appropriate isolators, the item may be tested without the isolators at a 
different severity as stated in the relevant specification. 

4.5 The relevant specification may require an additional test on an item 
with the external isolators removed or blocked in order to demonstrate 
that minimum acceptable structural resistance has been achieved. In 
this case, the severity to be applied shall be given in ihe relevant 
specification. 

5. INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN IN THE RELEVANT 
SPECIFICATION 

5.1 When this standard is referred to in a relevant specification, the 
following details should be given as far as they are applicable: 

Clause 

a) Gravitational effect 2.2 

b) Maximum and/or minimum temperature 2.3 

c) Magnetic interference 2.3 

d) Mounting of components 3 

e) Mounting of equipment and other 4 
articles 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 2.1 ) 

EXPLANATION ON METHODS OF MOUNTING 

A-l. COMPONENTS 

A-l.l When the test is to determine the suitability of a component for 
its operational environment, the relevant specification should ensure that 
the component is held in a manner which simulates that used in service. 
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that components above a certain 
mass, which should be given in the relevant specification, will also require 
the body being supported both for the test and for the operational 
environment. 

A-l -2 For the method of mounting, the detailed information given in 
Fig. 1 to 4 should be used. For any special requirements, the manufac- 
turers should be consulted. 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 



Method* of Mounting 



Examples 




1A 



Y//M I WM 

1 lijj 



1B 




Components provided with obvious 
means of mounting, for example, 
diodes, electrolyiic capacitors, rccti- 
firri, switches, connectors, relays, 
transformers, powei transistors. 



Fig. 1 Examples op Obvious Means op Mounting Components 

6 



IS 9001(ParM2): 1977 



Methods of Mounting 




2A 



Examples 



Components, such as transis- 
tors, integrated circuits, relays 
andothcis where the distance 
to the fixture is limited . by 
design. 




v//7M^m m 



2C 



Resistors, capacitors. 



Fig. 2 Examples of Mounting op Components by 
the Leads Only — Cm/mm*/ 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 




Examples 



Resistors, capacitors, inductors, 
diodes. 

Note — Applicable for 

components having a mass not 
exceeding 6 grains, unless 
otherwise specified by the rele- 
vant specification. 



Resistors, capacitors, inductors, 
diodes, tran»iMors. 

Note 1 — It is important 
that the relevant specification 
states whether or not the 
component it in contact with 
the mounting sui face. 

Notr 2 — Applicable for 
components whose mass does 
not exceed 3 grams, unless 
otherwise specified in the 
relevant specification. 



Fio. 2 Examples of Mounting of Components by 
the Leads Only 



8 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 



Methods of Mounting 




\\\\\\\\\\\\K^ 




3A 




Examples 



Tubular components the coaling 
of which is fragile, such as high 
power resistors. 



Transistors, diodes. 




Integrated circuits. 



3C 



Fio. 3 Examples op Mounting op Components by 
the Body Only 



9 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 



Mtthods of Mounting 





/SSJifSSSSSSSSSSrSSASSSSSSSSSSSJ 



4 

T 



4C 



^P 



Examples 



Capacitors, relays, additional 
body fattening, for example, 
with extra bracket, necessary 
by reason of mass or severity. 



Transistors mounted on a 
heat-sink. 



tfJ^^JjJ^JJJJJ^JJJJJ^ 



4D 



Transformers, chokes. 



Relays 



flo. 4 example! of mountino of components by thb 
Body and tub Lbads 

10 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 

A- 1.2.1 Some components having special geometrical forms or 
shapes, for instance, disks, spheres, bulbs, and those requiring special 
fastening devices are not shown in the figures. For these, it is essential 
that the relevant specification gives detailed information. 

A-l.2.2 If a manufacturer recommends more than one method of mount* 
ing, tests should normally be performed using all the appropriate 
methods. It is recommended that new components are used for each 
test. 

A-1.3 Whichever method is specified or chosen, it is important that 
components are fastened rigidly to the test fixture or apparatus. This 
can be achieved by clamping, soldering, embedding or gluing the 
component body and/or its leads as appropriate. 

A-l.3.1 A normal size printed wiring board to which components are 
fastened does not, generally, give sufficient rigidity, and it may not be - 

Eossiblc to achieve the requirements of the test. In addition, reproduci- 
ility will probably be impaired. Small portions of a board may prove 
to be satisfactory, provided that attention is paid to their dynamic 
characteristics. 

A-1.4 When an internal robustness test is to be performed, it is impor- 
tant to note that the mounting method is rarely that which will be used 
iii the operational environment. It is then essential that the dynamic 
stress be transmitted to the internal structure. It is essential to ensure 
this by mounting the component by its body and its leads. 

A-1.5 When designing test fixtures for high impact or high frequency 
tests, care should be taken that no resonances exist within the frequency 
range specified for the test. In addition, it may be necessary for the 
velocity of sound in the fixture material to be considered. Care should be 
taken to ensure, as far as is practicable, that the propagation path is well 
below a quarter wavelength. Test fixtures for large components or for 
the simultaneous testing of several components will need special 
consideration and the general principles given for equipment fixtures are 
applicable ( see A-3 ). 

A-1.6 Should it be necessary to subject a component to a robustness of 
terminations test after the dynamic tests, the leads should not be bent for 
the dynamic tests, nor should they be displaced relative to the body of 
the component. If, however, this cannot be avoided, the relevant 
specification should specify that separate components are to be used for 
the two tests. 

A-2. EQUIPMENT AND OTHER ARTICLES 

A-2.1 Equipment type items shall be mounted by their normal means of 
attachment, unless otherwise stated by the relevant specification. 

11 



IS 9001 (Part 12): 1977 

A-2.1.1 It is important that the item is mounted in a manner repre- 
sentative of that used in its operational position. For example, an 
item normally held by its front panel alone should be so mounted for the 
test. 

A-2.2 In cases where the normal mounting structure is available and it 
is practicable to use it, it is strongly recommenced that this be done, 
since this is more representative of operating conditions. It should be 
remembered, however, that the fixing points referred to in the relevant 
test shall then be taken as those of the mounting structure and not of the 
item. 

A-2.2.1 If the normal mounting structure is not available or, in special 
cases, where it is known that it does not influence the behaviour of the 
equipment, the test fixture designed so that the appropriate test require- 
ment can be met, shall be used. 

A-2.3 Items intended for use with isolators may sometimes have to be 
tested without them, for example, if the item -is mounted with others in 
a common mounting system, or if the dynamic characteristics of the 
isolators are very much variable (for example, if ihey are temperature 
dependent ). With the exception of the steady state acceleration test, 
the new level should be determined by considering the envelope of the 
transmissibility curves of the isolator system along each axis. VVhere the 
severity is known to vary with the direction of the applied constraint, 
this should also be taken into account. 

A-2.4 If no transmissibility characteristics are available, the new seventy 
will need to be chosen arbitrarily but preferably after discussion between 
the supplier and the purchaser. 

A-2.5 It should be noted that, for a steady state acceleration test, there 
may under certain circumstances be a safety hazard if the item is tested 
with its isolators. The use of stays or straps may then be unavoidable. 

A-3. TEST FIXTURES 

A-3.1 General 

A-3.1.1 The fundamental purpose of the test fixture is to transmit 
faithfully the constraints from the test apparatus to the item, and to 
ensure that the specification requirements can be met at the fixing points 
of the item. 

Note — A test fixture will invariably be required for mounting and orientation 
purposes. Therefore, it is considered desirable to highlight possible problem areas 
associated with the fixture design which could prevent the achievement of the test 
requirements and thus affect the reproducibility. However, it should be noted that 
it u not the function of this guidance section to offer solutions; these can be found in 
the technical literature, 

12 



IS 9001 ( Part 12 ) : 1977 

A-3.1.2 The design of the test fixture will be governed by the physical 
shape and mass of the item, the severity of the test requirements and the 
capabilities of the test apparatus. These last two parameters are depen- 
dent on the test under consideration. 

A»3.2 Shock and Bump — The total mass and maximum severity will 
normally be specified by the manufacturer of the test apparatus. For a 
given item mass, the design of the test fixture will generally be easier if 
the capability of the test apparatus in significantly greater than that 
strictly necessary, since the fixture can then be heavier and less complex. 

A-3.2.1 It is still important to consider the effect of stiffness and 
dimensions ( see A-3.5 ). 

A-3.3 Vibration — The main parameter limiting the total mass of the 
item and its test fixture is the thrust capability of the test apparatus. 
This is normally specified by its manufacturer. In terms of severity, the 
most important features are the frequency range and displacement and/or 
acceleration required. However, in terms of the test apparatus perfor- 
mance, large thrust and a wide frequency range are normally incompatible. 
Thus, unlike rhe shock and bump situation, it may not be appropriate to 
use the largest vibration generator available. As a result, test fixtures 
are normally more complex than those required for other tests and 
extensive experience is needed in order to achieve satisfactory results. It 
also needs to be remembered that the frequency response may well be 
affected when the fixture and item are fastened to the vibration 
generator. 

A-3.3.1 Some of the parameters which need to be considered in the 
fixture design are given in A-3.5 and A-3.6. 

A-3.4 Acceleration, Steady State — The fixture design is simplest for 
this case, since the acceleration is applied progressively and the dynamic 
behaviour of the fixture and the item can be ignored. Thus the fixture 
need only be rigid enough to withstand the static forces involved and 
sufficiently versatile to accommodate the orientation of the item. It 
should be remembered, however, that normally a maximum force for 
the test apparatus will be specified by its manufacturer. 

A-3.5 Choice of Material 

A-3.5.1 When designing a test fixture, the choice of material will 
primarily be governed by mass and stiffness considerations. Some 
problems associated with mass limitations were dealt with as appropriate 
to each test ( set A-3.2 to A-3.4 ). Stiffness, which is only of significance 
where dynamic considerations are involved, can impose severe restrictions 
on the design of the fixture. 

13 



IS 9001 (Part 12): 1977 

A-3.5.2 The stiffness of a material is a function of its internal metallur- 
gical and chemical properties. It, therefore, varies over the wide range 
of metals and plastics available for use. For any given material, the 
stiffness varies with the dimensions, its means of support ( for example, 
single or double, encastered beams ) and, to a lesser extent, the method 
of construction. Certain materials have more advantageous stiffness-to- 
mass ratios, and this enables a fixture to be stiffer for the same mass, 
which is often desirable. 

A-3.5*3 Another characteristic of a material is its damping, which is 
also a function of its internal properties. As an example, the internal 
damping for aluminium is approximately four times greater than that for 
steel. Damping has some influence, mainly on the behaviour of vibration 
fixtures. The fundamental aim of the design of the test fixture is to 
permit no resonances to exist within the frequency range specified for 
the test. If this is impracticable, then the fidelity of the transmission of 
vibration from the test apparatus to the item is affected. The degree to 
which it is affected is directly related to the damping. It should be 
borne in mind that the damping of most common metals, whilst varying 
from one to another, has a relatively small effect on the overall behaviour 
of the test fixture but under certain circumstances it may need to be 
utilized. 

A-3*5*4 A further feature which should be considered, particularly in 
the case of a shock test requiring a fast rise time or a vibration test with 
a high upper frequency, is the velocity of sound in the material to 
be chosen. The propagation path in the material should, wherever 
practicable, be well below a quarter wavelength. 

A-3.5-5 Test fixtures need not be made of the same material throughout. 
It may be necessary, for various reasons, for example, electrical or thermal 
insulation, increased damping, to use fixtures made of a combination of 
materials, such as metal and plastic, or even metal and ceramic. 

A-3.6 Method of Construction 

A-3*6.1 There are various methods of construction available. These 
include bolting, riveting, welding, casting, the use of adhesives and. so 
on. The choice will depend on any difficulties anticipated in meeting 
the test requirements, the material used, etc. The test fixture should be 
as simple as possible, for example, a solid block is often all that is 
necessary. It should be noted that bolted structures will nbt normally 
achieve the stiffness obtained with the other forms of construction. This 
factor becomes important when dealing with large structures and/or' 
high frequencies. 

A-3.6.2 AH interfaces should be as flat as is necessary to achieve good 
mechanical contact. In addition, the maximum number of fixing holes 
on the mounting surface of the test apparatus should be utilized, consistent 
with the size of the fixture. 

14 



IS 9001 (Part 12): 1977 

A-3.6.3 It is often advantageous to design a fixture which can be used 
a number or times for different items. If threaded holes arc used and 
the material is such that undue wear might occur, the use of steel 
inserts is recommended. Care needs to be taken, however, that their 
fit is adequate and that no deterioration takes place. If bolts arc used, 
they may need to be of the high tensile type. 

A*3.6.4 It is important that, when fastening the item to the fixture, no 
deformation of either should occur. If it does, this probably indicates 
that the fixture is insufficiently stiff and might prevent the requited test 
severity from being applied to the fixing points of the item. 

A-3.6.5 As far as is practicable, all bolts should be tightened to their 
maximum permitted torque. If damping is likely to be of significance, it 
should be noted that the internal damping of a bolted or riveted structure 
is greater than that of one which has been welded. 

A~4. BALANCING 

A-4.0 Balancing is generally only a problem in the case of vibration and 
steady state acceleration tests, but may need to be considered for the 
shock and bump tests. 

A-4.1 Vibration — In the case of vibration, it is necessary to ensure 
that the centre of gravity of the fixture when loaded with the item, which 
should always be kept as low as possible, is nominally on a line which 
passes through the centre of gravity of the moving element of the 
vibration generator and is also perpendicular to the elements surface. 
In some instances, it may not be possible to ensure that the centre of 
gravity of the fixture and item is in line with the thrust axis of the 
vibration generator. This can result in flexture modes, standing wave 
patterns due to the length of the propagation path and rocking, which 
restrict the usable frequency range and prevent the test requirements 
being met at the fixing points of the item. Thus, it may be necessary to 
use counterbalancing techniques, although these should be avoided unless 
found to be essential. As the frequency increases, the item, and possibly 
the fixture, may resonate and, if so, will cause relative movement of the 
'dynamic centre of gravity' which will continue to move. This situation 
can be aggravated if counter balancing techniques have been used. Thus 
a position is created which currently has no practical solution. This 
effect can usually be tolerated but, if not, it may be alleviated by the use 
of a larger or more powerful vibration generator, provided the test 
specification requirements can still be met. 

A-4.1. 1 Very often, slip-tables are used in conjunction with vibration 
generators, in particular where the item is gravity-sensitive and where 
complex test fixture design might otherwise be necessary. Nonetheless, 
problems similar to those mentioned above may be encountered. 

15 



IS 9001 (Part 12): 1977 

A-4.2 Acceleration, Steady State — For steady state acceleration 
testing, a centrifuge is normally used and it is essential to balance the 
fixture and item statically and dynamically in relation to the test 
apparatus, in order to prevent damage to its bearings. The manufacturer 
will normally state the degree of unbalance permissible. 

A-5. POSITIONING OF ACCELEROMETERS 

A-5.1 The design of the test fixture shall allow for the attachment of 
accelerometers at the positions required for the appropriate tests. 
Attachment can be made in a number of ways, usually recommended by 
the manufacturer of the accelerometer, and include screwing, the use of 
special adhesives, etc. It may, on occasion, be advantageous in the 
case of a vibration test to allow for the attachment of additional 
accelerometers in order to. explore the dynamic behaviour of the fixture. 

A-6. PERFORMANCE CHECK OF TEST FIXTURE 

A-6.1 Before performing a vibration test, it may also be useful to check 
that the test requirements can be achieved at the specified points when 
the fixture is either unloaded, loaded with a dynamically-representative 
item or loaded with the real item. In this latter case, it may be advisable 
that the check be performed at a lower vibration amplitude than that 
required subsequently. 

A-6.1*l It may be appropriate to carry out this check in the case of 
other dynamic tests. 

A-7. LARGE AND/OR COMPLEX ITEMS 

A-7.1 The terms * large ' and ' complex ' are difficult to define. A fixture 
designed for an item of equipment may be large for a test laboratory 
normally involved in testing components. This is not the case consi- 
dered in this standard. ' Large ' is intended to describe an item/fixture 
combination which an equipment testing laboratory would normally have 
difficulty in handling and which, because of its mass,. physical size, 
complexity of attachment or the frequency range specified, require! a 
solution which is currently beyond the engineering state of the art. 

A-7.2 There are inevitably occasions when such a fixture is required, 
and it will be found that the test requirements- cannot be folly met by 
conventional means, because the resonance behaviour of the fixture and 
of the item is beyond control. After having explored other techniques, 
possibly including the use of parallel operation of vibration generators, 
reference shall ultimately be made to the test procedure to ascertain what 
actions need to be taken. Usually the test procedure in such cases 
requires that the various parameter values achieved are noted and 
subsequently agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 

16 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Hoadquartarm 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 10002 

Telephones: 323 01 31 , 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax :+ 91 01 1 3234062, 3239399, 3239382 

E - mall : bis@vsnl.com. Website : http:/Mww.bis.org.ln 



Control Laboratory : 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201 01 477 00 32 

Regional Offleao: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 323 76 1 7 

♦Eastern : 1/14 CIT Scheme VII, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi, CALCUTTA 700054 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34 A CHANDIGARH 1 60022 60 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road. CHENNAI 6001 13 254 1 3 1 5 

tWestem : Manakalaya, E9, MIDC, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, 832 92 95 
Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offleao: 

'Pushpak*. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 550 1 3 48 

Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 839 49 55 
BANGALORE 560056 

CommerdaJ-cum-Office Complex, Opp. Dushera Maidan, E-5 Arera Colony, 72 34 52 
Bittan Market BHOPAL 462016 

62/63, Gangs Nagar, Unit VI, BHUBANESWAR 751 001 40 36 27 

5th Floor, Kbvai Towers. 44 Bala Sundaram Road, COIMBATORE 641016 21 88 35 

Plot No. 58, Neelam Bata Road, NIT, FARIDABAD 121001 542 82 61 

Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 471 19 98 

53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, Apurba Slnha Path, 5411 37 
GUWAHAT1 781003 

5-6-56C. L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 320 10 84 

E-52, Chitranian Marg, C- Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 37 38 79 

1 1 7/41 8 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 21 68 76 

Seth Bhawan. 2nd Floor, BeNnd Leela Cinema. Naval Klshore Road. 21 89 23 
LUCKNOW 226001 

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 52 51 71 

Mahabir Bhawan, 1st Floor, Ropar Road, NALAGARH 174101 * 2 14 51 

PatHputra Industrial Estats, PATNA 800013 26 28 08 

First Floor, Plot Nos. 667-660, Market Yard, GuMskdl, PUNE 41 1037 426 86 59 

Sahajanand House' 3rd Rocr, Bhaksnacar&cfc^ 80 Feet Road, 378251 
RAJK0T 360002 

TXX No. 14/1421, Urihwslty P. O.Palayam^THRW 696034 3221 04 



•Sales Office la at 5 Chowrtoojtea Approach, P.O. Princep Sfroet, 2371086 

CALCUTTA 700072 

tSaJes Office is at Novelty OM^befS, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 3096528 

n e pr ography Unit, BIS, Ham Delhi, India 



