RAT Alte IS 7424 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Photoelectric Reflectance 
Method for Measurement of 
Whiteness of Plantation White 
Sugar in Solid State 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 67.180.10 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 2 


Sugar Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
Sugar Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 


Plantation white sugar is manufactured and commercially transacted on the basis of visual comparison of colour 
and grain size as prescribed in IS 498. While grain size determined by employing various sieves, whiteness of 
sugar in reference samples prepared by Bureau of Sugar Standards is determined by Photoelectric Reflectance 
Meter. 


The principal object of the development of this standard covering photoelectric reflectance method is to specify 
procedure for preparing reference samples of identical whiteness eliminating personal errors. This is necessary 
to be done every year as whiteness is affected during storage. Besides, the standard method would also help in 
scientific evaluation of such issues as the introduction of new colour grades. 


This Standard was first published in 1974 to cover plantation white sugar manufactured and commercially 
transacted on the basis of visual comparison of colour and grain size as was prescribed in IS 498. IS 498 was 
revised in 2003 in the light of decision of Government of India to reduce the number of sugar grades to six only 
in two colour series namely: 

a) L-30, M-30, S-30 ; and 

b) L-29, M-29 and S-29. 
These six grades were included in revised IS 498. Due to various changes in the technology of sugar manufacture 
and hence the sugar quality also, the standard IS 498 was further revised in and a new 31 colour series has been 
introduced, while 29 colour series is abolished. After introduction of a new grade SS-31 total seven numbers of 
grades in force. In light ofthe above changes and also considering change in the quality of plantation white sugar 
being produced, it became imperative to revise IS 7424 giving the modulated reflectance values of these seven 
grades. 


Reflectance values of sugar are obtained through photoelectric reflectance meter, which are converted to Modulated 
Reflectance (MR) values, by multiplying them with average grain size of sugar. The MR values thus obtained are 
utilized for gradation of plantation white sugar. 


This standard is based on extensive research investigations carried out on the method of evaluation of whiteness 
of plantation sugar in solid state at National Sugar Institute, Kanpur. The method was published and elaborated 
in proceedings of 4" joint convention of Sugar Technologists Association. The method was also rechecked at 
National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi earlier. 


With a view to facilitate preparation of reference samples of sugar or to arrive independently at the modulated 
reflectance values of different grades of plantation white sugar, the MR values are given in Annex A. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


IS 7424 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


PHOTOELECTRIC REFLECTANCE METHOD 
FOR MEASUREMENT OF WHITENESS OF 
PLANTATION WHITE SUGAR IN SOLID STATE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the method of measurement 
of whiteness of plantation white sugar (vacuum pan) in 
solid state by means of photoelectric reflectance meter 
for preparation of reference samples and introduction 
of higher colour grades. 


1.2 This method is not intended for day-to-day routine 
grading of sugar in sugar factories which shall be 
done on the basis of visual comparison with reference 
samples. 


2 APPARATUS 


2.1 Photo-Electric Reflectance Meter 


It shall preferably be furnished with two-way operation 
from both 230 V ac mains and 9 V storage batteries. It 
shall be provided with a search unit and a digital display 
unit with accuracy up to two digits after decimal. 


2.1.1 For mains operation, a constant voltage 
transformer or an equivalent device shall be provided 
to keep constant voltage supply to the system. The 
complete unit consists search unit with connector cord, 
calibration plaque plates, black cavity and colour filters. 


2.1.2 The search unit shall be provided with a 9 V 
concentrated filament lamp. Suitable colour correcting 
filter or filters shall be placed in the parallel beam of 
light. The filters shall be used to correct the colour 
sensitivity of the photo-cell to match it with that of 
the eye. The operating voltage of the lamp shall be 
specified. 


2.1.3 The function buttons control basic operations. 
When power button turn on, red light in display will lit 
up. The appropriate colour filter shall be used in search 
unit to get the proper results from plaque plates (used 
for calibration) and black cavity. Calibration buttons 
are used to set blank (zero) and standard readings 
(mentioned on plaque plates for each of three colours). 


2.2 Reflectance Standard 


It shall be a freshly prepared magnesium oxide surface 
whose reflectance shall be taken to be 100 percent. 


However, for convenience, the following reflectance 
standards shall be provided with the instrument: 


a) A white enamel plaque of reflectance not less than 
80 percent with its reflectance value calibrated 
against magnesium oxide. 


b) A grey enamel plaque of reflectance about 
40 percent with its reflectance calibrated against 
magnesium oxide. 


c) A highly polished black glass plate. 
3 MEASUREMENT OF REFLECTANCE 


3.1 When measuring samples amber, blue and green 
buttons shall be used to select appropriate calibration 
curve for specific tri-stimulus filter in search unit. When 
one of these three buttons is depressed, the corresponding 
LED above it will illuminate and indicates which 
filter calibration curve is being used. When filters are 
changed in search unit, the corresponding channel 
shall be selected via amber, blue, and green buttons. 
Filters and their corresponding memory settings shall 
be changed at will, once the system has been calibrated. 
Only those channels that are being used for samples 
shall be calibrated. 


3.2 To calibrate the system desired filter channel 
shall be selected via amber, blue and green buttons. 
Next the CHANGE button is to be depressed causing 
CHANGE led to illuminate. The instrument /system 
shall now be ready for a two point calibration starting 
with zero offset and followed by Standard plaque plate 
value setting. 


3.2.1 The first step of calibration is to set BLACK 
CAVITY zero offset (dark current correction). The 
black cavity standard shall be placed on search unit 
before this measurement is taken. Once the black 
cavity is in place on search unit and CALIBRATE 
mode has been entered. ZERO button shall be 
depressed. This will cause the CHANGE light to go 
out and normal reflectance display to resume. While 
the black cavity standard is on search unit, system 
should display between 0.10 and (-) 0.10. If it does 
not produce this value the calibration should be 
repeated. 


IS 7424 : 2019 


3.2.2 After the zero offset has been set, the second 
calibration point shall be determined by using standard 
plaque value, follow the procedure given below: 


a) Place the standard plaque plate with the recessed 
glazed surface towards the search unit. 


b) Press CALIBRATE button. The calibrate light 
will illuminate, and then press STD button. The 
STD light will illuminate as well as all three filter 
lights (amber, blue and green) also. 


c) The display will show any reflectance value or 
previously entered standard plaque value. 


d) Read assigned plaque reflectance value for selected 
colour from label on standard plaque plate. 


e) Enter the standard value in the system using 
amber, blue and green buttons to increment the 
tens, units, and tenths digits respectively. The 
digits will individually increment between 0 to 
9 units, when buttons are depressed. Standard 
plaque plate values between 00.0 to 99.9 can be 
entered in to the system. 


f) When desired /required reading is set /appears 
on the display, depress STD button, second time 
/Twice. The STD Led will extinguish, as well 
as CALIBRATE Led also. Normal reflectance 
display will resume and display should be identical 
as standard plaque value ( + 0.2) after the standard 
plaque value is entered. 


System is now ready to measure the reflectance value 
of any sugar sample (in the standard glass bottle) put 


it on the search unit by replacing the standard plate for 
the newly calibrated /set colour filter. 


3.3 Connect instrument to a.c. power mains or to 9 V 
storage batteries. Put the green filter (colour correcting 
filter) in the search unit and place the polished black 
cavity it on. The display shall then indicate zero 
reflectance, if not, adjust zero controls to set display 
to zero; then place standard white plaque on search 
unit and adjust the sensitivity controls to get correct 
reflectance reading for this calibrated plaque (if not 
set previously). Now place grey enamel plaque on 
search unit and check that display gives correct value 
of reflectance for calibrated plaque. The plaques and 
black plates shall be washed with neutral detergents 
or soft soaps and dried before use. Care shall be taken 
not to scratch their surfaces, specifically that of black 
cavity. After suitable intervals reflectance values of 
white and grey enamel plaques shall be checked against 
magnesium oxide standard. Now the instrument is 
ready for measurement. 


4 CALCULATION 


Take the mean reflectance value of the four surfaces of 
the sugar in the bottle. Obtain the modulated reflectance 
(MR) values by the following formula: 

Modulated Reflectance (MR) = R x G 


R = Mean reflectance value of the four surfaces of 
the sugar, in bottle; and 


G = Average grain size of the sugar, in mm. 


ANNEXA 
( Foreword ) 


MINIMUM VALUES OF MODULATED REFLECTANCE 
OF PLANTATION WHITE SUGAR* 


IS 7424 : 2019 


Standard Mr Values 
Grain Size Grain Size, Standard MR Values 
Designation (In mm) Minimum* 
Max. Min. 
L-31 2.36 1.70 91 
M-31 1.70 1.18 70 
S-31 1.18 0.60 49 
SS-31 0.60 0.212 27 
L-30 2.36 1.70 85 
M-30 1.73 1.18 62 
S-30 1.18 0.60 43 


* As recorded in the first week of September every year. 


IS 7424 : 2019 


ANNEXB 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Sugar Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 02 


Organization 


National Sugar Insititure, Kanpur 


Army Service Core (ASC), New Delhi 
CONCERT, Chennai 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 


Food Safety Standards Authority of India, New Delhi 
Global Cane Sugar Ltd, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indian Sugar Mills Association, New Delhi 
Indian Sugar Exim Corporation, New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


National Co-operative Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


National Fed. Of Co-operative Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


The Sugar Technologists Association of India, New Delhi 


Triveni Engineering & Industries Ltd, Muzaffarnagar, UP 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI NARENDRA MOHAN (Chairman) 
Suri ASHUTOSH Basra! (Alternate) 
Lt Cor B. B. SAHU 


SHRI R. SANTHANAM 
SHRI M. SOMASUNDARAM (Alternate) 


SHRI SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. Kamar (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR PANWAR 
SHRI RAKESH KUMAR RANJAN (Alternate) 


Ms Apoorva SRIVASTAVA (TECHNICAL OFFICER) 


Dr G. S. C. Rao 
MR AnIL SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


DRA. D. PATHAK 
Dr A. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR YOGESHWER SHUKLA 


SHRI G. K. THAKUR 
Suri PANKAJ RASTOGI (Alternate) 


MR RaJiv AGGARWAL 
MR RAIEEV Kurup (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH CHANDRA 


SHRI K. P. VAIsH 
Suri N. K. SHARDA (Alternate) 


MR MANOHAR GOPAL JOSHI 


SHRI SANJAY AWASTHI 
SHRI ANURAG GOYAL (Alternate) 


MR RAJESH SINGH 
Suri P. K. KHADELWAL (Alternate) 


Suri P. RAJESH, SCIENTIST “E? AND HEAD (FAD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI RAJPAL 
ScIENTIST °C’, BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 02 (13613). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


