( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Is:!m1(fartII)-19fJ1

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF SOUND INSULATION IN BUILDINGS AND OF BUILDING ELEMENTS
PART II STATEMENT OF PRECISION Committee, REQUIREMENTS LTDC 5

Acoustics Sectional

Chairman DR M. PANGHOLY Emeritus Scientist, National Physical Laboratory, Members
DR K. ACHYUTHAN

New Delhi 110 012

Representing Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) Ahuja Radios, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi

SHRI R. S. VOHRA ( Alternate )

SHRI SANDEEPAHUJA SHRI S. P. JERATH ( Al&mate ) COL T. R. BHALOTFLA

LT COL K~~HAN LAL ( Alternate DR A. F. CHHAPGAR SHRI TEK CHANDANI ( Alternate DR P. N. GUPTA SHRI R. K. JAIN

Department of Electronics, New Delhi Component Industries Association, Electronic , ( ELCINA ), New Delhi SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH ( Alternan , Railway Board, New Delhi SHRI K. S. KALIDAs SHRI V. JAYARAMAN( Alternate ) Botton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRIJ. S. MONGA SHRI M. S. MONGA ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C.-MUKHERJEE SHRIJ. K. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore DR ( MISS ) SHAILAJANIKAM Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI K. D. PAVATE ( CSIR ), Pilani SHR~M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Films Division, Bombay SHRI A, V. RAMANAN Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi RESEARCHENGINEER Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New SHRI M. SANKARALINGAM
IMhi

SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) Directorate SHRI SARWANKUMAR SHRI K. CHANRACHUDAN ( Alternate )

General of Civil Aviation,

New Delhi

( Continued on page 2 @J Copyright 1982 INDIAN This publication reproduction is protected STANDARDS INSTITUTION under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and under the said Act.

in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright

IS. : 9901 ( Part II ) - 1981
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members SHRI M. N. Srimc~~ SHRI S. K. TANDON ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDENT SURVEYOROF WORKS ( FOOD ) SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH
SHRI K. D'SA ( Alternate ) SHRI R. C. JAIN,

Representing Posts and Telegraphs Central Public Works Board, New Delhi New Delhi

Department,

Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and The Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association. Bombav Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member) Secretar?,

Head ( Electronics )

SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI

IS:99Ol(PartIt)-1981

Indian

Standard

MEASUREMENT OF SOUND INSULATION IN BUILDINGS AND OF BUILDING ELEMENTS
PART II STATEMENT OF PRECISION REQUIREMENTS

0. FOREWORD
Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 26 October 1981, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council.

0.1 This Indian

0.2 It is not possible

to specify completely the construction of laboratory test facilities or the sound field conditions obtained. Therefore, some details of the test set-up and the procedure must be left to the choice of the operator. This, together with the statistical character of sound fields within rooms, leads to uncertainties in the results due to non-systematic ( random ) and systematic influences. 0.3 Random influences can be determined by repeated measurements under essentially similar conditions, variations being made in order to obtain representative samples of the actually existing conditions ( for example, position of loudspeaker and microphone ). The repeatability obtained is a measure of the confidence to be placed in the results with respect to random influences. 0.4 Systematic influences ( for example, size and shape of test rooms, mounting conditions of test specimen, calibration of measuring equipment ) cannot be determined by a simple procedure. Generally, comparison measurements in different test set-ups and knowledge of the random uncertainties under these conditions are necessary in order to assess the systematic influences. 0.5 In agreement with modern statistical methods, the concepts of repeatability and reproducibility of complete results are used in this standard, rather than the variance of the individual quantities comprising the result. Repeatability and reproducibility offer a simple means of checking and stating the precision of measurements. 0.6 This standard which covers statement is a part of the series of Indian Standards of precision requirements on measurement of sound

3

IS:9!Bl(PartII)-1981
insulation in buildings in this series are: Part I Part III Part IV Part V Part VI Part VII Part VIII and of building elements. Other standards

Requirements

for laboratories of airborne sound insulation between of facade of

Laboratory measurements of building elements Field measurements rooms

of airborne

sound insulation sound insulation sound

Field measurements of airborne elements and facades Laboratory floors Field measurements

of impact

insulation of

measurements

of impact

sound insulation

floors

Laboratory measurements of the reduction of transmitted impact noise by floor-coverings on a standard floor.

0.7 While

assistance has been derived from, preparing this standard, ISO/DIS 140/11 `Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements: Part II Statement of precision requirements', issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 0.8 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

( Part II ) lays down procedures for assessing uncertainty in the acoustical measurements described in Parts III to VIII of IS : 9901t due to non-systematic influences. 1.2 The results may be used for checking different measuring arrangements in one laboratory and for comparing such conditions in different laboratories or in field situations. Minimum values for the precision required when carrying out tests according to series ( Parts III to VIII ) of IS : 9901t are stated in 4.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS : 1885 ( Part III/Set 8 )-1974: shall apply in addition to the following.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( reuG.4 ) . jMeasurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements. SElectrotechnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section 8 Architectural

acoustics.

4

IS:99oI(PartII)-1981 2.1 Result-The final value obtained instructions in the test procedure. by following the complete set of

2.2 True Value - For practical purposes, it is the value towards which the average of single results obtained by n laboratories tends, when n tends towards infinity. Consequently, such a true value is associated with the particular method of test. 2.3 Accuracy - The closeness of agreement between the true the mean result which would be obtained by applying the dure a very large number of times. The smaller the systematic uncertainty which affects the result, the more accurate is the value and test procepart of the procedure.

2.4 Precision - The closeness of agreement between the results obtained by applying the test procedure several times under prescribed conditions. The smaller the random part of the uncertainty, the more precise is the procedure. 2.5 Repeatability - Qualitatively, it is the closeness of agreement between successive results obtained with the same test procedure, on the same test specimen and under the same conditions ( same operator, same apparatus, same laboratory and same intervals of time ). Quantitatively, it is the value below which the absolute difference between two single test results ( pair ) obtained in the above conditions may be expected to lie with a specified probability. This quantity is denoted by r. 2.6 Reproducibility - Qualitatively, it is the closeness of agreement between individual results obtained with the same method on the same test specimen but under different conditions ( different operators, different apparatus, different laboratories and different time ). Quantitatively, it is the value below which the absolute difference between two single test results ( pair ) on the same test specimen obtained by operators in different laboratories, using the prescribed test procedure, may be expected to lie with a specified probability. This quantity is denoted by Q. 2.7 Arithmetic Mean - The arithmetic is defined by the equation: mean x for a given set of results

X=-E
where n = number

1 *

n i-l

Xi

of observed

values xi, and

x = an estimator

for the true value of the mean.

5

IS:99Ol(PartII)-1981 2.8 Variance - Qualitatively, a measure of the dispersion of a series of random results about their average. Quantitatively, for a given set of results, the sum of the squares of the deviation of each result from the arithmetic mean, divided by the number of degrees of freedom. In the simple case of n consecutive ( ungrouped ) observations, the variance is calculated according to the equation:

where $2 is an estimator for the true value a* of the variance.

2.9 Standard Deviation - The positive square root s of the variance, s is an estimator for the true value of CT of the standard deviation. 2.10 Degrees of Freedom-The number of degrees of freedom ZJ is equal to the number of independent terms contained in the expression for the variance. In the simple case of consecutive ( ungrouped ) observations: v=n-1 2.11 Probability Level - The probability that the statement in question is true. In this standard, a probability level of 95 percent is used. 3. MEASUREMENT 3.1 General 3.1.1 For routine testing according to this series of standards, on many occasions only one test on a specimen is carried out. In such cases, no reliable figure for the confidence to be placed in the result is obtained. In the interest of reliability, it may, therefore, be advantageous to perform two tests and check the difference of the results against the repeatability r of the test procedure. If their difference is less than or equal to r, the test operator may consider his work as being under control and take the average of the two results as the estimated value of the quantity being tested. 3.1.2 Before routine acoustical testing is taken up by an organization, the repeatability of the test procedure and the test set up shall be checked as to its capability of producing reliable and repeatable results. These checks should be repeated from time to time, especially whenever changes in the procedure, the test set-up or the instrumentation are made. 3.1.3 It is recommended so as to check each- other's that different testing- organizations results for reproducibility. 6 collaborate PROCEDURE

IS:99Ol(PartII)-1981 3.2 Check OT Repeatability

3.2.1 As a standard check of repeatability of airborne and impact sound measurements under given conditions, the following method shall be used. 3.2.2 A set of six-complete measurements, for example; R, D,Z or L, respectively, as a function of frequency, is grouped into pairs of consecutive measurements, without changing the original order of the set. The difference in results between the two members of every pair is compared at all frequencies with the requirements in 4 and Table 1. If these values are exceeded at any one frequency, all the results are rejected and the method of checking isrepeated completely. In case of a second failure to achieve the prescribed values, the test procedure and/or the test set-up are considered inadequate and shall be improved to obtain the required repeatability.
NOTE - When carrying out repeatability checks, the details of the test procedure should not be reobcated to the extent of using. for examole. identical oositions for the microphone, loudspeaker or tapping ma&me, as thisAwould result $ values of r unattainable under practical conditions. Rather,, these influences be varied in such~a way as to obtain independent and representatrve samples of the quantities affecting the repeatability ( that is, the average sound pressure levels in the rooms ).

4. REQUIREMENTS

FOR

REPEATABILITY

4.1 Since the procedure outlined in this standard has not yet been used in building acoustics on a broad scale, precise numerical data of the standard deviation of complete results exist only for one laboratory. From these values, tentative figures for repeatability requirements have been calculated and are given in Table 1. A simplified method for carrying out interlaboratory measurement for determining these values is described in Appendix A. 4.2 Laboratory Measurements be so chosen, within the standardized III to VIII ) of IS : 9901*, that the to 3.2 does not exceed the values

4.2.1 The test procedure shall procedures of this series ( Parts repeatability checked according given in Table 1. 4.3 Field Measurements

4.3.1 In field measurements, the acoustical conditions of test are not under the control of the operator and shall in most cases be accepted as they are.
*Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements.

7

lS:9!IOl(PartII)-1981
TABLE 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR REPEATABILITY (r)

( Ckzuses3.2.2,4.1 THIRD-OCTAVE BAND

and 4.2.1 )

~FOR AIRBORNE SOUND

CENTRE FREQUENCY

REDUCTION INDEX R

TFORNORMALUED IMPACT SOUND LEVEL Ln
(3) dB 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1

(1)
HZ 100 125 160 200 250 315 400 500 630 800 1 000 1 250 1600 2 000 and above

(2)
dB 5 5 5 5 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 2 2

4.32 If instruments and a procedure checked by a laboratory are used, the repeatability due to these influences alone can be considered essentially similar to that of laboratory measurements. However, the overall repeatability in situ cannot be stated since the appropriate values of the standard deviation are not known for the given situation, and may under unfavourable conditions considerably exceed the laboratory values.

APPENDIX A (Clause 4.1 )
COOPERATIVE A-l The repeatability DETERMINAnON OF REPEATABILITY

attainable under given testing conditions is related to the standard deviation obtained from numerous measurements under the same conditions by the equation:

8

IS:99ol(PartII)-1981 For a sufficiently large number of results, P can be approximated equation : by the

where t is the factor derived from Student's distribution for a probability level of 95 percent and the appropriate number of degrees of freedom ( see Table 2 ) .
TABLE 2 FACTOR t FOR CALCULATING THE REPEATABILITY PROBABILITY LEVEL OF 95 PERCENT FOR A

NUMBER OF DEGREES OF FREEDOM u

t
`i 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 ifi 182 776 571 447 365 306 262 228

1 I 4 5

:: 13 :"; 16 17 18 :i :: ;~: 25 26 27 :; 30 40 60 120

2 201 179 2 160 2 145 131 2 120 2 110 2 101 2 093 086 2 ~080 074 2 069 064 2 060 2 2 2 2 2 056 052 048 045 042

2 021 2 000 1 980 1 960

9

IS : 9901 ( Part II ) - 1981 A-IS The determination of repeatability according to this method in one laboratory is very laborious, since approximately 35 degrees of freedom are considered necessary for calculating sufficiently exact values of s. Moreover, a more reliable value of the standard deviation of the standardized procedure will be obtained if a number of measurements on separate test specimens of the same construction are carried out in different laboratories. In this case, the standard deviation for calculating the repeatability is given by the equation: (n,-l)~T+ (a,-l)sz+.
(fZ,+?Z,+......+fZi

S=

..... +

(fti-l)Si'+. +. ..... t-Y&)

..... -k

+

(fZ.k-l)Jk"

where si =standard deviation evaluated in the i-th from ni consecutive ungrouped results, and k =number of laboratories involved. laboratory

A-l.2 The number of laboratories and the number of results in each shall be so chosen that the number of degrees of freedom given by the denominator of the expression in the square root of the above equation, is at least 35. However, for each individual laboratory, at least five results are necessary. The test conditions for the determination of s shall correspond as far as possible with the examples given in series (Parts III to VIII) of IS : 9901*.

*Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements.

10

