IS 15724:2006

Indian Standard AUTOMOTIVE TYRES -- RETREADING PROCEDURE -- HOT PROCESS

ICS 83.160.10

.

0 BIS 2006

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 December 2006 Price Group 3

Automotive Tyres, Tubes and Rims Sectional Committee, TED 7

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive ~es, Tubes and Rims Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 15724:2006

Indian Standard AUTOMOTIVE TYRES -- RETREADING PROCEDURE -- HOT PROCESS
1 SCOPE This standard covers the retreading of tyres for passenger cars, light trucks, trucks and buses, methods of retreading and the equipment to be used, 2 REFERENCE The following standard contains provisions, which through reference in this text, constitutes provisions of this standard. At the time of publication the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 1S No. 13531:2004 Titie Automotive @es -- Tyre -- Retreading materials for mould cure process 3.9 Mould Cure -- Vulcanization in a cavity, usually made of aluminum or steel, which contains the tread design that is impressed into the new rubber as it cures. 3.10 Mould Lubricant release after curing. -- Material used as a mould

3.11 Pressure Tread -- Proprietary system for applying extruded, patterned, uncured tread onto a buffed casing, without the use of moulds, in a single operation. 3.12 Rubber Fold or Lamination (Mould Cure) -- Defect occurring in the initial stages of curing when areas of the rubber foid into itself If contamination (for example, excessive mould lubricant) is presen~ the fold will open (delaminate) in service. 3.13 Splice -- Junction formed by joining the two ends of a tyre component. 4 REQUIREMENTS

3 DEFINITIONS 3.1 Cure -- Process of vulcanization of rubber by applying heat and pressure over a period of time. 3.2 Cure Rate -- Speed at which a compound cures and reaches its optimum physical properties. 3.3 Cure Time -- Time required, at a reference temperature, for a compound to reach optimum physical properties. 3.4 Die --A two piece metal plate with an orifice through which rubber compounds are shaped when forced through the opening by an extruder. 3.5 Die Size -- A dimensional size designation for retread rubber. 3.6 Extruder -- A machine that shapes a rubber compound by the process of extruding into a usable form (that is, strip or die size). 3.7 Extruding -- Process of forming an uncured rubber compound into a given shape. 3.8 Mould -- Equipment which impresses the tread design into the uncured tread rubber as it vulcanizes the new tread onto the prepared casing. 1

4.1 Method of Retreading Casings shall be retreaded by an approved mould cured process that is in accordance with the application procedure given in 4.5 and 4.6. 4.2 Repairs Permissible defects shall be retreaded in accordance with the specification for repairs. All butllng dust shall be removed in such manner as to prevent contamination of the buffed surface. 4.3 Buffing 4.3.1 Location The buffing operation shall be carried out in a separate bay or room that is so constructed and isolated that no buffig dust can be spread on the other parts of the factory. 4.3.2 The buffig machine shall be properly installed and aligned to buff on centre. Wheels or flanges shall be available for the tyre sizes being buffed. The proper templates or other methods of radius control shall be available. Post to have readily available, dimension and specification chart. 4.3.3 An efficient butllng room needs excellent lighting

IS 15724:2006 of a minimum 200 foot candles (2 152 lux), proper ventilation and enough space to handle a flow of tyres safely and efllciently. 4.3.4 The buffing area may be the source of retread plant tires. The room shall be kept clean and dust collectors shall be serviced regularly. Access doors should be provided in the duct work every 3.66 m in a horizontal run. The walls should be fire resistant. Flammable materials and smoking shall be prohibited. 4.3.5 Large fire extinguishers should be mounted within 15.25 m in readiIy accessible locations and visible. Check with your local fire department for correct procedures. 4.3.6 Select the correct template for the type and size casing. 4.3.7 The casings should to be buffed to the overall buffed width, radius, diameter and bead-to-bead measurement specifiedon the operationdata charts. 4.3.8 Bufllng shall remove all original tread and shoulder design without exposing tyre plies in the shoulder area. The surface must be symmetrical and free of oxidized rubber. 4.3.9 At the completion of the butllng process, a carbide buffing wheel should be used on the finished buffed edges. Do not allow the carbide wheel to scorch the rubber. Make sure all weather cracking is removed. 4.3.10 As a precaution, the butllng operator should never wear gloves or loose fitting clothes. This could cause serious injury, if caught in the rasp blades or by a spinning tyre with loose belts. Always wear approved eye protectors when buffing. While doing the buffing following precautions shall be taken: a) Check the tyre to be buffed to ensure that the proper template is in place or the radius is set; b) Check the expandable rim (flanges) for proper width and size. If an expandable rim is used, lubricate the rubber bands to allow easy movement of the beads and improvement of the band life; c) Install the tyre on the buffer and inflate it. Keep hands off the bead while inflating; d) While inflating the tyre, ensure the rasp is far enough away, so that the tyre can expand without damaging the safety door or rasp; e) Inspect the tyre before buffiig, checking for missed nail holes and any other foreign materials; f) Turn on the rasp and move either the tyre or rasp until contact is made. If template buffer is used, be sure the template is touching the follower bar before proceeding; 2

d Once tyre is in contact with the rasp, start at the
centre and work outward, going in one direction until reaching the shoulder edge. Proceed back across the tyre to the opposite shoulder edge. Always follow the template or radius to ensure proper contour and them move the rasp in for a deeper cut, if needed. A recommended cut is about 1.5 mm to 2.4 mm on eaeh pass, although the final pass should be very light to ens~ a good texture; the under h) Before making the ~~&?e#@me tread. PIWf-%~_120" tipart and in both shoulders to -~ #roper C@ltOUr and eliminate heat build=q. This allow you to check the under tread whicli should be 0.8 mm minimum @ z.~~' j) Gt W~**"*%fW wd-w shwldWW*&; ; ` control to stop the @i''h6t exposed to the water

the crown width or use a piece oftread stock of the size you wish to apply to the casing. If the buffed surface is too wide, mark the buffed surt%tee at each edge of the tread rubber for cut points, making sure the tread is centred; m) To trim the shoulder, traverse the buffer to one side stopping on the shoulder radius angle of the template, normally 35�. Move the tyre in at a slow pace and cut the side until the mark disappears on the surface. Swing the machine to the other side and repeat the process; n) Afier the sides are trimmed, texturize with the sidewall attachment. This will remove any rough texture and will give a good cosmetic appearance. When the tread fits the casing, bushing the sides, is all that is needed. This will ensure cushion flow and proper adhesion; and p) Measure the buffed tread width with a flexible rule or a tread design section, verifying that it conforms to specification. 4.4 Mould Cure Measurement Certain measurements are to be made to fit the casing into a mould. All measurements shall be withh limits. Typical dimensions would include: a) Outside Diameter/Circu%m ference: 1) Measure with a vernier scale or edge reliable digital readout 2) Measure with the casing inflated on the buffe~ and 3) Measure at the tyre centreline.

`

IS 15724:2006 b) Overall Bug Width: 1) Measure over the buffed crown ffom edge to edge; and 2) Use 6.4 mm wide tape. c) Bead-to-Bead 1) Measure from bead-heel to bead-heel over buffed crow, and 2) Measure with the tyre deflated. d) BufedRadius: 1) Controlled by the template on a template buffe~ 2) Must meet manufwturer'srecommendationsto fit properly and 3) Musthavethe propershoulderradius to ensure good flow and prevent edge cracking and liting. 4.5.6 Hand Brushing Brushing should be done in a circular scrubbing motion to work the cement into the surface. Spread cement well without puddling on the stiace. Use a hand stippling brush, Exposed areas of steel or fabric, due to buffing or sklving, requires hand bmshing cement immediately upon completion of skiving. Allow to dry thoroughly. 4.5.7 Spray Cementing There are two types of cementers: a) Airsprq-- This equipment should have a6.9 bars dry airprvssure inlet line (well trapped) to elimiite oil and water fkom air. The agitation motor inlet pressure should be 4.1 bars. The spray gun should be set at approximately 1.4 bars. Heavier cements and room temperature may require variations in pressure to obtain proper spray pattern. The spray gun uses air to atomize the liquid and create the pattern.

e) Atlerbuffing,eachcasingshallbe inspected(great care should be taken to ensure that the buffed surfaGe does not beGomeContaminated) to ensure
compliance with classification and dimensional requirements as mentioned in 4.3.6 and freedom ilom: 1) Contamination of the buffed surface; 2) Injuries not detectable or detected before buffing; and 3) Damage or injury caused by bufllng. f) TransportationandStorage-- Buffed casings shall be protected tlom contamination and shall be transported preferably on trolleys avoiding direct contact with the floor and shall be stored in a clean area reserved specifically for such casings.

b) Airless Spvay-- This systemoperateson hydraulic
pressure, which forces pure- cement through a special gun that produces a spray. Pump may be pneumatic or electrical. This system is less prone to air contamination than air spray systems. 4.5.8 The area where cement is applied should be: a) Well ventilated -- usually a spray booth is required or advised; b) Free from excessive dust and away tlom direct sunlight; and c) Away horn moulds, boilers, furnaces, excessively hot and/or moist areas, open flame or electrical sparks. 4.5.9 D~ing Cement Apply a sufficient amount of cement. Heavy applications take longer to dry. Do not apply cushion or tread stock while cement is wet. This can cause tread lifts or separations. Al!ow all cements to dry thoroughly. Fifteen minutes is a good guideline to use for drying time. Low temperatures and/or high humidity may require longer drying time. To determine if cement is dry, use a small piece of cushion and peel back poly film. With slight pressure, touch buffed surface if cement is dry, cushion will stick to the surface when removed. If surface is still wet, cushion will put off with no apparent tack. 4.5.10 Over-Drying Precautions Cemented casings left in storag?e over 12 h should be rebuffed and re-cemented before further processing. 4.6 Mould Curing

4.5 Cementing 4.5.1 Before applying to the tyre, mix or agitate cements so that solids are evenly mixed with solvent.
4.5.2 In repair areas, all cement cans shall be kept closed except when in use. All containers and brushes for cement shall be kept clean. 4.5.3 All production spray cementing shall be done in a spray booth to remove solvent ties as rapidly as possible to prevent a fire hazard. Do not use electric motors in the spray booth unless they are explosion proof. 4.5.4 All cementing should be done at room temperature. 4.5.5 Spray booth exhaust fans should be connected to automatically turn on when the sprayer is activated. This ensures proper venting of fumes while spraying. 3

4.6.1 A40uldCure Tread System The mould cure tread system uses a steel or aluminum

1S 15724:2006 mould with a tread castor machined in it. Uncured rubber can be applied to tyres and the design moulded into place during cure. Uncured rubber can be applied by strip winding or slab extruders that provide the correct width and thickness to till the tread design in a mould. Rubber can also be purchased in a specified shape to apply around a tyre for mould cure. This is die size or camelback rubber. The following are three generally recognized mould cure retread builders being used today: a) Strip winders/strip stock, b) Factory die size (box) rubber, and c) Extruder/builders (die size extrusion). 4.7 Bead-to-Bead Retreading a) A system of retreading called bead-to-bead has been used. This system replaces not only the tread but also places a thin layer of rubber on the sidewalls extending all the way to the beads; b) The tyre receives the normal buff in the tread area and a lighter buff on the sidewall extending to the bead of the tyre. Sidewall bufllng is usually performed by a buffing machine with touch-up buffing being done by a hand buffer, The sidewall is buffed much lighter than the tread area and to a depth sufficient to remove oxidation and contaminated rubber. The tyre is then cemented and allowed to dry; and c) The tread is normally applied first with a die size or extruder/builder machine. The sidewall rubber is then applied, extending from the bead up to and over the tread stock in the shoulder. The sidewall stock is approximately 1.6 mm in thickness and is compounded to resist weather checking and to withstand extreme flexing in the sidewall. When using the bead-to-bead retread system in passenger car tyre retreading, any information that is removed from the sidewall of the tyre while butling must be replaced. This includes the type construction, the number and type of body cord material, inflation pressure and load carfying capacitjy. White sidewalls can also be replaced with this type of retread system. 4.8 Splicing a) Splicing of tread rubber is pne of the most essential manual operations in the rebuilding and reconditioning of a tyre. Its purpose is to hold the tread ends in perfect intimate contact from the time the cap is applied until it is filly moulded and cured. It should be emphasized that the best splice is still somewhat weaker than any other section of the tread rubber which has never been fresh cut and joined together again. However, a properly made splice is entirely adequate for all types of service and will show no indications of opening. The joining of the two ends of the stock itself or tack created by cements. The success of a splice is primarily dependent upon the proper method, workmanship and cleanliness; and b) Defective splices are rarely evident when the tyre is removed fi-omthe matrix, but show up atler some service and sometimes months after the tyre leaves the shop. hen a shop reports open splice trouble, the analysis of the problem may require a search of practices used several months before. These practices may have been changed deliberately or as a result of experience or suggestions made and adopted. This is a very important part of the analysis since there are times when a shop reports open splice trouble and a critical analysis of its present methods reveals nothing which would cause the ,defect. 4.9 Curing Mould Cure a) In a mouldcureplantor anycuringfacility,a good supply of steam or electricity is required; b) The lighting should be minimum 100 foot candles and makimum 200 foot caqdles (minimum 1076 lux and 2152 lUX,M@; c) Adequate space should be pkovided to ensure storing of built product, extra moulds and finished material; d) Proper moulds, specification charts, measuring calipers, rims, curing tubes and various tools are needed; and e) A sufilcient supply of compressed air is needed to maintain the specified pressure at the moulds. 5 MOULD CURE PROCESS a) Full Circle -- It uses inside curing rims and curing tubes. Some full circle systems use two-piece curing rims, a collapsible rim, or a segmented fivepiece ahun@n rim. Regardless, they all serve the same purpose, to hold pressure inside a tyre to create an upward push to achieve proper pressure in the mould tread are% b) In conjunction with the rim, a curing tube is used to hold the air and create the outward push and pressure. Most till circle moulds use one type or another rims and curing tubes; c) A tyre is loaded into the mould, usually atler the tube and rim are installed (except in the case of ring moulds, in which they are installed later). In most shops, a debagger or spreader is available to assemble the rim and bag in a tyre; d) Move the tyre to a bead aligner or a press to install the tyre in the mould, The tyre beads drowntogether to shrink the diameter. This is accomplished by

IS 15724:2006 h-awing them over the rim which pulls in the ;idewalls; e) rhe mould is placed over the tyre or drawn in by a :ylinder or press. The mould is locked and the ~eads are released to allow the tyre a relaxed position. Some systems, for instance, running a 1 radial tyre successfully in a full circle mould, draw a vacuum to shrink the size; Never pry a curing tube out of the tyre with a sharp instrument. Also do not use valve stems for handles to extractor carry the tube. Reach around the tube after spreading the tyre or use a debagger Curing tubes should be stored flat or on saddle hooks in a cool, dry arew Curing tube failure is expensive; mould blows are even more severe; and Circumferential tube splits can be caused from using tubes too small in larger tyres. 5.2 Final Inspection a) Inspect mould length carefully. Vents, which are much shorter in some areas than others may indicate improper fit and pressure. This is particularly true of steel belted radial tyres and is usually the cause for rejection; b) Inspect for tread elements that did not fill. If this is

o Fu~-iHrted moulds will contain the sidewalls from
expanding too far. Although, some systems require side plates to hold the sidewall from being over expanded and the curing tubes from blowing;

a

A stand with a centre locking device will maintain the sidewalls and set the cross-section. This allows the tyre to move enough to grow into the mould, but not enough to let the curing tube expand and explode. The distance between the rim and sidewall should be 3.2 mm to 6.4 nun. If the rim fits the mould exactly or too tightly, the tyre cannot move

and will causeimproperfit andcure;and
h) On ring moulds h also important to use the proper rim width and not to squeeze the cross-section so that tyre can move into the mould properly. Proper adjustment is important on a center locking device. If compressed too much, the shoulders will suffer from lack of pressure. 5.1 Curing Tubes a) Create the force between the rim and the tyre to move into the mould or cavity; b) The inside curing rim throat diameter should be as close to this dimension as possible; c) To receive maximum service life, curing tubes should be used with the same size tyres; d) Make sure to check the valve stem fittings for tightness;

causedby the plugged vents; note the matrix size and locationon the tread. If it is the result of the
laminationwhere the extruder ribbons did not fill the tread design,note the matrix identification. If subsequent tyres fkom this matrix show the same problem, promptly correct the building programrne; c) Inspect the edges of the retread rubber on both shoulders to ensure it has filled the mould but not overflowed onto the unbuffed surfaces of the sidewall. Overflow robber will not stick to unbuffbd surfaces and the loose rubber can start a tread separation. Overflow on casings can cause tyre failure due to cracking and d) Each retread must be inspected inside and out for evidence of processing problems or defects. Inspect the inside of the ~es while they are still hot to detect the presence of ply or belt separation or buckling.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standar& Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the ftee use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaff'u-rnedwhen such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by @erring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. TED 7 (461). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAUOF INDIANSTANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafw Marg, New Delhi 110002 website: www.bs.org.in Telephone~ 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional OffIces: Central Eastern : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 r 23378499.23378561 "12337 862~ 23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 f2832 9295,28327858 ~2832 7891,28327892

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus,IV Cross Road, CHENNAI600113 Western : Manakalay& E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE.BHOPAL.BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE.FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simw Printing Pros, Delhi

