•••••**••*•**•*• 



i&Sz 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
r Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 9160 (1979) : Guidelines for trimming of Indian cattle 
hides [CHD 17: Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied 
Products] 



i^fJlfi^»fcfrfr¥f f /m^KN^i^^T^>^II IS 



ZS&W I l>^V^^>>&fi<> 



>^XVVfeV£ 




• 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge" 



?TR rr^ fnj\ <sMMI | Wf ^ft ^TPTT ^f W ^RTT "f 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



^ *2*~* 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 9160' 1ST* 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



GUIDELINES FOR 
TRIMMING OF INDIAN CATTLE HIDES 



LUG 675'Ltfrj : 675*025-63 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

UANAK EtliAVAN. 9 ILAEIAIII'U Ail All /.AlAR MARG 

NEW DELHI I LtWJUj 




August I07P 



IS : 9160 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 
TRIMMING OF INDIAN CATTLE HIDES 

Leather Sectional Committee, GDC 16 

Chairman Representing 

Dr M, Santappa Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 

( GSIR ), New Delhi 

Members 

Shri R. K. Agaivwal Leather Research & Testing Laboratory, 

Directorate of Industries, Kan pur 

Shri K. S. Unny ( Alternate ) 
Shri Dilip Banerjee Indian Leather Technologists Association, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Sarkar ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. S. Dutta ( Alternate II ) 
Shri A. T. Basak Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 

Shri Nandy ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Bhattacharjee Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) 

Shri S. Sampath ( Alternate ) 
Shri O, P. Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri C. D. Vasantraj ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Ghosh Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri J. S. Bisht ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. H. Jadhav Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 

Shri S. P. Singaram ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Kannan Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri T. K. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Dr Z. Kotasek Bata India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. Legros ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. P. Madhavan Gordon Woodroffe & Co ( Madras ) Pvt Ltd, 

Madras 

Shri A. Sreepharan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. D. Parpia Leather Export Promotion Council, Madras 

Shri A. A. Rasheed ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS i 9160 - 1979 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Principal, College of Leather Department of Education, Government of West 

Technology, Calcutta Bengal, Calcutta 

Shri S. Raja The Tanner, Bangalore 

Shri G. Roy Choudhury Export Promotion Council for Finished Leather & 

Leather Manufactures, Kanpur 
Shri B. D r Sengupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R, Saha Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. C. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Sen State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. O. Sunderarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Sjnha Roy Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, 

Kanpur 
Shri C. R. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Uppal Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur 

Shri S. Jayaramak ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. M. Saxuna, Director General ,ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director { Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. N, Saha 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 



Raw Hide and Hide Trims Subcommittee, CDC 16 : 14 

Convener 
Dr S. C. Nandy Central Leather Research Institute ( CSIR ), Madras 

Members 
Agricultural Marketing Ad- Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur 
viser to the government op 
India 

Shri S. Jayaraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. S. Bhattacharjee Ordinance Factories, Kanpur 

Shri B. R. Dasgupta Bata India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Mitra ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. K. Duraivelan Indian Hide and Skin & Improvement Society, 

Madras 
Shri G. P. Ma dh a van Gordon Woodroffe & Co ( Madras ) Pvt Ltd, Madras 

Shri L. Gopalakrisbnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Nazar Mohamed Poineer Tanneries & Glue Works Pvt Ltd, Kanpur 

Shri Asif Nazar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Nayyar Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, 

Kanpur 
Shri Gaitonde ( Alternate ) 



IS : 9160 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR 
TRIMMING OF INDIAN CATTLE HIDES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 6 June 1979, after the draft finalized by the Leather 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 

0.2 In India about 75 to 80 percent of hides are available from fallen 
animals and the rest from slaughtered cattle. In big cities, cattle 
slaughtering takes place in the municipal slaughter houses but in other 
places cattle are slaughtered by local butchers. An examination of the 
cattle hides obtained from various sources and as marketed in different 
regions of the country reveals wide differences in shape and pattern of 
the flayed hides. In some cases, hides obtained are of bad shape due to 
faulty ripping cuts during flaying. Besides, hide appearance may differ 
depending on the extent of trimming. 

0.3 The Leather Sectional Committee decided to formulate these guide- 
lines with the object of cultivating consciousness among flayers, slaughter 
houses and raw hide merchants for following a standard trim pattern. 
Observance of such standard pattern for cattle hides would make the 
tanners' processing job easier by avoiding the trimming operation before 
soaking. The hide trimmings could be collected at source by raw hide 
dealers and marketed to the actual buyers, which some tanners have to 
throw away as waste. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from ISO 2820-1974 Method of trim for raw hides of cattle 
and horses published by International Organization for Standardization. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes guidelines for trimming of cattle hides. 

1.1.1 Goat and sheep skins are excluded from the scope of this 
standard. 

1.1.2 This standard does not lay down any specification of quality. 

3 



IS : 9160 - 1979 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 1640- 
1960* shall apply. 

3. TRIMMING 

3.0 General hide appearance will differ depending on the extent of 
trimming. Some times partial trimming is done by the curers. In other 
cases, hides after flaying are cured and marketed without any trimming. 
In the absence of any uniform practice being followed throughout the 
country, the final trimming is done in the tannery before the hides are 
put to soaking. From tanners' viewpoint, hide trimming means removing 
those parts of the hide which may create inconvenience during machine 
operations or during processing. 

3.1 Shape and Size of Cattle Hide — The shape and size of a hide 
depend on the breed of the animal. Consequently, the shape of the 
hide may somewhat differ in different cases. 

3.2 Trimming Pattern — The trimming pattern may vary slightly 
depending on the method of slaughter, for example humane stunning 
according to religious rites. The percentage of hide trimmed out may 
vary according to the breed of the cattle and the method of slaughter. 

3.2.1 Indian cattle hides should be trimmed to the pattern illustrated 
in Fig. 1. 

3.2.2 The head portion should be cut by joining the outline already 
present in the hide ( see Fig. i ) in case of hides from slaughtered 
animal. 

3.2.2.1 In case of fallen hides, the head portion should be cut 
straight behind the ear. 

3.2.3 Fore shanks should be trimmed across the knee just above the 
knee cup and hind shanks on the hoof ( see Fig. I ). 

3.2.4 Tail length should not be more than 10 cm from the tail rest, 

3.2.5 Cow bags, teats, etc, should be removed. In a freshly flayed 
hide ears, snout, lips, cow bags and teats should be removed prior to 
salting. 

3.2.6 After salting and before transportation or selling to the buyers, 
the other unwanted parts, such as head, fore and hind shanks and tail 
should be removed. 



•Glossary of terms relating to hides, skins and leather. 

4 



IS 1 91 60 -1979 




Note — This illustration is diagrammatic only and is not intended to illustrate 
any dimensions. 

Fig. 1 Trim Pattern for Cattle Hides 



3.3 Percentage of Hide to be Trimmed — For all practical purposes, 
about 85 percent of the hide mass can be had after proper trimming 
( see 3.2 ) for conversion into useful leather. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Baste Units 

Unit 



Quantity 

Length 

Mass 
Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 

temperature 

Luminous intensity 
Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

QUANTITY 

Plane angle 
Solid angle 

Derived Units 

Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Blectric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



metre 

kilogram 

second 

ampere 

kelvin 

candela 
mole 



Unit 

radian 
stcradian 



Unit 

newton 
joule 
watt 
weber 
tcsla 
hertz 
Siemens 



volt 
pascal 



Symbol 
m 

kg 
s 
A 
K 

cd 
mol 



Symbol 
rad 

sr 

Symbol 

N 

J 
W 

Wb 

T 

Hi 

S 

V 

Pa 



Definition 

I N = I kg.m/s* 
1 J - I N.m 

1 W - J J/s 

i wb - i v.s 

1 T - 1 Wb/m« 

t Hz - I c/» (s">) 
1 S - 1 A/V 
I V - I VV/A 

1 Pa = I N/ro» 



