( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard

REQUIREMENTS OF LOWINCOMEHOUSINGGUIDE
PART 1 URBAN AREAS

( First Revision J
Firs1 Rcprial NOVEMBER
1997

UDC

728.11 ( 026 )

0 BIS 1993 .

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Group 3 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI July 1993

Housing Sectional Committee,

CED 5

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized Housing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. by the

This standard was first published in 1978 on the recommendations of the Housing Ministry's Conference held in 1975. In this standard the requirements of that section of the population, who had very low family income and who really could not afford to build a house, was considered. Hence, the approach of this Guide had been directed towards housing for the low income and not for low cost housing as such which might be needed by those having high income compared to others. The attempt, therefore, was made in this Guide to find out how far low the requirements of housing could be brought down without jeopardizing certain safeties, namely, fire safely, health safety and structural safety. Though in this Guide certain modification have been attempted in the plannmg and general building requirements, requirements regarding structural safety, health safety and fire safety have been specified in accordance with the National Building Code. The revision of this standard has been taken up keeping in view the experience by various housing organizations in implementing this standard. gained over the years

IS 8888 : 1978 covers the need of only urban areas, though similar guidelines are necessary for rural areas and slum upgradation. It has, therefore, been decided to formulate `Guide for Requirement of Low Income Housing' in following parts to cater to the need of urban areas, rural areas, and slum settlements respectively: ( Part 1 ) Guide for requirements of low income housing : Part 1 Urban area ( Part 2 ) Guide for requirements of low income housing : Part 2 Rural area ( Part 3 ) Guide for requirements of low income housing : Part 3 Slum upgradation This ( Part 1 ) is the revised version of IS 8888 : 19'7'8. Other two parts are under preparation. revision the major modifications are as follow: a) Single room dwelling has been discouraged. b) Guidelines for water seal latrine has also been incorporated. c) Cluster planning approach has beeu recommended. It is generally recommended
on cost of construction. Therefore, and also the generally understood

In this

felt that planning and general building requirements would have an important bearing some relaxation vis-a-vis the provisions of National Building Code planning norms according to master plans available have been to achieve higher densities which are quite possible and achievable.

This Guide discourages plotted development since it would cost more in terms of land, except in the case of incremental housing and also site and services schemes. Instead, recommendations have been made for row housing and group housing on cluster planning approach. In so far as reduction in general building requirements are concerned, though it is difficult to justify all the relaxations made in their totality, it is felt that,in the interest of cost of construction, without some relaxations could be attempted'. This must be clearly undersacrificing any safeties mentioned, stood in the use of this Guide and to that extent comfort would be reduced. This Guide would be kept under constant review and revised provisions may have to be brought out from time to time based on experience resulting from implementation of the Guide. To get the maximum benefit out of these relaxations, mass housing schemes may be considered for such type of housing so that system building and other techniques would become possible, where necessary and cost of construction reduced. This Guide applies essentially to permanent structures except in the case of site and services scheme. For maintaining and preserving the environment so created by this housing, it is necessary that the authorities themselves assume the responsibility of management of the open spaces. In the event it is not always possible to do so, appropriate cooperative societies or other mechanisms could be attempted to see that the open spaces provided are utilized for the purpose for which they are meant. ( Continued on third cover )
i

IS 8888 ( Part I ) : 1993

Indian Standard

REQUIRBMENTS OF LOW INCOME HOUSING GUIDE
PARi ( 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard provides guidelines for the planning and general building requirements of low income housing for houses having a maximum plinth area of 40 rn%. 1 URBAN AREAS

First Revision /
b) drainage culvert, conduit, catch-pit, gully pit, chamber, gutter and like; and c) compound wall, gate, unstoreyed porch and portico, slide, swing, uncovered staircases, area covered by CHAHHJA and the like. 3.3 Density The residential density is expressed in terms number of dwelling units per hectare. of

1.2 The provisions of this Guide on layout planning of low income housing colonies are applicable to public and private agencies/ government bodies. 1.3 The provisions of this Guide on design and construction of buildings for low income housing in approved layouts are applicable to all private and public agencies. 2 REFE&ENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this Guide: IS No. SP 7 : 1983 12314 : 1937 National Title Building Code of India are necessary

Code of practice for sanitation with leaching pit latrines in rural communities Requirements of cluster ing for housing - Guide plann-

NOTE - Where such densities are expressed exclufacilities and open spaces sive of community provision and major roads ( excluding incidental open spaces 1, these will be net residential densities. Where these densities are expressed taking into consideration the required open space provision and community facilities and major roads, these would be gross residential densities on neighbourhood level, sector level or town level, as the case may be. and community The provision of open spaces facilities will depend on the size of the residential community. Incidental open spaces are mainly open spaces required to be left around and in between two buildings to provide light and ventilation. 4 PLANNING

4.1 Type of Development

13727 : 1993

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose definitions shall apply. 3.1 Cooking Alcove A cooking space having direct access from the main room without any inter-communicating door. 3.2 Covered Area Ground area covered immediately above the plinth level covered by the building but does not include the space covered by: a) garden, rockery, well and well structures, plant nursery, waterpool, platform round a tree, tank, fountain, bench CHABUTRA with open top and unenclosed on sides by walls and the like: 1 of this the following

The type of development for low income housing shall be plotted development/flatted development as row housing or group housing on cluster pattern ( see IS 13727 : 1993 ). 4.2 Layout Pattern 4.2.1 In the land to be developed, at least 75 percent of the plots may be of the size less than or up to 60 ma per dwelling unit in metropolitan towns and 100 me in other towns and hill areas. Remaining 25 percent of the plots may be more than 60 ma, however, no plot shall be more than 200 m2. In case of group housing or flatted development at least 75 percent units should have a plinth area ( excluding external circulation such as stairs,.lifts, lobbies etc ) up,to or not exceeding 40 m2. 4.2.2 The mix of plot of different sizes should have a wide range to accommodate the need, of lower income group. The project may include more than one site provided they are in the. same neighbourhood.

Is 8888 ( Part

1)': 1993
generally conform to
4.4 Density

4.2.3 The layout should the following land use:
Saleable

Land Under Each Use r_--___A-__._,

General i) Residential ii) Work places, schools institutions, shops, community places, etc
Non-Saleable

4.4.1 The density norms for plotted development and mixed development shall be as follows:
Type of Developmertt Range of Derlsities ( Gross )

Hill Area 35 percent

50 percent minimum 20 percent maximum

a) Plotted development 15 percent b) Mixed development i) Small towns ii) Cities

65-120 plots hectare 75-100 units per loo-125 units per 125-150 units per

per

Roads, pedestrial drains, paths, public and semiopen public spaces
NOTES

30 percent maximum

50 percent

iii,) Metropolitan
cities

dwelling hectare dwelling hectare dwelling hectare

4.4.1.1 In case of developments with per dwelling unit covered area of 15 ma maximum densities of 500 dwelling units per hectare shall be pemissible. 4.5 Height of Building The height of building shall not exceed 15 m.
NOTES 1 For buildings up to this height of 15 m, there is no need to provide lifts. 2 Housing for the low income group shall be preferably be ground and one. 3 Building for housing beyond 15 m in height should be restored to in exceptional circumstances and it should be governed by provisions laid down in SP 7 : 1983.

1 Any neighbourhood development should have provision for basic civic and community facilities, however, where such facilities are available in proximity the same could be considered and, in that case, the area under residential use could be increased correspondingly. 2 If land required under statutory provisions of master plaa/de%elopment plan is proportionately higher but serves larger city needs, readjustment of the iecommended la,nd use pattern can be considered. Such provisions should, however, be carefully reviewed by the planning authorities to keep them to the barest minimum levels.

4.3 Plot Area

4.6 Cluster Planning For size of open cluster, and open space, set backs, vehicular access, and pedestrian paths in cluster planning the provisions given in IS : 19 shall apply. 5 GENERAL BUILDING 5.1 General The provisions contained in Part III General; building requirements of SP 7 : 1983 shall apply excepting for the specific provisions made in this Guide. 5.2 Plinth The minimum height of the plinth shall be regulated on the basis of environmental and topographical condition and higher plinth height may be required in areas prone to flooding. 5.3 Size of Room 5.3.1 Habitable Room Every dwelling unit to be provided should. have at least two habitable rooms. Even if one room house is provided initially it should betcapable
2

4.3.1 Plot Size plot size with ground coverage not exceeding 75 percent, shall not be less than 40 ,ma in small and medium town and not less than 30 rnr in metropolitan cities. Plot sizes below 30 ma but not less than 15 ma may be permitted in case of cluster planning, however, in such cases the ground coverage and FSI shall be 100 percent and 2 percent respectively.
NOTES 1 In exceptional cases in metropolitan cities with population more than 1 million the size of plots may be brought down to 25 m* in cases of low income housing colonies located in congested areas as decided by the Authority. 2 A minimum of 25 percent of the plot size shall be left open without adversely affecting light and ventilation for habitable spaces and toilet. It shall not be made mandatory to leave set back on any side.

The minimum

REQUIREMENT@

4.3.2 The

Minimum Frontage

minimum 3-6 m in width

frontage

of the plot

shall be

Is`8888

( Part 1 ) : 1693

of adding a new second room in future. However, in case single room tenaments are required to be provided where future additions are not possible, the carpet area of the multipurpose single room, should be at least 15.5 ma. In a house of two rooms; first room shall not be less than 9.0 ma with minimum width of 2.5 m and second room shall be not less than 6.5 ma with a minimum width of 2.1 m provided the total area of both the rooms is not less than 15.5 ma. In incremental housing the bigger room shall always be the first room: -5.3.1.1 To facilitate incremental housing in case -of flatted development or otherwise, habitable space at mezzanine level may bi permitted. The minimum size of such a mezzanine floor should not be lesser than 6.5 and such a floor should occupy not more than 50 percent of the room area of which it is a part. Such a mezzanine floor should have appropriate openings to facilitate light and ventilation as per 5.5 of this -Guide. Minimum clear height below and above the mezzanine floor should be 2.4 and 2.1 respectively. As far as possible mezzanine floor should have direct ventilation from the external face of the buliding. Where this is not possible ventilation through main room can be allowed provided total area of openings in the main room is area of provided taking into consideration mezzanine floor. Such mezzanine floor may be accessible through the main room by a ladder, whose minimum angle with vertical plane should be 224". Height of the riser should be less than 250 mm. S.3.2 W.C. Bath Room
i) Size of independent

5.4 Miuimom Height The minimum height of rooms spaces as follow& a) b) c) d) Habitable room Kitchen Bath/W.C. Corridor 2*6 m 2.6 m 2.1 m 2.1 m shalt- be

5.4.1 In the case of sloping roofs, the aver&& height of roof for habitable rooms shaF1 be 2.6 m and the minimum height at eaves shall be 2.0 m. 5.5 Lighting and Ventilation The openings through windows, ventilators other ope&ngs for lighting and ventilation be as foI!ows: a) One-tenth of the room floor area for hot climate. b) One-sixth of the room floor area for hot climate. and shall dfywet-

NOTE-The windows and other openings shgll about on to open spaces either thrcugh arcas' left open within the plot or the front, side and rear spaces provided in the layouts which shall be treated as deemed to be sufficient for light and ventilation purposes.

5.6 Stairs The following criteria shall be internal individual staircase: adopted fox+

WC shall be 0.90 ma with minimum width of 90 cm,

ii) Size of independent bath room shall be 1.20 rnz with minimum width of 1 m, and iii) Size of combined bathroom and WC shall be 1.80 ml! with minimum width of 1 m. 5.3.3 PAtchen The size of a cooking alcove serving as cooking space shall not be less than 2.4 ma with a minimum width of 1.2 m. The size of individual kitchen provided in two-roomed house shall not be less than 3.3 ma with a minimum width of 1.5 m. 5.3.4 Balcony balcony, where provided shall not be more than l-2 m and it' shall not .project beyond the plot line and on roads or pathway. 3
The width of individual

a) Minimum width i) 2 storeyed - straight 0.60 m ii) 2 storeyed - winding O-75 m iii) 3 or more storeyed 0.75 m straight iv) 3 or more storeyed 0.90 m winding b) Riser 20 cm, Max c) Tread i) 2 storeyed 22.5 cm, Min ( see Note ) * ii) 3 storeyed or more 25 cm, Min
NOTE - This could bc reduced to 20 cm as the cleir' tread between perpends, with possibility of `opix~ riser as well as nosing and inclined riser to hA\;e an effective tread of 22'5 cm.

d) Head Room - The minimum clear head room shall be 2.1 m. 5.7 Circulation Area Circulation area on any floor including'staircase shall not exceed more than 8 m? 5.8 Water Seal Latrine 5.8.1 No building plan shall be approved and no building shall be deemed to have been

IS 8888 ( Part

1) :1993
pathway shall be 3 m. Where houses areaccessible from one side only pathway can be 2 m width. The maximum length of such path-ways should not be more than 60 m. 7 OTHER REQUIREMENTS 7.1 Requirements of fire safety, structural~ design, building services and plumbing services shall be as specified in SP 7 : 1983. 7.2 One water tap per dwelling units may beprovided, where adequate drinking water supply is available. If supply is inadequate, public hydrants shall be provided. In the absence of. piped water supply, hand pumps may be used for provision of water supply. 7.3 Recognising the need for informal use ofspace for shopping and informal occupation like road side repairs, pan shops etc, it is suggested that about l/4 of the total shopping area in a layout should be reserved for such informal uses to cater to the needs of low incomefamilies. 7.4 The infrastructural services shall be provi-, ded before the plots are handed over to individual owners. 8 SITE AND SERVICES SCHEMES

completed and fit for human occupation unless provision is made for water seal latrine. No dry latrine shall be allowed. Water seal latrines can also be provied on the basis of community toilets or shared toilets as per the recommendation given in IS 13727 : 1993. 5.8.2 Where leaching pits are used, it should be constructed within the premises of the households as it would be economical as well as facilitate their cleaning. However, where, due to space constraint, construction of pits within the premises may not be possible, pits may be constructed in places like lanes, streets and roads. 5.8.3 In case the pit is located under the road, street or foot path the inverted level of the pipe connecting the level of the pipe connecting the latrine pan with the pit shall be at least 1-l m below ground level or below the bottom of the water main existing within a distance of 3 m from the pits whichever is more. For construction of such pits IS 12314 : 1987 may be referred. 5.8.4 The water seal latrine should be properly maintained and kept in sanitary condition by the owner or the occupier. The contents of the septic tanks, soak pits, leach pits, etc should be periodically emptied. The leach pits should be cleaned only after 2 years of their being put out of service after they were full. 6 ROADS AND PATHWAYS 6.1 The area under roads and pathways in such housing projects should normally not exceed 20 percent of the total land area of the project. 6.1.1 Access to the dwelling units, particularly where motorised vehicles are not normally expected should be by means of paved footpaths with a right of way of 6 m and a pathway of 2 m only. The right of way should be adequate to allow for the plying of emergency vehicles and also for road side drains and plantation. 6.1.2 Where motorable access ways are not provided and pedestrian pathways are provided, the minimum right of way of such pedestrian

8.1The developed plot sizes shall be as specified
in 3.3. Services would have to be laid by the agency concerned as per the provisions of' SP 7 : 1983. In so far as roads and pathways are concerned they could also be in line with 6. 8.2 Site and services schemes shall provide the following: for-

a) The complete infrastructural needs for a parmanent housing, on the periphery of individual plot or a group/cluster plots. b) A service sanitary core in the plot, c) A skeletal structure of columns and roof or a developed plinth, and d) Permission to allow temporary construction on the plot. While provisions in 8.2(a) and 8.2(d) areessential in site and services projects provisions,. recommended in 8.2 (b) and 8.2 (c) are additional provisions dependiog upon affordability.

IS 8888 ( Part 1) : 1993

ANNEX A ( Foreword )
Housing Sectional
Cho:rman
Mini&y of Urban Development, New Delhi

Committee,

CED 51

hlcmbers
SIIRI AROMEII Iilivr PIIOF H. P. BABEL PR~F Snnrll SAHA ( Allernde SHRT H. U. BIJLANI
CJIIEF

Development Alternatives, New Delhi School of Planning and Architect, New Delhi

)
In personal capacity ( 1 Sndllna

FErrclace, Pancl~shcel New Delhi

Park,

Jvcrc

Al~CliITECT SENIOR ARCBITECT ( H B TP ) I (dftrrnafs CHIEF Ex~~~EER, AUTHORITY A~CIIITHC'T, AOTHORI'CY ( rl/lernafe ) GHIEB' &`OINEER ( D ) SIJPE.RI~;TENUINO ENC+INEER( dltemo~c ) ENOIXEERINQ MEMBER, DDA SHllI B. B. G.4HQ SHRI Y. K. GAII~ SHlll CHBTAN VAlDyA ( Ail~77ldC ) S~II~I 0. P. GAXYALI Dx N. K. JAIN ( .Ilternn!~ ) SHRI T. N. Gnpra SHRI HARBINUER SINQH SlllC~ II. x. .\oQRA\VAL ( dllernate ) SJll:I N. N._jAvl)EItai: SHlu P. nil. DESHPANI)E ( &fun&e) SHI~IM. N. JOOLEKAIL Srrllj S. I(, TANEJ.4 ( ilhrrlale j SHRI `I?. P. KALIAPPAN SIIRI J. ~CIUVANESWARAK , Alternate ) ~IISS NINA KAPOOR SIlRI A. K. M. KARlu SHRI K. R.S. KTIISLINAN

Central Public Works

Delhi-17

)

Department, and Area

) Maharashtra Central Public Housing Works Development New Delhi Authority, Bombay

Department,

Delhi Developmrnt Authority, Nelv Delhi Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee National Housing Bank, New Delhi National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi

Building Materials and Trchnology Promotion Cpuncil, New Delhi Public Works D~paltment, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur CIDCO Housing Tamil of Maharasbtm and Urban Nadu Slum
Ltd, New Bomba)

Development Clearance

Corporation, Mad:as

New Delhi

Board,

SHRI s. SELVANTUAN ( .1llemofe ) DR A. G. MADWAVA KAO SERI I. I<. MANX ( Allmale ) SHRI U. N. RATII Car, D. V. PAWALQIGAR ( Ahrnof~ SNRI K. S. SHINIWAsAN SI~RI M. M. MlsTRY ( &ttrnate ) SHRI Y. R. TANFJA,

BRIG N. KTXAR SHI~I K. M. N.~hrnr~n SHRI RAJA SINGH

The Mud Village Society, New Delhi Housing Department, Government of Meghalaya, Shillong Department of Science and Technology ( DST ), New Delhi Engineer-in-Chief's Branch Indian Structural Railway Construction Co Ltd, New Delhi Madras

( dhrnnte

)
Engineering Research Centre,

B. G. Shirke

& Co, Pune Organization, BIS New DeIhi

j
National Director Buildings General, ( Es-ojicio Member )

Director-in-Charge

( Civ En~g

)
Secretary
SRRIJ.

Joint

Director

K. PRASAD ( Civ Engg ), BIS

.Panel for Guide for Requirements
Convener
SB~I M. N. JOOLF:PAR

of Low Income Housing,

CED 51 : P3

Housing

and

Urban

Development.

Corporation,

New Delhi

Members slrnr D. P. SIXQI~ ( Ahrnale to Central Building Research Institut:, Roorkee National Housing Bank, New Delhi Town and Country Planning Organization, XIYW Delhi Building Materials Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi National Buildings Organization, New Delhi Vastu-shilpa Foundation, Ahmadabad
SHRI M. N. Joglekar ) SHRI II. B. GARY SHRI Y. K. GARB SHRI K. T. GURI.WIXI<I SHRI T. N. GEPTA SERI M. M. MISTILY SUPEIZINTEXDIXQ ENOINEEI: ( DESIGSS ) EXECUTIVK E~GI~;EER ( HQ) ( .lkrna~c
SHE?1 YAlIN PAKIlL-.;\

)
Central Public Works Department, P\`ew Delhi

In so far as specifications for low income housing are concerned, it is felt that !he National Building of specificatic>ns amogn which th: cheaper ones could bc chosen where desired. Code gives a variety any particular specification for this type of Therefore. no attempt is being m?:le to recommend housing; it is entirely LIP to the concerned agency to decide what specifications they would provide in relation to the total cost of the unit keeping in view the performance requirements. In preparing this Guide, planning it is pointed of low income out that housing this should colonies low be applicable by all private income to: and public either agencies by p,lblic agencies,

a) layout

b) designing and construction of building under government bodies or by private builders.

housing

This Guide provides for incremental housing. This would mean that in the case of housing for low income groups where the construction of a unit cannot b: completed at one time depending on the resource of the family they should be permitted to add another room at a later stage. For this purpose it has been felt necessary to give scope for incremental housin g which would permit both horizontal and vertical increment. It is felt that site and scrvlccs schemes should generally fdllow thy pattern of low income housing and therefore it IS suggested thLtt the plot size should be limited to 40 rns in normal areas and 25 m2 to Here again, 30 m2 for metrop.>litan cities and the services should b: provided by the public agencies. the road and pathways have been brought down to the level recommended for low income development. may decide to provide whercvcr possible a skeletal Having provided site and services, the authorities structure of four columns and a roof or a developed plinth so that the owner of the site could build up the rest depending upon his resources. Here again, the question of maintenance of open spaces and services would be of great importance and the public agency should take responsibility for the same. The experience and feedback of sites and services schemes, recently executed in country, have revealed that some of the schemes are designed only for providing developed plcts. They neither and social environment noi provide the optimum level of quality of living in terms of physical do they help beneficiaries of economically weaker section of the community by providing them benefits of differential pricing based on the principle of cross subsidization. Studies on other bchemes, particularly those financed by World Bank, have revealed that the provision of commercial and industrial land use in the schemes provides an integrated environment and helps in reducing the price of EWS plot to be within the affordable limits of weaker section. Besides this, integration of housing area with commercial and industrial land uses renders it to be self supporting and also offers the residents, facilities existing in the heart of the city. The minimum plot size should however be formulated, keeping in view, the built up spaces at the ground floor and the environment requisities. The committee responsible for the formulation of this Guide is given in Annex A.

.

Standard Mark

by the provisions of the Bureau qf Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Rurea? of lndian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

The use of the Standard

Mark is governed

Bwwkraf Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Sfundards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. . Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or editio'n by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doe : No. CED 51 ( 4927 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication `Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 1 323 3233841 76 17

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

{ 337 86 84 99,337 26,337 8.5 9120 61

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 1 60 20 38 25 43

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 { 235 23.5 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 Western
: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andhcri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

(ISam)

`urnn~~~rr~

.xll 01 ssa.uu

a[qe.~oloru

.,u~ c aq ([eqs .heMqled ueysapad qms 30 ~(BMJO @!r 103 ]ueam IOU XI? sLeA\qled uevlsapad a~aq~,
.-(

dq) `03

#U!MOIIOJ

2111

dlIu!lSqIlS

dJl4dlZ~dS

7S.Uj

`2'1'9

X??Vl2

`p

&?d

)

3(IIfl33NISflOH WU03NI MO? BO SLN3l+EIWfl?KRI C66T: (1:l-led) 8888 SI OLL T `ON LN3l4CIN5II/1I~

P66T AWU

