IS 15784 : 2007

Indian Standard
HEALTHCARE FACILITIES - PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS

res

11.020

� BIS 2007

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

September 2007

Price Group 7

Hospital Planning Sectional Committee. MHR 14

FOREWORD
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards. after the draft finalized by the Hospital PlanningSectional Committee had been approved by the Medical Equipment and Ho spital Planning Division Council. This is the formal recognition by the community of the social structure of a country and its responsibility for providing the means for keeping them well or restoring lost health. The healthcare facilitie s has been defined as an integral part of a social and medical organization. the function of which is to provide complete healthcare (both curative and preventive) to the population and whose outpatient services re ach out to the family in its home environment, The healthcare facilities are also a centre for the training of health workers and bio- social research. This definition holds true for big as well as small hospitals. It visualizes the healthcare facilities as one part of a comprehensive system of preventive and curative medicine and as an institution devoted not only to in-patient treatment but also to ambulatory and domiciliary care. In the recent past. there has been a mushrooming growth of substandard hospitals and nursing homes in India which necessitated the need of review of position in this regard and put forward suggestions for improving the quality of healthcare through standardization and accreditation of healthcare fac ilities . The situation. in fact. is even worse as these healthcare facilities and beds are distributed irrationally in different areas of the country. What is technically called 'Licensing of Ho spitals' is lacking altogether in India. Every healthcare facility has its own structural plan with the result that quality assurance of medical care is not in evidence. This necessitated in the development of this standard. This standard is env isaged to provide a national system of healthcare to common mankind. Healthcare facilities faithfully mirror the level of a nation's development. Healthcare facilities can be classified into various type s based on d ifferent criteria. This standard is intended to cater to the needs of secondary and tertiary level. healthcare facilities. speciality and superspeciality hospitals. While nothing prevents its application to other areas like nursing homes. paramedical services, etc. it is likely that these may also form our future projects specifying specific needs to particular application. This standard on healthcare facilities covers guidelines on access. assessment and continuity of care. patient rights and education. care of patient. management of medication. hospital infection control. continuous quality improvement. responsibility of management. facility management and safety. human resource management, information management system of healthcare facilities. The other standards published on the subject, which could also be relevant. are given in Annex A. The Composition of committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B.

,

IS 15784 : 2007

Indian Standard
HEALTHCARE FACILITIES - PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS
1 SCOPE Th is standard covers the essential requirements for healthcare fac ilities, secondary and tertiary level, speciality and superspeciality hospitals.
2 REFERENCES

The following standards contain provisions, which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreement based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition s of the standards indicated below:

life-stabil izing treatment and be then either admitted (if resources are available ) or transferred appropriately to another healthcare facil ity that has the resources to take care of such patients. Patients shall be accepted only if the healthcare facility can provide the required service. There shall be policies and procedures for managing patients during non-availability of beds. The staff shall be aware of these processes. 3.3 Healthcare facilities shall have an appropriate mechanism for transfer or referral of thos � patients who can not be treated there. There shall be policies and pro cedures for the tran sfer of stable and unstable patients to other appropriate healthcare facility and detailed procedures identifying staff responsible during transfer. The healthcare facilities shall give a summary of patient's condition. investigation reports and the treatment given at the time of transfer/referral to other healthcare facilities. 3.4 During admission the patient and/or the family members shall be educated to make informed decisions. It shall be ensured that the patients and/or family members are explained about the proposed care, expec ted results, possible complications and expected costs in a language that can be understood by them.

1itle Basic req uire me nts for hospital planning: (Part I) : 1988 Up to 3D-bedded hospitals (Part 2) : 1988 Up to lOO-bedded hospitals management ISIISO 1400 I : Environmental 2004 systems - Requirements with guidance for use ISIISO 15189 : Medical laboratory - Particular requirements for quality and 2003 competence Performance guidelines for quality 15195 : 2002 assurance in hospital services up to 3D-bedded hospitals 15461 : 2004 Performance guidelines for quality assurance in hospital serv ices up to 100-bedded hospitals 18001 : 2007 Occupational health and safety management systemsRequirements
IS No. 12433

3.5 Patients cared for by the healthcare facilities shall
undergo an established initial assessment. The hcalthcare fac ilities shall define the content of the assessments, time frame for completion of initial assessment & personnel who shall carry out these assessments.

3 ACCESS,ASSESSMENTAND CONTINUITY OF CARE

3.1 Patients shall be well informed of the services that
the healthcare facility can and cannot prov ide. This will facilitate in appropriately matching patients with the healthcare facility 's resources. The healthcare facilities clearly define and prominently display the services that it can provide and the staff is oriented to these services (see also 4.4) . 3.2 The healthcare facilities shall have a well-defined registration and admission process with standardized policies and procedures for outpatients. in-patients and emergency patients. Emergency patients shall receive

3.5.1 The initial assessment for in-patients shall be documented within 24 h Ofearlier as per the patient's condition or hospital policy including screening for nutritional needs . The initial assessment shall result in a documented plan of care , which includes preventive aspects of the care.
3.6 All patients cared for by healthcare facilities shall undergo regular reassessment. All patients shall be reassessed at appropriate intervals as per the need to determ ine their response to treatment and to plan further treatment or discharge. Staff involved in direct clinical care shall document all reassessments. 3.7 Laboratory services shall be provided as per the requirements of the patients. Scope of the laboratory services shall be commensurate with the services provided by the healthcare facilities and adequately

IS 15784 : 2007

qualified and trained personnel perform and/or supervisethe investigations.There shall be policies and proceduresto guide collection, identification, handling, safe transportation, processing and disposal of specimens. The laboratory results shall be available within a defined time frame and critical results shall be intimated immediately to the concerned personnel. Howeverlaboratory tests not available in the healthcare facilities shall be outsourced to other healthcare facilities based on their quality assurance system.
3.7.1 There shall be a documented established laboratory quality assurance programme (see ISIISO 15189). This programme shall address verification and validation of test methods, surveillance of test results, periodic calibration and maintenance of all equipments with documentation of corrective and preventive actions. 3.7.2 There shall be a documented established laboratory safety programme. This programme shall be integrated with the healthcare facility's safety programme . Written policies and procedures shall guide the handling and disposal of infectious and hazardous materials. Further the laboratory personnel shall beappropriately trained in safe practices and shall beprovided with appropriate safety equipment/devices .

Imaging personnel shall be provided with appropriate radiation safety devices. which shall be periodically tested and documented . Personnel shall be trained in radiation safety measures. The imaging signage shall be prominently displayed in all appropriate locations. Policies and procedures shall guide the safe use of radioactive isotopes for imaging services. 3.9 During all phases of care, there shall be an identified qualified person responsible for the patient. Care of patient shall be coordinated in all care settings within the healthcare facilities. Information about the patient's care and response to treatment shall be shared among medical, nursing and other care providers. The information shall be exchanged and documented during each staffing shift, between shifts and during transfers between units/departments. Patient's record(s) shall be available to the authorized care providers to facilitate the exchange of information. 3.10 The healthcare facilities shall have a documented discharge process and each patient's discharge process shall be planned. Policies and procedures shall exist for coordination of various departments and agencies involved in the discharge process (including medicolegal cases). Policies shall be in place for patients leaving against medical advice. A discharge summary shall be given to all the patients leaving the healthcare facility (including patients leaving against medical advice). 3.10.1 Healthcare facilities shall define the content of the discharge summary, which shall be provided to the patients at the time of discharge. This shall contain the reasons for admission. significant findings, diagnosis, the patient's condition at the time of discharge, information regarding investigation results. any procedure performed, medication, other treatment given and the name of the treating doctor. Discharge summary shall contain follow-up advice, medication and other instructions in an understandable manner and incorporate instructions about when and how to obtain urgent care.
3.10.2 In case of death, the summary of the case shall also include the cause of death and may be given to the next of kin on demand.

3.8 Imaging services shall be provided as per the requirementsofthe patients and shall comply with legal and other requirements. The scope of the imaging services shall be commensurate with the services provided by the healthcare facilities. Adequately qualified and trained personnel shall perform and/or supervise and interpret the investigations. 3.8.1 Policies and procedures shall guide the identification and safe transportation of patients to imaging services . Imaging results shall be available within a defined time frame. However. critical results shall be intimated immediately to the concerned personnel. Those imaging tests, which are not available in the healthcare facilities, shall be outsourced to other healthcare facility based on their quality assurance system.
3.8.2 There shall be a documented established quality assurance programme for imaging services. This programme shall address the verification and validation of imaging methods, surveillance of imaging results, periodic calibration and maintenance of all equipments with documentation of corrective and preventive actions.

3.10.3 The patient records shall contain a copy of the discharge/case summary.
4 PATIENT'S RIGHTS AND EDUCATION

3.8.3 There shall be a documented established radiation safety programme. This programme shall be integrated with the healthcare facility's safety programme. Written policies and procedures shall guide the handling and disposal of radioactive and hazardous materials.
2

4.1 Patient and family rights support individual beliefs, values and involve the patient and family in decisionmaking processes. These shall include respect for personal d ignity and privacy during examination, procedures and treatment, protection from physical abuse or neglect. treating patient information as

IS 15784 : 2007
confidential. refusal of treatment . informed consent before a nes thesi a . b lood a nd bl ood produ ct transfusion s and a ny invasive/h igh risk procedures/ treatment. Patient and family rights shall include information and conse nt befo re any research protocol is ini tiated and info r ma tio n on how to vo ice a complaint. It shall also include the expected co st of the treatment and acces s to his/her cli nical record s.

5.1.1 The care and treatment orders shall be signed . named, timed and dated by the concerned doctor and care plan shall he co untersigned by the clinic ian incharge of the patient within 24 h. Evidence based medic ine a nd cl inic al practice guide lines shall be ad opted for patient care wherever available. 5.2 Emergenc y services shall be guided by policie s. procedures and applicable laws and regulat ions and shall he documen ted. These shall also address handling of medico-legal cases and the patients shall receive care i n co nso na nc e with the pol ic ie s . Pol ic ies and pr ocedu res sha ll gu ide th e tr iage of patients for appropriate care. The staff shall be trained and familiar with the policies and procedures for care of emergency patients. All the patients who are admitted. discharged or transferred to other healthcare facility shall be docum ented.
5.3 The ambul ance serv ices shall be commensurate with the sco pe o f the se rv ices pr o vided by the healthcare facilities. Ther e shall he adequate access and s pa ce for the ambulance( s) . Th ese s ha ll be appropriately equipped and manned by the trained personnel. 5.3.1 There shall be a checklist of all the equipments and e merg ency medications. Equipments sha ll be checked on a da ily basis. Emergency medications shall be c hec ked dail y and prior to dispatch. The ambulan ce(s) sha ll ha ve a proper co mmunication syste m

4.1.1 The health care facilities shall protect pat ient 's and family's right s du ring care. Th ese right s shall be documented and communicated to patients and families in a format and language that they ca n understand . 4.1.2 The healthcare facil ity's leaders shall protect patient's and family 's right s. The staff shall be aware of their respon sibility in protectin g these rights. Violation of patient and family rights shall be recorded. reviewed and corrective/preventive measure s taken . 4.2 There shall be a docum ented pro cess for obtaining patient and/or family 's con sent for informed deci sion making. about their care . This shall also include ge neral consent at the time of patient's admi ssion.
Patient and/or his famil y memb ers shall be informed of the scope of such general con sent. The healthcare facili ties shall list those situations wher e informed consent is required . Informed co nse nt shall include information on risks, benefits, alternatives and as to who will perform the requisite proc edure . in a language that they can understand. The policy shall describe who can g ive co nse n t wh e n pat ient is inc a pa b le o f independent decision-making. 4.3 Patients and famil ies shall have a right to informat ion and education about the ir healthcare needs in a language and manner that is understood by them . 4.3.1 This shall include edu cation about the safe and effective use of medication and their potential side effects; diet and nutrition and immunizations.

5.4 There shall be documented policies and procedures for the care of pat ients requiring cardio-pulmonary resusc itation. The se pol icies and procedures shall be used uniformly throughout the healthcare facility.
5.4.1 All the staff providing patient care shall be trained and periodically updated in card io -pulmonary resuscitation. The events during a cardio-pulmonary resuscitation shall be recorded. 5.4.2 A post-e vent analy sis of all cardiac arrests shall be done by a mult idisciplinary committee. Corrective and preventive measures shall be taken based on the post -event analys is

4.3.2 These shall also include education about their specific disease process, complications and prevention strategies. about preventing infections and shall be in a language and format that they can understand.
4.4 Patient and families shall have a right to informat ion on expected costs . There shall be a uni form pric ing policy in a given setting (outp atient and ward category). The tariff list shall be made availabl e to the patien t's family. They shall be edu cated about the financial implicat ions when there is a change in the pat ient cond ition or treatment se tting.

5 CARE OF PATIENTS
5.1 The care of pat ients shall be uniform in different treatment settings and shall be guided by the applicable laws. rules and regulations.

5.5 There shall be documented pol icies and procedures to define ration al use of blood and blood products . The applicable laws and regulations shall go vern the transfusion serv ices. The conse nt shall be obtained for don ation and transfusion of blood and blood produ cts . The staff shall be trained to implement the policies and procedures. Transfusion react ions shall be analyzed for preventive and corrective actions . 5.5.1 The healthcare facilities shall have programme to educate the patient and the family regarding blood don ation .

3

IS 15784: 2007
5", There shall be documented policies and procedures to guidethe care of patients in the intensive care and high dependency units. The healthcare facilities shall have documented admission and discharge criteria for these units. The staff shall be trained to apply these criteria.
immunization and safe parenting and this shall be documented in the medical record. 5.10 There shaIl be policies and procedures to guide the care of patients undergoing moderate sedation. Competent and trained persons shall perform sedation. The person administering and monitoring sedation shall be different from the person performing the procedure/surgery. 5.10.1 Intra-procedure monitoring shaIl include at least the heart rate: cardiac rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure. oxygen saturation, and level of sedation . Patients shall be monitored after sedation . Criteria shall be specified and used before transferring out the patient from the recovery area. 5.10.2 Equipment and manpower shall be available to rescue patients from a deeper level of sedation than that intended .

5.6.1 Adequate staff and equipment shall be available
in intensive care and high dependency units. A quality assurance programme and infection control practices shall be implemented. The policies shaIl have defined procedures to handle situation of bed shortage in these units.

5.6.2The unique needs of end of terminaIly ill patients shall be identified and cared for.
5.7 There shall be documented policies and procedures
for the care of vulnerable patients (elderly, physically and/or mentally challenged and children). These shall be in accordance with the prevailing laws and the national and international guidelines. 5.7.1 Care shall be organized and delivered in accordance with the policies and procedures. The healthcare facilities shall provide for a safe and secure environment for this vulnerable group. Staff shaIl be trained to care for this vulnerable group.

5.11 There shall be documented policies and
procedures to guide the administration of anesthesia. All patients for anesthesia shall have a pre -anesthesia assessment by a qualified individual, which shall result in formulation of documented anesthesia plan.

5.11.t An immediate preoperative re-evaluation shall
be carried out and documented. The anesthesiologist shall obtain informed consent for administration of anesthesia. During anesthesia, monitoring includes regular and periodic recording of heart rate , cardiac rhythm, respiratory rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, airway security and potency and level of anesthesia.

5.7.2A documented procedure shall exist for obtaining
informed consent from the appropriate legal representative. 5.8 There shall be documented policies and procedures for the care of high risk obstetrical patients. The healthcare facilities shall define and display whether high risk obstetrical cases can be cared for or not. Persons caring for high risk obstetrical cases shall be trained and competent.

5.11.2 Each patient's post-anesthesia status shall be
monitored and documented. A qualified individual shall apply defined criteria to transfer the patient from the recovery area. AIl adverse anesthesia events shall be recorded and monitored 5.12 There shall be documented policies and procedures to guide the care of patients undergoing surgical procedures. 5.12.1 Surgical patients shall have a preoperative assessment and a provisional diagnosis documented prior to surgery. The treating surgeon shall obtain informed consent prior to the procedure. There shaIl be documented policy and procedure to prevent adverse events like wrong site, wrong patient and wrong surgery. Persons qualified by law shall be permitted to perform the surgical procedures. 5.12.2 A brief operative note shall be documented prior to transfer out of patient from recovery area. The operating surgeon shall also document the postoperative plan of care. There shall be a quality assurance program followed for the surgical services, which includes surveillance of the operation theatre

5.8.1 The healthcare facilities caring for high -risk
obstetrical cases shaIl have the facilities to take care of neonates of such cases. High-risk obstetrical patient's assessment shall also include maternal nutrition. 5.9 There shall be documented policies and procedures for the care of pediatric patients. The healthcare facilities shall define and display the scope of its pediatric services. 5.9.1 The policy for care of neonatal patients shaIl be in consonance with the national/international guidelines and those who care for children shall have age specific competency. There shaIl be provisions for special care of children including facility for breast feeding. 5.9.2 The patient shall be assessed for nutrition, growth, psychosocial and immunization status.

5.9.3 There shall be policies and procedures to prevent
child/neonate abduction and abuse. The children's family members shall be educated about nutrition:

4

IS 15784 : 2007
environment and monitoring of surgical site infection rates. 5.13 There shall be documented policies and procedures for the care of patients under restraints (physical and/or chemical). Reasons for restraints shall be documented and such patients shall be more frequently monitored. The staff shall receive training and periodic updating in control and restraint techniques . 5.14 There shall be documented policies and procedures for the management of pain. The healthcare facilities shall respect and support the appropriate assessment and management of pain for all patients. The patient and family shall be educated on various pain management techniques. 5.15 There shall be documented policies and procedures for rehabilitative services during hospitalization and after discharge. These services shall be commensurate with the healthcare facility's requirements and shall be provided by a multidisciplinary team. unique needs of such patient and family. These shall also incl ude sensitively addressing issues such as autopsy and organ donation. The staff shall be educated and trained in end-of-life care . 6 MANAGEMENT OF MEDICATION

6.1 There shall be documented policies and procedures
to gu ide the healthcare facility of pharmacy services and usage of medication. The policies and procedures shall comply with the appl icable laws and regulations. A multidisciplinary committee shall guide the formulation and implementation of these policies and procedures.

6.2 There shall be a hospital formulary developed by
the multidisciplinary committee. There shall be a defined process for acquisition of these medications and a process to obtain medications not listed in the formulary. 6.3 There shall be documented policies and procedures for storage of medication. Medications shall be stored in a clean , well-lit and ventilated environment. Sound inventory control practices shall guide storage of the medications and shall be protected from loss or theft. 6.3.1 Sound alike and look alike medications shall be stored separately and there shall be a method to obtain medication when the pharmacy is closed. Emergency medications shall be available all the time and replenished in a timely manner when used. 6.4 There shall be documented policies and procedures for prescription of medications. The healthcare facility shall determine who can write orders. The orders shall be written in a uniform location in the medical records , which shall be clear, legible, dated, named and signed. There shall be documented and implemented policy on verbal orders. 6.4.1 The healthcare facilities shall define a list of highrisk medication, which shall be verified prior to dispensing. 6.5 There shall be documented policies and procedures to guide the safe dispensing of medications. These policies shall include a procedure for medication recall.

5.16 There shall be documented policies and
procedures to guide all research activities in compliance with national and international guidelines.

5.16.1 The healthcare facility shall have an ethics
committee to oversee all research activities. The committee shall have the power to discontinue a research trial when risks outweigh the potential benefits.

5.16.2 Patient's informed consent shall be obtained
before entering them in research protocols. They shall be informed of their right to withdraw from the research at any stage and also of the consequences (if any) of such withdrawal. The patients shall be assured that their refusal to participate or withdrawal from participation, will not compromise their access to the healthcare facility's services.

5.17 There shall be documented policies and
procedures for nutritional therapy, assessment and reassessment.

5.17.1 Patients shall receive food according to their clinical needs and shall have a written order for the diet. Nutritional therapy shall be planned and provided in a collaborative manner preferably by a dietician. When families provide food, they shall be educated about the patient's diet limitations. Food shall be prepared, handled, stored and distributed in a safe manner. 5.18 There shall be documented policies and
procedures to guide the end-of-life care. These policies and procedures shall be in consonance with the legal requirements and shall address the identification of the

6.5.1 Labelling requirements shall be documented and
implemented by the healthcare facility. Expiry dates shall be checked prior to dispensing. 6.6 There shall be defined and documented procedures for medication administration and must be administered by those who are permitted by law to do

so.
6.6.1 Prepared medication shall be labelled prior to preparation of a second drug and Patient shall be identified prior to administration. Medication, dosage,

5

IS 15784 : 2007
route andtiming shall be verified from the order prior to administration, which shall be documented. 6.6.2 There shall be documented policies and procedures to govern patient's self-administration of medications and also patient's medications brought from outside the healthcare facilities. 6.7 Patients and family members shall be educated about safe and effective medication and food-drug interactions. 6.8 Patients shall be monitored after medication administration, which shail be documented. Adverse drug events shall be defined & reported within a specified time frame. These adverse drug events shall be collected and analyzed. Policies shall be modified to reduce adverse drug events when unacceptable trends occur. 6.9'There shall be documented policies and procedures to guide the use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. These policies shall be in consonance with local and national regulations. A proper record shall be kept of the usage, administration and disposal of these drugs , which shall be handled by appropriate personnel in accordance with policies. 6.10 There shall be documented policies and procedures to guide the usage of chemotherapeutic agents. Chemotherapy shall be prescribed by those who have the knowledge to monitor and treat the adverse effect of chemotherapy and shall be prepared and administered by qualified personnel. Chemotherapy drugs shall be disposed off in accordance with legal requirements. 6.11 There shall be documented policies and procedures to govern usage of radioactive or investigational drugs. These shall be in consonance with the laws and regulations. These policies and procedures shall include the safe storage. preparation. handling. distribution and disposal of radioactive and investigational drugs . Further staff. patients and visitors shall be educated on safety precautions. 6.12 There shall be documented policies and procedures to guide the use of implantable prosthesis. These polic ies and procedures shall govern procurement and usage of implantable prosthesis. Selection of implantable prosthesis shall be based on sc ientific cri teria and internationally recogn ized approvals. The batch and serial number of the implantable prosthesis shall be recorded in the patient's medical record and the master logbook. 6.13 There shall be documented policies and procedures to govern/guide procurement. handling. storage. distribution, usage and replen ishment of medical gases . These shall address the safety issues at all levels and appropriate records shall be maintained in accordance with the policies. procedures and legal requirements.

7 HOSPITAL INFECTION CONTROL
7.1 The healthcare facil ities shall have a well -designed. comprehensive. coordinated and an effective documented infection control programme, aimed at reducing/eliminating risks to patients. visitors and providers of care. 7.1.1 The healthcare facilit y shall have a multidisciplinary infec tion control committee. an infec tion control team shall have designated and qualified infection control nurse(s) for this activ ity. The infection control programme shall be documented. 7.2 The healthcare facilities shall have an infection control manual, which is periodically updated. The manual shall identify the various high-risk areas. It shall outline methods of surveillance in the identified highrisk areas and shall focus on adherence to standard precautions at all times. The manual shall also include equ ipment cleaning and sterili zation practices. There shall be an appropriate antibiotic policy. which shall be established and implemented. 7.2.1 The manual shall also include laundry and linen management processes. kitchen sanitation and food handling issues. Engineering controls to prevent infections and mortuary practices and procedures shall be included as appropriate to the healthcare facilit ies. 7.3 The infection control team shall be responsible for surveillance activities in identified areas of the healthcare facilities and these surveillance activ ities shall be appropriately directed towards the identified high -risk areas. Collection of surveillance data shall be an ongoing process. Verification of data shall be done on regular basis by the infection control team. In cases of notifiable diseases. information (in relevant format) shall be sent to appropriate authorities. Scope of surveillance activities shall incorporate tracking and analyzing of infection risks. rates and trends. 7.4 The healthcare facilities shall take actions to prevent or reduce the risk of healthcare facility's associated infection in patients and employees. The healthcare facilities shall monitor urinary tract, resp iratory tract, intra-vascular device and surgical site infections. 7.4.1 Appropriate feedback regarding healthcare facility's associated infection rates shall be provided on regular basis to medical and nursing staff. 7.5 Proper facilities and adequate resources shall be provided to support the infection control programme. Facilities like hand washing shall be accessible to healthcare providers in all patient care areas and

I

6

IS 15784 : 2007 compliance with proper hand washing shall be monitored regularly . 7.5.1 Isolation/barrier nursing facilities shall be available and adequate gloves. masks. soaps. and disinfectants shall be available and used correctly . 7.6 The healthcare facilities shall have a documented procedure to take appropriate actions to control outbreaks of infections and handling such outbreaks. This procedure shall be implemented during outbreaks. After the outbreak is over appropriate corrective actions shall be taken to prevent recurrence. 7.7 There shall be documented procedures for sterilization activities in the healthcare facilities and there shall be adequate space available for sterilization activities. Regular validation tests for sterilization shall be carried out and documented. There shall be an established recall procedure when breakdown in the sterilization system is identified. 7.8 Statutory prov isions with regard to bio-medical waste management shall be complied with. Prescribed authority for the management and handling of biomedical waste shall authorize the healthcare facility. Proper segregation and collect ion ofbio-medical waste from all patient care areas of the hospital shall be implemented and monitored. The healthcare facilities shall ensure that bio-medical waste shall be stored and transported to the site of treatment and disposal in proper covered vehicles within stipulated time limits in a secure manner. Bio-medical waste treatment facility shall be managed as per statutory provisions (if in-house) oroutsourced to authorized contractor(s). Requ isite fees. documents and reports shall be submitted to competent authorities on stipulated dates. 7.8.1 Appropriate personal protective measures shall be used by all categories of staff handling bio-medical waste. 7.9 The infection control programme shall be supported by the healthcare facility 's management and includes training of staff and employee's health. Healthcare facility's management shall make available resources required for the infection control programme. The healthcare facility shall regularly earmark adequate funds from its annual budget in this regard. 7.9.1 The healthcare facilities shall conduct regular preinduction training for appropriate categories of staff before joining concerned department (s). It shall also conduct regular 'in-service' training sessions for all concerned categories of staff at least once in a year. Appropriate pre-and post-exposure prophylaxis shall be provided to all concerned staff members. 8 CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT assurance and cont inuous improvement programme developed. implemented and maintained by a multidisciplinary committee (see IS 15195 and IS 15461).

8.1.1 There shall be a designated individual for coordinating and implementing the quality assurance and continuous improvement programme. which shall be comprehensive and shall cover all the major elements related to quality assurance and risk management. The designated programme shall be communicated and coordinated amongst all the employees of the healthcare facilities through proper training mechanism . 8.1.2 The quality assurance programme shall be reviewed at predefined intervals and opportunities for improvement shall be identified. This shall be a continuous process and updated at least once in a year. 8.2 The healthcare facilities shall identify key indicators to monitor the clinical structures, processes and outcomes. which shall include appropriate patient assessment, diagnostics services; safety and quality control programmes and invasive procedures. Further monitoring shall include adverse drug events, use of anesthesia. use of blood and blood products, availability and content of medical records. infection control activities and clinical research.
8.3 The healthcare facilities shall identify key indicators to monitor the managerial structures, processes and outcomes which shall include procurement of medication essential to meet patient needs, reporting of activ ities as required by laws and regulations. risk management and utilization of facilities. Further monitoring shall include patient satisfaction, employee satisfaction , adverse events. data collection to support further study for improvements and data collection to support evaluation of the improvements and its evaluation. 8.4 The healthcare facilities shall have defined sentinel events and established processes for intense analysis of such events . Sentinel events shall be intensively analyzed when they occur and corrective and preventive actions taken. based on the findings of such analysis . 8.5 The quality improvement programme shall be supported by the healthcare facility's management, which shall make available adequate resources required for quality improvement programme. The healthcare facilities shall earmark adequate funds form its annual budget in this regard. Further appropriate statistical and management tools shall be applied whenever required. 8.6 There shall be an established system for audit of patient care services. For this medical staff participates in the system. The parameters to be audited shall be defined by the hea1thcarefacilities. Patient and clinician

8.1 There shall be a documented structured quality
7

IS 15784: 1lX17
anonymity shall be maintained. All audits shall be documented and remedial measures shall be implemented. 9 RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANAGEMENT 9.1 There shall be documented and well-defined responsibilities of the management with an organogram. Those responsible for governance shall appoint the senior leaders in the healthcare facilities and shall support the quality improvement plan. 9.1.1 The healthcare facilities shall comply with the applicable legislations and regulations . Those responsible for governance shall address the healtheare facility's social responsibility. 9.2 The services provided by each department shall be documented. Each programme. service. site or department in the healthcare facility shall have effective leadership and scope of services shall be defined. Administrative policies and procedures for each department shall be maintained. 9.2.1 Departmental leaders shall be involved in qual ity improvement 9.3 The healthcare facilities shall be managed by the leaders in an ethical manner. The leaders shall make public the mission statement of the healthcare facilities and shall establish its ethical management. 9.3.1 Thehealthcarefacilitiesshall disclose its ownership' & shall honestly portray the services. which it can and cannot provide. The healtheare facilities shall accurately bill for its services based upon a standard billing tariff. 9.4 A suitably qualified and experienced individual shall head the healthcare facilities. The designated individual shall have requisite and appropriate administrative qualifications and experience. 9.4.1 Leaders shaII ensure that patient safety aspects and risk management issues shall be an integral part of patient care and hospital management. 9.4.2 The healthcare facilities shall have an interdisciplinary group assigned to oversee the hospital wide safety programme. 9.4.3 The scope of the programme shall be defined to include adverse events ranging form 'no harm' to 'sentinel events'. laws. byelaws and requisite facility inspection requirements. 10.1.1 The management shall be conversant with the laws and regulations and shall know their applicability to the healthcare facilities. Beside this management shall regularly update any amendments in the prevailing laws of the land and shall ensure implementation of these requirements. There shall be a mechanism to regularly update licenses/registrations/certifications. 10.2 The healtheare facility's environment and facilities shall operate to ensure safety of patients. their families, staff and visitors (see ISIISO 14(01). 10.2.1 Up-to-date drawings shall be maintained which detail the site layout. floor plans and fire escape routes . The provision of space shall be in accordance with the available literature on good practices. Indian Standards or International Standards (see Annex A). enacted legislation (wherever applicable) and directives from government agencies. There shall be a documented operational and maintenance (preventive and breakdown) plan. 10.2.2 There shall be designated individuals responsible for the maintenance ofall the facilities and maintenance staff shall be conbM:lablcrouad the clock for emergency repairs. Response times shall be monitored from reporting to inspection and implementation of corrective actions.

10.3 The healthcare facilities shall have a program for clinical and support service equipment management in accordance with its services and strategic plan. A collaborative process shall select equipment and all equipment shall be inventoried and proper logs are maintained as required. 10.3.1 Qualified and trained personnel shall operate and maintain the clinical and support service equipments. These equipments shall be periodically inspected and calibrated for their proper functioning. 10.3.2 There shall be a documented operational and maintenance (preventive and breakdown) plan . 10.4 The healthcare facil ities shall have provisions for safe water. electricity. medical gases and vacuum systems. Potable water and electricity shall be available round the clock with alternate sources. which shall be tested on regular basis.
10.4.1 There shall be a maintenance plan for piped medical gas and vacuum installation. 10.5 The healthcare facilit ies shall plan for handling community emergencies. epidemics and other disaster and shall identify potential emergencies. The healthcare facilities shall have a documented disaster management system. 8

9.4.4 Management shall ensure implementation of systems for internal and external reporting of system and process failures and shall provide resources for proactive risk assessment and risk reduction activities.
10 FACILTY MANAGEMENT AND SAFETY 10.1 The healthcare facil ities shall be aware of and shall comply with the relevant rules and regulations.

IS 15784 : 2007 10.5.1 Provision shall be made for availability of medical supplies, equipment and materials during such emergencies and hospital staff shall be trained in the hospital's disaster management plan. This plan shall be tested at least twice in a year. 10.5.2 The healthcare facilities shall have documented plans for fire and non-fire emergencies with plans for early detection, abatement and containment of the same. 10.5.3 The healthcare facilities shall have a documented safe exit nlan in case of fire and non-fire emergencies and staff shall be trained for their role in case of such emergencies. Mock drills shall be held at least twice in a year. 10.5.4 The healthcare facility shall have a defined policy on smoking. 10.6 The healthcare facilities shall have a documented disaster management plan for handling community emergencies, epidemics and disaster. The staff shall be trained in the disaster management plan. The plan shall be tested at least twice a year. 10.7 The healthcare facilities shall have a well defined and documented plan for management of hazardous materials and such materials shall be identified within the healthcare facilities. The healthcare facilities shall implement processes for sorting, handling, storage, transporting and disposal of hazardous material. 10.7.1 Requisite regulatory requirements shall be met in respect of radioactive materials. There shall be a plan for managing spills of hazardous materials and staff shall be educated and trained for handling such materials. 10.8 The healthcare facilities shall have a safety committee to identify the potential safety and security risks. This committee shall coordinate development, implementation, and monitoring of the safety plan and policies (see IS 1800 I). 10.8.1 Facility inspection rounds, to ensure safety, shall be conducted at least twice in a year in patient care areas and at least once in a year in non-patient care areas. Inspection reports shall be documented and corrective and preventive measures shall be undertaken. Further there shall be a safety education programme for all staff. 11 HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 11.1 The healthcare facilities shall have a documented system of human resource planning. n.l.1 The healthcare facilities shall maintain an adequate number of staff to meet the care, treatment and service needs of the patient as per the norms wherever available
9

(for example, IS 12433 (Parts I and 2). The required job specifications and job description shall be well defined for each category of staff. The healthcare facilities shall verify the antecedents of the potential employee with regards to criminal/negligence background.

11.2 The staff joining the healthcare facilities shall be socialized and oriented to the hospital environment. Each staff member, employee, student and voluntary worker shall be appropriately oriented to the healthcare facility's mission and goals. They are also made aware of hospital wide policies and procedures as well as relevant department, unit, service, programmer's policies and procedures. Further each staff member shall be made aware of his/her rights and responsibilities. n.2.1 All employees shall be educated with regard to patient's rights and responsibilities and shall be oriented to the service standards of the healthcare facilities. 11.3 There shall be a documented ongoing programme for professional training and development of the staff. Training shall also be given when job responsibilities change/new equipment is introduced. There shall be a feedback mechanism for assessment of training and development programme. 11.4 Staff members, students and volunteers shall be adequately trained on specific job duties or responsibilities related to safety. All staff shall be trained on the risks within the hospital environment. 11.4.1 Staff members shall be able to demonstrate and take actions to report, eliminate/minimize risks. Staff members shall be made aware of procedures to follow in the event of an incident. Reporting processes for common problems, failures and user errors shall exist. n.5 There shall be a documented appraisal system for evaluating the performance of an employee as an integral part of the human resource management process. The employees shall be made aware of the system of appraisal at the time of induction. Performance shall be evaluated based on the performance expectations described in job description. The appraisal system shall be 'used as a tool for further development. Performance appraisal shall be carried out at pre-defined intervals and shall be documented.

11.6 The healthcare facilities shall have a welldocumented disciplinary procedure and shall have a written statement of the policy of healthcare facilities in place. The disciplinary policy and procedure shall be based on the principles of natural justice.
n.6.1 The policy and procedure shall be known to all categories of employees of the healthcare facilities and the disciplinary procedure shall be in consonance with

IS 15784 : 2007 the prevailing laws. There shall be a provision for appeals in all-disciplinary cases. 11.7 There shall be a grievance handling mechanism in the healthcare facilities. The employees shall be aware of the procedure to be followed in case they feel aggrieved. The redress procedure shall address the grievance. Actions shall be taken to redress the grievance. 11.8 The healthcare facilities shall address the health needs of the employees. A pre-employment med ical exam ination shall be conducted on all the employees. Health problems of the employees shall be taken care of in accordance with the healthcare facility's policy . Regular health checks of staff dealing with direct patient care shall be done atleast once in a year and the findings/results shall be documented. Occupational health hazards shall be adequately addressed. 11.9 There shall be a documented personal record for each staff member. Personal files shall be maintained in respect of all employees. The personal files shall contain personal information regarding the employee's qualification, disciplinary background and health status. All records of in-service training and education shall be contained in the personal files. Personal files shall contain results of all evaluations. 11.10 There shal l be a process for collecting, verifying and evaluating the credentials (ed ucatio n, registration, training and experience) of medical professionals permitted to provide patient care without supervision. 11.10.1 Medical professionals permitted by law, regulation and the healthcare facilities to provide patient care without supervision shall be identified. The education, registration, training and experience of the identified medical professionals shall be documented and updated periodically. All such information pertaining to the medical professionals shall be appropriately verified whenever possible and necessary. 11.11 There shall be a process for authorizing all medical professionals to admit and treat patients and provide other clinical servi ces commensurate with their qualifications training. registration and as per the laid down policies and authori zation procedures of the healthcare faci lities . The req uis ite se rvices to be pro vided by the medi cal pro fession als shall be known to them as well as the various departments/units of the hospital. 11.12 There shal l be docum ented process for collecting, ve rify ing and eva luat ing the crede ntia l (education. registration. training and experience ) of nursing staff. It shall be updated periodically. All such information pertaining to the nursing staff shall be appropriately verified wherever possible and necessary. 10 11.13 There shall be a process to identify job responsibilities and make clinical work assignments to all nursing staff members commensurate with the qualifications, training and registration and any other regulatory requirements. The services provided by nursing staff shall be in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations. The requisite services to be provided by the nursing staff shall be known to them as well the various departments/units of the healthcare facility. 12 INFORMATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 12.1 There shall be documented policies and procedures to meet the information needs. These shall be in compliance with the prevailing laws and regulations. 12.1.1 All information management and technology acquisitions shall be in accordance with the policies and procedures. The healthcare facilities shall contribute to external databases in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations. 12.2 The healthcare facilities shall have processes in place for effective management of data. Formats for data collection shall be standardized. Necessary resources shall be available for analyzing data. Documented procedures shall exist for storing, retrieving and timely and accurate dissemination of data. These shall also cover selection of appropriate clinical and managerial staff in selecting, integrating and using data . 12.3 The healthcare facilities shall have a complete and accurate medical record for every patient. Every medical record shall have a unique identifier. 12.3.1 Healthcare facilities policy shall identify those authorized to make entries in medical record and every medical record entry shall be dated and timed. The author of the entry can be identified and contents of medical record shall be identifiable and documented. These records shall help in providing an up-to-date and chronological account of patient care -12.4 The medical record shall reflect continuity of care and shall contain information regarding reasons for admission, diagnosis and plan of care. Operative and other procedures performed shall be incorporated in the med ical record. 12.4.1 When patient is transferred to anoth er healthcare facilities the medic a l record shall contain the date of tran s fer. the reaso n for th e tran sfer , the name of re ceivin g healthcare facilities and a copy of the discharge note duly sig ned by appropriate and qualified personnel. 124.2 In case ofdeath, the medical record shall contain a copy of the death certificate indicating the cause, date

IS 15784 : 2007
and the time of death . Whenever a clinical autopsy is carried out, the medical record shall contain a copy of the report of the same. 12.4.3 Care providers shall have access to current and past medical record. 12.5 There shall be documented policies and procedures in place for maintaining confidentiality, integrity and security of information . These shall be in consonance with the applicable laws and shall incorporate safeguarding of data/record against loss , destruction and tampering. 12.5.1 The healthcare facilities shall have an effective process of monitoring compliance of the laid down policy. 12.5.2 The healthcare facilities shall use developments in appropriate technology for improving confidentiality, integrity and security. 12.5.3 Privileged health information shall be used for the purposes identified or as required by law and not disclosed without the patient's authorization. A documented procedure shall exist on how to respond to patients/doctors and other public agencies requests for acc ess to information in the medical record in accordance with the local and national laws and regulations 12.6 There shall be documented policies and procedures for retention time of patient's clinical records, data and information . These policies and procedures shall be in consonance with the local and national laws and regulations. The retention process shall provide expected confidentiality and security. 12.6.1 The destruction of medical records, data and information shall be in accordance with the laid down policy. 12.7 The healthcare facilities shall regularly carry out med ical audits. Medical records shall be reviewed periodically. Reviewing shall use a representative sample based on statistical principles. The review shall be conducted by identified care providers and shall focus on the timeliness, leg ibility and completeness of the medical records. The review process shall include records of both active and discharged patients and shall mention any deficiencies in records. Appropriate corrective and preventive measures undertaken shall be documented.

II

IS 15784 : 2007

ANNEXA
(Foreword, and Clause 10.2.1)
LIST OF OTHER INDIAN STANDARDS PUBLISHED ON THE SUBJECT OF HOSPITALS WHICH COULD ALSO BE RELEVANT
IS No.

Trtle

IS No.

Trtle

Recommendations for basic requirements of general hospital buildings: (Part I) : 1984 Administrative and hospital services department buildings (Part 2): 1984 Medical services department buildings (Part 3) : 1984 Engineering services department buildings 12377 : 1988 Classification and matrix for various categories of hospital 13808 Quality management for hospital services (up to 30-bedded hospitals) - Guidelines:

10905

(Part I) : 1993 Out-patient department (OPD) and emergency services (Part 2) : 1993 Diagnostic and blood transfusion services (Part 3): 1995 Wards, nursing services and operation theatre (Part 4) : 1996 Hospital support services (Part 5) : 1996 Hospital equipment management IS 15551 : 2003 Qual ity management systems Guidelines for process improvements in health service organization IS 15579 : 20051 Medical devices - Quality manageISO 13485 : ment systems - Requirements for 2003 regulatory purposes

ANNEXB
(Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Hospital Planning Sectional Committee, MHR 14
Organization
Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital. New Delhi
All India InstilUte of Medical Sciences. New Delh i Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India, Kanpur Batra Hospital & Medical Research Centre. New Delhi Christian Medical College & Hospital. Yellore Defence Research & Development Organization. New Delh i Department of Health & Family Welfare. New Delh i Directorate General of Anned Forces Medical Services. New Delh i Directorate General of Health Serv ices . New Delhi Directorate of Architecture. New Delhi Directorate of Health Services. Delh i
DR

Representativets)
N. K.
DR D . DR CHATURVF DI

(Clulirman)

DR P. C . CHAU8 EY

K.

SHARMA

(Alternate)

H. N. SHARMA B. L. W AIlHWANI (Altemate)
AI>OIllONAL MEI>ICAI. S UPfRlNTENI>INr

DR (SMr) M . S HARM A

(Alternate)

DR S EI.VAKUMAR

DR R. P. TRIPAllll
DR DR D .

M. C.

G UPTA

(Alternate) (Altemate) (Alternate)

K.

SUR BA

DR S.

K.

PRAOHAN

DR (COL) PAWAN K APOOR

Lr-Coi. A NURAG
DR

KHANNA

R. N.

SALH AN

DR
SHRI

A.

N.

SISHA

(Alternute) (Alternate)

N. B.

SH E-I.AR

DR ( SMT) UPl NI >F.R KAUR DR ANII . MI'HR A D R S . MIGI.ANI

(Alternatet

12

IS 15784 : 2007
Organization
Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi Employees State Insurance Corporation. New Delhi Holy Family Hospital, New Delhi Hospital Management Planning Consultants. New Delhi Hospital Services. Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd. New Delhi Indian Hospital Association. New Delhi Indian Institute of Health Management & Research. Jaipur Indian Medical Association. New Delhi Indian Society of Health Administrators. Bangalore Indira Gandhi National Open University. New Delhi Janak Healthcare Pvt Ltd. Mumbai Jawahar Lal Nehru University. Delhi Maulana Azad Medical College. New Delhi Medical Council of India. New Delhi Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) National Academy of Medical Sciences (India). New Delhi National Accreditation Board for Hospital. New Delhi National Institute of Health & Family Welfare. New Delhi Office of The WHO Representative to India. New Delhi Planning Commission Health & Family Welfare Division, New Delhi School of Planning & Architecture. New Delhi BIS Directorate General
Representativets]

DR N. K. CHATURVEDI DR A. K. SINGHAl. (Alternate) DR S. K. JAIN SHRI ANII. AGGARWAL SHRI EIlWARIl DAVID DR LEKH RAJ
LAU.A

(Alternat~)

SHRI SANJIV Soon SHRI R. K. KHArIAN (Alternate) DR (SMT) PRAMlLA GHEI SHRI I. B. SINGH (Alternate) DR S. D. GU!'TA DR SAmuSH KUMAR (Alternate) DR SANJEV MAuK DR VINAY AGGARWAL (Altunate) DR AsHOK SAHNI DR A. K. AGARWAL PROF S. B. ARORA (Alternate) SURI K. J. S. GULATI SHRI GIRISH SUETH (Alternate) DR RAMA V. BARU DR S. RMUI DR R. D. BANSAl. DR KAIYAN GHOSH DR P. K.DAvE DR (SHRIMAn) GEETA SUIlBA RAO (Alternate) DR (COL) PAWAN KAPOOR DR B. K. RANA (Alternate) DR J. K. DAs SHRI SUNil. NANDRAI DR (SMT) AMIlUIAM NAIR KAPOOR SHRI ANII.- DEWAN SURI RAKF.5H CHANUER. Scientist 'F' & Head (MHO) [Representing Director General (Ex -officio)1

Member Secretary SHRI C. P. PURl Scientist 'E' (MHD), BIS

Panel for Formulation of Standard on Healthcare Facilities, MHR 14/Pl
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar. New Delhi All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi Directorate General of Health Services. New Delhi Indian Medical Association, New Delhi National Academy of Medical Sciences. New Delhi National Accreditation Board for Hospitals, New Delhi PROf' P. C. CHAUBEY (Convener) DR SIDHARTH SATI'AlllY DR A. N. SINHA DR AMy GAMBltl1t DR (SltRIMATI)GEETA SUIlIlA RAo DR (COl.) PAWAN KAPOOR

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory inst itution establ ished under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization , marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. Th is doe s not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard , of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade des ignations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS .

Review of Indian Standards
Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review ind icates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for rev ision . Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions' . This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. MHR 14 (0030).

Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters ; Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delh i 110 002 Telephones ; 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 1114 C.IT. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700 054 SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400 093 Telegrams ; Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 2323 76 17 { 23233841 2337 8499 ,2337 8561 { 2337 8626, 2337 9120 260 3843 { 2609285 2254 1216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 { 2832 9295, 2832 7858 2832 7891, 2832 7892

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR . KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO . PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM .
Printed by Sunshine Graphics

