( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF PHOTOVOLTAIC ( PV ) POWER GENERATING SYSTEM

UDC

621.311~25 : 621.383.5

@ BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August 1994

Price Group 5

Solar Photovoltaic

Energy System Sectional

Committee,

ET 28

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Solar Photovoltaic Energy System Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. Photovoltaic ( PV ) Power Generating Systems consist of various components and subsystems. In this standard, an overview of the major subsystems and a description of components and interfaces has been detailed. It is intended that future Indian Standards will address a detailed classification of PV Power Generating-Systems. Performance parameters of PV systems shall be covered in separate Indian Standards. In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from 82 ( CentralOffice ) 19 Guide : General Description of Photovoltaic ( PV ) Power Generating Systems, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ).

IS 14153 : 1994

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF PHOTOVOLTAIC ( PV ) POWER GENERATING

SYSTEM
1 SCOPE 1.1 This Indian Standard gives an overview of terrestrial PV Power Generating System Configurations and is intended to serve as an introduction to future PV system standards under consideration. 1.2 It contains : An overview of major subsystems; A description of major components and interfaces; and A table with possible configurations which can be derived from the layout in Fig. 2. 1.3 Solar photovoltaic/thermal auxiliary power source(s), requirements are outside standard. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 12834 : 1989, `Solar systems - Terminology' photovoltaic energy shall apply.
SECTION 3 GENERAL ONE

3.4 The PV Power Generating System may operate in parallel with some other auxiliary power source(s) that are connected at the appropriate interface(s). In any particular PV Power Generating System design some of the subsystems shown in Fig. 1 may be absent. 1 3.5 Although the power quality parameters given for the ac/ac interface and the grid interface are identical in theory and in practice, PV generated power quality should be controlled at the output stage of the inverter for grid connected systems. For stand alone systems with ac load, the ac/ac interface may not be necessary since it is ac load power quality dependent. 3.6 For grid connected systems, general conditions relating to supply and use of energy as per Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 shall be followed. 3.7 All components used fin PV power generating system and parameters specified shall conform to Indian Standard Specifications wherever these exist. In the case of components or parameters for which Indian Standard Specifications do not exist, these shall be subject to mutual agreement between supplier and purchaser.
SECTION TWO

hybrid systems, civil engineering the scope of this

REQUIREMENTS

3.1 Photovoltaic ( PV ) Power Generating System consist of components and subsystems that are used to convert incident radiation directly into electrical energy. The electrical parameters of the input of a subsystem should be compatible with the output electrical parameters of a preceding subsystem(s). 3.2 All subsystems indicated in Fig. 1, except the `PV', the load/grid and the Electrical Storage may be referenced as a Power Conditioner ( PC ) that could be supplied as a single unit. 3.3 Some or all the elements of two or more subsystems may be incorporated into one capable of could be unit that physical performing the functions of the individually incorporated subsystem.

4 MAJOR CONFIGURATIONS

4.1 The major identified:

generating

configurations

are

a) Stand Alone

System - An independent power production system that is not connected to the grid and could thus be designed free from grid code requirements. System - A power Connected producing system interconnected with an existing electric power grid, subject to grid requirements.

b) Grid

1

s"B&EM

--CI

MASTER CONTRdLLER MONITORING

k

-

INVERTOR

ac,,LiNE I,

h -

,

ac/ac INTERFACE

tt c ac LOAD z CI iz

23
STORAGE SUB&STEM MASTER CONTROLLER ,MONlTORlNG h STORAGE MASTER CONTRoLLER MONITORING

..
Y

(a)

STAND

ALONE

SYSTEM

WITH

ac

LINE

INVERTDR

A

c

ac/ac INTERFACE

%

ac

LOAD

(b)

STAND

ALONE

SYSTEM

WITH

dc

UNE

suR&TEM

--IC

% __C

INVERTOR

__C

ac/ac GRID INTERFACE

e

ac

GRID

(C)

GRID

CONNECTED

SYSTEM

Fig.

1 PV POWER

GENERATING

SYSTEM

AND

MAJOR

SUBSYSTEMS

(b&C DRIVEN PUUP, SPEclRc LOAD

IRRIcAT#)R...)

rSTAND-ALONE SYSTEM

TELECDMbttJNICATION. UCHTlNG 1 AlH0DlC PROTECTION . . . . . . . . . . . . (AC DRIVEN PUMP. lRRlG+TlDN . . . 1 (PV DRIVEN HOME APPLIANCES ...)

VIUAGE ElJXTRtFICATlON WITH 6 C DiSTRlBUTlON . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0)

p~4g~~;gg~i~iCATl0td

wITtj . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .

DC LOAD

w
61ACNEi3-UP (-. SYSTEM_. ]

(DC POWERED HOME APPUANCES...)

GRlD

AC LOAD hTrtlouT STORAOE AC LOAD ITH STORAGE DC LOAD WiTHDul STDfME pAC LOAD ITH STORAGE KLOCWD(&E&Eh$AAL;y!XE". FACILITY PV . .. .. .. .. . .. . ... . . ... . .. .. .. .) _ (MULTI-FA~~~LY HOUSES . . . . . .._ - . . ...)

GRlD CONNECTED SYSTEM

ir,
DISTRIBUTED MULTI-LOAD

~~VCTRlFltZATl0N g~cTRlmnoN

WITH DC

f;;

Wm . . . . . . . . . . . ..".........d........

FIG. 2

EXAMPLE OF Pv POWER GENERATING SYSTEM

IS 14153 : 1994
SECTION THREE

DESCRIPTION OF MAJOR SUBSYSTEMS, COMPONENTS AND INTERFACES OF THE PV POWER GENERATING SYSTEM 5 MASTER CONTROL (MCM) 5.1 Functional Description The master control and monitoring subsystem is the highest order of photovoltaic system control. It supervises the overall operation of PV Power Generating System and the interaction between all subsystems. The master control may also interact with the load(s). The MCM may be a subsystem that consists of electronic and/or logic electromechanical, circuitry or its functions may be incorporated in the other subsystems. For ease of design and operation some or all functions of the MCM may be included in other subsystems. The accuracy and operating range of all types of control and monitoring functioning shall be specified by the manufacturer and the accuracy shall be as agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. The MCM should ensure system operation in either the automatic or the manual operating mode. The monitoring function of the MCM subsystem may include sensing and collection of data signals, processing; recording transmission and presentation of system data as required. The function can monitor: The photovoltaic array; b) dc conditioner; Cl dc/dc load ~interface; 4 The storage subsystem; 4 aclac interface; f 1 Load(s); g> Inverter; h) Auxiliary suppIy, etc; _i) Grid interface; k) Environmental conditions; m) Power conditioner; n) Photovoltaic array current; p) Array average temperature; q) Battery state of charge; and r) Battery temperature. AND MONITORING

c) Analogue display; and d) Permanent recording type. The subsystem control data to assure proper system subelements. function operation uses collected of all major

The subsystem control functions may include but are not limited to: a) storage control device; b) array tracking; c) system startup; d) dc power transmission control; e) inverter startup and control; f) ac load; g) support function(s) startup and control; h) security; j) fire protection; k) auxiliary supply startup and control; m) grid interface power control; and n) other support functions. In any particular PV Power Generating System design, some of the subsystems shown may be absent and some of the components of a subsystem may be present in single or multiple form. 6 PV SUBSYSTEM 6.1 Functional Description The PV subsystem consists of a mechanically and electrically integrated assembly of components required to form a unit that can produce dc power directly from incident solar radiation. 6.2 Main Characteristic The PV subsystem may be comprised limited to : a) modules; b) sub-array; c) array field; d) electrical interconnection; e) foundation; f) mounting structure; g) protecting device(s); and h) earthing. of but not

a>

Monitors may be of the following types: a) Light emitting diodes; b) Alpha numeric digital display;

The PV subsystem should be designed on the basis of an economic and physical assessment of required system design functions and performance requirements ( suciaa; opz;atfl~ meteorological conditions, performance, load characteristics &d safety requirements ). 4

1s 14153 : 1994

The PV subsystem may be designed to meet average or peak system requirements of the load. Its size may be limited either by site restrictions or by the results of system optimization studies that include performance and cost. It should be ncted that since PV subsystem orientation affects system energy production, system design calculations are necessary to select the optimum orientation for the array. Arrays can be either fixed or discretely/continuously adjustable. Optimum selection of the fixed tilt many factors such as angle depends upon location, distribution of sunlight, load profile and particular site throughout the year. conditions. 6.3 Parameters The following features, whichever should be specified: a) Input couditions 1) irradiance; and 2) irradiation. b) Output conditions 1) power; 2) voltage; 3) current; and/or 4) energy. c) Protection equipment applicable

Fuse Switch Blocking diode Lightning protection Voltage level contoller Maximum power tracker Although the dc-conditioner can be specified and tested independently of the PV Power Generating System, the technical characteristics depend upon the requirements of the system in which the unit is to he installed ( Fig. I ). 7.3 Parameters The following should be specified: a) Input conditions 1) nominal voltage and current; 2) voltage and current range; 3) dynamic variations; 4) ripple; 5) regulation; 6) load conditions at which regulation is needed; 7) duty cycle of operation of the load; and 8) noise immunity for the load. b) Output conditions 1) voltage and current; 2) tolerance of output voltage; 3) current limitation; 4) character of the loads; and 5) dc conditiqeer efficiency. c) Protection and monitoring equipment 1) unit protection; 2) for the load; and 3) isolation between input and output. d) dc conditioner efficiency. e) Interaction with master control. f) Environmental conditions. g) General mechanical features. h) Safety requirements. j) Electromagnetic interference ( e.m.i ). k) Instrumentation. m) Acoustic noise level. 8 dc/dc SUBSYSTEM
8.1 Functional Description

d) e) f) g) h) j)

1) lightning protection device; 2) earthing; and 3) subsystem protection, that is, bypass diode(s). Environmental conditions. Site security. General mechanical features. Interaction with master control. Instrumentation ( sensors ). Personnel safety.
SUBSYSTEM Description

7 DC CONDITIONER
7.1 Functional

The dc-conditioner provides protection for the dc electrical components and converts the PV voltage into a usable dc voltage. subsystem It generally includes all auxiliary functions ( such as internal power supplies, error amplifiers, self protection features, etc) required for its proper operation. 7.2 Main Characteristics The dc-conditioner may consist of one or more, but is not limited to the following elements:

The dc/dc subsystem includes the necessary functions to interface the PV Power Generation System dc voltage to the dc load. It may

IS 14153 : 1994 additionally connect an suPPlY* 8.2 Main Characteristics auxiliary dc power protection, mentation, output current etc. laminater, instru-

9.2 Main Characteristics The characteristics may include, but following: of the storage subsystem are not limited to, the

A dc/dc interface may include, but is not or more of the following limited to, one elements: a) Disconnect switches and fuses b) dc/dc voltage conversion c) Sanction of auxiliary dc supply d) Filtering devices e) Protective devices such as: 1) earthing; 2) lightning; and 3) under/over voltage. 8.3 Parameters The following should be specified: a) Input conditions 1) nominal voltage and current; 2) voltage and current ranges; 3) dynamic variation; and 4) dc conditioner efficiency.

a) Type of storage
capacity Maximum depth of discharge c) Environmental constraints d) e) Temperature dependency f) Life cycles &I Internal loss of storable energy related )

b) Storage

( time

h) Specific energy ( ratio of storable energy to the weight of the storage component) 9.3 -Parameters The following should be specified: a) Input conditions I) nominal voltage and voltage range; 2) maximum charging current; and 3) battery trickle charge current. b) Output conditions 1) voltage range; 2) maximum discharge current; 3) maximum depth of discharge; 4) battery temperature; and 5) battery voltage - full battery and voltage per cell

b) Output conditions
1) voltage and current; 2) tolerance of output voltage; 3) current limitation; and 4) characteristics of loads. Interface efficiency Cl d) Protection equipment 1) unit protection; 2) for the load; 3) isolation between input a,nd output; and 4) over voltage and current. e) Interaction with master control f 1 Environmental conditions g) General mechanical features h) Safety requirements interference (e.m.i) j) Electromagnetic Instrumentation k) m) Acoustic noise level. 9 STORAGE SUBSYSTEM 9.1 Functional Description Thestorage subsystem provides the means to preserve electrical energy. The subsystem may also include input-output control devices such as charge regulation, over/under voltage 6

voltage

can operate for Energetic and faradic efficiency 4 e) Self discharge f) Cycling conditions g) Protection equipment 1) unit protection; 2) for the load; 3) over/under current and voltage; 4) for safety; and 5) for environment. h) Safety requirements d Interaction with master control ( MCM ) kj Maintenance m) General mechanical features n) Instrument.ation p) Battery management system

c) Number of `no sun' days that the system

fS 14153 : 1994 charge to full charge/trickle charge; of over charge/over 2) prevention discharge; and 3) protection of battery from emergency due to load fault. 10 INVERTER SUBSYSTEM

1) control

3) isolation between input and output; and 4) over voltage and current e) f) g) h) j) k) m) n) Loss without load Interaction with the master control Environmental condition General mechanical features Safety requirements Electromagnetic interference ( e.m.i ) Instrumentation Acoustic noise generation

10.1Functional Description
The inverter changes dc-conditioner and/or storage battery output into usable ac power. It may include voltage control, internal power amplifiers, supplies, error self protective devices, etc. 10.2 Main Characteristics The inverter may control one or more, not limited to the following parameters: a) Frequency b) Voltage level c) Start up and shut down d) Synchronization me) Reactive power f) Quality of output power Although the inverter can be specified and tested independently of the PV Power Generattechnical characteristics the ing System, depend upon the requirements of the system in which the unit is to be .instailed. For example, parameters can differ between a stand alone and a grid interactive system. 10.3 Parameters The following should be specified: a) Input conditions 1) nominal voltage and current; 2) voltage and current range; and 3) dynamic variations of input voltage. b) Output conditions 1) number of phases; 2) voltage and current; 3) output frequency and harmonic distortion; 4) tolerance of voltage and frequency; 5) current limitation; 6) character of the loads; and 7) power factor ( pf ). c) Inverter ~ehiciency d) Protective equipment 1) unit protection; 2) for the load; 7 but is

11 ac/ac SUBSYSTEM 11.1 Functional Description The ac/ac subsystem includes the necessary functions to interface the PV Power Generating System ac voltage to an ac load. It may additionally connect an auxiliary ac power supply * 11.2 Main Characteristics An aclac subsystem may consist of one or more, but is not limited to the following elements: a) Disconnect switches and fuses b) ac/ac voltage conversion c) Connection of auxiliary ac supply d) Filtering devices e) Protective features such as: 1) earthing; 2) lightning protection devices; 3) under/over voltage; and 4) safety. 11.3 Parameters The following should be specified: a) Input conditions 1) number of phases; 2) nominal voltage(s) and current(s); 3) voltage and current ranges; 4) frequency; 5) power factor ( pf ); and 6) dynamic variations. b) Output conditions 1) number of phases; 2) voltage and current ranges; 3) frequency and harmonic distortion; 4) tolerance of voltage and frequency; 5) current limitation; of loads; and 6) characteristics 7) power factor ( pf).

IS 14153 : 1994 8) phase imbalance limitations Protection equipment 1) unit protection 2) for the load 3) isolation between input and output 4) over voltage and current Interaction with master control Environment conditions General mechanical features Safety requirements Interface efficiency Electromagnetic interference ( e.m.i ) Instrumentation 4) relays; and 5) isolation transformer. e) Coupling and discoupling 12.3 Parameters The following should be specified: a) Input conditions 1) number of phases; 2) nominal voltage(s) and current(s); 3) voltage and current ranges; 4) frequency; 5) frequency range; 6) power factor ( pf ); and 7) dynamic variation. b) Output conditions system

f) g) h)
j)

k)

12 GRID INTERFACE SUBSYSTEM 12.1 Functional Description electrically The grid interface subsystem interconnects the output of the dc/ac inverter and the grid distribution network. It permits the PV Power Generating system to operate in parallel with the grid and thus power may flow to or from the grid.
NOTEThe PV Power Gonerating system generated power that flows to the grid should not adversely affect the quality of the existing power on the distribution system nor endanger the safety of its operation.

1) number of phases;

2) voltage and current range;
3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) frequency and harmonic distortion; tolerance of voltage and frequency; current limitation; characteristics of loads; -power factor ( pf ); and phase balancing.

12.2 Main Characteristics An at/Grid interface subsystem may consist of one or more, but is not limited to the following elements: a) Disconnect switches and fuses b) ac/ac voltage conversion c) Filtering device d) Protective features such as: 1) earthing; 2) lightning protection devices; 3) under/over voltage protection devices: ,

c) Production equivalent 1) unit protection; 2) for the load; 3) isolation between input and output; and 4) over voltage and current. d) Interaction with master control e) Environmental conditions f) General mechanical features g) Safety requirements h) Interface efficiency j) Electromagnetic interface ( e.m.i ) k) Instrumentation

1s 14153 : 1994

ANNEX A
EXAMPLE CONFIGURATIONS DERIVED FROM FIGURE 2, WITH SOME TYPICAL APPLICATIONS
X denotes

(X)

optional

a necessary system component system component
dC SK I

Cemponents system Photovoltaic Po~~mGenerating

Conditioner

dc/dc Interface

Storage

Inverter

ac/ac Interface

I

acjac Grid Interface

Typical Examples

I

I

I

STAND-ALONE
dc stand-alone without storage _ --dc stand-alone with storage _---ac stand-alone without storage X (X) X X (X) X I_____X ~-------~~--~ Lighting - Telecommunications -Domestic appliances X
I

Pumping production

Hydrogen

' ---_

x
I

(X)
I__-__I______ X ~~___~

X

Pumping

ac stand-alone with storage dc and ac standalone without *torage

X

(X)
(X)

X

X

Rural electrification Telecommunications Remote industrial

______~
X

x x

X

X

X

----dc and ac stand. alone with storage X

~~--~

--_
X

(X>

X

x

Industrial

with DC loads

ELECTRIC UTILITY CONNECTED
ac Grid connected without storage X (X) X x

1

x

Urban cations grid

residential appli. feeding power to

--____----____ ac Grid connected with storage X (X) X X X X Uninterrupted power
SUPPlY

i

ELECTRIC GRID CONNECTED
Grid connected with storage Grid conneoted with storage X (X)

x

I I
X

~~~
stations

Power

X

(X)

9

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmoious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not -preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sixes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the up for revision. latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. ET 28 (3185). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected -

BUREAU OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 -Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones
: 331 01 31,

331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional

Offices : 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 110002 Maniktola 160022 700054 f37 84 99, 137 86 26, NEW DELHI CALCUTTA

Central : Manak Bhavan,

331 01 31 ( 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII M, V. I. P. Road, Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

160 1603 843, 20 25, f235 02 16, 1235 15 19, f632 92 95, 1632 78 91, 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East )

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CQIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers. Alisarh. India

