IS:817-1866

Indian Standard

XXXX ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 2008

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TRAINING AND TESTING OF METAL ARC WELDERS

( Revised)
Seventh Reprint JANUARY 1998

UDC 621'7h'753

: 658'386

0 copyright 1966
i.

BUREAU
MANAK

OF.
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MAR0

-9 RAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

`Gr 10

September 1966

IS t 817~ 1966

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TRAINING AND TESTING OF METAL ARC WELDERS

(Revised)
Welding General Sectional Committee, S?vfDC 14
cbaimkwl RIprrsrnti?ig
Indian +ygen Ltd, Calcutta

Sttm R.

C&am

SEN K. D. AOARWAL SHPI M. M. Gn-n (Al&m&) Sxar J. K. AHLUWALIA SHRI M. M. GHOEH(ANnnn*) SHRI F. V. BADSHE.IN. C. BAOCHI SH~UD. P. Cwm Sttm K. C. Cttoumium Stttu K. K. MATHUR(Altam& I) Smu N. V. PANDIT(Alkmarr II) Snnr B. N. DAM DR N. D. DON SHIU S. K. It\ar (AI&nab) SHIU K. C. JWTH SHRZ J. N. Mane (A-8) Smu M. MITRA SHRI T. Brawu (ANmrolr) AYBAYVRR(Altin&) sHm HI&"vz smu s. v. i&PROPG. K. OOALE Sntm S. K. P~nus Car. S. G. PENDSS SHRI K. G. K. RAO
SHI(I J. P. SMOJA

Diitorate of Technical D&we, New Delhi

Development

(CGDP), Ministry of

Stewarts & Lloyds of India Ltd, Calcutta Directorate General of Technical Development National Test House, Calcutta Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals (Inspection Wing) (Miitry of Industry & Supply), New Delhi Ministry of Railways National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamsbedpur Indian Engineering Association, Calcutta Engineer-in-Cbicf's Branch, Army Headquarters Asiatic Oxygen & Acetylene Co Ltd, Calcutta Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta J. B. Advani-Oerlikon Electroda Private) Ltd Bombay Association of Principals of T&&xl Insti&ons (India), New Delhi Braidwaite & Co (India) Ltd, Calcutta Directorate General of Employment C Training, New.Delhi Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamsbedpw Central Boilen Board, New Delhi Public World Department, Madras C+ral rlblic Works Department, New Delhi (z4~muf.r) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam Director. IS1 (JZx-oficioMember)

EXBCU~IVB ENOINBE~(Ea$, CAL-A Snar T. N. VBUJ SHIU B. S. Kmstm8w.ux.a, Deputy Director (Strut & Met) (.Saretav)

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

LS I 817-1966 CONTENTS
PAOR

0. FOREWORD ................
SECTION 1 GENERAL

4

1. SCOPE

............... ............

5 6 6
6 6

2. TERMINOLOGY 3. SYb%BOLS ...............

4. MATERIALS ............... 5. SELECTION OF TRAINEES ............

6. LENGTH OF COURSE, Hours OF INSTRUCTION AND TIUAL PERIOD 0F INSTRUCTION ............ 7 ............. 7. RECORDCARD 7
SECTION2 -EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES FOR THE TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT

8. 9. 10. 11.

APPARATUS ............... SUPERVISION REFERENCE MATERIAL

7

............ ............ .......

8 8

QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIESOF INSTRUCTOR SECTION3 -

9

Coums 0~ INSTRUCTION 10
10

12. GENERAL ............... 13. INSTRUCTION IN WELDING PRACTICE ..........

WELDS IN FLAT POSITION AND FILLET SUB-SECTION 3A -BUTT WELDS IN FLAT AND HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION ......... 11 SUB-SECTION 3B BUTT AND FILLET WELDS IN VERTICAL POSITION AND BUTT WELDS IN HORIZONTALVERTICAL POSITION ...... 18 WELDING IN OVERHEAD POSITION ......... ... 21 22'

SUB-SECTION 3C -

14. ASSESSMENT OF CHECK TEST WELDS
2

IS:
%XlON 4 -

817-1966

TESTSFORWELDERS PAGE

... 15. GENERAL . . . 16. INITIALQUALIFICATION TEST ... 17. ANNUAL TESTS

... ... ... ...

... ... ...

... 18. PERIODIC CONTROL TEST . . . 19. RE-TESTSFORANNUALTEST AND PERIODIC CONTROL TEST ... ... 20. POSITION FORTEST WELDS APPENDIXA APPENDIXB APPENDIXC APPENDIXD APPENRIXE APPENDIXF RECOMMENDED FORMFORRECORDCARD

. . . 25 . . . 25 . . . 31 . . . 31 . . . 31 . . . 32 . . . 33

RECOMMENDED DESIGNOF POSITIONING EQUIPMENT . . . 35 ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT RECOMMENDED FOR TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT FOR WELDERS ... . . . 40 RECOMMENDED FORMOF TRAINEEPROGRESS CHART . . . 42 RECOMMENDED SYLLABUSFORTRAINING COURSE RECOMMENDED SAFETYRULES ... . . . 46 .. 53

3

ItS-r 813-1966

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR TRAINING AND TESTING OF ,METAL ARC WELDERS

(Revised)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (Revised) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 21 February 1966, after the draft finalized by the Welding General Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division CouuciL 0.2 As a part of steel economy programme, it was recommended that welding should be used as a mode of fabrication in preference to riveting. This standard was first prepared in 1957 to lay down a scheme for training and testing in welding to a trainee in order to enable him to undertake normal welding jobs. It, however, specified training and testing in welding in four positions, namely: (a) flat, (b) horizontal-vertical, (c) vertical, and (d) overhead. But in the actual practice, it was observed that in 85 percent of the cases a welder was required $0 weld in the ilat position in case of butt welds and inthe flat and horizontal-vertical position in case of fillet welds. Hence the time spent in training and testing a trainee in all the positions (namely, flat, horizontal-vertical, vertical and overhead) was found to be not directly useful. Further, in case a welder fails to qualify in some of the difficult positions, repeat training is `to be given and thus considerable time and energy is wasted. In order to simplify the course of training and to make the course directly related to the actual re uirement of the job, this standard is revised and Section 3 is split into t%e following three sub-sections: welds in flat position and fillet welds in flat Sub-section ,3A -Butt and horizontal-vertical position, and fillet welds in vertical position and butt Sub-section 3B -Butt welds in horizontal-vertical position, and Sub-section 3C -Butt welds and fillet welds in overhead position. 0.2.1 Welders who, in the normal course of their work, will be required to weld only the types ofjoints in the positions described under Sub-section 4

IS:

817-1966

3A, will have to undertake training in Sub-section 3A. Welders who have to, in addition, weld the types of joints in positions described under Sub-section 3B, will be required to be trained in Sub-section 3B also after they have completed the training in Sub-section 3A satisfactorily. Welders who would be required to carry out welding work in all positions, will be required to be trained in Sub-section 3A, 3B and 3C in that order. 0.2.2 Separate codes for qualifying tests for welders engaged in welding of boilers and penstock pipes are being formulated. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

SECTION 1. SCOPE

1 - GENERAL

1.1 This code recommends minimum requirements for a truction in manual metal arc welding as applied to mild steel certain standard tests, comprising the initial qualification test establishment and subsequent annual and periodic tests for welder. 1.2 The principal code are: a) to of b) to of objectives for the course of instruction

course of insand prescribes at the training the practising

covered by the

coach the trainee in the fundamental techniques and safe practices metal arc welding, give the trainee a good understanding of the proper methods metal arc welding as applied to mild steel,

c) to enable the trainee to acquire enough skill in welding to pass the qualification tests prescribed in this code, and d) to provide the trainee with a basic knowledge of welding theory. 1.2.1 The course of instruction is not expected to produce an experienced welder, but rather a welder with enough skill and knowledge so that he will have immediate value to industry as a welder on less difficult work, and will be able, by gaining experience in industry, to progress rapidly to work of greater difficulty and responsibility. *Rules for roundingoff numericalvalues (re&.red) . 5

IS: 817-1966 1.3 The standard tests prescribed in the code comprise the following.
1.3.1 Initial Qualijication Test - It is the test which the trainee shall lx required to pass before completing his course of training. The passing of this test indicates that the welder has enough basic skill and knowledge, to be of value to -industry as a welder. check tests designed to be 1.3.2 T~J? Annual and Periodic Tests -The applied at regular intervals for ensuring that a welder actually engaged on work has continued to maintain a standard of proficiency, as required by the initial qualification test. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this code, all terms relating to arc welding, unless otherwise defined in this code, shall have the meaning assigned to them in IS : 8121957*. 3. SYMBOLS

3.1 For the purpose of this code and unless otherwise defined in this code,
the symbols used shall have the meaning assigned to them in IS : 813-1961 t. 4. MATERIALS

4.1 Steel used as parent metal, for testing, according to the provisions of
this code, shall conform to IS : 2062-1962:. 4.2 Electrodes -Electrodes, used for all tests, according to provisions of this code, shall conform to the requirements of IS : 814-19634.

5. SELECTION OF TRAINEES 5.1 Trainees selected to receive the instruction recommended in this code
shall have the following qualifications :

4

b)
4

Ability to understand the language of instruction; No physical or mental disability that precludes safe operation of welding equipment or interferes with full performance of duties in industry ; and The minimum age requirements prescribed in the State and Central Labour Laws applicable in the State in which the instruction is conducted.

*Glossaryof tcrrmrelatingto weldingand cutting of metals. tScheme of symbolsfor welding(ammdad). $Specificationfor structuralsteel (fusionweldingquality). 3 Speciiicationfor coveredelectrodea for metal arc weldingof mild steel (r&) 6

.

IS : 817 - 1966 6. LENGTH OF COURSE, HOURS OF INSTRUCTION PERIOD OF INSTRUCTION AND TRIAL

6.1 It is recommended that each trainee devotes a minimum of 75 hours for Sub-sections 3A and 3B each and 50 hours for Sub-section 3C of Section 3 to actual welding, exclusive of time spent in witnessing demonstrations by the instructor, preparing plates for welding, testing specimens, observing the work of other trainees and receiving instruction in welding theory. 6.2 Length of Instruction in Welding Theory - It is recommended that each trainee devotes 50 hours to instruction in welding theory prescribed in Section 3. 6.3 Length of Welding Practice in Any One Day-The length of time spent by the trainee in actual welding practice in any one day shall not exceed 6 hours. 6.4 Trial Period of Instruction - In the beginning of the course there shall be a trial or probationary period, not to exceed 30 hours, the period to be determined by the training establishment, during which the instructor shall observe the aptitude and interest of the trainee and determine whether in the interest of all concerned the trainee shall continue the course. 7. RECORD CARD

7.1 Upon completion of the course and fulfilment of the requirements prescribed in this code, the trainee shall be granted a record card indicating that the trainee has passed the tests prescribed in Section 4. Further, these tests together with their results shall be listed on the record card. If the trainee has passed some, but not all the final qualification tests prescribed, the tests which the trainee has not taken or has failed to pass shall be permanently indicated on the card. 7.2 The record card shall have additional pages for recording the results of annual tests taken by the welder. Additional pages may also be provided for recording any periodic and special tests, for example, welding in special steels, pipe welding, which the welder may take. A recommended form for this card is given in Appendix A. SECTION 8. APPARATUS 8.1 Welding Booths - Each welding booth shall have an area with sufficient clear floor space to allow adequate freedom of movement for All four sides of the welding station shall the trainee and the instructor. provide complete protection to persons and property on the outside against Internally each booth shall be so fire, personal injury or other damage. 7 2-EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT FOR THE

IS I 817-1966
constructed, lighted and ventilated, as to provide complete protection to the trainee. Suitable ventilation, adequate to prevent the accumulation of welding fumes shall be provided for each booth (or each room of booths, if partitions between booths do not extend to the ceiling). Any State or local regulations that are applicable shall be complied with. 8.2 Positioning Jig - Suitable positioning jigs shall be provided facilitate the execution of the welding tests prescribed in Section 4. suggested design of such equipment is given in Appendix B. to A

8.3 Arc Welding Machines - The training establishment shall be equipped with at least 50 percent as many arc welding machines or welding outlets as there are trainees in the shop class (see 6.1 for actual welding time for trainees). Each welding machine shall have a rated current of 200 A or more. It is desirable that at least one machine having a manual continuous hand welding current rating of 300 A or more be available. 8.4 Electrodes -There shall be an adequate supply of covered metal arc welding electrodes of the types and sizes required for the exercises prescribed in Section 3. 8.5 Material for Welding - An adequate supply of .mild steel plate of the required quality shall be provided for the exercises prescribed in Section 3. 8.6 Testing Apparatus - The training establishment shall possess apparatus suitable for preparing and testing the test specimens as prescribed in Sections 3 and 4 or shall have facilities for having these test specimens prepared and tested elsewhere. 8.7 Miscellaneous - In addition to the foregoing, the training establishment shall provide all other apparatus and equipment necessary for the safe and proper execution of the welding course prescribed herein. A list of accessories and equipment recommended for a training establiihment is given in Appendix C. 9. SUPERVISION 9.1 Number of Trainees per Instructor - Each shop class should be restricted to not more than 12 trainees in attendance per instructor. 9.2 Record of Trainees' Prog;ress - A record shall be kept of each trainee's progress, showing the number of hours of individual practice and the results of all tests prescribed in Sections Land 4. A recommended form of trainee progress chart is given in Appendix D. 10. REFERENCE MATERIAL

the start of the course a prepared outline 10.1 Out&e of Course -At indicating the syllabus of the course, the tests required, and the subjects 8

IS:

817.1966

to be covered in the related instruction shall be made available to the trainees. A specimen syllabus for the course is given in Appendix E. 10.2 Welding Publications - The training establishment shall have available for trainees' use suitable reference material consisting of books, manuals, periodicals, codes, standards, etc. 11. QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES OF INSTRUCTOR

instructions prescribed in this code may be given 11.1 General -The by one or more instructors, provided each instructor in welding practice possesses the qualifications prescribed under 11.2.1 and each instructor in welding theory possesses the qualification prescribed under X2.2. IJI addition, each instructor shall have the ability to present effective demonstrations and explanations of those portions of the course which he is to teach. 11.2 Qualifications of Instructor 11.2.1 Each instructor giving any portion of the instruction in welding practice (see 13) shall possess the following qualifications: a) A minimum of three years' experience as welder or welding supervisor, of which at least two years shall have been spent as manual metal arc welder; h) Proven ability to pass all the tests prescribed for trainees in Section 4 of this code; c) A practical knowledge of the physical properties of the metals and the welding process; d) Familiarity with the topics in welding theory covered in Section 3; and e) Familiarity with the codes and specifications used in welding and capability to read simple drawings relating to welding of structures. 11.2.2 Each instructor giving any portion of the instruction in welding theory shall have a thorough knowledge of the subjects on which he gives instructions. 11.3 Duties of Instructor - The instructional staff shall be charged with the responsibility of giving instruction in welding practice and welding theory, as prescribed in Section 3. The duties shall include the following : a) Planning instruction in accordance with the course outlined in this code keeping in view the following four basic sieps of instruction : 1) Preparing the trainee for new instruction; 2) Using appropriate methods for presenting the new instruction (demonstration, illustration, explanation, discussion, etc) ; 3) Providing proper supervision and criticism as the trainee applies his new knowledge and skill; and 4) Supervising and checking tests assigned to trainees. 9

IS:

817-1966 b) Instructing the trainee to work safely, emphasizing the training establishment's safety regulations. c) Observing acceptable shop management practices, such as (1) care, control and conservation of materials and equipment, and (2) shop cleanliness and orderliness. d) Keeping attendance SECTION records and recording trainees' progress. OF lNSTRUCTION

3.COURSE

12. GENERAL 12.1 The instruction shall consist of welding practice and lectures in theory. The practical and theoretical training should be suitably interspersed and related one to the other. The training shall start with instruction in safety precautions, protection of person and protection and care of equipment. This instruction coming at the very commencement of the course will reduce the risk of disablement of the trainees from such causes as arc-eye, electrical shocks, etc, and help in preventing damage to equipment which might be caused by ignorance of its proper use. 12.1.1 The instruction in safety shall be given before the trainees are A list of recommended permitted to use any regular, welding equipment. safety rules is given in Appendix F, and, should be used in this instruction. 12.1.2 For detailed instructions for safety and health requirements in electric and gas welding and cutting operations reference should be made to IS : 818-1957*. 13. INSTRUCTION IN WELDING PRACTICE

13.1 Instruction in welding practice shall be given by means of a series of exercises which shall conform at least to the requirements prescribed in this section. The exercises shall be performed on steel plates of various thicknesses as appropriate for each individual exercise. The steel shall be reasonably fret from scale, rust, paint and other defects which adversely affect welding. For the execution of each exercise, the trainee shall have a welding unit for his exclusive use. 13.1.1 The importance of maintaining uniformity of voltage and current conditions in order to attain uniformity and good quality of welds and the importance of proper cleaning and de-slagging during the welding process shall be emphasized during each exercise. 13.1.2 In the list of suggested welding exercise no specific recommendations are made with respect to the number of times each exercise should be repeated. The trainee should be required to perform each exercise to the *Code of practice for safety cutting operations.
and health requirements in electric and gaa welding and

10

IS : 817 - 1968
satisfaction exercise. of the instructor before being allowed to advance to the next

13.1.3 It is recommended that the trainee should test as many of his welds as possible as soon as they have been cooled in still air. Further, the instructor should inspect the tested weld and point out to the trainee any defects that may be in evidence and the reason for such defect or failure of the joint. The techniques of testing shall be as prescribed for the check tests (see 14). 13.1.4 It is recommended that the size of specimen, various illustrations, be maintained wrherever possible. 13.1.5 It is recommended before welding. that t&e pieces as indicated tack in the welded

,

be set up and

13.1.6 After completing each group of exercises the trainees shall be required to pass the check tests prescribed for that group designed to demonstrate whether he has acquired a satisfactory degree of skill in the techniques covered by that group of exercises.

SUB-SECTION 3A - BUTT WELDS IN FLAT POSITION AND FILLET WELDS IN FLAT AND HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION 13.2 Group A Exercises Striking Arc and Bead WeldingExercises in Group A shall be designed to instruct the trainee to readily strike the arc, maintain the correct arc length, achieve full control of slag and weld metal, and deposit consistently beads of the correct length, width All the exercises shall be perand profile with various sizes of electrodes. formed with electrodes of sizes ranging from 3.15 mm to 6.3 mm. The following exercise shall be included in this group: Welding Lesson Striking Running position) the arc beads (flat Tapping Fig. 1). Welding Procedure method and scratch method (see

With 3.15, 4, 5, and 6.3 mm electrodes. Deposit continuous beads with craters properly filled and without excessive deposits of metals at the points of re-striking the arc, then practice making long continuous beads in all directions (see Fig. 2B and 3). Practice different weaving techniques (see Fig. 4) advancing in all directions, that is, from left to right, right to left, towards and away from the operator, using 3.15, 4, 5, and 6.3 mm elctrodes. in the flat position.

Bead welds-weaving technique (flat position)

13.2.1 All the exercises in Group A shall be performed
11

IS : 817- 1966 13.2.2Check Tests on Exercises in Group A - No specific tests are prescribed for this group. The trainee should be able, to strike the arc by either method at any desired point. He should be able to deposit beads from right to left and vice-versa'of uniform appearance and width? in continuous lengths with craters properly filled without excessive deposus of metals at the points of re-striking the arc. He should be able to apply the different weaving techniques (see Fig. 4) advancing from left to right, right to left and towards and away from the operator, and obtain beads of uniform width. He should be able to deposit a weld metal pad with several layers, using different weaving techniques and obtain fair uniformity in thickness, width and appearance. ti

IA Tapping Method I6 Scratch Method
STRIKING THE

FIG. 1

ARC

2A Discontinuous Bead

2B .Continuous Bead

FIG. 2

BEAD TECHNIQUE

START

_/~-

4 (A)

ELCCIrfODL 4 _&$ytl' Y $,d_ 4 (0) WEAVING TECHNIQUE Cc> -

FIG. 3 RI+STRIKING THE ARC

FIG. 4 12

IS:

817-1966

13.3 Group B Exercises - Welding of Butt Joints and Fillet Joints in Flat Position - The exercises in Group B shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making corner, fillet, and butt welds in the flat position. Exercises on the following types of welds shall be included in th& group: %zd? a) Corner welds Position of Welding As illustrain ted Fig. 5B Joint Preparation As illustrain ted Fig. 8B Procedure of Welding Weld the joint with two runs first with a 4-mm electrode and the second one with a 5-mm electrode using weaving *technique. Weld the joint with a 4-mm electrode to obtain a 6-mm fillet. Weld the joint with a 4-mm electrode for the first run and a 6.3 mm electrode for the second run to nbtain a IO-mm fillet. Weld the joint in three runs first run with a 4-mm electrode and the subsewith 5-mm quent runs electrodes. Make the joint by welding one run on each side using a 5-mm electrode.

b)

Fillet welds single run Fillet welds multi-run

As illustrated in Fig. 5C or 5D As illustrated in Fig. 5C or 5D

As illustrated in Fig. 7 As illustrated in Fig. 7

c)

d)

Butt welds

As. illustrated in Fig. 5A

As illustrated in Fig. 8A

e)

Butt welds multi-run

As illustrated in Fig. 5A

As illustrated in Fig. 6

13.3.1 Check Tests on Exercises in Group B - The trainee shall be required to make two specimen welds conforming to the requirements stated in Table 1.
TABLE 1 SPECIMEN WELDS FOR CHECK TESTS ON EXERCISES IN GROUP B

SPECIMEN JOINT PREPARATION No.
1 As

I'osrr~ox OP
WELDING

PROCEDURE OF WELDING in in Weld to be made in a single-run with a 5-mm electrode Weld to be made in multi-runs with a 4-mm electrode for the. root-run and a 5-mm electrode for the succeeding runs

Fig. 7 2

illustrated

in in

illustrated As Fig. 5C or 5D illustrated As Fig. 5:~ or 5B

As illustrated Fig. 8A

13

IS : 817 - 1966

TEE

JOtHI

LAP

,o,n,

FIG. 5

ILLUSTRATIONS OF POSITIONOF WELDING

14

IS : 817 - 1966

Fro. 6

BUTT WELD

(SQUARE EDGE)

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 7 FORMSOF JOINT FOR FILLET WELD SPECIMEN

15

IS: 817-1966

I--

200 mm

8A

Single V-Butt Joint o-75 mm

WELDED PLATE

PLATE CKNESS

8B

Details of Corner Joint
SPECIMEN

FIO. 8

FORMS OF JOINT FOR BUTT WELD

13.3.1.1 The weld shall be inspected visually for appearance, checked for size and contour with a suitable weld gauge and then ruptured for internal examination (see Fig. 9). Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions under 14.
exercises in Group C shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making fillet welds in the horizontal-vertical position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3.15 mm or larger electrodes, leading to the use. of 4 and 5 mm electrodes 16

ver8ical Position -The

13.4 Group C Exerdses

-

Welding of Fillet Joints in the Horizontal-

IS: for check tests. in this Group:

817-1966

Exercises on the following types of welds shall be included

9A For Form of Joint illustrated in Fig. 7A

9B For Form of Joint illustrated in Fig. 8 OF RUPTURING

9C For Form of Joint illustrated in Fig. 7B

Fm. 9

METHOD

CHECK TEST SPECIMENS

Position of Welding

Joint Preparation

Procedure for Welding

a)

Fillet welds

As illustrated in Fig. 5G and 5H As illustrated in Fig. 5G and 5H

As illustrated in Fig. 7 As illustrated in Fig. 7

Deposit a single run fillet of 6 mm size using 4-mm and 5-mm electrodes. Deposit a 10 mm weld in three runs 4-mm electrodes. fillet with

b) Fillet welds multi-run

13.4.1 Check Tests on Exercises in Group C - The trainee will be required to make two specimen welds conforming to requirements stated in Table 2.

TABLE
SPECIMEN

2

SPECIMEN

WELDS F.OR CHECK
POSITION

TESTS ON EXERCISES

IN GROUP

C

No. 3 4

JOINT I~REPARATION illustrated in in

OF WELDING

PROCEDURE OF WELDING

2g.g.

As illustrated in Fig. 5G and 5H As illustrated in Fig. 5G and 5H

Weld to he made in a single run with a 4-mm electrode Weld to be made in a single run with 5-mm electrode

As illustrated Fig. 7

13.4.1.1 Each weld shall be inspected visually for appearance and checked for size and contour with a suitable weld gauge and ruptured for internal examination (see Fig. 9). Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions mentioned under 14.

17

SUB-SECTION 3B - BUTT AND PILLET WELDS IN VERTICAL POSITION AND BUTT WELDS IN' HORIZONTALVERTICAL POSITION 13.5 Group D Exercises - Welding in Vertical Position-The exercises in Group D, shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making bead, fillet and butt welds in the vertical position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3.15 mm or larger electrodes, leading to the use of 4-mm electrodes for the check tests. For the exercises requiring welding' in the vertical down direction, electrodes suitable only for this purpose shall be selected. Exercises on the following types of welds shall be mciuded in this group:
%%: a) weldsBead vertical-up & vertical-down Position of Welding As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 5L and 5M As illustrated in Fig. 5L and 5M Joint Preparation As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 7 As illustrated in Fig. 7 Procudureof Welding Practice bead welds-both vertical and down using 3.15~mm, 4-mm and 5-mm electrodes. Weld the joint with a 6*3-mm fillet weld using a 4-mm electrode. Weld the joint in two runs to obtain a IO-mm filletfirst run with 4-mm electrode and the second with a 5-mm electrode. Weld the joint in three runs first run with 3.15~mm second and third with 4-mm electrodes. Weld vertical down with a 3.15~mm and 4-mm electrode.

b) Fillet weldssingle-run, vertical-up c) welds Fillet multi-run, vertical-up

d) Butt

welds

As illustrated in Fig. 55 As illustrated in Fig. 5K

As illustrated in Fig. 8A As illustrated in Fig. 8B

e)

Corner weldsdown direction

13.5.1 Check Tests on Exercises in Group D - The trainee shall be required to make two specimen welds conforming to the requirempnts stated in Table 3.
13.5.1.1 The weld shall be inspected visually for appearance, checked for size and contour with a suitable weld gauge and then ruptured for intern&examination (see Fig. 9). Each weld shall meet the requirements specified under 14. 18

I8 t 817-1888
TABI SWFLDS FOR CHEGK TESTS ON EXERCISES (Churs 13.54
POSITION OF bXEDURE

IN GROUP

D

~PEIXZ&JEN Jonvr %3PARATION

OF

WELDINC3

5

kr illustrated in Fig. I

Aa illustrated in
Fii. 5L or 5M

WELDINO

6

As illustratkd in Fig. 0A

As illustrated in Fig. 55 or SK

Weld as specified in Fig. 7 to be made in a singlorun with a 4-mm electrode. After visual inspection and gauging, weld shall be increased in size by one or more additional runs to form a IO-mm fillet weld Weld to be made in multi-runs with a 3.15-mm electrode for the first run and 4_mm electrode for the subsequent runs

13.6 Group E Exercises -Welding in Horizontal-Vertical Position for Butt Welds - The exercises in Group E shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making bead and butt welds in horizontalvertical position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3*15-mm or larger electrodes, leading to the use of 3*15- and 4-mm electrodes for check tests. Exercises on the following'types of welds shall be included in this group !

T&hLf
welds a) Bead and reinforcing pad in horizontal 1 vertical position b) Butt welds

Position of Welding

Joint Preparation

Procedure of Welding

As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 5E

As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 10

Practice deposition of beads using 3.15-mm and 4-mm electrodes. Weld the joint by building up the weld with the required number of straight beads (approximately 4) deposited without weaving. First run to be made with 3*15-mm and the subsequent runs with e-mm electrodes. Weld the joint by building up the weld with the required number of runs (approx 5) deposited without weaving first run with 3.15-mm and the subsequent runs with 4-mm electrodes.

cl Butt welds

As illustrated in Fig. 5E

As illustrated in Fig. 14 (alternative horizontal - vertical position) 19

IS z 817-1966

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 10

JOINTPREPARATION FORBun WELDS

13.6.1 Check Tests on Exercises in Group E - The trainee shall be required to make one specimen weld conforming to the following requirements:
Specimen
NO.

Joint Preparation

Position of Weldipg

Procedure of Welding

7

As illustrated in Fig. 10

As illustrated in Fig. 5E and 5F

Weld to be made in multiruns with 3-I 5-mm electrode for the first run and 4-mm electrode for the subsequent runs.

13.6.1.1 Each weld shall be inspected visually for appearance and checked for size and contour with a suitable weld gauge and ruptured for internal examination (see Fig. 9B). Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions mentioned under 14. 20

IS : 817 - 1966 SUB-SECTION 3C-WELDING IN OVERHEAD POSITION

13.7 Group F Exercises - Welding in the Overhead Position The exercises in Group F shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making bead, fillet and butt welds in the overhead position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3*15-mm or 4-mm electrodes, leading to the use of 4-mm electrodes for the check tests. Exercises on the following types of welds shall be included in this group:
Position of Welding Joint Preparation Procedure of Welding

a)

Bead welds overhead position

As illustra-

ted in Fig. 2

As illustrated in Fig. 2 As ted 7 As ted 7 illustrain Fig. illustrain Fig.

b) Fillet weldssingle-run c) Fillet weldsmulti-run

Make a lo-mm fillet weld building up the weld in three runs using 4-mm electrode. d) Butt welds As illustra- As illustra- Weld the joint in three ted in Fig. ted in Fig. layers using weaving techniques for the last two 5N 8A Initial two layers layers. with 3-l 5-mm electrode and the final layer with 4-mm electrode. 13.7.1 Check Tests on Exercises in Group F - The trainee shall be required to make two specimen welds conforming to the requirements stated in Table 4.
TABLE No. 8 4 SPECWEN WELDS FOR CHECK TESTS ON EXERCISES IN GROUP F

As illustrated in Fig. 5Q and 5R As illustrated in Fig. 5Qand 5R

Practice striking the arc and depositing beads with 3.15-mm 4-mm and electrodes. Make a 5-mm fillet weld with a 4-mm electrode.

SPECIMEN

JOINT PREPARATION As illustrated in Fig. 7

POSTIONOF WELDING As illustrated in Fig. 5Qor 5R

PRO&DURE OF WELDING Weld as specified in Fig. 7 -to be ;em m ;lz-&un with

weld shall be increased in size by one or more additional runs to form a IO-mm fillet weld 5 As illustrated Fig. 8 in As illustrated in Fii. 5N or 5P Weld tb be made with 3*15-mm electrode for first run and 4mm electrode for subsequent runs in multi-runs.

. After $sud inspection and gauging,

21

IS : 817 - 1966 13.7.1.1 The weld shall be inspected visually for appearance, checked for size and contour with suitable weld gauge and then ruptured for internal examination (see Fig. 9). Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of the provisions specified under 14. 14. ASSESSMENT 14.1 Inspection OF CHECK Fracture TEST WELDS

Before

14.1.1 Factor 1 - Sha#e of. Projle - The shape of the profile shall be checked by measuring dimensions of the weld. The finished weld may be slightly over rather than under the specified size. profile of the weld is affected 14.1.2 Factor 2 - Shape of Projle -The by the type of filler material or electrodes used, the position of joint and the welding technique. 14.1.2.1 In butt welds the surface should be slightly convex. Typical profile views for butt welds have been illustrated in Fig. 11. 14.1.2.2 In fillet welds the contour may vary from concave to convex, according to the type of electrode or filler material, the welding position and technique. Typical profile views for normal fillet welds have been illustrated in Fig. 12. of height and 14.1.3 Factor 3 - Uniformity of Surface -Uniformity spacing of the `ripples' are an indication of the quality of workmanship. The shape and appearance of ripples in the weld surface vary according to the class of welding. 14.1.4 Factor 4 -Degree of Undercut - Undercutting is a particularly undesirable fault. When present it is evident as a notch of depression parallel and adjacent to the sides of the weld. The welded joint should be reasonably free from undercut, but slight intermittent occurrences may be disregarded, provided that such undercut is not in the form of a sharp notch. 14.1.5 Factor 5 - Smoothness of Joint Where Welding is Recommended - The joint in a weld run where welding has been recommended should show no pronounced lump or recess in the weld surface. 14.1.6 Factor 6 -Freedom from Surface Cavities and Trajped Slag - Smoothness of finish and general freedom from surface cavities and trapped slag are desirable. Surface cavities in a weld deposit may be caused by lack of fusion, gas bubbles or trapped slag, due to the use of unsuitable material Where suitable materials are used, the presence of incorrect technique. of these defects may be considered attributable to the quality of workmanship. 14.1.7 Faztor 7 - Disposition of Runs, Single and Multiple - Where multiple runs are deposited they should, at the surface, be of approximately equal width and there should be no deep notch or groove between adjacent runs nor should the edge of one run produce a sharp ridge or recess in the surface of another run. 22

IS:

817-1`966

14.1.7.1 The disposition of the lower runs in a multiple run weld can only be ascertained by examination of an etched cross-section of the weld.

I IA

Desirable Profile In V-Butt

AT

a001

I IB

Undesirable Profile in V-Butt

I IC

Desirable Profile in Unprepared Butt, Weld Each Side

I ID

Undesirable Profile in Unprepared Butt

I IE

Undesirable Profile in Unprepared Butt

FIG. 11

TYPICAL PROFILES IN Burr WELDS

a) Concave, equal leg lengths l2A

b) Convex,

equal leg lengths

Desirable Protlles

&"PERfECT

ROOT

OCNLTRATION

a! LLQ
12C Undesirable Profile Undercut Notch effect due to overlap lower toe Unequal leg lengths

I2B

Undesirable Profile Too convex No root penetration Notch effect at sides of weld

at

Fm. 12

TYPICAL PROFILES IN FILLETWELDS

23

IS t-817-

1966

14.1.8 Factor 8 - Penetration Bead in Butt Welds - The size of the penetration bead, that is, fused metal projecting on the reverse side of the joint, varies according to the materials being welded, the type of joint, the welding orocess. the welding techniaue and the skill `of the welder. Where a $&ration bead is required, ii should be reasonably uniform in width and appearance (see Fig. 13).
I

"

I3A Single Vee Joints

13'8 Square Butt, I.6 mm to 65 mm one run where no backing is deposited

FIG.

13

TYPICAL SHAPES OF PENETRATION BEADS IN BUTT WELDS

14.1.9 Factor 9 - Quality of Weld Metal for Met& Arc Welding - In the case of weld deposits on good quality material made with covered electrodes, the use of incorrect current or incorrect arc length are us~lally made evident by porosity both in the body of the weld and in the crater accompanied by a poor surface finish and an irregular profile. A deep crater is not itself a criterion of overheating nor of the use of excessive current but may depend upon the characteristics of the electrode.

14.2 Inspection of Weld Fracture - Inspection of weld fractures gives information concerning the disposition of runs and the following faults, if present at the section or fracture: incorrect profile, undercut, slag inclusions, poor root penetration and other lack of fusion, as described in the following factors. 14.2.1 Factor 10 - Degree of Fusion the whole area of the joint surfaces. Fusion should be complete over

14.2.1.1 The fracture should be inspected for lack of fusion. This may occur at the surfaces to be joined between layers of weld metal. .Lack of fusion at the joint surfaces is indicated by the retention of the original form and surface markings; between layers of weld metal it will appear as lines between the layers. 14.2.2 Factor 11 - Degree of Root Penetration for Butt and Fillet Welds Defects are most likely to occur at the root of the weld and in this position they are liable to have the maximum effect in reducing the strength of the weld. A close examination of the root shall, therefore, be made. In V-butt welds the first run should normally penetrate right to the underside of the plates, producing a penetration bead of the size required. In normal fillet welds with good root penetration the weld metal should reach the corner (see Fig. 11 and 12). 24

IS : 817 - 1966 14.2.3 Metallic from the they are being to
Non-Metallic (Slug) Inclusions and Gas C&ties y Noninclusions may consist of matter from the rod and flux used or Unless they are caused by use of unsuitable materials, electrode. attributable to the quality of workmanship, the desired result achieve a uniform appearance and freedom from cavities. Factor 12 -

14.2.4 Factor 13 - Qunlity of Weld Metal - Inferior quality of weld In metal arc weldmetal may be caused by incorrect welding technique. ing the defects may generally be due to excessive arc length or speed or The fracture does not possess its customary clean incorrect current. If present appearance but revea!s voids, oxide films and slag inclusions. to a considerable extent, they may result in a rough, porous, discoloured and lustrelcss appearance in the fracture. SECTION 4 15. GENERAL 15.1 The tests shall be of the following a) Initial qualification test, b) Annual test, and c) Periodic control test. 15.2 These tests are designed to show that the welder is familiar with the Approval of welders for works of sprcial nature usual welding techniques. may demand additional special trade or approval tests. 16. INITIAL QUALIFICATION TEST three types: TESTS FOR WELDERS

16.1 The Initial Qualification Test shall be conducted after the trainee has completed all the requirements relating to the thcorctical instruction and welding practice specified in the relevant Sub-section or Sub-sections for which he intends to qualify. 16.1.1 A trainee shall not be allowed to take the Initial Qtialification Test for Sub-section 3B unless he has a valid Initial Qtalilication Test Certificate for Sub-section 3`4; he shall not be allowed to take the Initial Qualificatict Test for Sub-section 3C unless he possesses an Initial Qualilication Test Certificate for Sub-section 3B. 16.2 Preparation of Test Pieces 16.2.1 Gmernl- The steel shall be rcnsonably lice from scale. rtlst, oil, pamt and other defects which adversely afrcct welding. 16.2.2 Butt We/d `Test Piece - The test piccc shall conform IO the rccluircments of Pig. 14. The edges to be wc!detl sliall br prcparcd I)y macllining or by machine flame cuttmg. The joint preparation shall bc uil\)ackecl single-V. The plates should be slightly prr-set so tlu11 tllcy arc ~c;~s(,I~;~I)IJ 2.5

IS : 817 - I9sS flat after welding. All runs should be deposited with 4-mm filler rod, including the sealing run. The weld shall be back-chipped or flame-gouged to a semicircular groove to a depth of 3 mm. After back-chipping or flame-gouging, the sealing run shall be deposited. Each run of weld shall be stopped and restarted with a fresh filler rod within the central 50 mm of the test piece. In the flat position (see 20), the test piece shall be welded using 4-mm electrodes for the first run and sealing run and 5-mm electrodes for the other runs. 16.2.3 Fillet Weld Break Test Piece - The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 15. The test weld should be deposited using 4-mm filler rods to deposit a weld of 6 mm leg length. The weld should be stopped and restarted with a fresh filler rod within the central 50 mm of the test piece. When the trainee is to be tested only for welding in the horizontal-vertical position (see 20), the welds shall be deposited using 5-mm filler rods. 16.3 Marking of Test Pieces 16.3.1 Each completed test plate shall be indelibly marked in such a manner as to identify each specimen that will be removed therefrom. The marking shall identify : a) the +rainee, b) the position 16.4 Assessment pieces for all the three tests shall of welding, used. and

c) the size of electrode

16.4.1 By K&al Examination - Test be visually examined for the following:

a) Dimensions of weld deposit - The dimensions of the weld shall be checked. The finished weld should be slightly over rather than under the specified size. b) Shape of projile - In butt welds, the surface should be slightly convex. Typical profile views for butt welds have been illustrated in Fig. 11. c) Uniformity of surface - The height and spacing of ripples. shall be uniform. d) Degree of undercut - The welded joint shall be free from undercut, but slight intermittent occurrences may be disregarded provided that such undercut is not in the form of a sharp notch. e) Smoothness of joint where welding is recommended - The joint in the weld run where welding has been recommenced shall be as smooth as practicable and shall show no pronounced lump or recess in the weld surface. f) Freedom from surface cavities and trapped slag-The surface weld shall be free from porosity, cavities and trapped slag. 26 of the

ISs 817-1966

-f
50 OlSCARl

t 40 _L

FACE PECIMEI

BEND

lESERVE REPEAT IF

FOR TEST REWIREI

,.,J-+
-f
40 ROOT PECIME~ BEND i50 _-IL

/i f!
Position <

NscARc

/
L-V V (UP) V (Down) 0

60"-65"

I

g:;;:
70"-75"

, 80":85"

NOTE-Weld SO mm.

to be stopped and re-started with

a fresh electrode

within

central

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 14

METHOD OF MAKING Bu,~ WELD BEND TEST SPECIMEN FOR INITIAL QUALIFICATIOW TEST AND ANNUAL TEST (See alternative to this figure on P 28) 27

IS: 817-1966

ORIZONTAL VERTICAL

All dimensions (Alternative for Fig. 14 showing

in millimetres. the length of weld specimen)

In fillet welds the contour may vary from concave to convex, according to the type of electrode or filler material, the welding position and technique. Typical profile views for normal fillet welds have been shown in Fig. 12. 16.4.2 By Testing

16.4.2.1 Butt we& - After external visual assessment sf the butt .weld test pieces, two bend test specimens each 40 mm wide shall be cut from the test piece by sawing or machining (see Fig. 14). The upper and lower surfaces of the weld shall be filed, ground or machined, level with respective original surfaces of the plates. Tool marks should be avoided as they lead to localization of stress and may cause premature failure. For this reason the direction of machining of the surfaces should be along the specimen and transverse to the weld. The sharp corners of the test specimens shall be rounded to a radius not exceeding 1 mm. The specimen shall then be bent to an angle of 180" over a former having a diameter equal to four times the thickness of the specimen as shown in Fig. 16. One test specimen shall he tested with the face of the weld in tension and the other with the 28

IS : 817 - 1966

-I---

Jl -A
ii- so

k
100 -+ 100 i IO0

-7

1

"ELDso

+

ZS'O

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 15 METHOD OF MAKING FILLET WELD BREAK TEST SPECIMENFOR INITIAL QUALIFICATION, ANNUAL AND PERIODIC CONTROL TESTS

+FIG. 16 METHOD OF CARRYING OUT BEND TES-I 29

root of the weld in tension. A good weld should show no crack or defect of a dimension greater than 3 mm measured along the weld and l-6 mm measured across the weld. Premature failure at the corner of test specimens should not be regarded as cause for rejection. Prior to bending, the edges of the test specimen should be etched to reveal the weld, if this is not sufficiently discernible to ensure that the bending takes place on the centre line of the weld. 16.4.2.2 Fillet weld break test-After external-visual assessment of the fillet weld break test piece, the test piece shall be cut into three equal portions by sawing or machining and broken open along the weld and the weld fracture examined (see Fig. 15). The weld fracture shall be examined, keeping in view the following factors: a) Degree of fwion - Fusion should be complete over the' whole area of the joint surfaces. The fracture should be inspected for lack of fusion. This may occur at the surfaces to be joined and between layers of weld metal. Lack of fusion at the joint surfaces is indicated by the retention of the original form and surface markings; between layers of weld metal it would appear as lines between the layers. are most likely to occur at the b) Degree of root penetration -Defects root of the weld. In normal fillet welds with good root penetration the weld metal should reach the corner (see Fig. 11 and 12). c) The fracture shall have a clean uniform appearance and the weld metal should be free from cavities and slag inclusions. 16.5 R&test for Initial Qualification Test 16.5.1 In case a trainee fails to meet the requirements of one or more tests mentioned under 16.2 to 16.4, a re-test may be allowed immediately or after some further training on the following conditions: a) An immediate re-test shall consist of two test welds of each type on which he failed. The re-test welds shall meet all the ,requirements specified for such welds. b) If the re-test is made after the trainee has had further training or practice, the complete Initial Qualification Test shall be repeated. 16.6 Validity of Initial Qualification Test Certiiicate 16.6.1 The certification implied in passing of the Initial Qualification Test is valid only when the holder is employed as a welder within six months of the passing of the test. The certification shall lapse automatically if, for any reason, he has not worked as a welder for a period of six months or more. Such lapsed certification shall be reinstated provided Periodic Control Tests specified under 18 are passed. 30

IS t 817 = 1966 17. ANNUAL TESTS

17.1 General - The Annual Tests to be taken by a welder and the results of which are to be entered on his Record Card (see 7) shall comprise a butt weld bend test and fillet weld break test as specified under 17.2 and 17.3 respectively. Details of test pieces and preparation are given below. preparation of test piece and testing 17.2 Butt Weld Bend Test -The procedure for the butt weld bend test shall be the same'as those prescribed under 16.2.2 and 16.4.2.1 for the Initial Qualification Test. 17.3 Fillet Weld Break Test - The preparation of test piece and testing procedure for the fillet weld break test shall be same as those prescribed under 16.2.3 and 16.4.2.2 for the Initial Qualification Test.

18. PtiODIC

CONTROL

TEST

18.1 The Periodic Control Test consists of the fillet weld break test and should be done at regular intervals of six months. Welders engaged continually on work that is subject to examination by some non-destructive testing method, such as radiography, need not be subjected to the Periodic Control Test. The preparation of test piece and testing procedure for the Periodic Control Test shall be the same as those prescribed under 16.2.3 and 16.4.2.2 for the Initial Qualification Test. 19. RETESTS TEST FOR ANNUAL TEST AND PERIODIC CONTROL

19.1 Annual Test -If the welder fails in the Annual Test, although Periodic Control Tests have not shown any specific reason to question The re-test shall consist of his ability, he shall be re-tested immediately. two test welds of each type on which he fails. The test welds shall meet all the requirements specified for such welds. If the trainee fails in such a re-test, he shall be employed on unimportant work for some period -and then resubmitted to the Annual Test. 19.2 Periodic Control Test - If the results of the Periodic Control Tests indicate that there is some reason to question the welder's ability, then he shall be submitted to the tests prescribed for the Annual Test. If he fails in this test, he shall be put on unimportant work for a period and then resubmitted to the Annual Test. 19.3 The welder shall not be permitted to re-start until he has passed the Annual Test. 31 on important work

20. POWMON

FOR TEST WELDS

20.1 In the Itiitial, @alifkation Test, the Annual Test and the Periodic Control Test, the position for the test welds would depend on the welding positions for which the trainee or welder is to be certified or passed. The minimum requirements of test welds shall be as given in Table 5. 20.2 The entries made ,in the Record Card. (see 7) shall have a reference to the welding positions for which the. tests have been conducted and passed.

TABLE

5

MINIMCM

REQUIREMENTS (C&u.re20.1)

OF-TEST

WELDS

fhB-SECTION

`TLpe

OF JOINT

WELDING

POSITION

3A

Bud Weld Fillet Weld Fik Weld

Flat Flat Horizontal-Vertical vertical up vertical up Horizontal-vertical Ovuhead Overhead

3B

Fillet Weld Butt Weld Butt Weld

3c

Fillet Weld Butt Weld

32

IS:

817-H@

APPENDIX
(Clause 7.2)
RECOMMENDED FORM

A
FOR RECORD CARD

(Page 1 of Card) (Name of Training Establishment issuing the Record Card) Name of the Trainee Permanent Address ................... -::::::::::: :::: F

Signature of Trainee This Record Card certifies that . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..i............ (Full name of trainee) whose signature and photograph are shown above, has completed a course or courses of training in metal arc welding conforming to a Sub-section or more than a Sub-section of Section 3 of IS : 817-1966 `Code of practice for training and testing of metal arc welders (revised) and has passed the test or tests specified in the said Code of Practice as indicated in the following pages and duly certified by signatures under official seals. (Page 2 of Card) Courses of Training Completed and the Initial Qualification Tests Passed Sub-section 3A of Section 3 of IS : 817-1966 Period of Training From (date). . . . . . . . . . . . . to (date). . . . . . . . . . . . .Total. . . . . . . . . . ._.days Type of Weld Butt Fillet Fillet Position of Welding Flat Flat Horizontal/Vertical Date of Tests Remarks

Date :

(Signature of Training Establishment Officer) (Iksignation of Officer) (Official Seal of Training Establishment) (Continued) 33

I8r 817-1966
(Page 2 of Card --Con&f) Sub-section 33 of Section 3 of IS : 817-1966 Period of Training From (date) . . . . ..i......~(date).............Total............days TvpG of Weld Fillet Butt Butt Position of Wilding vertical up Vertical Up Horizontal/Vertical (Signature Date : of Training Establishment Officer) (Designation of Officer) (Official Seal of Training Establishment) Datu of Tests Ren&s

Sub-section 3C of Section 3 of IS : 817-1966 Period of Training From (date). . . . : . . . . . . . . to -(date). . . . . . . . . . . . . Total. . . . . . . . . . . .days Tyfie of Weld Fillet Butt Position of Welding Overhead Overhead (Signature Date : Date of Tests Remarks

of ,Training Establishment Officer) (Designation of Officer) (Official Seal of Training Establishment)

(Pages 3 to 12 of Card) Record if Annual Tests Type of Weld Position of Welding D;fst of Remarks Signature of Ojicer wzth Designation and O&al Seal

Sub-section 3A Butt Fillet Fillet Sub-section 3B Fillet Butt Butt Sub-section 3C Fillet Butt

Flat Flat Horizontal/Vertical Vertical Up Vertical Up Horizontal/Vertical Overhead Overhead 34

IS : 817 - 1966

APPENDIX (Clause 8.2)

B

RECOMMENDEDDESIGN OF POSITIONING
B-l. INTRODUCTION

EQUIPMENT

B-l.1 The positioning equipment is designed to hold and position plates while the trainee is busy in performing welding exercises and tests. The purpose of such equipment is to provide a convenient method for holding airy kind of joint (butt joint, lap joint, tee joint or corner joint) so that it may be welded in the flat, horizontal, vertical or overhead position.
B-l.2 This appendix describes the device and illustrates its application. B-l.3 B-2. Separate equipment OF should general features of the positioning booth.

be\ provided

for each welding

DESCBIPTION

EQUIPMENT including all jigs and fixtures,

B-2.1 The complete positioning equipment, is illustrated with details in Fig. 17. B-3. ILLUSTRATIONS OF USE OF

EQUIPMENT

B-3.1 The use of positioning equipment has been illustrated by photographic of qualification test assemblies being prepared in each of the four positions Corresponding sketches of these test plates show the orientation of welding. of plates and wilds for each position. of plates B-3.2 Butt Welds - Fig. 18A to 18D illustrate the orientation for butt welding in the flat, horizontal-vertical, vertical and overhead positions while Fig. 19A to 19D show the butt welding being deposited in the corresponding positions. B-3.3 Fillet Welds -The orientation of plates for fillet welding in the flat, horizontal-vertical, vertical and overhead positions is illustrated in Fig. 20A to 20D. B-4.

ADVANTAGES

OF POSITIONING

EQUrPMENT

B-4.1 Some of the advantages
over the other makeshift to B-4.1.5.

of using this type of positioning equipment, facilities commonly employed, are given in B-4.1.1

B-4.1.1 The equipment increases actual welding time by (a) eliminating the use of C clamps; (b) facilitating rapid clamping of plates in jigs and adjustment of the jigs to any desired angle; (c) holding test plates rigid while they are being chipped and cleaned of slag; (d) permitting easy 35

IS :817-1966

2 Column 3 Main column bracket 4 Galvanized iron pipe frame

I Base

5 6 7 8

Holder bracket Strairht plate holder Main bracket clamp Disc clamp

9 IO II 12

Holder bracket clamp Holder positionin clamp Plate holding brackets Column fixed to base with bolts

FIG. 17

ILLUSTRATION

OF RECOMMENDED DWGN OF POSITIONING EQ~P~

36

IS I 817-1966 removal and replacement of test plates between passes when necessary; and (e) readily permitting the setting and holding of plates at proper root opening* B-4.1.2 The equipment ilhrstrated permits welding on plates of any length up to 180 cm in the vertical position, and would hold plate of any thickness up to 16 mm. Special holding jigs may be made to take in plate of any desired thickness. B-4.1.3 The equipment permits holding the work in any position and at any desired level from the floor to over 180 cm above, thereby accustoming the trainee to some of the positions and angles at which he might be required to work on the job.
AX&O? WaD

t40n12oNTAL 18A

LAXIS OF WELD HORIZONTAL

for

Position of Plates Flat Butt Weld

186 Position of Plates for Horizontal Vertical Butt Weld

AXIS OF WtLO VERTICAL

AXIS

OF WORlZOHlAC

WEI.

IK Position of Plates for Vertical Butt Weld

l8D Position of Plates for Overhead Butt Weld FOR

FIG. 18

POSITIONS OF PLATES 37

BUTT WELDS

IS : 817 - 1966

19A

Flat Position

19B

Horizontal-\ljerticaI

Position

19C

Vertical

Position

I9D

Overhead

Position

FIG. 19

POSITIONSOF PLATES FOR BUTT WELDS

38

Is' t 817 -. 1966

2OA Position of Plates for Flat Fillet Weld

206 Position of Plates for Horizontal Vertical Fillet Weld

20C Position of Plates for Vertical Fillet Weld FIG. 20

20D Position of Plates for Overhead Fillet

POSITION OF PLATESFOR FILLET WELDS

Ml.4 The equipment displaces table and stool from welding booth. (A tool tray, if desired, may be made as part of the equipment, as shown in Fig. 17.) B-4.1.5 The equipment may be readily constructed in most of the machine shops and welding shops.
39

IS: 817-1966

APPENDI'X (C2uu.w8.7)

C

ACCE!BORIES AND EQWMENT RECOMMENDED FOR TRAINING ESTARLISHh$ENT FOR WELDERS C-l. SHOP MACHINES AND ACGES@RY EQUIPMENT

C-l.1 The training establishment shall be provided with the following shop and accessory equipment:

4 b) cl 4

Heavy work bench with machinist's or blacksmith's vice weighing 30 kg or more; Gas cutting torch (manual or machine type) or plate shear for preparing plates for welding and for cutting test specimens; Two-ended pedestal grinder with 25 ~3. cm (or larger) wheels and wheel dresser; coarse

Heavy power hacksaw, (preferably with 25 cm width capacity) or horizontal metal band saw;

4 Portable or flexible shaft grinder ;. f ) Equipment for machining test specimens; $9 Guided-bend test device with hydraulic jack
capacity;

of 8 tonnes or larger

h) 3 k) 4 4

Break or rupture device with hydraulic jack of `8 metric tons or larger capacity; Fire extinguishers, chemical type; Fire buckets with water; Sand bags for fire protection ; Scrap box 90 x60 x30 cm;

P) Chartboard for progress chart, instructional charts and notices; q) Small platform scales for weighing out electrodes;

r)

First aid kit;

s) Provisions for sterilizing welding helmets; t) Anvil 45 kg or heavier; u) Display board for sample specimens of welding exercises; and v) Hot metal quenching tank.
NOTE - Facilities for showing motion pictures, `filmstrips and slides have been fauna IO be of assistance.

40

IS: C-2. SMALL TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES

817-1966

C-2.1 While welding, each trainee shall be supplied with the following equipment : . Sledge hammer for rupturing check test specimens, Ball peen hammer, C-clamps, Cold chisels, Centre punches, Scribers, Metal rules, Try squares, Sets of metal marking steel stamps (letters and figures of 5 mm height), k) Sinall steel wedges, m) Medium coarse files for rounding edges of test specimens, and n) Soapstone marking crayon. FOR EACH TRAINEE WHILE WELDING a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) j)

G-3. RF.QBS

G-3.1 While welding, each trainee shall be supplied with the following equipment : a) Helmet or hand shield with suitable coloured filter lens and clear cover glass, b) Welding and cutting torches, c) Ground clamp (where necessary leather gloves, or gauntlets), d) Safety goggles for use while chipping and cleaning welds and for flash protection, e) Wire scratch brush, f) Slag-chipping hammer, and g) Pair of short pick-up tongs or heavy gas pipe pliers. TRAINEE OBSERVERS C-4. EQUIPMENT FOR INSTRUGTORS WHILE OBSERVING AND

C-4.1 While welding, each instructor and trainee shall be supplied with the following equipment: a) Helmet or hand shield with suitable coloured filter lens and clear cover glass, and b) Weld gauges. 41

IS : 817 - 1966

APPENDIX (Clause 9.2)
RECOMMENDED FORM OF TRAINEE

D
PROGRESS CHART

Name ............................................ Address ........................................... Local Address ..................................... Employer's Name & Address. ....................... .............. .......... ......................... *Courses required : 1. Butt Welds in Flat Position and Fillet Welds in Flat and Horizontal-Vertical Position, 2. Butt and Fillet Welds in Vertical Position and Butt Welds in Horizontal-Vertical Position, and 3. Butt Welds and Fillet Welds in Overhead Position Special remarks, if any. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . Terms of payment Cash/Credit/Free Date in. . . . . . . . . . . Date out. . . . . . . . . . .Total Period (weeks). . . . . . . . . . .
LESSON 1 BUTT WELDS IN FLAT POSITION AND FILLET WELDS IN FLAT AND HORIZONTALVERTICAL POSITION Dates Days Total No. of b%zf welding pr+$ce Striking the arc and bead welding Striking the arc Running beads (flat position Bead welds weaving technique (flat position) status of progress * These cxuses correspond to Sub-sections 3A, 3B, and 3C of Section 3. -----__ --t I ___ tEstimated time observing weld and test specimens

42

IS : 817 - 1966

Welding of butt, Comer weld Single-run fillet weld Multi-run fillet weld Butt weld (see Fig. 8A) Butt weld (see Fig. 6) Making check test No. 1 Making check test No. 2 Status of progress specimen

fits jc

and fillet joints in flat position

I I I

_. _ _. _. _. _.

I

I

.

specimen

position

Welding of fillet joints in the horizontal-vertical Single-run tillet weld -----Multi-run fillet weld ------Making cheek test specimen No. 3 ------Making check test specimen No. 4 I,, status of progress III

I

I

43

Is :

817 - 1966
Dates Days T tal N: of h:zzf welding practice Welding in vertical position Es-ted time zz3 test specimens

LESSON 2 BUTT AND FILLET WELD IN VERTICAL POSITION AND BUTT WELDS IN HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION

Bead welds and reinforcing pad in horizontal-vertical position Butt welds (see Fig. 10) Butt welds (see Fig. 14) Making check test specimen No. 5 Making check test specimen * No. G Status of progress Welding in ha&ontal-vertical Bead welds-vertical vertical down Single-run vertical up Multi-run vertical up Butt welds -- ---Corner tion welds-down dircc-_ ---Making check test specimen No. 7 Status of progress ----fillet up and __ ---welds-_ ---fillet welds-- -_-------lz ition for butt welds

44

IS:
LESSON 3 WELDING IN OVBRHEAD POSITION Dates

817-1966
Estimated time observing weld and test specimens

Total No. of hours of actual welding practice

Bead welds position

in

overhead

I

I
---

I

I

Single-run fillet weld Multi-run fillet weld -Butt weld ---f No. 8

Making check test specimen I I I I

Making check test specimen No. 9

I
Status of progress

I

I

I

45

Is : 817.1966

APPENDIX (Chse 10.1)
RECOMMFJVDED E-l. BUTT FLAT SYLLABUS

E

FOR TRAINING

COURSE

WELDS IN FLAT POSITION AND FILLET WELDS IN AND HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION (See 13) Theory 50 hours, Min 75 hours, Min
Position Hours of Instruction 7

PERIOD

Actual Welding Practice Period Details of Course

1st Week

Theory

a) Safe0 in Welding The instruction course shall be so designed as to make the trainee aware of the necessity for observing safety precautions under the following three general headings : 1) Protection of person, that is, proper shoes, clothing, hand shield, helmet or goggles with the rrght shade of filter, adequate ventilation, avoidance of electric shock, etc. 2) Protection of property, that is, safeguarding combustible material, protection from hot slag? flying sparks and flame, availability of fire protection equipment, etc. 3) Protection and care of equipment, that is, proper cable connections, avoidance of grounding electrode holder, shutting off equipment when not in use, storage and handling of oxygen and acetylene cylinders (or acetylene generators where low pressure system 46

IS.: 817-1966
Period Details of Course is used), operation of pressure Position iYour. of Instruction

regulators, handling of blowpipe, care of hose and equipment, etc. Safety rules recommended in Appendix F and the detailed instruction given in IS : 8181957*.

b)

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to acquaint the trainee with the principal welding processes in common use, with particular emphasis on manual arc welding.
30*

Welding Processes

Practice

Elementary gas cutting Bead welds Running beads

Flat Flat
3

Film shows, discussion, etc.

2nd Week

Theory Elementary Electricity a> The elements of electricity

7

should be explained in a simple manner to the trainees to assist them in properly appreciating the lecture that follows on electric welding equipment.
Welding and Gar Cutting Equipment

b)

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an idea of the characteristics of arc welding plant of different types, their principal features, method of connecting up, current setting
for safety and health requirements in electric and gas welding and

cutting operations.

*Code of practice

47

IS : 817-1966
Period Details of Course Position Hours of Instruction

and minor adjustments. Fitting and dismantling of manual gas cutting equipment, flame adjustment and care of equipment should also be covered.
Practice

Reinforcing pad Fillet welds
Film shows, discussion, etc.

Flat Flat

30*

2 8

3rd Week

Theory

4

Instruction in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an elementary knowledge of the thermal and metallurgical factors involved in the welding of steel. The welding characteristics of high tensile and alloy steels, cast iron and non-ferrous metals should also be explained in a simple manner. Instruction in this subject shall be designed to give the trainee an elementary knowledge of factors involved in reading simple blue prints in order to assist him in comprehending common welding terms and symbols used. Flat 30* 3
Elementary Blue Print Reading

Elementary Welding Metallurgy

b)

Practice

Corner welds

Film shows, discussion, etc.

*It has een found that of the total number of hours of training a trainee spends not more than 3 5 to 40 percent at the welding point having practice in welding, the rest of the time being spent in the prepFa&p of plates, testing of specimens, witnessing demonstration, etc.

48

IS : 817-1966
Period Details of Course Position Hours of Instruction 7

4th Week

Theory
a)

Welding Procedures, Terms and Symbols Instruction in this subject shall include plate edge preparation, types of joints, use of jigs, fixtures and manipulators, tacking and other aids to assembly, sequence of welding, residual stresses, control of distortion, pre-heating and post-heating. The more important terms relating20 arc welding and the standard symbols used for detailing weld sizes and showing welds on drawings shall be explained. 30* Flat 3 7

Practice Butt weld -

Single

`V'

Film shows, discussion, etc. 5th Week Theory a) Quality of Welds Instruction in this subject shall be designed to familiarize the trainee with the characteristics of good welds and causes of defective welds. The topic for discussion ;idlf include (1) squndnayd usron, (3) penetration, (4) weld contours and dimensions.

b) Inspection and Testing of Welds Under this heading should be covered the more common methods of weld inspection and testing (shop as well as field Instruction in this methods). subject is better given in the form
*It more time tion, has been found that of the total number of hours of training a trainee spends not than 35 to 40 percent at the welding point having practice in weld&g,. the rest of the being spent in the preparation of plates, testing of specimens, witnessmg demonstraetc.

49

Y8 : 817-1966
Period Details of Course of a discussion of the trainees' welds before and after testing. The following points in particular should be covered : 1) Visual inspection and use of weld gauges. 2) Bend, tensile, impact and pressure tests. 3) Non-destructive methods such as radiographic and magnetic particle inspection. Practice Butt weld square edges Flat 30* 3 7 30* Position Hours of Instruction

Film shows, discussion, etc. 6th Week
Thor

Same as 5th week Practice Fillet welds

Further lectures. Horizontalvertical

Film shows, discussion, etc. 7th Week Theory a) Characteristics of Electrodes in this shall be Instruction designed to familiarize the trainee wi& the different types of electrodes used in metal arc welding. b) Estimating and Costing Factors affecting welding cost and the method of estimating materials requirements shall be explained in a simple manner. Practice Revision Film shows, discussion, etc.
*It more time tion,

3 7

30* 3

has been found that of the total number of hours of training a trainee spends not than 35 to'40 percent at the welding point having practice in welding, the rest of the being spent in the preparation of plates, testing of specimens, witnessing demonstraetc.

50

IS : 817-1966

E-2. BUTT AND FILLET
BUTT WELDS (sic 13) PERIOD Period 1st Week IN

WELD IN VERTICAL POSITION AND HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITIONS Welding Practice 75 hours, A& Position Hours of Instruction 37*

Actual

Details of Course

Practical Bead welds Fillet welds Film sbws, discussion, etc.

Vertical/up Vertical/up

3 Vertical/up Vertical/up 37*

2nd Week

Practical Fillet welds Butt - Single `V Film shows, discussion, etc.

3 Vertical/up Vertical/ down Horizontal/ vertical 3 37* Horizontal/ vertical Horizontal/ vertical 3 38* 37*

3rd Week

Practical Butt - Single `V' goy;zwzrises) Depositing bead Film shows, discussion, etc.

4th Week

Practical Butt weld-bottom plate square top plate bevelled Butt weld-both plates bevelled Film shows, discussion, etc.

5th Week

Practical Revision Film shows, discussion, etc.

2

*It has been found that of the total number of hours of training a trainee spends not more than 35 to 40 percent at the welding point having practice in welding, the rest of the time being spent in the preparation of plates, testing of specimens, witnessing demonstration, etc.

51

IS : 81711966 E-3. WELDING IN OVERHEAD POSITION (See 13)
PERIOD Period 1st Week Actual Welding Details of Course Practice 50 hours, Min Position Hours of Instruction 37*

Practical Bead welds Fillet welds Film shows, discussion, etc.

Overhead Overhead

3 Overhead 37*

2nd Week

Practical Fillet weld Film shows, discussion, etc.

3 Overhead 37*

3rd Week

Practical Butt weld -

Single `V'

Film shows, discussion, etc. 4th Week Practical Butt weld - Single `V' (Further exercises) Revision Film shows, discussion, etc. Overhead

3 37*

3

*It more time tion,

has been found that of the total number of hours of training a trainee spends not than 35 to 40 percent at the welding point having practice in welding, the rest of the being spent in the preparation of plates, testing of specimens, witnessing demonstraetc.

52

IS : 817 - 1966

APPENDIX (Clause 12.1.1)
RECOMMENDED SAFETY

F

RULES

DO
1 Wear 2 Wear leather a helmet gloves, adequate clothing and heavy shoes, tightly of welding laced.

or use a shield when in the vicinity materials from the vicinity

flash arc. cr gas by a slag.

3 Remove combustible cutting operations.

of welding

4 Get prompt first aid if burned flash or flying scale.

or if your eyes have been injured grinding, peening or removing

5 Wear safety goggles when chipping,

6 Keep booth and floor clean and clear of electrode and carelessly disposed tools. 7 Know how to use the fire extirrguishers

stubs, scraps of metal their location. hot. the

and memorize

8 See that hose connections

are tight and that cables do not become exhaust gases when operating

9 Make proper provision for venting tip of the torch in confined spaces.

DON'T 1 Look at a welding 2 Use cracked 3 Hang flash with the naked eye. helmets or shields. or cylinder valves.

or defective

a torch with its hose on regulators

4 Pick up hot objects. 5 Use electrode holders with defective jaws. with a grounded for that purpose.

6 Leave the electrode holder on the table or in contact metallic surface. Replace it on the support provided

7 Weld on closed containers or on containers that have held combustible materials. Secure permission from the instructor before welding on any container. 8 Weld in the vicinity of flammable 53 or combustible materials.

IS : 817- 1966 9 Weld
(Special 10 Weld on galvanized metal without permission care should be taken to provide adequate spaces without equipment. gas cylinder. adequate from the instructor. ventilation.)

in confined to repair

ventilstion.

11 Attempt 12 Strike

an arc on a compressed

NOTE- For detailed instructions for safety and health requirements in electrode and gas welding and cutting operations, reference should be made to IS : 818-1957".

*Code of practice for safety and health rrquiremrnts cutting operations.

in electric and gas welding and

54

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131.323 3375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234O62,91 11 3239399,91 11 3239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 8-77 0032

Central

Laboratory:

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional Central `Eastern Offices:

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : 1114CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Ma&da, CALCUTTA 7OOO54 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

32376 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 23523 15 832 92 95

Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern TWestern : Manakalaya, E9, Behind Mar01 Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 38OOOl $Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T: Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500601 E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 1171418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013

550 1348 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 1996 541137 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 52 51 71 26 23 05 32 36 35 621 17 271085 309 65 28 222 39 71

. Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
T.C. No. 14/1421, University PO. Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM `Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 TSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 *Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002
Printed at Simw

695034

Printing Press, Delhi

