( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9901 ( Part V ) - 1981

MEASUREMENT SOUND PART V

OF AND OF

INSULATION IN BUILDINGS BUILDING ELEMENTS
FIELD MEASUREMENTS OF FACADE Sectional OF AIRBORNE AND LTDC 5 ELEMENTS Committee,

SOUND FACADES

INSULATION

Acoustics

Chairman DR M. PANCHOLY Emeritus Scientist Physical Laboratory New Delhi

National Members

( CSIR )

~RGpW$GntifZg Ministry of Defence ( R&D Ahuja Radios, New Delhi

DR K. ACJTYUTXAN SRRI R. S. VOIIR~ ( AlfHnQte) SRRISANDEEP ARUJA SIWI S. P. JERATH ( Alternate ) COL T. R. BHALOTRA LT-COL KI~~AN Lar, ( Alternate DR A. F. CHRAFCAR SRRI TEK C~ANI,ANI ( Alternote DR P. N. GUPTA SHRI R. K. JAIN

)

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi Component Industries Association Electronic ( ELCINA ), New Delhi SHRI L. K. V:SRWANATH ( Allmate) Railway Board, New Delhi SHRI K. S. KALIDAS SHRI V. JAYARAXAN ( Alternate ) Botton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SERI J. S. MONQA SHRI M. S. MONG~ ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MUKHKRJEE SHRI J. K. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore DR ( MISS ) SHAILAJA NITCAM Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, Sn~r K. D. P.<VATE Pilani Sanr M. R. KAPOOR ( Akmte ) Films Division, Bombay SBP.I A. V. RAM~NAN Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi RESEARCH ENQINEEK ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1982 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is prowcted undrr the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall he dwmt,d to he an infringtmlent of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9901 ( Part V ) - 1981

Members SHRI
SAEWAX KUXAR

Representing
Directorate General of Civil Aviation,

New Delhi SRRI K. CEANRACHUDAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New SHRI M. SHANKARALINQAX __ Delhi SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) SHRI M. N. SHUKLA Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI S. K. TANDON ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDENT SURVEYOR OB Central Public Works Department, New Dellii WORKS ( FOOD ) SHRI L. K. VISHWANATH Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd Bombay; and The Radio Electronics & Telehsion Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SHBI K. D'SA ( Ahmate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o@io Mcmba ) SHRI R. C. JAIN, Heed ( Electronics )

SHRI P&VAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics

), IS1

2

IS : 9901( Part V ) - 1981

Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF SOUND INSULATION IN BUILDINGS AND OF' BUILDING ELEMENTS
PART V FlELD MEASUREMENTS OF FACADE OF AIRBORNE AND SOUND INSULATION ELEMENTS FACADES

0.

FOKEWOKD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part V ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The purpose of this standard is: a) to specify procedures to measure the sound insulation properties of a facade with respect to outside noise such as traffic noise, thus making it possible to ensure that the constructions meet the desired acoustical conditions inside the building; and b) to prescribe field procedures to determine whether facades have met building specifications and to check where faults occurred in the facade construction. 0.3 This standard covering field measurement of airborne sound insulation of facade elements and facades, is a part of the series of Indian Standards on measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements. Other standards in this series are: Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part VI Requirements Statement for laboratories of precision requirements of airborne sound insulation of

Laboratory measurements building elements Field measurements rooms Laboratory floors

of airborne sound insulation between of impact sound insulation of

measurements 3

IS :-9901 ( Part
Part Part VII

V ) - 1981
Field measurements of impact sound insulation of floors

VI I I Laboratory measurements of the reduction of transmitted impact noise by floor coverings on a standard floor

assistance has been derived from 0.4 While preparing this standard, ISO/DIS 140/V ` Measurement of sound insulation in buildings and of building elements: Part V Field measurements of airborne sound insulation of facade elements and facades `, issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, it shall be done m accordance with IS : 2-lS60*. accordance with is to be rounded this off,

.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part V ) specifies field methods for measuring the sound insulation properties of facades under particular acoustical conditions and for determining the protection afforded by the facade to the occupants of the building.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and IS : 1885 ( Part III/Set 8 )-19747 shall apply.
3. CONDITIONS

definitions

given

in

OF MEASUREMENT

3.1 The test specimen is located either in an outer wall ( for example in the case of a window ) or is the outer wall itself ( for example a whole facade ). 3.2 When
determining the existing acoustical conditions, the measurements should preferably be carried out according to 4 with traffic noise ( sound from different directions and with varying intensity ). 3.3 When testing the sound insulation properties of facades, measurements can alternatively be performed according to 5 with loudspeaker noise ( directed sound ). 3.4 However, on account of the differences in the nature of the incident sound, the results of both methods cannot be expected to agree fully.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rekcd ). tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section 8 Architectural

acoustics.

4

IS : 9901 ( Part V ) - 1981 4. MEASUREMENT 4.1. Principle 4.1.1 If the sound is incident on the test specimen from different directions with varying intensity, as, for example, traffic noise in busy streets, the sound reduction index is obtained from the equivalent sound pressure levels measured as a function of frequency on both sides of the test specimen. This quantity is denoted by Rtr: WITH TRAFFIC NOISE

Rlr = Lcq,l where

Lc*,2 t 10 log10

$dB

. . . . . . (1)

L gq,l is the

equivalent sound pressure level 2 m in front of the test specimen including the reflection effect of the test specimen; averaged sound pressure over the room; level in the receiving ( see Appendix A ); room. room

L rq,2 is the equivalent
S

is the area of the test specimen is the equivalent absorption

A

area in the receiving

NOTE - Equation (1) is applicable when the line of traffic is sufficiently long and straight to ensure a fairly uniform distribution of incident sound. M hen the angle of elevation ( observed from the point of least distance between the test specimen and the line of traffic ) is more than about 20", there will be predominance of oblique angles of incidence and the results may diffc r from those obtained at ground floor level to the extent that thesound reduction index of the test specimen is deptndent on the angle of incidence. When the angle of elevation exceeds 50", cquaticn (1) shculd not be used. In cases where it is required to measure the protection afforded by the fsczde irrerFective of its construction and surface area or its positicn relative to the nci:e sources, the standardized level difference D,,T,~~ shculd be used:

D,,T,w .=LpQ~l - Lw,,+ 10l%o TdB
where 7 is the measured T0 is the reference reverberation reverberation

I

0

. . . . . . (21

time in the receiving

room;

time, 0.5 second for dwellings.

4.2

Equipment
equipment shall be suitable for meeting the requirements

4.2.1 The
of 4.4.

5

IS : 9901 ( Part V ) - 1981 4.3 Test Arrangement

4.3.1 For the test arrangement to be used in the field, it is not possible to standardize the area of the test specimen and the volume and shape of the receiving room. 4.4 Test 4.4.1 Procedure Generation and Evaluation

of Sound Field the existing traffic noise, incident on

4.4.1.1 For sound excitation, the test specimen, is used. 4.4.2

Measurement of the Equivalent Sound Pressure Levels The equivalent sound pressure level LIP is defined by the

4.4.2.1 formula:

Ti

-+$I PW
Leg

-

0 10 log 10 -_____

dB PO% sound pressure; sound pressure; time.

. . . . . . (3)

where p(t) is the time-varient p,, = 2-i is the integrating 20 PPa is the reference

4.4.2.2 Lcp can be determined by an appropriate integrating device or ( as an approximation ) by a noise distribution analysis according to IS : 9S89-1981*. 4.4.2.3 On account of the possible fluctuations of the traffic noise, the equivalent sound pressure levels Leg,1 and Leg,2 shall be measured simultaneously on both sides of the specimen, for example, by recording the sound signals with a two-track magnetic tape machine and by evaluating both signals within the same time intervals.
NATE -When determining the difference of average sound pressure levels from simultaneous measurements, it is unimportant whrther the actual readings are expressed m terms of L,,, L,, or L,,. ( Lso and L,, are the sound pressure levels exceeded in 50:/o and 10% of the observation time respectively. ) In some cases one of each of these will be measured for othrr reasons and it will not be nrcessary to measure all three but only that which is the most convenient at the time. When specifically measuring sound insulation and not noise disturbance, it is preferable to use Leg.

4.4.2.4 microphone

For determining the equivalent sound pressure level Legrl, the should be placed about 2 m in front of the test specimen.
response.

*Assessment of noise with respect to community

6

1s : 9901( Part V ) - 1981 4.4.2.5 Alternatively, the microphone may be placed as close as possible ( less than 2 cm ) to the outer face of the test specimen with the axis parallel to it. In this case 3 dB are subtracted from the value of according to equations (1) and (2) respectively. &+ or DnT,tr calculated
NOTE 1 - When the microphone several difficulties may arise: is placed as close as possible to the test specimen, of the microphone

a) the level measurements will depend critically on the position with respect to the outer face of the test specimen;

b) insufficiently large impedance of the test specimen ( compliance of the window pane, absorption of facade material ) may cause error of unknown magnitude; c) different microphone sensitivity and directivity on both sides of the test specimen.

NOTE 2 - If there is a balcony in front of the test specimen, the measurement with traffic noise cannot be applied for determining the sound reduction index of the test specimen. However, the combined protection afforded, including the balcony, could be determined by placing the microphone 2 m in front of the balcony and by using equation (2).

4.4.2.6 The sound pressure level in the receiving room should be an average over space and time. This average may `be obtained by using a number of fixed microphone positions or a number of stationary positIons of a remotely controlled movable microphone. The microphone positions shall be out of the near field of the test specimen. 4.4.3 Frequency Range of Measurements

4.4.3.1 The sound pressure level should be measured using thirdThe discrimination characteristics of the octave or octave band filters. filters should be in accordance with IS : 6964-1973*. 4.4.3.2 frequencies 100, 1 250, Third-octave band should be used: filters having _ at least the following 500, 630, 800, centre 1 000,

125, 160, 200, 250, 1 600, 2 000, 2 500,

315, 400, 3 150 Hz.

If octave band filters are used, as a minimum the series beginning with centre frequency 125 Hz and ending at 2 000 Hz should be used.
NOTE 1 -Use frequency.

of lower

frequency

is dependent

on the distribution

of

natural

times for the empty rocm are adjusted to a NOTE 2 - The minimum~reverbcration volume of 180m'. For other volumes, these times should be multiplied by the factors

high frequencies,

( Vi180 )3 ( V being the volume of the room expressed in cubic metres ) except at where the air absorption is the predominant factor influencing the decay rate. half-octave and third-octave band filters for analyses of

*Specification for octave, sound and vibrations.

7

IS : 9901 (Part 4.4.4

V ) - 1981

Measurement and Evaluation of the Equivalent Absorption Area

4.4.4.1 The correction term of equation ( 1 ) containing the equivalent absorption area may preferably be evaluated from the reverberation time measured according to IS : 8225-1976" and evaluated using Sebine's formula: A = EC where A is the equivalent Y is the receiving T absorption room volume, time, area, in square metres; T . . . . . . (4)

in cubic

metres;

is the reverberation

in seconds.

An alternative method of taking the equivalent absorption area into account is to measure the average sound pressure level produced by a sufficiently stable sound source the power output of which is known. 4.4.5 Measurement Procedure which affect the repeatability of the

4.4.5.1 The necessary criteria measurements are shown below: a) On the outside, i) traffic ii) position b) On the inside, i) minimum boundaries, fields; ii) number iii) averaging distance especially noise source(s);

and relative to the test specimen.

of the microphone

between microphone test specimen, with regard positions;

and room to the near

of microphone

time of the levels; and absorption area, readings in each B.

iv) method for determining the equivalent which involves a number of repeated position. An example 4.5 of typical test conditions

is given in Appendix

Precision
is

4.5.1 It satisfactory
*Method

required repeatability.

that the measurement procedure should give For the instrumentation and, in specific cases,
of absorption coefficients in a reverberation !3 room.

of measurement

IS : 9901 ( Part for the complete measuring conditions, this can be determined method shown in IS : 9901 ( Part III )-1981*.

V ) - 1981 with the

4.5.2 It is recommended that different organizations in the same country periodically perform comparison measurements on the same test object to check the repeatability and the reproducibility of their test procedures. 4.6 Expression of Results

4.6.1 For the statement of the airborne sound insulation of the test specimen, the sound reduction index Rq should be given at all frequencies of measurement in tabular form and/or in the form of a curve. For graphs with the level in decibels plotted against frequency on a logarithmic scale, the length for a 10 : 1 frequency ratio should be equal to the length for IO dB, 25 dB, or 50 dB on the ordinate scale. 4.7 Test Report 4.7.1 The a) name test report should state: has performed the measurements;

of organization

that

b) date of test; c) description of test specimen, and details of mounting; if possible with sectional drawing

4

indication level Lep,l; suitable specimen

of traffic

situation

and the equivaIent showing flow;

sound pressure of the test room;

e) a

plan of the building, in relation to the traffic and equivalent absorption

the position

f) volume g> method h) 3

area of the receiving

applied for determining the equivalent sound pressure level including the time intervals used and, in the case of a noise distribution analysis, the class width used;

either sound reduction index dized sound level difference whichever is appropriate; the area S used for evaluation brief 4.4.5 description ). of details

Rq of test specimen or the standarD,,T,w as a function of frequency
of of

Ry;
procedure and equipment ( sac

9

*Measurement of sound insulation in buiidings and of building elements: Laboratory measurements of airborne sound insulation of building elements.

Part III

9

iS : 9901 ( Part V ) - 1981 5. MEASUREMENT 5.1 Principle 5.1.1 The loudspeaker is located outside the building at an appropriate distance from the test specimen. The sound is incident on the test speci-, men mainly from one direction only. 5.1.2 The sound reduction WITH LOUDSPEAKER NOISE

Rq and is given by the following Rq = L;
where C1

index determined equation: 4s CAST dB

by this method

is called

-

Lz + 10 log,0

. . . . . . (5)

is the average sound pressure level immediately in front of the test specimen without the reflecting effect of the test specimen ( see 4.4.2 ); is the angle of incidence ( angle between the loudspeaker axis directed at the centre of the test specimen and the normal to the surface of the test specimen ); is the average sound pressure level in the receiving ( See Appendix A ); room. of 5.4. room;

`p

L2

S

is the area of the test specimen is the equivalent absorption

A
5.2 5.3

area in the receiving

The equipment Test

shall be suitable

for meeting

the requirements

Arrangement

5.3.1 For the test arrangement to be used in the field, it is not possible to standardize the area of the test specimen and the volume and shape of the receiving room. 5sl: ~Test Procedure 5.4.1 and Evaluation

Generation of Sound Field

5.4.1.1 The kind of loudspeaker arrangement and its distance to the `test specimen should be so chosen that the test specimen is excited as uniformly as possible. The loudspeaker should be placed as near as possible to the ground, preferably on the ground.
5.4.1.2 The local differences of sound pressure of the test specimen should not exceed 5 dB. level over the surface of incidence 75" may be

5.4.1.3 The measurements shall be made at an angle Other angles in the series O", 15", 30", 60" and of 45". added. 10

IS : 9981 ( Part V ) - 1981 ,542
Measurement of the Average Sound Pressure Levels

5.4.2.1 The average sound pressure level V1 is obtained from the The mic rophone sound radiation of the loudspeaker in the free field. should be placed at the same distance from the source as the surface of The sound pressure level should be averaged over an the test specimen. Except for the area corresponding to the surface of the test specimen. this measurement should be -reflecting influence of the test specimen, carried out under the same acoustical conditions as during the actual It can be considered as calibration measurements on the test specimen. ,of the loudspeaker.
NOTE T If there is a balcony in front of the test specimen, the measurement shall not yield the reduction index of the test specimen alone but rather the combined sound protection offered by the test specimen and the balcony under the given angle of incidence.

5.4.2.2 The sound radiation of `&etween calibration and measurement
NOTE 1 m from current.

the loudspeaker should of sound insulation.

not change

This may be checked by placing the microphone at a distance of about the loudspeaker on the axis of radiation or by measuring the loudspeaker

5.4.2.3 The sound pressure level in the receiving room should be an This average may be obtained by using average over space and time. a number of fixed microphone positions or a continuously moving microThe microphone positions shall be out phone with an integration of JS. ,~f the near field of test specimen.
NOTE - An alternative described in Appendix C. method which may be advantageous in some cases is

5.4.3 5.4.4

Frequency Range of Measurements -

Provision

of 4.4.3

shall apply.

Measurement and Evaluation of the Equivalent Absorption Area the correction area, provision term of equation (5) containing of 4.4.4 shall apply.

5.4.4.1 Concerning &he equivalent absorption 5.4.5

Measurement Procedure determine which a normal test procedure of the

5.4.5.1 Each organization should which -complies with this standard. 5.4.5.2 The necessarv criteria measurements are shown below: a) On the outside, i) position of the loudspeaker

affect the repeatability

relative

to the test specimen;

ii) directivity

of the loudspeaker; 11

IS : 9901 ( Part iii)

V ) - 1981

angle of incidence; of loudspeaker.

iv) calibration b) On the inside,

9

minimum boundaries, fields;

distance especially

between microphone and room test specimen, with regard to near

positions or, in the case of a moving ii) number of microphone microphone, the microphone path; iii) averaging time of the level; . absorption area, readings in each D.

for determining the equivalent iv) method which involves a number of repeated position. An example 5.5 5.6 Precision Expression of typical test conditions

is given in Appendix

Provision of Results

of 4.5 shall apply.

5.6.1 For the statement of the airborne sound insulation of the test specimen, the sound reduction index Rep should be given at all frequencies of measurement in tabular form and/or in the form of a curve. For graphs with the level in decibels plotted against frequency on a logarithmic scale, the length for a 10 : 1 frequency ratio should be equal to the length for 10 dB, 25 dB or 50 dB on the ordinate scale. The angle of incidence should be indicated, for example

R45.

5.7 Test Report 5.7.1 The test report a) name b) should state: that has performed the measurements;

of the organization

date of test; if possible with sectional showing drawing and

c) description of test specimen, details of mounting; d) ~a suitable specimen; e) volume plan of the

building, absorption

the position

of the test room;

and equivalent

area of the receiving

f) kind of loudspeaker arrangement, the angle cpof sound incidence as well as the position of the loudspeaker relative to the test specimen that is the height of the tert specimen, the distance of 12

19:99Ql(PartV)-1981
the loudspeaker from the facade and the lateral the angle of elevation C# and the angle of azimuth E ); g) type of noise and filters used; h) sound reduction frequency; index displacement or p ( see Appendix

R 'p of

the test specimen of

as a function

of

j) the area S used for the evaluation k) brief description 5.4.5 ), of details of

Rep;
and equipment ( see

procedure

APPENDIX A ( C'Zauses 4.1.1 and 5.1.2 )
AREAS A-l. When determining equations ( 1 ) and ( 5 ) from within the receiving OF TEST SPECIMEN
the sound reduction index of a facade, S in is the area of the whole facade as viewed room.

A-2. If the sound reduction index of only a part of the facade ( for example a window ) is to be determined, S is the area of that part of the facade as seen from within the receiving room. In the case of a window or a door, S is the area of the free opening in which the element i( including a possible frame and sealing ) is mounted. In both cases it shall be proved that the sound transmission through the rest of the facade is negligible. `The area S used shall be stated in the test report.

APPENDIX B ( Clause 4.4.5.1)
EXAMPLE OF TEST PROCEDURE WITH TRAFFIC FOR MEASUREMENTS NOISE

An example of a test procedure which will normally be expected to give .satisfactory repeatability is given below for cases where the room volume -exceeds 25 ma and the distance between the traffic noise sources and the itest specimen is not less than 6 m. 13

IS :9901( Part V ) - 1981
Thetraffic noise sources shall have a uniform distribution of sound incidence and sufficient sound power as a function of frequency for the measuring situation and the likely sound insulation of the test specimen. The microphone shall be placed about 2 m in front of the test specimen. Six microphone positions randomly distributed throughout the room are taken, using an averaging time of 5 seconds in each frequency band at each position. No microphone position shall be nearer than O-5 m to the room boundaries or 1 m to the test specimen. In the case of single vehicles passing the test specimen, for each of the six microphone positions the level difference is determined separately for each passing on the basis of a filtered tape loop analysis resulting in equivalent sound pressure levels for each frequency band. The averaging time shall be chosen according to the duration of the passing. The equivalent absorption area should be determined from readings taken using three microphone positions with two reverberation time analyses at each position.

APPENDIX C [ Clause5.4.2.3 ( Note ) I]
OPEN-CLOSED METHOD In field measurements, difficulties in determining the sound pressure level outside of the building may arise, for example, due to weather conditions ( wind, rain ) or due to shadow effects of balconies. In such cases it would be advantageous to determine the sound reduction index of a specimen such as a window or door by measurements in the receiving room only with the test specimen open and closed. This so-called open-closed method is feasible if the test specimen is openable and if the sound reduction index of the outer wall is considerably higher than that of the test specimen. The sound reduction index determined by this method using loudspeaker noise is called Rvoc and given by the following equation:

Rqoc = Lz
where

open -

L,

closed

+

7 10 log10 mT2'"" dS open

I..

(6)
in

ir closed and T open are the reverberation times measured the room with the test specimen closed and open. 14

IS : 9961 ( Part The correction 10
h310 ; closed open

V ) - 1981

term
dB

takes into account that the equivalent absorption area in the room is changed when the test specimen is opened.

receiving

If this influence is to be evaluated from the average sound pressure level produced by a standard source, the correction term should be replaced by A 10 logto e;=& where Aopen and Acloaed are the equivalent absorption room with the test specimen is open and closed. areas of the dB

If only a part of the test specimen ( not less than one-third of the full area S of the test specimen ) is openable, a further correction term! 10 loglo-& dB

shall be added to equation ( 6 ), where S openis the area of the part of test specimen which can be opened.

APPENDIX D [ Clause 5.4.5.2 (b) ]
EXAMPLE OF TEST WITH PROCEDURE FOR MEASUREMENTS LOUDSPEAKER NOISE

An example of a test procedure which will normally be expected to give satisfactory repeatability in cases where the room volume exceeds 25 m* is given below. For a test specimen at ground floor level, tha loudspeaker is placed on the' ground at an angle of incidence of 45", the axis of the loudspeaker being directed to the centre of the test specimen. The loudspeaker is placed at an adequate distance sound level over the surface of the test specimen. 15 to ensure uniform

IS : 9901 ( Part V ) - 1981 Six microphone positions randomly distributed throughout the room are taken, using an averaging time of 5 seconds in each frequency band at each position. No microphone position should be nearer than 0.5 m to the room boundaries or 1 m to the test specimen. As an alternative, the sound field sampling procedure can be carried out using a rotating microphone device having a sweep radius of 0.7 m. In this case the plane of the traverse is inclined in relation to the room boundaries and the device should have an averaging time equal to the traverse time which should be a minimum of 30 seconds. The equivalent absorption area should be determined from readings taken using three microphone positions with two reverberation time analyses at each position.

APPENDIX E 1 czausc 5.7.1 (f) ]
POSITION OF LOUDSPEAKER The position of the loudspeaker, placed on the ground at Q ( see Fig. 1 ), relative to the test specimen is determined by the height h of the test specimen, the distance d of the loudspeaker from the facade and the lateral displacement b. The angle q, of sound incidence d is then given by formula

`Os(f =I

d/h'

+

d'

+

bS

In htu, for a desired angle of incidence the necessary distance fcr a given height and lateral displacement may be~obtained from the formula -d = cot `p l/ha + by Conversely, for a given given by the formula b 3 @-& `p hf height and distance the lateral displacement is.

NOTE - Alternatively, the position of the loudspeaker relative to the test specimen can be described by the angle of elevation 4-. and the angle of azimuth B: d db= + da cm $ = co:, (3 = I_ dde + 6" +4F+Ts

Then,

the angle

of incidence

is given by the formula

cos q3 = CO6 + co!4 p 16

IS : 9901 ( Part V ) - 1981

F&CAM

c
0
R

TEST SPECIMEN

3------x

O-AHER

Fro. 1 Porrno~ OFLOUDSPEAKER RELATIVEPO TEST SPECIMGN

17

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units Q!JAN!lT~ Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

UNIT

SYMBOL

metrt kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m

kg
s

A K
cd

mol

Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units

UNIT

SYMBOL

radian sterndian

rad 81

QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force Electromotive Preature, atress

UNIT IlC+WtOll

SYMBOL

N

1 N I I

1 kg.m/s*

-joule watt webtr tesla hertz riemens
VQh

J
W
Wb /

Jm1N.m

1 W=-lJ/s 1 Wb 0 1 V.s 1 1 1 T S 0 1 Wb/m 1 A/V 1 N/m* 1 Hz D 1 c/s (s-l) V m 1 W/A

T HZ S V Pa

Pascal

1 Pa -

