WaT HTA IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


wet g St nara a ama 


qmi 2 ukRem gR 


LED Based Solar Lantern 


Part 2 Methods of Test 


ICS 27.160 


© BIS 2018 


mia AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Mh WH, 9 Seg VHC AM, ae feeei-110002 
vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2018 Price Group 10 


Solar Photovoltaic Energy Systems Sectional Committee, ETD 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Solar 
Photovoltaic Energy Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


This standard covers test methods for portable LED based solar lanterns, which are lighting systems consisting of 
white LEDs as a light source, a storage battery (Sealed maintenance free lead-acid or nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) 
or lithium based battery or other) and electronics, all placed in a suitable housing made of durable material such 
as metal or plastic and a separate PV module. The battery is charged by electricity generated through the PV 
module through a charge controller. For the purpose of this standard, the service environment of the lantern 
(without the PV module) can be described as being fully covered by a enclosure to protect it from direct rain, sun, 
wind-blown dust, fungus, etc. 


This standard is published in two parts. The other part in the series is 
Part 1 Specification 
Considerable assistance has been derived from IEC/TS 62257-9-5 (2013) in the formulation of this standard. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical-values (revised)’. 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


LED BASED SOLAR LANTERN 
PART 2 METHODS OF TEST 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down test methods for portable LED 
based solar lanterns, which are lighting systems 
consisting of white LEDs as a light source, a storage 
battery (Sealed maintenance free lead-acid or nickel- 
metal hydride (NiMH) or lithium based battery or other) 
and electronics, all placed in a suitable housing made 
of durable material such as metal or plastic and a 
separate PV module. The battery is charged by 
electricity generated through the PV module through a 
charge controller. For the purpose of this standard, the 
service environment of the lantern (without the PV 
module) can be described as being fully covered by a 
enclosure to protect it from direct rain, sun, wind-blown 
dust, fungus etc. 


2. REFERENCES 


The Following Standards are necessary adjuncts to this 
standard: 


IS No. Title 
12762 (Part 1): Photovoltaic devices: Part 1 
2010 Measurement of photovoltaic current 
— Voltage characteristics 
16047 : 2012 Secondary cells and batteries 


containing alkaline or other non-acid 
electrolytes — Secondary lithium 
cells and batteries for portable 
applications 

Secondary Cells and Batteries 
Containing Alkaline or Other Non- 
Acid Electrolytes — Portable Sealed 
Rechargeable Single Cells: Part 1 
Nickel-Cadium 

Secondary cells and batteries 
containing alkaline or other non-acid 
electrolytes — Portable sealed 
rechargeable single cells: Part 2 
Nickel-Metal hydride 


16048 (Part 1): 
2013 


16048 (Part 2) : 
2013 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
shall apply. 


3.1 Capacity of a Cell or a Battery — The quantity 
of electricity (electric charge), usually expressed in 
ampere-hour (Ah), which a fully charged battery can 
deliver under specified conditions 


3.2 Life of a Lamp — The total time for which a lamp 
has been operated before it becomes useless, or is 
considered to be so according to specified criteria. 


NOTE — To entry lamp life is usually expressed in hours. 


3.3 Light Unit — Assembly inside a casing of all 
parts such as lamps, optical apparatus, coloured glass, 
terminals, necessary to exhibit a light aspect. 


3.4 LED based Solar Lantern — Solar photovoltaic 
(PV) based lanterns (SL), which are lighting systems 
consisting of white LEDs as a light source, a storage 
battery (Sealed maintenance free lead-acid or nickel- 
metal hydride (NiMH) or lithium based battery or other) 
and electronics, all placed in a suitable housing made 
of durable material such as metal or plastic and a 
separate PV module. The battery is charged by 
electricity generated through the PV module through a 
charge controller. 


3.5 Lux — SI unit of illuminance: illuminance 
produced on a surface of area 1 square metre by 
aluminous flux of | lumen uniformly distributed over 
that surface 


3.6 Ampere symbol A — SI unit of electric current, 
equal to the direct current which, if maintained constant 
in two straight parallel conductors of infinite length, of 
circular cross-section with negligible area, and placed 
1 metre apart in vacuum, would produce between these 
conductors a force per length equal to 2 x 107 N/m. 
NOTE — CGPM definition is as follows: “The ampere is that 
constant current which, if maintained in two straight parallel 
conductors of infinite length, of negligible circular cross- 
section, and placed | m apart in vacuum, would produce 


between these conductors a force equal to 2 x 107 newton per 
metre of length”. 


3.7 Multimeter — Multirange multifunction 
measuring instrument intended to measure voltage, 
current and sometimes other electrical quantities such 
as resistance. 


3.8 Ammeter — Instrument intended to measure the 
value of a current. 


3.9 Voltmeter — Instrument intended to measure the 
value of a voltage. 


3.10 Integrating Sphere — Hollow sphere whose 
internal surface is a diffuse reflector, as non-selective 
as possible. Used to determine the total luminous flux 
(lumen output) of a lighting device. 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


NOTE — An integrating sphere is used frequently with a 
radiometer or photometer. 
3.11 Power Supply — Electric energy converter which 
draws electric energy from a source and supplies it in a 
specified form to a load. 


3.12 Overvoltage Protection — Protection intended 
to operate when the power system voltage is in excess 
of a predetermined value. 


3.13 Portable — Products or subsystems are portable 
when two or more of the main components (energy 
source, energy storage, and light source) are connected 
in a way that makes the product or subsystem easy for 
an individual to carry. 


3.14 Light Emitting Diode LED — Solid state device 
embodying a p-n junction, emitting optical radiation 
when excited by an electric current. 


3.15 Low-Voltage Disconnect LVD — Battery 
voltage at which the load terminals of the charge 
controller are switched off to prevent the battery from 
over discharging. 


4 VISUAL SCREENING 


4.1 Background 


This test verifies the overall workmanship of the 
product. 


4.2 Procedure 

4.2.1 Properties, Features, and Information 

4.2.1.1 Test pre-requisites 

The SL should be new, unaltered, and in its original 
packaging. Read the SL’s box and documentation for 
instructions on using the SL. Ensure the SL’s battery is 
fully charged prior to conducting the test. While 
submitting the solar lantern for testing in the lab, the 


manufacturer/client has to provide the detailed 
information of the product in accordance with Annex A. 


4.2.1.2 Apparatus 


The SL to be positioned under a bright task light for 
examination. 


4.2.1.3 Procedure 

a) See, if a user’s manual is included with the 
SL with a list of all parts. 

b) Verify that all parts listed on the parts list are 
present including a carry handle. 

c) Examine, if all the components of the solar 
lantern are fixed at their designated places and 
bolted/soldered. 

d) Verify that the SL switches on successfully. 

e) Verify that all of the SL’s switches and 
connectors function as they should. 


f) Verify that the module manufacturer name/ 
logo, model number, serial number and year 
of make are laminated inside the module 

g) Verify that the number of indicators in the SL 
(e.g. charge indicator and load cut off 
indicator) include descriptions of indication 
meanings. 

h) Verify that no recognizable damage present 


j) Verify that there are no sharp edges on the 
body of the lantern 


4.2.2 Internal Inspection 


An internal inspection is performed to assess the 
electronics, soldering workmanship and for the 
connection of different components to be solder free. 
The SL can fail the inspection if poor internal 
workmanship inhibits the SL from properly functioning. 


4.2.2.1 Test pre-requisites 


The SL should be new, unaltered, and in its original 
packaging. Read the SL’s box and documentation for 
instructions on using the SL. If the SL’s instructions 
require it to be fully charged prior to operation, do so 
prior to conducting this test. Ensure that the SL’s battery 
is fully charged prior to conducting of test. 


4.2.2.2 Apparatus 


The SL should be positioned under a bright task light 
for examination. 


4.2.2.3 Procedure 


a) Check the SL’s functionality before 
disassembling, 

1) Does the SL work as described with 
provided documentation? 

2) Doall ofthe SL’s switches and connectors 
function as they should? 

3) Verify that no faulty operation is 
observed. 

b) Disassemble the SL so the following internal 
observations can be made: 

1) Verify that the SL uses the strain free cable. 

2) Verify that the charging indicator is true 
charging indicator and not deceptive. 

3) Verify that wires and cables are properly 
laid out and no bare wires in the solar 
lantern including the PCB. 

4) Inspect the electronic components’ 
quality and workmanship. Verify that no 
presence of any poor solder joints, such 
as cold joints or joints with little solder 
and corrosion of metals on the PCB. 

5) Verify that no discoloration or brittleness 
upon flexing the conductors. 


6) Verify that there is no recognizable 
damage, either inside or outside the solar 
lantern. 

7) Examine if the SL has an easily 
replaceable battery and/or printed circuit 
board (PCB). The battery and PCB are 
easily replaceable if they can be 
interchanged without any tools other than 
screwdriver(s) (i.e., without soldering or 
splicing). 


4.3 Verify that the SL’s overall internal workmanship 
quality is satisfactory. 


5 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


5.1 Background 


After visual screening the SL must be prepared before 
starting the tests. The preparation includes breaking 
the connections between the SL’s battery and circuit in 
order to facilitate charging the product, powering the 
product with a laboratory power supply, as well as 
taking measurements. 


5.2 Related Tests 


The sample preparation procedure must be performed 
on all SLs prior to conducting the testing. 


5.3 Procedure 
5.3.1 Sample Preparation 


The SL is rewired in order to make measurements of 
current and voltage during selected tests, charge the 
SL’s battery via a battery analyser, and simulate a 
specified battery voltage during selected tests. 


5.3.1.1 Equipment requirements 


a) Wire (0.52 mm? or thicker), 

b) Wire cutters, 

c) Wire strippers, 

d) Soldering iron and solder, 

e) Heat shrink and heat gun, or electrical tape, 


f) Screw drivers and/or other appropriate tools 
for opening the SL, and 

g) May be required, depending on the SL, a 
power drill with an appropriately sized drill 
bit to make a hole in the SL’s enclosure to fit 
four extension wires. 


5.3.1.2 Procedure 


a) Open the SL, without incurring damage, such 
that its battery is exposed. 


b) Identify the positive and negative terminals 
or leads on the SL’s battery. 


c) With wire cutters, cut the positive and negative 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


wires individually where the SL’s battery 

connects with the rest of the SL circuit. Cutting 

the wires together could cause an electric shock. 
NOTES 


1 in some cases, a third wire is attached between 
the SL’s battery and circuit for battery temperature 
monitoring — do not cut this wire, leave it as is. 


2 In some cases, more than one wire is connected 
to the SL’s positive battery terminal and/or more than 
one wire is connected to the SL’s negative battery 
terminal —keep the wires attached to each terminal 
together and treat them as one wire end for the 
remainder of the procedure. 


d) Extend the four wire ends (two connected to 
the battery terminals, two connected to where 
the original battery terminal wires intertied 
with the PCB) by soldering on additional 
wires. Make the wire extensions long enough 
to be extended approximately 6 cm outside 
the SL’s enclosure. Be sure to cover the wire 
solder connections with heat shrink. 


NOTE — When working with the extension wires, be 
sure to keep the battery positive and negative extensions 
separate when bare to avoid electrical shock. 


e) Close the SL such that the wires can extend 
outside the SL’s enclosure without being 
pinched. 

f) Some products are designed with openings in 
their enclosures such that the wires can fit 
through these openings without physically 
changing the SL’s enclosure. 

g) Some products do not have openings for wire 
extensions to fit through, in which case a hole 
must be drilled into the side of the SL’s 
enclosure. A drill bit with a diameter slightly 
greater than the combined diameter of all four 
extension wires should be used. Choose a 
location on the SL’s enclosure to minimize the 
extension wire length and minimize changes 
to the SL’s enclosure. Be sure that the extension 
wires do not interfere with the SL’s light output. 


h) To ensure the SL still works after it has been 
rewired, connect the wire pairs (with 
connectors or electrical tape) so the original, 
unaltered circuit is replicated and turn the SL 
on. If the SL does not turn on, check that the 
wires are connected correctly and that the 
solder joints connecting wires are good. 


6 PV MODULE CHARACTERISTICS TEST 


6.1 Background 


The purpose of the photovoltaic (PV) module I-V 
characteristics test is to validate the SL manufacturer’s 
PV module data (if available) and determine the PV 
module’s I-V characteristic curve under standard test 
conditions (STC). 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


Solar LED lamp units are often powered by PV modules 
having a power range from approximately 0.3 watts- 
peak (Wp) to 5 Wp. When selecting a measurement 
instrument, it is important to ensure that it is able to 
make accurate measurements of modules in the desired 
size range. The PV module can be measured with a 
solar simulator in accordance with IS 12762 (Part 1). 


6.2 Test Outcomes 


The test outcomes of the outdoor PV module I-V 
characteristics test are listed in Table 1. 


Table 1 PV Module I-V Characteristics Test 


Outcomes 
(Clause 6.2) 
SI Metric Reporting Notes 
No. Units 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 


i) Short-circuit current (Z) Amperes (A) 
at STC 


Report at STC 


ii) Open-circuit voltage Volts (V) Report at STC 
(Voc) at STC 

iii) Maximum power point Watts-peak Report at STC 
power (Pmpp) at STC (Wp) 

iv) Maximum power point Amperes (A) Report at STC 
current (Zmpp) at STC 

v) Maximum power point Volts (V) Report at STC 
voltage (Vipp) at STC 

vi) Pload Power at defined Watts Report at STC 
load 

vii) STC I-V Curve dataset Volts (V), Delimited dataset 

Amperes (A) 


6.3 Procedure 
6.3.1 Equipment 
Sun simulator. 
6.3.2 Method 


Measure the STC performance of the PV module by 
using the indoor sun simulator. In case of crystalline Si 
module the STC performance should be measured after 
initial exposure of the module. Transfer the STC 
performance and I-V curve of the PV module to NOCT. 


Use IS 12762 (Part 1) for STC performance 
measurement. 


7 BATTERY TEST 


7.1 Background 


The battery test is used to determine a SL’s actual 
battery capacity and storage efficiency. This 
information is useful to determine if a battery is 
mislabelled or damaged. During the test the battery is 
connected to a battery analyser, which performs charge- 
discharge cycles on the battery. The last charge- 


discharge cycle data from the battery test is analysed 
to determine the actual battery capacity and battery 
storage efficiency. 


7.2 Test Outcomes 


The test outcomes of the battery test are listed in 
Table 2. 


Table 2 Battery Test Outcomes 


(Clause 7.2) 
Sl Metric Reporting Units Note 
No. 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Battery Milliampere-hours — 
capacity (mAh) at a discharge 
(Cy) current (0,x /, A) 

ii) Battery Percentage (%) At least two complete 
storage charge-discharge 
efficiency cycles are required 
(1) for the calculation 


7.3 Procedure 
7.3.1 Sealed Lead-Acid Battery Test 


The SL’s sealed lead-acid battery is cycled on a battery 
analyser and the data from the final charge-discharge 
cycle is used to determine the SL’s actual battery 
capacity and storage efficiency. 


7.3.1.1 Equipment requirements 


Battery analyser with the voltage, current, and capacity 
measurement tolerances specified in section 4 of 
IS 16048 (Part 1) 


7.3.1.2 Test pre-requisites 


The battery can be taken out of the lighting product for 
this test. 


7.3.1.3 Procedure 


a) Prime the battery using a charge rate of 0.1/, 
A, a discharge rate of 0.1 7, A, and the 
information in the battery cycling 
recommended practices given in Annex B. 

b) Using the battery analyser, continuously cycle 
the battery until the maximum battery capacity 
is reached (that is, until the capacity 
improvement is less than or equal to 5 percent 
over the previous battery capacity). 

c) Ensure the battery is charged using a charge 
rate of 0.17, A and the information in the 
battery cycling recommended practices (see 
Annex B). After charging, the battery shall be 
stored in an ambient temperature of 20°C + 
5°C for not less than 1 h and not more than 4 h. 


d) 


e) 


7.3.1.4 
a) 


b) 


c) 


The battery shall be discharged at a rate of 
0.1 Z,A, using the information in the battery 
cycling recommended practices given in 
Annex B, and the battery capacity shall be 
measured. 

Continue cycling the battery until the change 
in measured battery capacity between 
subsequent cycles is less than or equal to 15 
percent, ensuring that the last two charge- 
discharge cycles have identical charge and 
discharge rates. 

If the battery will be stored after undergoing 
this test, charge the battery using a charge rate 
of 0.1 Z, A and the information in the battery 
cycling recommended practices given in 
Annex B. 


Calculations 


Determine the total energy input into the SL’s 
battery during the final charge cycle (E) using 
the following formula: 


E, = )\(V. x1, x At) 


where 
The energy entering the battery during 
the charge cycle, in watt-hour (Wh); 
The voltage recorded during the 
charge cycle, in volt (V); 
I, Thecurrent recorded during the charge 
cycle, in ampere (mA); and 
At The time interval between subsequent 
data points, in hour (h). 
Determine the total energy output from the 
SL’s battery during the final discharge cycle 
using the following formula: 


Ey = >) (VaxlaxAt) 
where 

E; The battery’s energy output during the 
discharge cycle, in watt-hour (Wh); 

V, The voltage recorded during the 
discharge cycle, in volt (V); 

I, The current recorded during the 
discharge cycle, in ampere (mA); and 

A, The time interval between subsequent 
data points, in hour (h). 


Determine the SL’s battery capacity with data 
from the final discharge cycle using the 
following formula: 


Cp = X (la x At) 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


where 


C, The measured battery capacity, in 
milliampere-hour (mAh); 

I, The current recorded during the 
discharge cycle, in ampere (mA); 
and 

At The time interval between subsequent 
current data, in hour (h). 


d) Determine the SL’s battery efficiency using 
the following formula: 


where 


nN, The battery storage efficiency; 


E; The battery’s energy output during the 
discharge cycle, in watt-hour (Wh); 
and 

E, The energy input to the battery during 


c 


the charge cycle, in watt-hour (Wh). 
7.3.2 Nickel-Metal Hydride Battery Test 


The SL’s nickel-metal hydride battery is cycled on a 
battery analyser and the data from the final charge- 
discharge cycle is used to determine the SL’s actual 
battery capacity and battery storage efficiency. 


7.3.2.1 Equipment Requirements 


Battery analyser with the voltage, current, and capacity 
measurement tolerances specified in section 4 
of IS 16048 (Part 1). 


7.3.2.2 Test prerequisites 


The battery can be taken out of the lighting product for 
this test. 


7.3.2.3 Procedure 


a) Prime the battery using the charge-discharge 
rates specified in 7.1 of IS 16048 (Part 2) and 
the information in the battery cycling 
recommended practices (see Annex B). 


b) Using the battery analyser, continuously cycle 
the battery until the maximum battery capacity 
is reached (that is until the capacity 
improvement is less than or equal to 5 percent 
over the previous battery capacity). 

c) Follow the discharge performance at 20°C 
procedure in 7.3.2 of IS 16048 (Part 1), 
using the measured battery capacity from 
the previous charge-discharge cycle as the 
target capacity for the next charge-discharge 
cycle. 

d) Continue cycling the battery until the change 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


in measured battery capacity between 
subsequent cycles is less than or equal to 15 
percent, ensuring that the last two charge- 
discharge cycles have identical charge and 
discharge rates. 

e) Ifthe battery will be stored after undergoing 
this test, charge the battery using the charge 
rates specified in 7.1 of IS 16048 
(Part 1) and the information in the battery 
cycling recommended practices annexure B 


7.3.2.4 Calculations 
Perform the same calculations listed in 8.3.1.4. 
7.3.3 Lithium Ion Battery Test 


The SL’s lithium-ion battery is cycled on a battery 
analyser and the data from the final charge-discharge 
cycle is used to determine the SL’s actual battery 
capacity and battery storage efficiency. 


7.3.3.1 Equipment requirements 


Battery analyser with the voltage, current, and 
capacity measurement tolerances specified in 4 of 
IS 16047. 


7.3.3.2 Test pre-requisites 


The battery can be taken out of the lighting product for 
this test, if desired. 


7.3.3.3 Procedure 


a) Follow the discharge performance at 20°C 
procedure in 7.3.1 of IS 16047, using the 
measured battery capacity from the previous 
charge-discharge cycle as the target capacity 
for the next charge-discharge cycle. 

b) Continue cycling the battery until the change 
in measured battery capacity between 
subsequent cycles is less than or equal to 15 
percent, ensuring that the last two charge- 
discharge cycles have identical charge and 
discharge rates. 


c) Ifthe battery will be stored after undergoing 
this test, charge the battery using the charge 
rates specified in 4 of IS 16048 (Part 1). 


7.3.3.4 Calculations 
Perform the same calculations listed in 7.3.1.4. 
7.3.4 Lithium iron Phosphate Battery Test 


The SL’s lithium iron phosphate battery is cycled on a 
battery analyser and the data from the final charge- 
discharge cycle is used to determine the SL’s actual 
battery capacity and battery storage efficiency. 


7.3.4.1 Equipment requirements 


Battery analyser with the voltage, current, and capacity 
measurement tolerances specified in 4 of IS 16047. 


7.3.4.2 Test pre-requisites 


The battery can be taken out of the lighting product for 
this test. 


7.3.4.3 Procedure 


a) Follow the discharge performance at 20°C 
procedure in 7.3.1 of IS 16047, using the 
measured battery capacity from the previous 
charge-discharge cycle as the target capacity 
for the next charge-discharge cycle. 

b) Continue cycling the battery until the change 
in measured battery capacity between 
subsequent cycles is less than or equal to 15 
percent, ensuring that the last two charge- 
discharge cycles have identical charge and 
discharge rates. 

c) Ifthe battery will be stored after undergoing 
this test, charge the battery using the charge 
rates specified in 4 of IS 16048 (Part 1) and 
the information in the battery cycling 
recommended practices (see Annex B). 


7.3.4.4 Calculations 
Perform the same calculations listed in 7.3.1.4. 
7.3.5 Nickel-Cadmium Battery Test 


The SL’s nickel-cadmium battery is cycled on a battery 
analyser and the data from the final charge-discharge 
cycle is used to determine the SL’s actual battery 
capacity and battery storage efficiency. 


7.3.5.1 Equipment requirements 


Battery analyser with the voltage, current, and capacity 
measurement tolerances specified in 4 of IS 16048 
(Part 1) 


7.3.5.2 Test prerequisites 


The battery can be taken out of the lighting product for 
this test. 


7.3.5.3 Procedure 


a) Prime the battery using the charge-discharge 
rates specified in 7.1 of IS 16048 (Part 1) and 
the information in the battery cycling 
recommended practices (see Annex B). 

b) Using the battery analyser, continuously cycle 
the battery until the maximum battery capacity 
is reached (that is, until the capacity 
improvement is less than or equal to 5 percent 
over the previous battery capacity). 


c) Follow the discharge performance at 20°C 
procedure in 7.2.1 of IS 16048 (Part 1), using 
the measured battery capacity from the 
previous charge-discharge cycle as the target 
capacity for the next charge-discharge cycle. 

d) Continue cycling the battery until the change in 
measured battery capacity between subsequent 
cycles is less than or equal to 15 percent, 
ensuring that the last two charge-discharge cycles 
have identical charge and discharge rates. 

e) Ifthe battery will be stored after undergoing 
this test, charge the battery using the charge 
rates specified in 7.1 of IS 16048 (Part 1) and 
the information in the battery cycling 
recommended practices (see Annex B). 


7.3.5.4 Calculations 


Perform the same calculations listed in 7.3.1.4. 


7.4 Reporting 


a) Battery capacity (Ah) at a specific discharge 
current, 

b) Battery storage efficiency (percent), and 

c) Deviation of the average result from the SL’s 
rating for each aspect tested, if available 
(percent). 


8 FULL-BATTERY RUN TIME/AUTONOMY 
TEST 


8.1 Background 


The full-battery run time captures one of the key system- 
performance metrics from a user’s perspective. It 
combines the relationship between battery capacity, 
circuit efficiency lighting system power consumption, 
capability of LED driver circuit to provide the constant 
output irrespective of battery voltage and under realistic 
operating conditions. 


In general terms, the full-battery run time test involves 
operating hours of a SL with a fully charged battery 
until the battery is discharged to the permissible 
discharge level that is load cut of condition while 
maintaining the light output well within the rated level. 


8.2 Test Outcomes 


The test outcomes of the full-battery run time test are 
provided in the respective tables 


8.3 Procedure 
8.3.1 Equipment Requirements 


a) Lux meter (the resolution of the luxmeter 
should be atleast 0.01 lux); 


b) Scale; 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


c) A darkened room or cabinet with direct 
luminance measurement under fixed 
geometry; 

d) Data-logging voltage device; 

e) Data-logging current device (for example 
voltage data logger and current transducer); 
and 


f) d.c. Current and voltage meters. 
8.3.2 Test Method 
This test is conducted in three steps. 


8.3.2.1 Measurement of the light output and light 
distribution of the SL (Step 1) 


a) Setthe SL in the dark room and work out the 
centre point of the SL in the room 

b) Draw the circles of 1,2, 3, 4 and 5 feet diameters 
from the centre point of the SL and mark it. 

c) Keep the SL at the centre point with the fully 
charged battery and switch it ON 

d) After 1 h of switching ON of the SL measure 
the light output in lux at eight equally 
distributed points on the periphery of each 
circle by keeping the detector in horizontal 
and vertical position respectively 

e) Record the data as in Table 3. 

f) The average light output should meet the 
requirements as specified and the variation in 
light output measured at 4 different points 
should not be more than 3 percent. If it passes 
proceed to step 2. 


8.3.2.2 Ensuring of the constant light output 
irrespective of the battery voltage (Step 2) 


a) Power the SL by using the d.c. power supply 
by setting it at the nominal battery voltage and 
connect the d.c. current meter and voltmeter 
to measure the LED driver input and output 
parameters. 

b) Switch on the lantern and measure the battery 
input current, input voltage, the LED driver 
output voltage and current at four different 
battery voltages ranging from load cut off 
voltage and the battery full charge condition 
voltage. 

c) Record the data as in the Table 4. 

d) The conversion efficiency of the LED driver 
should match the specified value. 

e) The variation in output current and power as 
function of battery voltage should not be more 
than 3 percent. 

f) Ifthe above two parameters at d and e do not 
meet the specified value, the system will be 
considered as fail at this stage. 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


Table 3 Light output measurement at different distances from the SL and different points 
(Clause 8.3.2.1) 


SI Distance from Detector Luxat Luxat Luxat Luxat  Luxat  Luxat  Luxat  Luxat Average Lux 
No. the centre of SL position Point! Point2 Point3 Point4 PointS Point6 Point7 Point8 (8) 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) a1) a2) 

i) 1feet Horizontal 

Vertical 

ii) 2 feet Horizontal 

Vertical 
iii) 3 feet Horizontal 
Vertical 
iv) 4 feet Horizontal 
Vertical 
v) 5 feet Horizontal 
Vertical 


Table 4 LED Driver Efficacy and Output Parameters as a Function of Battery Voltage 
(Clause 8.3.2.2) 


SI Battery LED Driver Input Parameters LED Driver out output LED driver Remarks 
No. Voltage parameters Efficiency (Variation in the output 
v anaa percent current/power as function 
Voltage Current Power Voltage Current Power of battery voltage) 
(V) (mA) (W) (V) (mA) (W) 

o) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 

i) 

ii) 

iii) 

iv) 


g) Ifthe system passes proceed to step 3. 


8.3.2.3 Measurement of the autonomy of the system/ 
full battery run time (Step 3) 


a) Set the SL in the dark room ( the temperature 
of the dark room should be in the range 25 to 
30°C) and make sure that the battery used in 
the SL is fully charged. 

b) Switch on the SL and note down the time of 
switching on of the SL. 

c) Keep on monitoring the battery voltage. 

d) Switch off the system the moment battery 
voltage reaches the load cut off value (The 
load cut off is required to set at a value up to 
which the battery discharge is permissible for 
example in case of a 12 V lead acid battery 
the load cut off is around 11.4 V). 

e) Work out the total ON duration of the SL, in 
hours 

f) The total ON duration of the SL should meet 
the specified autonomy of the SL 


8.3.3 Reporting 


a) System meets the light output requirement and 


light distribution as per specifications 
(Yes/No). 

b) Power fed to the LED is independent of the 
battery voltage (Yes/No). 

c) SL meets the autonomy requirement (Yes/No). 


9 CHARGE CONTROLLER BEHAVIOUR TEST 


9.1 Background 


Deep discharge and overcharge protection is important 
for user safety and battery longevity. Charge controlling 
is most important for products with lead-acid, Li-ion, 
and LiFePO4 batteries. The charge controller behaviour 
test contains five methods to examine a SL’s charge 
controller. Every SL must be tested with the active deep 
discharge method, where the SL is discharged until 
reaching its low voltage disconnect (LVD) voltage or 
appropriately exceeding its recommended deep 
discharge voltage threshold. Every SL must also be 
tested with the active overcharge protection method, 
where the SL is charged until reaching its over voltage 
protection (OVP) voltage or appropriately exceeding 
its recommended OVP voltage threshold. For SL with 
NiMH batteries that have no active deep discharge 


protection, the passive deep discharge protection 
method must be used, where the SL’s long-term 
discharging battery voltage is examined for safety. For 
SLs with NiMH batteries that have no active overcharge 
protection, the passive overcharge protection method 
must be used, where the SL’s long-term charging current 
is examined for safety. 


Every SL must also be examined for self-consumption. 
It is possible that a SL’s electronics may draw 
substantial amounts of energy from the SL’s batteries 
while the SL is not in use. This self-consumption may 
lead to shorter run times or problems when storing the 
SL for long periods of time. 


9.2 Test Outcomes 


The test outcomes of the charge controller behaviour 
test are listed in Table 5. 


9.3 Procedure 
9.3.1 Active Deep Discharge Protection Test 


The SL is discharged until its battery voltage reaches 
the SL’s LVD voltage or drops sufficiently below the 
specified deep discharge protection voltage threshold 
for the SL’s battery chemistry (see Note) 


Note — Recommended deep discharge protection voltage 
thresholds according to battery chemistry are: 1.87 V/cell + 
0.05 V/cell for lead-acid, 1.00 V/cell + 0.05 V/cell for NiMH 
and NiCd, 3.00 V/cell + 0.05 V/cell for Li-ion, and 2.00 V/cell 
+ 0.05 V/cell for LiFePO4. 


9.3.1.1 Equipment requirements 


a) dc power supply; 
b) Volt meter and/or multi-meter; 


c) Data-logging voltage measurement device 
(optional); and 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


d) Data-logging light meter or data-logging 
current measurement device (for example, 
voltage data logger with a current transducer) 
(optional). 


9.3.1.2 Procedure 


a) Setthe SL in the location where its parameters 
are to be monitored and/or data-logged. 


b) Turn on the SL to begin discharging the 
battery. Continuously monitor the battery 
terminal voltage and visual light output (see 
Note 1). 


c) Ifthe SL automatically turns off, the voltage 
immediately before it turns off is the SL’s deep 
discharge protection voltage. 


d) If the battery terminal voltage drops 
sufficiently below the specified deep discharge 
protection voltage threshold without the SL 
turning off, no active deep discharge 
protection is incorporated into the SL’s charge 
controller (see Note 2). 

NOTES 


1 If using data-logging devices, the light does not need to be 
continuously visually monitored. The battery voltage and either 
the battery current or light output must be collected at intervals 
less than or equal to 1 min. 


2 In some cases, the SL ’s charge controller will have a LVD 
voltage that is less than the specified deep discharge protection 
voltage threshold; therefore, the person conducting the test has 
the discretion to allow the battery voltage to proceed slightly 
below the specified deep discharge protection voltage threshold 
if deemed safe and necessary. 


9.3.2 Active Overcharge Protection Test 


The SL is charged until its battery voltage reaches the 
SL’s OVP voltage or sufficiently exceeds the specified 
overcharge protection voltage threshold for the SL’s 


Table 5 Charge Controller Behaviour Test Outcomes 


(Clause 9.2) 
SI Metric Reporting Notes 
No. Units 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) Active deep discharge protection Yes/No = 
ii) Deep discharge protection voltage Volts (V) Measured only if the SL has active deep discharge protection 


iii) Active overcharge protection Yes/No 
iv) | Overcharge protection voltage Volts (V) 
v) Passive deep discharge protection Yes/No 
vi) Passive deep discharge protection battery Volts per cell 
voltage at 24 h (V/cell) 
vii) Passive overcharge protection Yes/No 
vili) Passive overcharge protection continuous Milliamperes 
charging current (mA) 
ix) 30 day battery self-consumption fraction Percentage 


(%) 


Measured only if the SL has active overcharge protection 


Measured only for NiMH batteries with no active deep 
discharge protection 


Required only if tested for passive deep discharge protection 


Measured only for NiMH batteries with no active overcharge 
protection 


Required only if tested for passive overcharge protection 


Fraction of the battery’s measured capacity that is self- 
discharged over 30 days 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


battery chemistry (see Note). 


NOTE — Recommended overcharge protection voltage 


thresholds according to battery chemistry are: 2.42 V/cell + 


0.05 V/cell for lead-acid, 1.40 V/cell + 0.05 V/cell for NiMH 
and NiCd, 4.10 V/cell + 0.05 V/cell for Li-ion, and 3.60 V/cell 


+ 0.05 V/cell for LiFePO,. 


9.3.2.1 Equipment requirements 


dc power supply; 

Volt meter and/or multi-meter; 

Ammeter and/or multi-meter; 

Data-logging voltage measurement device 
(optional); and 

Data-logging light meter or data-logging 
current measurement device (for example, 
voltage data logger with a current transducer) 
(optional). 


9.3.2.2 Test pre-requisites 


The SL must be either fully discharged at the start of 
the test or discharged enough to accept at least 30 min 
of charging before reaching its overcharge protection 
voltage or sufficiently exceeds the specified overcharge 
protection voltage threshold. 


9.3.2.3 Procedure 


The SL is set in the location where its parameters can 
be monitored and/or data-logged. The SL is charged 
via the PV module socket from a DC power supply 
with a series resistor in place as shown in Fig. 1. 


Key 


v ow = 


b) 


c) 


Adjust the current limiting value of the dc 
power supply to the PV module’s maximum 
power point current at STC, /,,,, 


Due to voltage drops from the PV module’s 
blocking diode, cable losses, and the series 
resistor, set the power supply output voltage, 
V „using the following formula: 


ps? 
Vig= 1.25% V, 


„max 


where 


V,, the dc power supply output voltage, 
in volt (V); 

Vmax the SL’s battery’s maximum charge 
voltage, in volt (V), which can be 
obtained from the battery cycling 
recommended practices (see 
Annex B). 


Connect the PV module socket of the SL to 
the dc power supply in series with a protection 
resistor (see Note). The voltage drop in the 
series resistor should be between 10 percent 
and 15 percent of the voltage setting of the dc 
power supply (Vs); therefore, size the resistor 
based on the following formula: 


0.10, TT 0.155, 
Tapp Lapp 


where 


= the dc power supply output voltage, 
in volt (V); 


dc power supply 
Plug 
PV module input socket 


Set current limiting with the maximum power point current at STC 


2 
4 
6 


Series protection resistor 
Solar lantern 
Battery 


» Impp: from the PV module IV characteristics 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC OF THE DC Power SUPPLY-SL CONNECTION USING A SERIES PROTECTION RESISTOR 


10 


Lapp the PV module’s maximum power 
point current at STC, in ampere (A), 
obtained from the outdoor PV 
module I-V characteristics test; and 

R. the resistance of the series resistor, 


S 
in ohm (Q). 

NOTE — This protection resistor is only needed in cases 
where a “shunt regulator” is built in; however, as a 
schematic of the SL’s electronics is usually not provided, 

this resistor should be used in all cases for safety reasons. 

d) Ensure the series resistor’s power dissipation 
rating is greater than or equal to the value 


given by the following formula: 


IŽ XR, 


S 
where 

P, The series resistor’s minimum required 
power dissipation, in watt (W); 
The PV module’s maximum power 
point current at STC, in amperes (A), 
obtained from the outdoor PV 
module I-V characteristics test; and 


Lapp 


R, The resistance of the series resistor, 
in ohm (Q). 
Charge the SL at V,, and /,,, while 
continuously monitoring the battery voltage 
and current. (see Note) 


NOTE — If using a data-logging device, the battery 
voltage and current input must be collected at intervals 
less than or equal to 1 min. 


Ifthe SL automatically stops accepting charge, 
the voltage immediately before it turns off is 
the SL’s overcharge protection voltage. 


NOTE — For some SL’s, the current will not stop 
completely, but will begin tapering off when the SL’s 
battery voltage reaches its overcharge protection 
voltages or slightly above the specified OVP voltage 
threshold if deemed safe and necessary. Never let the 
battery voltage exceed 4.25 V/cell for Li-ion batteries, 
otherwise there is a risk of explosion. 


If the battery terminal voltage sufficiently 
exceeds the specified OVP voltage threshold 
while the continues charging, no active 
overcharge protection is incorporated into the 
SL’s charge controller (see Note.) 


g) 


NOTE — In some cases, the SL’s charge controller will 
have an OVP voltage that is greater than the specified OVP 
voltage threshold; therefore, the person conducting the test 


has the discretion to allow the battery voltage to proceed. 
9.3.3 Passive Deep Discharge Protection Test 


The SL is left to discharge for 24 h and the voltage 
after 24 h is recorded. This method is only performed 
on SLs with NiMH batteries that show no active deep 
discharge protection and Li ion batteries with built in 
battery management system. 


11 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


9.3.3.1 Equipment requirements 


a) dc power supply, and 
b) Volt meter and/or multimeter. 


9.3.3.2 Test pre-requisites 


The SL must have undergone the active deep discharge 
protection test, such that its battery voltage has just 
passed 0.95 V/cell when discharging. 


9.3.3.3 Procedure 


a) Specify the accepted 24 h passive deep 
discharge battery protection voltage (see 
Note). 

b) Turn on the SL and let it discharge for 24 h. 

c) The battery voltage after 24 h is the SL’s 


passive deep discharge battery protection 
voltage. 


NOTE — A 24 h passive deep discharge battery protection 
voltage of greater than or equal to 0.08 V/cell is recommended 
for NiMH batteries. 


9.3.4 Passive Overcharge Protection Test 


The SL’s PV module’s short circuit current alone may 
prove the SL has passive overcharge protection, 
otherwise the SL is overcharged and the charging 
current is observed to determine, if the SL has passive 
overcharge protection. This method is only performed 
on SLs with NiMH batteries that show no active 
overcharge protection. 


9.3.4.1 Equipment requirements 


a) dc power supply; 

b) Current meter and/or multi-meter; 

c) Data-logging voltage measurement device 
(optional); and 

d) Data-logging current measurement device (for 


example, voltage data logger with a current 
transducer) (optional). 


9.3.4.2 Test pre-requisites 


The SL must have undergone the active deep discharge 
protection test, such that its battery voltage has just 
passed 1.45 V/cell when charging. 


9.3.4.3 Procedure 


a) Set the SL and charge via the PV module 
socket from a de power supply. 

b) Determine the accepted passive overcharge 
protection continuous battery charging current 
(see Note). 

NOTE — A passive overcharge protection continuous 
battery charging current of less than or equal to twice 
0.1/t A is recommended for NiMH batteries. 


c) Compare the PV module’s short-circuit current 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


at STC (IZ) to the passive overcharge 
protection continuous battery charging 
current. If Z, is the smaller of the two, the SL 
has passive overcharge protection and no 
further testing is necessary 
d) Set the current limiting and voltage values of 
the dc power supply to the PV module’s new 
short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage, 
respectively. 
Connect the DC power supply to the SL’s PV 
module input socket and entire PV cable and 
calculate the voltage drop, Vap» between the 
power supply’s output and the SL’s battery 
terminals. 


Add Vao to the battery end of charge voltage, 
V sarges Which is determined by multiplying the 
number of battery cells by the specified OVP 
voltage threshold for NiMH batteries from the 
active overcharge protection test. This is 


called the total charge voltage, V, 


e) 


Plot a vertical line at V ax on the new I-V curve 
that extends from the voltage axis to the I-V 
curve. 


g) 


Plot a horizontal line that intersects the new 
I-V curve at the same point Vax does and 
extends to the current axis. The current where 
the horizontal line intersects the current axis 


is the charging current. 


h) 


j) Ifthe charging current is less than or equal to 
twice 0,17, A, the SL has passive overcharge 
protection. 

9.3.5 Standby Self-Consumption Measurement (Idle 


Current) 


This measurement quantifies the self-consumption of 
a SL when not in use. If the self-consumption is 
substantial, it may affect the use of the SL. 


9.3.5.1 Equipment requirements 


Ammeter with a precision of 0.01 mA (data-logging 
functionality is optional) 


9.3.5.2 Test prerequisites 


The SL’s battery should be discharged to its LVD or, in 
the case of the SL is not having a LVD, the specified 
deep discharge protection voltage threshold. 


9.3.5.3 Procedure 


a) Break the SL’s circuit at the battery’s negative 
terminal, connect the current meter in series, 
and ensure the SL is turned off. 


b) Wait 5 min to allow the SL to stabilize. Then, 
over a 10 min period, record (or data-log) the 
current draw at the battery’s negative terminal 


at intervals less than or equal to | min. 


12 


9.3.5.4 Calculations 


a) Determine the fraction of capacity the battery 
self-consumes over a 30-day period using the 
following formula: 


Taya sett X(720 h/30 days) 
Cy 


Fy seif T 
where 


F,sar The fraction of capacity the battery 
self-discharges over 30 days 


(percent); 

Tveser The average battery current draw 
over the 10 min data collection 
period, in milliamperes (mA); and 

C, The measured battery capacity, in 


milliampere-hours (mAh), obtained 
from the battery test. 


10 SOLAR CHARGE EFFICIENCY TEST 


10.1 Background 


The solar charge test provides estimates for two key 
sources of energy loss during solar charging: suboptimal 
operation of the solar module (solar operation 
efficiency) and losses from the SL’s internal electronic 
circuits that charge the battery (generator-to-battery 
efficiency). Along with the battery charge efficiency, 
these values are used in the solar run time calculation. 


A power supply along with two resistors is used to 
simulate a solar module and charge a SL’s battery. The 
voltage operating point during the test combined with 
the solar I-V curve is used to calculate the solar 
operating efficiency. Measurements of energy input to 
the SL solar charging port and SL battery are used to 
estimate the generator-to-battery efficiency. 


Ifthe SL is a kit that has multiple batteries that can be 
charged simultaneously by a single solar module, the 
test should be done with all the batteries connected at 
once. This will require additional measurements of 
battery current and voltage for each battery. 


10.2 Test Outcomes 


The test outcomes of the solar charge test are listed in 
Table 6. 


10.3 Procedure 
10.3.1 Solar Charge Efficiency Test 


The current and voltage from an electronics setup that 
simulates a solar module and into the SL battery are 
recorded at one minute intervals after the test setup is 
left to stabilize for 5 min. 


10.3.1.1 Equipment requirements 


a) Programmable power supply with constant- 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


Table 6 Solar Charge Efficiency Test Outcome 
(Clause 10.2) 


SI Metric Reporting Note 
No. Units 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Solar operation efficiency (77 Eon) Percentage This is representative of the efficiency with respect to optimal 
sol-op : ; E 
operation of the PV module (where optimal operation is at the 
maximum power point) 
ii) Generator-to-battery charging efficiency ( 1g-b) Percentage This is a lump figure for the whole lighting kit and is not 
disaggregated by lighting unit 
iii) Solar run time (standard solar day) Hours (h) Multiple outcomes will be found—one for each setting on 
each independent lighting unit 
iv) Solar charging system characteristics n/a This describes key features of the solar charging circuit 
voltage and constant-current modes and ability response curve of the PV simulator circuit 
to automatically step through a timed over the range of voltages that 
programme. corresponds to the I-V curve. 
b) Data-logging voltage devices. 2) The input variables to the spread sheet 
c) Data-logging current devices (for example should be the following: 


voltage data logger and current transducer. 


10.3.1.2 Procedure 


Preparation for the test: 


a) 


NOOR WDNDN = 


8 


Use the NOCT transferred I-V curve to find 
appropriate resistor values and power supply 
set points to simulate the PV module operating 
at NOCT during the charging cycle. Using a 
computer spread sheet is required for this step. 


1) Use the spread sheet to estimate the 


i) Series resistance, 

ii) Parallel resistance, 

iii) Voltage set point, and 

iv) Current set points corresponding to 
each level of simulated solar 
radiation listed in Table 8. 

3) The circuit simulation should be based 
on Ohm’s law. 


4) The spread sheet should estimate the 
NOCT current at evenly spaced voltage 


PV simulation circuit 
Laboratory power supply 
Series and parallel resistors (or variable resistors) 


PV simulation circuit output (measure current and voltage here during simulated charging) 

Connection cable from PV simulation circuit to lighting unit 

SL’s battery (measure current and voltage here during simulated charging) 

[optional] Additional lighting units with separate batteries that are included in the kit 

[optional] Additional lighting unit battery(-ies) (measure current and voltage here during simulated charging) 


Fic. 2 SCHEMATIC OF THE POWER SUPPLY AND SL CONNECTION FOR THE SOLAR CHARGE EFFICIENCY MEASUREMENT 


13 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


I; interp,j 


G 


t 


points by linearly interpolating between 
points on the measured I-V curve. 
5) Create a scaled I-V curve for each level 
of simulated solar radiation listed in table 
8 by multiplying the interpolated current 
values by the ratio of the desired solar 
radiation level to 1 000 W/m?: 
G: 


L 


I 2 
1000 W/m 


pv,ij T interp,j x 


The scaled, interpolated current at each solar 
radiation level i and voltage point j, in 
amperes (A); 

The interpolated current at NOCT and 1 000 
W/m? at each voltage point j, in amperes (A); 


The simulated solar radiation, in watts per 
square meter (W/m?); 


1) Use anon-linear minimization technique 
to minimize the weighted sum of the 
squared residuals between the scaled, 
interpolated NOCT I-V curve values and 
the simulated I-V curve of the PV 
simulator by altering the input variables. 
To give preference for close agreement 
near the maximum power point, the SSR 
at each point should be weighted by the 
product of the duration of each solar 
radiation step (from Table 7) and the 
power in the scaled NOCT curve: 


Iwi (Vj )XVX 


weighted SSR = 2, PQ taal A ~ j} 


where 


f: 


V. 


J 


Ti 


J 


The duration of time at each solar radiation 
level i, in hours (h); 


The voltage at each current and voltage point 
J, in volts (V); 


{V;) The scaled, interpolated current at each solar 


radiation level i and voltage point j, in 
amperes (A); 


Ts, 4(V;) The fitted simulated current at solar radiation 


level i and voltage j, in amperes (A); 

2) The outcomes of the spreadsheet are the 
best fit input variables: 
i) Series resistance (R,), 
ii) Parallel resistance (R,), 
iii) Voltage setpoint (Vm), and 
iv) Current setpoints (Z im»1000> Lsim.o00> 

I I I 


sim,7002 + sim,5009 a300) k 


14 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Build a PV simulator circuit like the one 
pictured in Fig. 2 using fixed or variable 
resistors with an appropriate power rating 
wired in parallel and series with the power 
supply. 

Measure the actual values of the parallel and 
series resistance in the PV simulator circuit 
and input them in the spreadsheet from step 
(a). Re-solve the minimization problem with 
those resistances held constant to find new 
ideal values for the other input variables. 
Check that the simulated I-V curve is a 
reasonable approximation ofthe true curve by 
calculating the deviation ratio between the 
simulated and scaled, interpolated NOCT I-V 
curves. The deviation ratio is defined as the 
simulated current divided by the scaled, 
interpolated NOCT current at each voltage 
point. For this calculation, use the true values 
ofthe input variables rounded to the precision 
of the test equipment. In the example below, 
the deviation ratio is close to unity (between 
0,95 and 1,05, or less than 5 percent error) in 
the key parts of the I-V curve (at and to the 
left of the maximum power point). 
Optionally, experimentally verify the 
calculated deviation for the 1 000 W/m? I-V 
curve: 


1) Connect data logging current and voltage 
sensors to the PV simulator output. Set 
the sensors to log data at very short 
intervals, 1 s or less. 

2) Simulate a PV module at NOCT and 
1 000 W/m’. Set the power supply current 
and voltage set points to Zim1000 and Vaim 

3) Measure an I-V curve for the PV 
simulator. Connect a variable resistor 
between the positive and negative 
terminals of the PV simulator and slowly 
sweep from high to low resistance and 
back. 

4) Disconnect the resistor and stop the data 
collection. 

5) Check to ensure the quality of the I-V 
curve data; cross check with the original 
(target) I-V curve to ensure the PV 
simulator is reasonably close, 
particularly in the region with voltages 
slightly below the maximum power point. 
The figure 3 below shows an example 
comparison. The true I-V curve (line 1) 
is compared to the simulated I-V curve 
(line 2). The deviation ratio between the 
two curves is defined as the simulated 


Key 


ON = CO <7 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


0.25 


1.3 D 


1.2 


0.2 


1.1 


0.15 


0.1 


0.9 


0.05 


is current with units of amperes on the primary vertical axis 


is voltage with units of volts on the horizontal axis 


is the deviation ratio (unitless) on the secondary vertical axis 
is the measured “true” | V curve, plotted against the primary axis 

is the | V curve from the PV simulator, plotted against the primary axis 

is the deviation ratio as a function of voltage, plotted on the secondary axis 


Fic. 3 EXAMPLE “TRUE” AND SIMULATED l-V CURVES PLOTTED WITH THE DEVIATION RATIO 


current divided by the true current at each 
voltage point. 


Charging the SL using the PV simulator: 


f) 


g) 


Set up the prepared SL and PV simulator 
circuit with current and voltage sensors. Set 
the data logging at | minute or more frequent 
intervals. 

i) Current entering the SL’s battery(s), in 
amperes (A). 

Voltage across the SL’s battery(s), in volts 
(V). 

Current provided by the PV simulator 
circuit, in amperes (A). 

Voltage across the PV simulator circuit 
output, in volts (V). 

Programme the power supply to simulate a 
“standard solar day” of charging using the 
steps indicated below (Table 7). It is 
acceptable to insert short pauses at 0 volts 
between steps to facilitate identification of 
solar radiation levels during data analysis. 


15 


0.8 


Table 7 Simulated Solar Day Power Supply 


Settings 
(Clause 10.3.1.2) 


SI Step Simulated Solar Current Set Voltage Set 
No. Duration Radiation Point Point 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) 0.5h 300 W/m? Tsim,300 Viim 
ii) 0.5h 500 W/m? Tim,500 Vim 
iii) lh 700 W/m? Tsim,700 Vim 
iv) lh 900 W/m? Eira,900 Vion 
v) 1h 1000 W/m? Lim, 1000 Vein 
vi) lh 900 W/m? Frim, 900 Vein 
vii) lh 700 W/m? Tsim,700 Vim 
viii) 0.5h 500 W/m? Tsimm,500 Vion 
ix) 0.5h 300 W/m? Tsimn,300 Vien 


h) 


Check the connections and set points, then 
begin data logging and start the simulated 
charging cycle. After the 7 h charging cycle is 
complete, stop the power supply, stop the data 
logging, disconnect the product from the PV 
simulator, and ensure the current and voltage 
data are valid with a quick check. 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


10.3.1.3 Calculations 


a) Determine the energy supplied by the PV 
simulator circuit (E ) using the following 
formula: 


Ecsite = à sera x V vsi x t;) 
J 


pvsim,o. 


where 

E wsimo The energy supplied by the power supply, in 
watt-hour (Wh); 

Trosi The current supplied by the power supply, 
in ampere (A); 

pvsimy The voltage supplied by the power supply, 

in volts (V); and 

t; The duration of time associated with each 


current and voltage point i, in hour (h). 


b) Determine the energy entering each battery 
(E,;) using the following formula: 


Epi = > (hay Voi, xt;) 


J 


where 

E,; The energy entering battery i, in watt-hours 
(Wh); 

Ii; | The current entering battery i at time j, in 
ampere (A); 

Vi; The voltage entering battery i at time j, in 
volt (V); and 

t; The duration of time associated with each 


current and voltage point j, in hour (h). 


c) Determine the energy allocation ratio for each 
battery using the following formula: 


Epi 
Qo; = — 
È Eri 
i 
where 
Q; The energy allocation ratio for battery i, a 
unitless ratio; 
E,; The energy entering battery 7, in watt-hour 


(Wh); 
d) Determine the generator-to-battery charging 
circuit efficiency (n,.,) using the following 


formula: 
> Foi 
E 


pvsim 


Ng-b = 


where 


Neb The generator-to-battery charging circuit 


efficiency; 

E,, The energy entering the battery, in watt-hour 
(Wh); and 

E pvsim is the energy supplied by the power supply, 
in watt-hour (Wh). 


e) Determine the deviation ratio as a function of 
voltage for each simulated I-V curve. For this 
calculation, use the spreadsheet from step (a) 
with the actual values of the input variables 
that were used during the test. 


Trg (V;) 
D; (v; )= == 
0) in (V,) 
where 


DV) The deviation ratio at each simulated solar 
radiation level i and voltage point j (unitless); 


T;,4(V;) The simulated current for simulated solar 
radiation level i and voltage point j, in 
ampere (A); 

Ix i(V;) The true current at each point from the 
scaled, interpolated I-V curve for simulated 
solar radiation level i and voltage point j, in 
ampere (A). 

f) Modify the current data by the deviation ratio 
to correct for deviation from optimal operation 
caused by the simulated PV circuit’s lack of 
fit with the true I-V curve. Use interpolation 
to estimate the deviation ratio at each voltage 
operating point i using linear interpolation 
between adjacent deviation ratios from the 
series that was calculated in the previous step. 
The modified current values calculated below 
can be described as the “current that would 
have been produced if a PV module were 
operated at the same point relative to the true 
I-V curve as was observed relative to the 
simulated I-V curve.” 


I 


I pvsim,mod, > D0) 
is 
where 
Tvsim,moa; The modified current at each point in 


the simulated solar charging day, in 
amperes (A); 
The measured current at each point in 


pvsin, 
the simulated solar charging day, in 
amperes (A); 
D{V;) The deviation ratio at each point in the 


solar charging day, which depends on 
the operating voltage and the simulated 
solar radiation level (unitless). 


g) Estimate the modified energy for the simulated 
solar charging day: 


= 3 (Fates mod j 


Jj 


E 


pvsim,mod 


xy 


pvsin, 


xt) 


where 


E 


pvsim,mod 


The modified energy supplied by the 
PV simulator, in watt-hours (Wh); 


The modified current supplied by the 
PV simulator, in amperes (A); 


The voltage supplied by the PV 
simulator, in volts (V); and 


I 


pvsim,mod,i 


pvsim,i 


t The duration of time associated with 
each current and voltage point i, in 
hour (h). 


h) Estimate the solar operation efficiency 
Olea 


where 
Motes The solar operation efficiency (unitless); 
pvsimamod The modified energy supplied by the PV 
simulator, in watt-hours (Wh); 
G is the solar resource (typically 5) in 
kilowatt-hours per square meter 
(kWh/m?) or equivalent full-sun hours 
(h); 
Pwnocr is the maximum power point of the PV 
module at NOCT and 1000 W/m? in 
watts (W). 
i) Estimate the solar run time on each setting for 
each battery with the equation below: 
Golar X Pnpp, NOCT XNsol-op x 
os Q; XNg-b X Noatt 
‘srt.s un P PBR s,i 
FBRs,i 
where 

tsptsi The solar run time on setting “s” for 
battery i in hours (h); 

G oint The total solar resource, in kWh/m? (or 
full sun hours) — typically use the standard 
solar day, 5 kWh/m?; 

Ppp Nocr The maximum power point of the PV 
module at NOCT in watts (W); 

Tlsol-op The solar operating efficiency as a 


fraction; 


17 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


Neb The generator-to-battery circuit 
efficiency as a fraction; 
Noatt The battery efficiency as a fraction; 
Preprs; The average power during the full-battery 
run time test on setting “s” for battery i, 
in watts (W); and 
ÍFBR.s.i The full-battery run time on setting ‘s’ for 
battery i, in hour (h). 
j) Repeat previous step with an alternative solar 
resource (optional step) 
k) Based on the test data, identify, ifthe following 


characteristics are present in the circuit 
between the solar module and the battery: 

1) DC-DC converter (check to see if the 

current is different) 

2) Constant current with voltage drop (use 
the relationship between current and 
voltage drop to approximate the 
resistance of the circuit) 


11 DUTY CYCLE TEST 


11.1 Background 


The duty cycle test is the very important test which 
provides the estimations whether the SL can meet the 
defined daily operating hours requirement with the PV 
eee ae with it when exposed to the specified 

pilys operating hours of the SL with the 
npg PEunodule PV module are defined in the 
specifications of the SL. 


11.2 Test Outcomes 


The test outcome is the estimation the Ah pumped inside 
the battery corresponding to the Ah discharged from 
the battery required for daily operation of the SL as 
specified. 


11.3 Procedure 
11.3.1 Duty Cycle Test 


Measurement of the total Ah discharged from the 
battery required for specified daily operation and the 
Ah pumped inside the battery corresponding to the total 
Ah discharged 


11.3.1.1 Equipment required 


a) Programmable power supply with constant- 
voltage and constant-current modes and ability 
to automatically step through a timed 


programme; 
b) Data-logging voltage devices; 
c) Data-logging current devices (for example, 


voltage data logger and current transducer); 
and 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


d) Stop watch. 
11.3.1.2 Procedure 


a) Fully charge the battery of the SL as defined 


in the battery test section. 
b) Connect the data logging devices to monitor 
the battery terminal voltage and the battery 
discharge current. 
Switch ON the lantern and note down the time 
of switching ON of the SL and monitor the 
discharge current from the battery. 


Keep the SL ON for the daily specified hours 
and work out the total discharged current 
(I,,a4)from the battery. 

Calculate the corresponding Ah required to 
be pumped inside the battery (lpn) for 
discharging Laa from the battery (For example 
if the battery charge-discharge efficiency is 
90 percent divide Ia by .9. It will give the 
Thin): 

Connect the attached PV module for charging 
the SL and monitor the instantaneous and 
integrated radiation on the module surface and 
the battery charging current. For an integrated 
irradiance (as specified for the SL under test 
to meet the specified hours of operation) work 
out the total charging current pumped inside 
the battery (Lapse) 

Note down I 
Repeat the test for four cycles. 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) and Lyin 


h) 


charge 


11.4 Pass Criterion 


The I needs to be equal or more than Ipin- 


charge 
11.5 Reporting 
SL pass the duty cycle ‘Yes/No’. 


12 TEMPERATURE COMPENSATION 


12.1 Background 


Depending on the battery chemistry the recommended 
over charge protection voltage (OPV) is defined at a 
particular temperature where as in real sense the 
temperature at which the SLis charged keeps varying 
throughout the year. Hence in order to ensure proper 
charging of the battery irrespective of the temperature 
it is required to have the temperature compensation 
arrangement in the SL electronics. 


12.2 Test Out Comes 


The OPV incorporated in the circuit measured in the 
entire temperature range of operation of the SL is 
required to match the OPV threshold voltage of the 
battery specified at that temperature. 


18 


12.3 Procedure 
12.3.1 Temperature Compensation Test 


Measure the OPV while keeping the SL at different 
temperatures in its realistic operating temperature range. 


12.3.1.1 Equipment required 


a) Programmable DC power supply, 

b) Voltmeter and/or multi-meter, and 

c) Heating and cooling chamber. 

12.3.1.2 Procedure 

a) Install the SL inside the heating and cooling 
chamber and take the battery terminal access 
out side the chamber. 

b) Set the chamber temperature at 27 C and 
measure the OPV as in 9. The OPV should 
not exceed the value as defined for the battery 
technology used in the SL. 

c) Increase the temperature of the chamber to the 
maximum operating temperature of the SL for 
which it has been designed. Wait for 30 
minutes and measure the OPV. 

d) Now decrease the temperature of the chamber 
to the lowest operating temperature of the SL 
for which it is designed and measure the OPV. 

e) Note down the OPV values measured at all 


the three temperatures. 


12.4 Pass Criterion 


The OPV measured at all the three temperatures should 
match the recommended OPV values of the battery of 
the SL under test for the same temperature. 


12.5 Reporting 


Appropriate temperature compensation incorporated in 
the system (Yes/No). 


13 OTHER PROTECTION TEST 


In addition the battery charging and discharging 
protection for reliable operation of the SL, it is required 
to have the protection for the various mishaps/accidents. 


13.1 Equipment Required 

dc Power supply, voltmeter and current meter. 
13.1.1 No Load Protection 

13.1.1.1 Purpose 


The purpose is to test that the SL can withstand the 
accidental open circuiting of the load when it is ON. 


13.1.1.2 Procedure 
Switch ON the SL and take out the load from the LED 


driver terminals .Keep the system in this position for 
30 min. Again connect the load. 


In case of mountings where access to LED terminals is 
restricted, manufacturers should declare alternative 
method to perform the test. 


13.1.1.3 Requirement 


The requirement is that the SL should work normally 
after this conditioning. 


13.1.2 Load Short Circuit Protection 
13.1.2.1 Purpose 


The purpose is to test that the SL can withstand the 
accidental short circuiting of the load when it is ON. 


13.1.2.2 Procedure 


Switch ON the SL and take out the load from the LED 
driver terminals .Short circuit all the terminals of the 
LED driver for 30 min. After 30 min again connect the 
load. 


In case of mountings where access to LED terminals is 
restricted, manufacturers should declare alternative 
method to perform the test. 


13.1.2.3 Requirement 


The requirement is that the SL should work normally 
after this conditioning. 


13.1.3 Battery Reverse Polarity Protection 
13.1.3.1 Purpose 


The purpose is to test whether the SL can withstand 
the wrong connection of the battery made by mistake. 


13.1.3.2 Procedure 


a) Connect the PV module to the SL and start 


charging the battery. 

b) Once the charging process is started 
interchange the battery terminals and keep the 
SL in this condition for 30 mins. 

c) After 30 minutes disconnect the PV module 


make the connections proper and check 
whether any fuse is blown off or not. In case 
the fuse is blown off place the fuse. 


13.1.3.3 Requirement 


The requirement is that the system should charge 
properly after this conditioning. 


13.1.4 LED driver Reverse Polarity Protection 
13.1.4.1 Purpose 


The purpose is to test whether the SL can withstand 
the wrong connection of the LED driver made by 
mistake. 


19 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


13.1.4.2 Procedure 


a) Connect the power supply to power the LED 
driver by setting the voltage equal to nominal 
battery voltage and make sure the load is 
ON. 

Once the SL is ON , interchange the input 
terminals of the LED driver and keep the SL 
in this condition for 30 min. 


b) 


c) After 30 minutes make the connections proper. 
13.1.4.3 Requirement 


The requirement is that the SL should function properly 
after this conditioning. 


13.2 Reporting 


a) Load short circuit protection provided Yes/NO. 

b) No Load protection provide Yes/No. 

c) Battery reverse polarity protection Provided 
Yes/ NO. 

d) LED driver reverse polarity protection 
provided Yes/NO. 


14 MECHANICAL DURABILITY TEST 


14.1 Background 


The mechanical durability test captures a SL’s 
robustness in withstanding the rigors of expected daily 
usage. The mechanical durability test includes the drop 
test & the switch and connector test. 


During the drop test, the SL is dropped from a height 
of 1 mon toa concrete surface. Six drops occur per SL 
sample, with each drop impacting a different side of 
the sample. During the switch and connector test, each 
switch and/or connector of the SL samples SL sample 
is cycled 1 000 times. 


Throughout these tests, the SL sample is examined for 
functionality, damage, and the presence of user safety 
hazards. 

14.2 Test Outcomes 

The test outcomes of the mechanical durability test are 
listed in Table 8. 

14.3 Procedures 


14.3.1 Drop Test 


The SL sample is dropped on six different sides from a 
height of 1 m on to a level concrete surface and 
examined for functionality, user safety hazards, and 
damage. 


14.3.1.1 Equipment requirements 


a) Tape measure or ruler at least 1 m in length, 
and 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


Table 8 Mechanical Durability Test Outcomes 
(Clause 14.2) 


Sl. Metric Reporting Notes 
No. units 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Drop test sample functionality Yes/no = 
ii) Drop test user safety hazard(s) Yes/no, — 
present description 
iii) Drop test sample damage Yes/no, — 
description 
iv) Switch and connector test cycles Cycles = 
achieved 
v) Switch and connector test sample Yes/no — 
functionality 
vi) Switch and connector test user safety Yes/no, — 
hazard(s) present description 
vii) Switch and connector test sample Yes/no, — 
damage description 
b) Camera. 


14.3.1.2 Test pre-requisites 


At the start of the drop test the SL samples should be 
minimally altered (ideally unaltered), fully functional, 
and have sufficient charge to check for functionality 
throughout the test. 


If the SL samples have multiple units or components, 
determine an appropriate order to test the parts need to 
undergo the drop test. SL samples or sample parts that 
are intended to be stationary (for example, separate 
control boxes, lamp units intended to be mounted, etc) 
and PV modules do not need to be drop-tested. Portable 
SL samples or sample parts (for example, torches, 
lanterns, desktop lamps, etc) should be drop tested. 


NOTE — This test is destructive test. In case the SL fails this 
test one more identical sample may be asked from the 
manufacturer at this stage and in case the other sample also 
fails this test the sample will be considered fail. 


14.3.1.3 Apparatus 


Choose an appropriate location to perform the drop 
test. The location should have a smooth, level concrete 
surface with ample space to avoid personal injury from 
a SL projectile (for example, glass and/or plastic 
shards). A height of 1 m must be established from the 
ground to begin the drop. 


14.3.1.4 Procedure 


a) Drop the SL sample six times from a height 
of 1 m—once on each of the six ‘faces’ of the 
product, taking care to drop the SL sample on 
parts deemed mechanically weak (for 
example, handles, loose parts, etc). 

NOTE — Each time the product should impact the concrete on 


a different face: the SL sample is rotated by 90° along the x-axis 
following each of the first three drops, rotated by 90° along the 


20 


y-axis from its initial drop orientation for the fifth drop, and 
rotated 180° along the y-axis from its fifth drop orientation for 
the sixth drop (see Fig. 4). 


Z 


X 


Fic. 4. THREE-DIMENSIONAL CARTESIAN COORDINATE 
SYSTEM FOR Drop TEST REFERENCE 


b) After each of the six drops, examine the SL 
sample for functionality, the presence of user 
safety hazards (for example, glass shards, 
short circuits, etc), and damage and record the 
observations with descriptions and 
photographs. Superficial damage (minor 
scrapes or “popped off’ components that can 
easily be put back in place) should not be 
noted; only note damage that is permanent and 
non-superficial. 


14.3.1.5 Calculations 
No calculations are made for the drop test. 
14.3.2 Switch and Connector Test 


Each SL sample switch and/or connector is cycled 1 000 
times and examined for functionality, user safety 
hazards, and damage. 


14.3.2.1 Equipment requirements 
Camera. 
14.3.2.2 Test pre-requisites 


At the start of the switch and connector test the SL 
samples should be fully functional and have sufficient 
charge to check for functionality throughout the test. 


NOTE — This test is destructive. If the SL has passed the 
drop test and fails in thistest one more identical sample may be 
asked from the manufacturer at this stage and in case the other 
sample also fails this test the sample will be considered fail. 


14.3.2.3 Apparatus 


No apparatus is required for the switch and connector 
test. 


14.3.2.4 Procedure 


a) Cycle each of the SL sample’s unique 
switch(es) and/or connector(s) 1 000 times. 

b) If damaged is observed during the testing, 
record the observations with descriptions and 
photographs. Superficial damage (minor 
scrapes or “popped off’ components that can 
easily be put back in place) should not be 
noted; only note damage that is permanent and 
non-superficial. 

c) Continue testing until the product fails to 
function, a user safety hazard develops (for 
example, short circuit), or 1 000 cycles are 
achieved. 


NOTE — If potential damage cannot instantly be observed 
during testing (for example, damage to a PV module or mobile 
phone connector), check for SL sample functionality after every 
100 cycles. 


14.3.2.5 Calculations 


No calculations are made for the switch and connector 
test. 


14.4 Reporting 


Report the following in the mechanical durability test 
report. 


a) Results for tested SL aspects for samples 1 
through n 
1) Drop Tests: 
i) 
ii) No damage present after each drop 
(pass/fail) 
iii) No user safety hazard present after 
each drop (pass/fail) 


Functions after each drop (pass/fail) 


2) Switch/Connector Tests: 

i) Cycles achieved for each switch and/ 
or connector 

ii) Functions after test (pass/fail) 

iii) No damage present after test (pass/ 
fail) 

iv) No user safety hazard present after 
test (pass/fail) 

b) Figures 
i) Photographs of observed user safety 


hazards and/or SL sample damage 
15 LUMEN MAINTENANCE TEST 


15.1 Background 


An important performance metric for LED lights is 
consistent luminous flux over the product’s lifetime. The 
lifetime of LEDs is mainly influenced by electrical 
operating conditions and thermal management. Further 


21 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


criteria, which accelerate degradation, include the quality 
of the phosphor used in white LEDs and the UV resistance 
of the housing. Assuming that an overall lifetime of 5 
years and a daily burn time (DBT) of 4 h are achieved, 
this results in a total operation time of 7 300 h. 


Examination of the lumen maintenance is performed 
in a long-term test. Because of time constraints, it is 
generally not practical to measure degradation over the 
entire expected lifespan of a product. The test methods 
described in this module monitor light output over a 
fixed period of operation in order to identify and flag 
products that are found to suffer significant lumen 
depreciation. 


For the 2 000 h test, a provisional L70 judgment can 
be made at 1 000 h for products that maintain a 95 
percent lumen maintenance average across all tested 
samples. Testing has shown that these products are very 
likely to have L70 greater than 2 000 h. 


Several of the tests used to evaluate solar LED products 
are relatively short-term, thus allowing a single test 
sample to be used on several different tests. Because 
the lumen maintenance test requires a sample to be 
dedicated for such a long period of time (up to 12 
weeks), it is recommended that test samples are 
dedicated to this test and not utilized for other testing. 


15.2 Test Outcomes 


The lumen maintenance test outcomes are listed in 
Table 9 


Table 9 Lumen maintenance test outcomes 
(Clause 15.2) 


Sl. Metric Reporting Notes 
No. Units 
q) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Lumenmaintenance at Percent The percentage of initial 
2 000 h light output (time = 0 h) 


that the product 
generates at the end of 
the test (time = 2 000 h) 


ii) Luminous flux at 2 Lumens — 
000 h (Im) 
iii) Lumen maintenance at Percent A provisional Ly rating 


1 000 h (provisional 
results) 


(L 2 2 000 h) can be 
given to products with a 
lumen maintenance of 
2 95 percent at 1 000 h 


15.3 Procedure 


Full screening lumen maintenance characterization 
involves SLs to be tested for 2 000 h. For 2 000 h tests, 
a provisional rating is provided after 1 000 h. 


15.3.1 Equipment Requirements 


a) Integrating sphere, 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


b) dc voltmeter, and 
c) dc ammeter. 


15.3.1.1 Full Screening test procedure 


a) The SL battery is replaced by a laboratory 
power supply that is set to deliver the SL’s 
standard battery voltage. 


b) The luminous flux is measured using an 
integrating sphere system. 
c) The minimum frequency at which the 


luminous flux of the SL ambient temperature, 
SL voltage,and current are measured and 
recorded (Table 10 ) 


Table 10 Lumen Maintenance Test Minimum 
Frequency of Measurement for Full Screening 
Test 


(Clause 15.3.1.1) 


SI Measurement Time interval Cumulative time 
No. number (h) (h) 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 1 0.33 (20 min) 0 
ii) 2 24 24 
iii) 3 48 72 
iv) 4 48 120 
v) 5 48 168 
vi) 6 48 216 
vii) 7 168 384 
viii) 8 168 552 
ix) 9 168 720 
x) 10 168 888 
xi) (optional) 112 1 000 
xii) 11 168 1 056 
xiii) 12 168 1 224 
xiv) 13 168 1 392 
xv) 14 168 1 560 
xvi) 15 168 1 728 
xvii) 16 168 1 896 
xviii) 17 104 2 000 


22 


15.4 Calculations 


Lumen maintenance is calculated by dividing the final 
light output reading by the initial light output reading 
and is always reported along with the test duration. 


Ifthe light output of the SL ever drops below 70 percent 
of the initial reading, then operating hours at which 
this occurs should be reported as Lọ. For example, if 
the initial reading was | 000 Ix, and readings dropped 
to 700 Ix after 720 h, then L,, = 720 h. 


If the light output of the SL at the end of the 2 000 hour 
test is greater than 70 percent of the initial reading, the 
L- rating will then be L- > 2 000 h. 


For the 2 000 h test, a provisional L- > 2 000 h rating 
can be given to products that have a lumen maintenance 
2 95 percent at 1 000 h. 


15.5 Reporting 


Report the following in the lumen maintenance test 
report: 


a) Results for tested SL aspects for samples: 


1) Drive current (A). 

2) Drive voltage (V). 

3) Waiting time (min). 

4) Initial, constant-voltage luminous flux 
(Im). 

5) Lumen maintenance (note if at 1 000 or 2 
000 h) (percent). 

6) Final, constant-voltage luminous flux 
(Im). 

7) Coefficient of variation of sample results 
for each SL aspect tested (%). 

b) Figures 


Plot the lumen maintenance versus time graph. 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.2.1.1 ) 
MANUFACTURER SELF-REPORTED INFORMATION 


A-1 BACKGROUND 


Having proper manufacturer information is important 
for communication throughout the testing process as 
well as for understanding key product information and 
any certifications the manufacturer’s lab or product may 
have. To this end, there are three categories of self- 
reported information: manufacturer information, 
product information, and manufacturer self-certification 
regarding either the manufacturing lab or product. 


A-2 OUTCOMES 


The manufacturer self-reported information outcomes 
are listed in Table 11. 


Table 12 Manufacturer Self-Reported 
Information Outcomes 


(Clause A-2) 


SI Metric Notes 
No. 
i) Manufacturer information Record all provided 
manufacturer information 
ii) Product information Record all provided product 


information 


Record all manufacturer or 
product certifications 


iii) Self-certification information 
A-3 Solicited Information 


A.3.1 Confidential Information (Not Released 
Publicly) 


A.3.1.1 Manufacturer Information 


a) Manufacturer company physical address; 

b) Contact person name; 

c) Contact person position at company (that is, 
job title); and 

d) Contact telephone number, Contact fax 
number and Contact e-mail address 

A.3.1.2 Product information 
a) Typical product shipping point of origin; 
b) Product driver type; 


23 


c) Battery charge control methods (that is, deep 
discharge protection and/or overcharge 
protection); 

d) Description of battery charge control methods. 


A.3.2 Public Information (May Be Released 
Publicly) 


A.3.2.1 Product Information 


a) Product name; 

b) Product model number; 

c) Battery chemistry (SLA, NiMH, etc) and full 
information ; 

d) Complete information of the LED used i.e. 
make, model, country of origin and full 
technical specifications. 

e) All product charging system types (for 
example, solar module, a.c. power etc); 

f) Ifthe product has ac power charging, is an 
adapter included? 

g) Ifthe product has solar charging, what active 
material is used in the PV module (for 
example, mono-Si, poly-Si, CIS, etc); 

h) All included product features (for example, 
mobile phone charging, radio, etc); 

j) All optional product features (for example, 
mobile phone charging, radio, etc); and 

k) Description of product warranty terms, 


including duration. 
A.3.2.2 Manufacturer Certifications 


These certifications should be accompanied with 
supporting documentation, such as copies of the 
original certifications, letters from an appropriate 
organization, or self-certification. 


a) All manufacturer company certifications and 
markings. 

b) All product certifications and markings (for 

example, UV-resistant plastic, UV-free LEDs, 

high-temperature batteries, module 


qualification test certificate, etc). 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.3.1.3, 7.3.2.3, 7.3.4.3 ) 
BATTERY CYCLING RECOMMENDED PRACTICES 


B-1 BACKGROUND 


During the battery test the SL’s battery is cycled 
numerous times in order to determine the battery’s 
actual capacity and storage efficiency. In addition to 
the charge-discharge guidelines specified in the battery 
test, the battery cycling recommended practices 
Annex C provides further information to ensure that 
the battery is not damaged during testing and the person 
conducting the test is safe. 


B-2 CHARGE-DISCHARGE SPECIFICATIONS 
BY BATTERY TYPE 


Table 12 contains battery cycling information specific 
to the five common types (i.e., chemistries) of batteries. 
This information should be used in conjunction with 
the charge and discharge rates specified in the battery 
test procedures. 


Table 12 Recommended Battery Cycling Specifications According to Battery Chemistry 
(Clause B-2) 


Battery Type Maximum Standby Voltage Maximum Charge Voltage End of Charge / End of Discharge Voltage 
(V/cell) (V/cell) Topping Charge Rate (V/cell) 
(A) 

Sealed lead-acid 2.25! 2.40! 0.05 I, 1.80 
Lithium-ion 4.05! 4.10! 0.05 I, 3.00 
Lithium iron 3.55! 3.60! 0.01 A 3.00 
phosphate 

Battery Type Negative Slope End of Discharge Voltage End of Recondition Charge Method 

(mV/cell) (V/cell) (V/cell) 

Nickel-metal hydride 8.00 1.00 0.40 Reverse load pulse at 9% 
Nickel-cadmium 8.00 1.00 0.40 Reverse load pulse at 9% 


1) or as per manufacturers specifications 


24 


IS 16476 (Part 2) : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Clause B-1) 
BATTERY CYCLING PROCESS FLOWCHART 


Prime battery using 
rated battery capacity 


Not required for lithium-ion or 
lithium iron phosphate batteries 


Note “new” battery 
Capacity 


Cycle battery using 
“new” battery capacity 


Cycle battery at least twice 


Note “new” battery 
capacity 


Is “new” battery 
capacity within 15% of 
previous? 


If battery will be stored 


m 


Record “actual” battery Charge battery using 
capacity “actual” battery capacity 


a Use the rated battery capacity for the first cycle of lithium-ion and lithium iron phosphate batteries 


25 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 28 (6496). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


