( Reaffirmed 2012 )

IS : 6399 - 1971

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF COFFEE SEED STORAGE STRUCTURES
Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI C.P.

AFDC

39
Research Institute

Refirescnting Central Food Technological ( CSIR ), Mysore

NATARAJAN
Members

Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi SHRI D. S. CHADHA Central Coffee Research Institute, Chikmagalur DRG.I. D'SOUZA Tea Research Association, Calcutta SHRI S. K. DUTTA DR D. N. BARUA ( Alternate ) The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi DR. K. K. IYA SHRI KISANMEHTA ( Alternate ) Food Specialities Limited, Moga DR M. K. K. IYENCAR SWRI F. J. RYAN ( Alternate ) Coffee Board, Bangalore SHRI M. A. MANDANA SHRI B. KRISHNAMURTHY ( Alternate ) Tea Packeters Association of India, Calcutta SHRI D. G. S. MARSH Tea Board, Calcutta DR K. K. MITRA Public Analyst, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh DR B. D. NARANC Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI C. K. RAMNATH SHRI K. VENKATACHALAM (Alternate ) Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi DR G. S. RANDHAWA SHRI T. A. SRIRAM ( Alternate ) DR V. BHALE~AO ( Alternate ) Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters, Co1 R. R. RAO New Delhi Lt-Co1 0. P. KAPUR ( Alternate ) The Sathe Biscuit and Chocolate Company Limited, SHRI M. G. SATHE Poona SHRI R. D. SATHE ( Alternate ) Cadbury-Fry ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. B. UNWALA SHRI B. J. CORK ( Alternate ) United Planters' Association of Southern India, DR K. S. VENKATARAMANI Coonoor DR C. S. VENKATA RAM ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&`o Member) DR HARI BHACWAN, Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary

SHRIE. N. SUNDAR
Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BI-IAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

INSTITUTION

SHAH ZAFAR MAR0 NEW DELHI 1

IS:6399-1971

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF COFFEE SEED STORAGE STRUCTURES
0. FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution

on 31 December 1971, after the draft finalized by the Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. to fungal, microbial and insect attacks if coffee seeds are stored in structures their entry inside and also if suitable transport and storage.

0.2 The damage to coffee seeds due can be minimized to a large extent which prevent, as far as practicable, measures are taken during handling,

0.3 The damage and pollution of coffee seeds during storage are due to It is therefore temperature, moisture and dampness, insects and rodents. obvious that in order to conserve coffee seeds they should be stored in sound structures of different types, each type being suitable for a particular region in the country and code of practice should be formulated and adopted for handling, transporting and storing; when such standards become available and are implemented, they will go a long way in minimising the loss of coffee seeds. 0.4 This standard has been formulated mainly with a view to guiding processors, dealers and other agencies connected with handling of coffee seeds so that the damage to coffee seeds is, as far as possible, reduced to the minimum. 0.5 This code is designed for the construction of structures which would permit effective control of insect and other pests of stored coffee seeds and which would entirely exclude rain and ground moisture. 0.6 This standard has been formulated after a study of Indian Standards for foodgrains storage structures, but to suit the special requirements of coffee seed godowns. 0.7 Suggestions for the improvement of the existing warehouses have already been made by the Coffee Board. ,This code, therefore, has been prepared with a view to providing guidance to the upcoming coffee curing works and also in the construction of coffee storage structures in the future. 2

IS : 6399 - 1971 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies requirements and method for coffee seed storage structures of the bag storage type. construction of

1.2 It also specifies requirements and method of construction structures intended to store cured coffee. 2. TERMINOLOGY

for storage

2.0 For the purpose if this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.i Bag - A container made either of jute, fabric or laminates having the standard dimensions and containing a net content of 60 to 80 kg of cured coffee seeds. 2.2 Bag Storage Structure bags. 3. LOCATION 3.1 The coffee seed storage structure shall be located on a raised and welldrained site, or on suitably made-up soils, if necessary. 3.2 The structure shall not be located on lands subjected to floods or inundations and shall be safe from damage by surface or seepage water. 3.3 The structure shall be at least 15 m away from residential buildings, factories ( other than coffee curing factories ), dairies, poultry runs, kilns and other possible sources of fire and 30 m away from garbage, dumping grounds, slaughter houses, hide curing centres, tanneries and such other places, the close vicinity of which is deleterious to safe storage of coffee seeds.
shall not apply to any new structures NOTE -This the premises of the existing curing works. which may be constructed within

Structure in which coffee seeds are stored in

3.4 The structure shall be away from large trees. 3.5 The structure shall be generally accessible situated near a rail head with goods siding. to lorries and preferably

3.5.1 Where the structure is near waterways, such as ferry heads and docks sufficient berthing, loading and unloading facilities shall be made available. 4. BAG STORAGE STRUCTURES

4.1 The bag storage structure may be of dimensions most `economically suited to the land available. The storage capacity shall be calculated taking 3

IS : 6399 - 1971
into account the coefficient factor factor as given below: 0.7 m2 per metric tonne of cured coffee seeds.

Coefficient

KOTE 1 -The coefficient factor is derived from: (a) 14 bags stacked one over the other, (b) each such bag cantaining 75 kg of coffee seeds, (c) 30 percent floor area for passage in between the stacks, and (d) stacks of 30 t bulk.
minimum height of the wall may be 5.5 m for flat roofed structures NOTE2 -The and in the case of other structures the minimum wall height may be 425 m inside at the point where the roof crosses the wall.

5. FOUNDATION 5.1 The foundation shall be carried to a depth of not less than one metre unless rock, sheet-rock or laterite is met with at a higher level and shall have concrete bedding of suitable thickness unless rock, sheet-rock or laterite is met with. 5.2 The foundation masonry shall be of stone burnt bricks, concrete blocks or other suitable materials depending upon the availability of the same at a particular region. It shall be constructed either in lime mortar 1:3 ( 1 part lime and 3 parts of sand ) or cement mortar of proportipn not less than 1 : 5. 5.3 The foundation trenches on both sides shall be filled with coarse or gritty material and shall be flush with ground level. 5.4 Necessary measures shall be taken to make the structure sand

termite-proof.

6. PLINTH 6.1 The plinth level shall be at a minimum rounding ground level. 6.2 height of 0.7 m from the sur-

The plinth shall be filled up as given under 7.1.

6.3 The plinth ( or basement ) masonry shall be of stone in cement mortar of proportion not less than 1 : 5 and cement pointed 1 : 4 or plastered on its outer surface with cement plaster not less than 1 : 6. 6.4 There shall be laid 75 mm thick stone slab or 1 : 2 : 4 cement plinth slab over the plinth masonry and below the superstructure. 7. FLOOR 7.i Filiing of Plinth or Basement - Fill with gritty moorum soil or red earth, sand or coal clinker. The layers should be of 75 mm up to a height of 150 mm in case of cement concrete floor or 225 mm in case of granite or any other good stone slabs floor, below the plinth level. Water profusely and compact each of these layers. Lay over these a layer of Water and compact these layers of coarse sand coarse sand and stone. and rubble stone and again compact these layers thoroughly. 4 concrete

IS : 6399 - 1971
granite 7.2 Laying of the Floor - It shall be of either cement concrete, stone or any other good quality stone slabs. If the floor is of cement concrete it shall be 75 mm thick ( 25 mm thick 1 : 2 : 4 of 20 mm metal over 50 mm of 1 : 4 : 8 of 40 mm metal ) and shall be laid in alternate panels, not exceeding 2.5 m2. The joints of panels shall be neatly grouted with cement If the floor is of stone slabs, a layer of lime concrete or cement mortar 1 : 3. concrete 1 : 4 : 8 of 38 mm metal of not less than 75 mm thickness shall be laid over the 150 mm layer of rubble stone, over which the stone slabs shall be set in lime mortar 1 : 3 or cement mortar 1 : 4. The stone slabs shall not be less than 50 mm in thickness and shall be cement pointed 1 : 3. 8. WALLS

8.1 The walls shall be solid and not hollow and shall be at least 300 mm

In the case of laterite or other thick in the case of brick construction. hard stone construction, the thickness of the wall shall be 450 mm up to a height of 3 m from the phnth and 225 mm thick from this height upwards. In the case of brick construction the walls shall be plastered with lime mortar 1 : 2 or cement mortar 1 : 4 shall be finished smooth. In case of laterite or stone construction cement mortar of 1 : 3 to 1 : 4 shall be used for pointing There shall be no aff-sets or projections in the wall. The walls purpose. shall be flush with the outer surface of the plinth; in case this is not possible, the plinth projections shall be rounded off. 9. DOOR

9.1 The door opening shall be not less than 2 m wide and 2.5 m high.
door leaves shall be of steel or timber and either may ing outside. When open, the door leaves shall be surface of the wall. When closed, they shall be close of the door. The door leaves shall not have cracks

The be rolling type or openflush with the outside fitting with the frame or open joints.

10. AIR VENTS 10.1 Air vents shall be provided Windows shall not be provided.
10.2 The clear opening of the air and shall be provided with shutters the road and safety considerations outer wall, they may be provided 10.3 11. For every 5 m length at floor level for the ingress of fresh air.

vents should not be more than 35 ems, opening inside. When the godown abuts preclude the erection of air vents in the in the inner wall.

of wall there shall be one air vent.

VENTILATORS

11.1 For every 6 m length of the wall, one ventilator of the size 0.7 m high and I.2 m wide shall be provided. A centrally rotating shutter shall be
5

IS : 6399 - 1971 provided to the ventilator and the shutter shall be close fitting with the frame of the ventilator. The frame of the ventilator shall be fixed flush with the inside face of the wall. 11.2 The ventilator shall be protected by glazed sun shades and frame work of expanded metal or wire mesh. 12. ROOF 12.1 The roof may be either of reinforced concrete,flat, or shell roof; a sloping roof with asbestos cement sheets or Mangalore tiles, if the former is not available. The sloping roof shall be a single-span or two-span structure with a central longitudinal gutter which is a source of leakage. Galvanized steel sheets shall not be used. 12.1 .l The eaves of the roof shall project at least O-7 m from the outer surface of the walls. The purlins and sheets shall be well anchored and secured. 13. DRAINAGE 13.1 Gutter and drain pipes shall be provided with the required dimensions taking into consideration the intensity of rainfall and the projected area of the roofing. 13.2 A stone or concrete slab of suitable dimensions shall be provided on the ground below each drain pipe so that the ground is not scoured due to the water falling from the drain pipe. The drain pipe shall be located in such a way that it shall not obstruct the ventilators. 13.3 All round the structure, abutting the plinth a pavement 0.5 m wide and 150 mm thick of lime concrete or cement concrete 1 : 3 : 6 or rubble stone pitching set in cement mortar 1 : 4 shall be constructed with suitable drainage arrangement. The pavement shall slope outside at 1 in 10. 14. UNDERGROUND DRAINAGE BY RUBBLE DRAIN

14.1 Where ground water is likely to rise during the rainy season above the lowest level of the foundation, a trench 0.7 m wide shall be constructed all round the structure. 14.2 The trench shall be one metre away from the outer periphery of the structure, and shall be at the lowest level of the foundation with a longitudinal bed slope towards the natural fall of the ground. It shall be connected to an outfall drain for ultimate disposal of the water. It shall be filled with rubble or brick bats or graded jelly to a depth of 0.7 m and the rest with earth, and then levelled. 14.3 The rubble filling of the rubble drain should be so filled as to have the effect of an inverted filter, that is, bigger rubble should be put at the bottom and the size of rubble, brick bat or jelly to be reduced gradually.
NOTE -The specifications under 14 depend upon locality and site conditions may not be insisted upon in the case of inland region with rainfall of less than 750 mm. In coastal and heavy rainfall regions these are necessary, where the soil conditions require.

6

