NAT HA IS 17532 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


vaa fai — fats 


ATM Safes — Specification 


ICS 13.310 


O BIS 2021 


anda get sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UA, 9 SERE TH AMT, ay ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 6 


Security Equipments Sectional Committee, MED 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Security 
Equipments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


Over the last decade, ATMs have witnessed phenomenal growth in India. The burglary attempts on ATMs have 
also increased over the years. The present scenario demands that the security level of ATMs be enhanced and 
effectively ensured to provide necessary assurance to the consumers. 

The availability of an Indian standard on one of the most important components of an ATM system, namely 
ATM safes, is a primary requirement towards addressing the problem. 

Considerable technical assistance has been derived from the first ever standard on ATM safes in India, 


EMTAC - P-101: 2016, published by EMTAC Laboratories Pvt Ltd, who offered the standard to be used as a 
working draft for preparing the Indian Standard Specification. 


The unique features of this standard are: 
a) Higher burglary resistance has been prescribed for the ATM safe door in view of its easier 
accessibility for an attack. 
b) Uniform performance parameters have been prescribed for different types of construction. 
c) The standard is implementable irrespective of the type and material of construction. 


d) A minimum resistance requirement has been prescribed for attempts to severe the safe from its 
anchorage. 


Considerable assistance has been derived from EN 1143-1 in preparing this specification. The performance 
requirements specified herein have been inspired by the provisions of EN 1143-1. In appreciation of the method 
of burglary resistance evaluation specified in EN, the tools and the evaluation procedure have been retained with 
minimum changes. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).’ The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17532 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
ATM SAFES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the physical construction, 
general requirements and performance criteria for 
ATM safes. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 ATM (Automatic Teller Machine) — A machine 
for storing and disbursing cash automatically on 
authentication through a smart card. The machine may 
also perform other banking operations related to the 
banking account authenticated similarly. 
NOTE — For the purpose of this standard, automated teller 
machines, currency exchange machines, currency recycling 


machines and machines such as teller assist machine etc. are 
all considered as ATM. 


2.2 ATM Base — Any integral part of an ATM system 
located between the ATM safe and the surface to which 
the safe is to be anchored. 


2.3 ATM Unit — ATM physical system consisting of 
ATM safe, cash disbursal system and external casing. 


2.4 ATM Safe — Safe forming part of an ATM system. 


2.5 ATM System — Assembly of sub units which 
provides an ATM function and affords security to cash 
and/or valuables stored within the ATM safe. 


2.6 Basic Value (BV) — Number of resistance units 
allocated to particular tool. 
NOTE — The basic value represents problems in obtaining, 
transporting, using and operating the relevant tool at the site 


in question and necessary knowledge and experience for its 
efficient use. 


2.7 Internal Space — Part of the interior of an ATM 
safe which is bounded by the inside surfaces and the 
bolt-work cover plate(s) of the door of the ATM safe 
body. 


2.8 Net Working Time (NWT) — NWT is the period 
during which a tool is used to attempt to create changes 
in the test specimen. It is to be exclusive of preparation 
time for test and time required for safety precautions, 
changing tools and its accessories and/or any other 
administrative requirement or break. Time shall be 
measured with granularity of 1 s. 


2.9 Opening — A through circular opening of 125 mm 
diameter or a rectangular opening of 125 x 100 mm or 
a square opening of 112 x 112 mm made in the body of 
the ATM safe. 


2.10 Resistance Grade — A classification designation 
of the ATM safe as determined by its resistance value. 


2.11 Resistance Unit (RU) — A numerical expression 
of burglary resistance resulting from one minute’s use 
of a tool having a tool coefficient of 1 and a basic value 
of zero. 


2.12 Resistance Value — Numerical value in resistance 
unit calculated for each test. 


2.13 Size — The size of an ATM is denoted by its 
external height. 


2.14 Tool Coefficient — Number in resistance units per 
minute allocated to a group of tools. 
NOTE — The tool coefficient represents factors such as noise, 


smoke, fumes and other effects, which increase the likelihood 
of a burglary attack being detected. 


3 CLASSIFICATION 


3.1 ATM safes shall be classified according to the 
grades specified in Table 1. 


4 DESIGNATIONS 


An ATM safe shall be designated by its grade and size. 


Example: An ATM safe of Grade B, Size — 600 mm 
shall be designated as ATM-B — 600. 


5 MATERIALS FOR ATM SAFES 


Materials specified in Table 2 are for general guidance 
only. Please refer to Annex C. The critical quality 
parameters of the materials used for the components 
shall be declared by the manufacturer at the time of 
type approval and records. 


a) Any metal plate or rod used in construction of 
ATM safe shall have a minimum tensile strength 
of 270 MPa. 


b) Any other material may be used provided the 
construction meets the performance requirement 
of the relevant grade specified in this standard. 


IS 17532 : 2021 


Table 1 Classification of ATM Safes 
( Clauses 3, 7.2, 7.4, 9.2 and 11) 


Resistance Minimum Resistance value Anchoring Locks 
Grade WO Strength (Clause 8) 
(Refer Annex A) (Clause 9) 
Through opening Through opening Opening of Tool attack test on Required force Quantity 
made without using made using existing ATM safe door fixing attachment (kN) (minimum) 
existing apertures apertures (Before anchoring) 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) m (vi) (vii) 
A 30 30 60 30 50 1 
B 70 60 110 55 70 1 
€ 120 100 180 55 100 IN 
D 270 220 400 75 100 1” 


* NOTE — Provision shall be made for fitment of second lock. 


Table 2 Materials for ATM Safes 
( Clause 5 ) 


SI No. Part Material 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Outer body, inner body, back, door, Any grade of stainless steel or any other non-ferrous metal/alloy or mild steel having 
hinge, bolt work, internal fixtures, ete minimum tensile strength of 270 MPa [see IS 277, IS 513 (Part 1), IS 513 (Part 2), 

IS 1079, IS 2062, IS 1875, IS 5986, IS 5522, IS 6911 and IS 6603 etc.] 

ii) Handles and other fittings Cast brass or tin bronze or mild steel powder coated or stainless steel or ABS or any 
other material suitable for the purpose 

6 DIMENSIONS AND OTHER 7 CONSTRUCTION AND WORKMANSHIP 


REQUIREMENTS OF ATM SAFE 


6.1 Dimensions 


ATM safes of any dimensions may be manufactured, as 
agreed between manufacturer and purchaser, subject to 
a tolerance of +/—3 mm on each declared dimension. 


6.2 Size 


Size of the ATM safe shall be denoted by its external 
height. 


6.3 Weight 


a) Minimum weight of the ATM safe shall be 
200 kg. At the time of type approval or 
revalidation or testing for any other purpose, the 
manufacturer shall declare the nominal weight of 
the ATM safe. The observed value shall be within 
+10/—5 percent of the declared nominal value. 


b) The nominal weight of the ATM shall be declared 
by the manufacturer at the time of certification. 
The actual weight of the ATM safe at the time 
of supply shall be within + 10/—5 percent of the 
declared weight. 


7.1 Body 


The construction of body shall be such that the resultant 
force of pull on the handle/door is resisted by a member 
that is either an integral part of the body or is welded 
to the inner part of the body and not by any component 
part that is screwed or riveted. 


It shall not be possible to open the ATM door, in bolt 


engaged condition, within the minimum required 
amount of RU specified for the corresponding grade. 


7.2 Anchoring Arrangement 


Minimum four anchors shall be provided, preferably, 
on the bottom of the ATM safe. The anchoring strength 
shall meet the requirement specified in Table 1. 


7.3 Cable Entry Openings 


Cable entry opening, if required by the purchaser, shall 
be suitably provided. Size of the cable openings shall 
be clearly indicated in the drawing. Cable entries may 
be used for burglary resistance tests. 


7.4 Opening for Currency Dispense or Deposit 


At least one suitable opening for currency dispense 
or deposit shall be provided on the ATM safe. The 
dimensions of the opening shall be declared. 


If two or more currency handling openings are close 
together, the tester is allowed to combine these in the 
test to create the through opening. 


Unused openings should be blocked. In case of a test 
attack on the unused currency disbursal opening, it 
should meet the requirement of minimum resistance 
value specified at col (ii) of Table 1 for the respective 
grade. At the time of supply of the ATM, any currency 
disbursal opening, that is not intended to be used, shall 
be blocked with the same arrangement that has been 
used for testing of the ATM safe. 


7.5 Door 


Door shall be made of mild steel plates, backed 
with suitable barrier(s) or any other type to meet the 
performance requirements as per the grade. 


Door shall fit snugly. In the close position, the gap at 
any place between the door and body shall not be more 
than 1 mm. 


In locked position, the door shall not have a play of 
more than 1.5 mm in the direction in which it opens. 


7.5.1 The door shall be secured by the movement of 
bolt work by using suitable handle and mechanism 
shall be allowed or disallowed to operate with the help 
of lock. 


7.5.2 Automatic Relocking Device 


An automatic relocking device one for each lock shall 
be fitted in the door which being always on guard, shall 
come into operation if a lock is dislodged by explosives 
or other means. 


7.5.3 Door shall have an internal bolt work cover plate 
which prevents unauthorized viewing of locks and bolt 
work and access to them, when the door is open. Bolt 
work cover plate shall be secured so that they cannot 
be opened or removed by unauthorized person without 
leaving visible traces. 


8 LOCKS 


High security locks conforming to relevant class of 
EN 1300 or equivalent as given below, shall be used on 
ATM safes. 


Grade of ATM Minimum class of lock in 
Safe EN 1300 
A A 


B B 
C B 
D C 


IS 17532 : 2021 


NOTE — At present there is no suitable Indian Standard for 
High Security locks to be used with ATM safes. As and when 
a standard is published, the requirement of locks shall be 
suitably modified. 


Where the ATM safes are supplied without locks, the 
appropriate grade/Class of lock shall be supplied with safe for 
testing. 


9 ANCHORING STRENGTH TEST 


9.1 Principle 


A horizontal force is applied on the ATM safe with an 
aim to fully or partially dislodge it from its anchored 
position. 


9.2 Test Equipment 


a) An arrangement to apply a horizontal force, as 
specified in Table 1, on the test specimen within 
an accuracy of + 5 percent. 


Steel plate to which the ATM safe shall be 
anchored. The plate shall be capable of 
withstanding the applied force, as specified in 
Table 1. 

Suitable devices for measuring the distance 
of movement or angle of tilt of ATM safe on 
completion of test. 


b 


wm 


c 


wa 


9.3 Test Criteria 


Application of horizontal force for 1 min shall not 
cause the ATM safe to be moved by more than 200 mm 
or to be tilted through an angle of more than 60°. 


9.4 Test Condition 


9.4.1 The ATM safe shall be anchored according to the 
manufacturer’s recommendation. An ATM safe without 
base shall be fixed directly to the steel plate. For an ATM 
safe with base, the safe shall be first attached to the base 
and the base in turn shall be attached to the steel plate. 
In either case manufacturer’s recommendation shall be 
followed. 


9.4.2 Wall mounted ATM safes shall be turned through 
90° and attached to the steel plate simulating the 
vertical mounting wall. 


9.4.3 Used bolts and other fixing arrangement shall not 
be used for anchoring the ATM safe. 


9.4.4 An attachment may be fixed to the ATM safe to 
facilitate the application of the force. It shall be ensured 
that the attachment does not weaken the ATM safe or 
tamper with its construction in any manner. 


9.5 Test Procedure 


a) Test shall be carried out with the ATM safe in 
closed and locked position. The location of the 
sides of the ATM shall be marked to facilitate 
measurement after the test. 


IS 17532 : 2021 


b) For floor-mounted ATM safes, the force shall be 
applied (100 Ji mm below the top of the ATM 
safe. For wall mounted ATM safes the force shall 
be applied (100* Jumm below the highest point of 
the safe when mounted according to 9.4. 


The load shall be applied smoothly and 
the required force shall be attained within 
2 to 3 minutes. The force shall be maintained for 
1 minute. The time shall be taken by a stop-watch 
after which the angle through which the ATM safe 
is tilted shall be measured while the applied force 
is maintained. 


C 


wa 


d 


Ee 


After the applied force has been released, the result 
of the application of force shall be measured. 
Where the ATM has been completely dislodged, 
the distance between the front face of the ATM 
before and after test shall be measured. In case of 
partial displacement, the angle shall be measured 
at the point of maximum displacement. 


10 SURFACE FINISH 


10.1 The inside and outside surfaces of the safe shall 
be painted or powder coated. In case of paint, an 
appropriate primer and undercoating shall be used in 
accordance to industry practices. The minimum overall 
thickness of the coatings shall be 50 u for powder 
coating and 70 u for liquid paints. Cross hatch test shall 
be conducted as per 10.2 to access the adhesion of the 
coating. 


10.1.1 The requirement of surface finish is not 
applicable to surfaces like stainless steel or any other 
corrosion resistant material. 


10.2 Cross Hatch Test 


a) Make 6 parallel cut marks using sharp 
metal pointer and straight edge, through the 
painted/coated surface, so as to make the base 
surface visible through cut marks. 


b) Cut marks shall be minimum 20 mm long and at 
2 mm distance from each other. 


c) Make 6 similar cut marks in the direction 
perpendicular to first set of cut marks, with same 
length and spacing. 


d) These 12 cut marks together shall make a pattern 
of 25 squares of 2 mm x 2 mm size, totally 
separated from each other. 


e) A good quality transparent adhesive tape not less 
than 20 mm width shall be stuck on the pattern, 
parallel to any one set of cut marks. 

f) To ensure continuous contact with paint/coat film, 
rub the tape firmly and remove air bubbles under 
the tape, if any. 


g) Within 60 to 120 seconds after sticking the tape, 
remove it by seizing free end of the tape and 
rapidly pulling it off at an angle close to 180°. 


h) Painting/Coating quality is considered as 
acceptable, ifnone ofthe 2 mm x 2 mm squares of 
paint/coat comes off the surface due to pulling the 
tape. 


11 BURGLARY RESISTANCE 


11.1 The burglary resistance performance (in terms 
of RU) of an ATM safe shall meet the requirement 
specified in Table 1 for the applicable grade. 


11.2 The burglary resistance shall be determined by the 
method prescribed in Annex A. 


11.3 For the purpose of evaluation of burglary 
resistance, the ATM safe shall at least, be subjected to 
the following attacks: 


a) an attack for opening the door; 
b) an attack on the back; 
c) an attack on the top; 


d) an attack on any one side face of the Safe at the 
discretion of the testing team; and 

e) any other attack leading to an access as specified 
in this standard. 


11.4 ATM safes shall be graded on basis ofthe minimum 
resistance value (VR) achieved. 


11.5 ATM safes shall be graded on basis ofthe minimum 
resistance value (V,) achieved. 


12 MARKING 


12.1 Marking of ATM Safes 
A metal plate displaying the following information 
shall be fixed on the inner face of the door shutter of 
ATM safes. 

a) Designation of the ATM safe; 

b) Manufacturer’s name; 

c) Manufacturer’s Trade-Mark (If any); 

d) Serial Number of the ATM safe; 

e) Year of manufacturing; 

f) Batch number (If any); and 

g) The declared nominal weight of the ATM safe. 


NOTE — For the sake of convenience in marking, the 
manufacturer may devise a codified system combining some 
or all of the information specified in (a) to (g), provided all 
information can be effectively traced back. 


12.2 Marking on Keys 


In case of key Locks fitted if any, the keys shall bear an 
identification number. 


12.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


13 TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


13.1 The ATM safes shall be considered to be 
conforming to the requirements of this standard, ifthey 
successfully passes the requirements and tests for any 
grade as specified in 5 to 11 of this standard. 


13.2 The manufacturer shall declare the grade prior 
to testing and the conformance shall be decided 
accordingly. 


14 TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION AND 
DESIGN DEFINITION 


14.1 The manufacturer shall provide a detailed 
engineering drawing of the test specimen, along with 
the sample offered for testing, indicating the following: 

a) A statement of the product designation as per 
ATM standard; 

b) Declared nominal weight of the sample; 

c) Inside dimensions and wall thickness with 
manufacturing tolerances; 

d) Horizontal and vertical cross-sections ofindividual 
layers constituting the barrier; 

e) Information about any materials or devices 
intended to generate gas, smoke or any other 
substance which may cause harm or injury to the 
test team members during testing; 


IS 17532 : 2021 


f) A list of the sizes covered by the same design shall 
also be indicated by their designations, in the event 
of samples being submitted for type approval or 
revalidation by a certifying authority; and 


g) Detailed instruction for anchoring the safe. 


14.2 The documentation on basis of which type approval 
or revalidation is obtained, shall be authenticated by 
the certifying authority and the testing agency. Copies 
of the authenticated document shall be retained by the 
certifying organization and the manufacturer and shall 
be the reference point for future validations or disputes. 


14.3 Any deviation from the approved technical 
documentation, beyond the tolerances permitted in this 
standard, shall constitute a design change and shall 
necessitate a revalidation of the design. 


15 RECORDING AND REPORTING OF TEST 
RESULTS 


15.1 The test report shall include the following: 
a) Identification of test specimen; 
b) Date(s) and place of testing; 


c) Composition of testing team indicating the roles 
ofthe members; 

d) Description of each tool attack in chronological 
order of events giving details of point of attack, 
tools used and time measurements; 

e) Continuous video recording of the attacks; 

f) Photographs of test sample taken before and after 
each attack; 

g) List of tools used with details of critical technical 
specifications; and 

h) Report on all requirements of the specification, 
with values wherever applicable. 


15.2 The burglary resistance test results shall be 
reported in terms of the resistance value along with 
details of calculations. 


IS 17532 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 3 and 11.2) 
BURGLARY RESISTANCE TEST 


A-1 PRINCIPLE OF TESTING 


A-1.1 The test is intended to simulate an actual attack 
situation with the use of tools that are most likely to 
be used by a team of burglars. The aim of the attack 
is to establish the resistance offered by the safe while 
attempting to make a through opening of one of the 
specified test gauges by use of specified tools. The 
resistance is assessed in terms of resistance value as 
determined by the tools and the time period of their use. 


NOTE — The opening shall be big enough to just allow the 
passage of the appropriate test gauge. 


A-1.2 The tools and programme of attack used during 
testing shall be those most likely, in the opinion of the 
testing team, to result in the lowest resistance values. 


A-2 EXPLORATORY TESTS 


A-2.1 Exploratory test may be done on the test specimen 
subject to the following conditions: 


a) These should be done before starting the actual 
test. Any exploratory test done after start of the 
test will be included in the networking time. 

b) The exploratory tests should be done preferably 
on a surface which will not be subjected to the 
actual test. 


A-3 TEST GAUGE 


A-3.1 One of the three following gauges, appropriate to 
the attack, shall be chosen for the test: 


a) A cylindrical test block of length 150 mm 
minimum and diameter 125 +? mm; 


b) A 112 mm x 112 mm + 0.2 mm square test block 
of length 150 mm; and 


c) A 125 mm x 100 mm + 0.2 mm rectangular test 
block of length 150 mm. 


A-3.2 Test gauges shall be made of hardened materials. 
A-4 TEST CRITERIA 


A-4.1 The criteria for a successfully completed tool 
attack test are: 


a) For any Face — The test gauge shall completely 
pass through the opening created. 


b) For Door — For a door attack as per col (iv) of 
Table 1, the ATM safe door shall be opened by 
at least 70 percent of the internal width of ATM 
safe over at least 70 percent of the height of the 
door. For a through opening on the door, the RU 
requirement shall be same as any other face. 


c) For Fixing Attachments — The fixing attachments 
shall be completely severed. 


A-4.2 Any tool attack test shall be continued until 
no more information necessary for determining the 
resistance grade can be reasonably expected. This can 
occur when the resistance value discovered in previous 
test attack is exceeded. 


A-4.3 An abandoned tool attack test shall count as one 
of the tests required. 


A-5 TESTING TEAM 


A testing team shall consist of: 


a) A team leader familiar with design practices 
followed in the industry. 

b) A time keeper familiar with the concept of net 
working time and the use of a stop-watch. 

c) Two operators skilled in operation of specified 
tools and trained in carrying out burglary resistance 
test. 

NOTES 


1 The team leader and time-keeper shall not participate in the 
operation of tools during the attack. 


2 No member of the team, except the time keeper, shall be 
changed/replaced during an attack. 


A-6 TESTING CONDITIONS 


a) Prior to performing the actual test attack, 
exploratory tool attacks can be carried out. These 
attacks shall not affect the number of actual test 
attacks required. 


b) Non-destructive lock manipulation or lock picking 
attacks are not allowed. 


c) ATM safes shall be tested with tools categorized 
in Annex B. 


d) During tool attack test following tools shall not be 
used simultaneously: 


1) two electric powered tools (see Table B-7, B-8, 
B-9 and B-10 ); 


2) two thermal tools ( see Table B-11); 
3) two hand hammering tools (I Table B-5); 
4) electric powered tool and a thermal tool; 


5) hand hammering tool and an electric powered 
tool; 


6) hand hammering tool and a thermal tool; and 


7) two specially made electric powered tools 
(see Table B-6). 
e) Dust cleaners brush may be used for cleaning the 
test specimen. 


f) Testing shall only be done in areas or against 
features which have not been weakened by earlier 
test specimen. 


g) All the attacks on ATM safe shall be completed 
within 48 hours, including all breaks taken by the 
testing team. 


h) No mechanical advantage shall be derived from an 
artificial condition for the test specimen. 


j) The use of balancers is not allowed in a tool attack 
test. 


k) Testing shall not be done in areas or against 
features which have been weakened by earlier 
tests. 


A-7 TEST PROCEDURE 


a) The team shall study the ATM safe along with the 
documentation provided by the manufacturer and 
accordingly prepare a test plan and document the 
same with reasons. 


b) The location of the intended area of attack shall 
be marked on the surface on which the attack is 


planned. 


= 


Cc 


wa 


The team leader shall ensure that the operators 
use the appropriate tools that are likely to have 
maximum destructive impact on the object of 
attack. 


While selecting the attack tools the team leader 
shall give due consideration to the ultimate aim 
of attaining the lowest resistance value while 
creating the desired opening. 


d 


Ee 


e 


wa 


The team leader shall take all steps to ensure 
that the operators do not over-exert leading to a 
weak attack. Such steps may include rotation of 
operators etc. 


A-8 MEASUREMENT OF NET WORKING 
TIME 


A-8.1 For each attack operation the clock shall be 
started when the tool is touching and attempting to 
make changes in specimen and shall be stopped when 
tool ceases to touch the test specimen. 


IS 17532 : 2021 


A-8.2 In case of using hammer, each blow shall be 
counted as 1 s when hammer is used with one hand 
only (1.5 kg, max). For sledge hammers where both 
hands are to be used (more than 1.5 kg to 3.5 kg max.) 
each blow shall be counted as 2 s. The time period 
required to carry out the hammer attack shall not be 
counted in NWT. 


A-8.3 The following shall be included in NWT: 
a) The time period for which a tool is in contact with 
the surface of attack. 


b) Any time period, not exceeding 3 s, taken to 
reposition a tool on the attack surface either by the 
attacker or another member of the attack team. 


A-8.4 The following shall not be included in the NWT: 
a) Time taken for exploratory tests not intended to 
weaken or damage the object of attack. 


b) Period of rest taken by the attack team members in 
between the periods that constitute the networking 
time. 


c) Time taken to change or repair an attack tool or 
any of its components (Re-sharpening of any 
attack tool during an attack is not permitted). 


d) Time taken to clean the surface by using a metal 
brush, cloth or similar accessories. 


A-9 CALCULATION OF RESISTANCE VALUE 
(Va 
For each tool attack, calculate the resistance value V, 
from the following equation, 
V= © txc)+} BV 
where 
>t = The sum of all operating times in minutes; 


c= The highest tool coefficient of the used 
attack tools; and 


BV = The sum of the basic values for all attack 
tools used. 
The calculated value shall be rounded up to the next 
whole number and represent the resistance value in 
resistance units (RU) for that tool attack test. 


IS 17532 : 2021 


ANNEXB 
TEST EQUIPMENT LIST 
( Clause A-6 ) 


In this table tool coefficients and basic value are given 
for each tool and tool category (A, B, C) which are 
allowed to be used in the burglary attack. The intended 
use of the tools are also described. 


NOTE 

1 In some cases, the Basic value also may vary within a tool 
category. 

2 The tool specifications given are nominal. Actual 


specifications within a variation of+ 10 percent is acceptable. 


3 The tools that can be used are not restricted to the examples 
given in the Tables. Any other tools may be used provided 
they match the description and the corresponding technical 
specification. 


Table B-1 Hand Dis-assembling Tools 
(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 
Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 
Weight 1.5 kg and Weight 3.5 kg and 
length 400 mm length 1500 mm = 
BV=0 BV=5 


These tools are used for non-destructive assembling 
of detachable elements, e.g. to detach screws, pins or 
bolts, sprig clips. 


Examples: Screw drivers, 


wrenches etc. 
Table B-2 Hand Gripping Tools 
(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


fork/ring/adjustable 


A B C 
Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 
Length 400 mm Length 1500 mm 
BV=0 BV=7 7 


These tools are used for the gripping (lever transmission) 
of tools and materials, for example, fixing/holding of 
chisel. 


Examples: Fork/ring/adjustable wrenches, chisel 


holders, forged tong, universal pliers etc. 
Table B-3 Hand Levering Tools 
( BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 
Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 
Length 750 mm Length 1500 mm 
BV=5 BV=7 7 


These tools transmit physical force as a lever, for 
example, prise-up a door, deform or fracture weak 
pieces. 


Examples: Screw drivers, tyre leavers, hand levers, 
crow bars etc. 


Table B-4 Manual Hand Sawing/Filing/Cutting 
and Drilling Tools 


( BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 
Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 
Weight 1.5 kg and 
length 400 mm = = 
BV =3 


These tools are used for manual grinding, cutting and 
detaching of various components/materials without 
electrical power. 


Examples: Hand drills, saws, files, side cutters, bolt 
croppers/cutters, plate shears, steel cutters etc. 


Table B-5 Hand Hammering Tools 
( BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 


Tool coefficient 
10 RU/min 


Tool coefficient 
7.5 RU/min 


Head weight 3.5 kg 
and length 1000 mm = 


BV =7 


Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 


Head weight 1.5 kg 
and length 750 mm 
BV=5 


These tools are used to break up various materials and 
to propel different accessories, such as chisels, drift 
punches and wedges. 


Examples: Sledge hammer, club hammer, hand axes, 
pick axes etc. 


Table B-6 Specially Made Tools 
( BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 


Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 


Power consumption 
500 W, weight 

1.5 kg and length 
400 mm 


BV=18 


Tool coefficient 
10 RU/min 


Tool coefficient 
7.5 RU/min 


Power consumption 

800 W, weight 

3.0 kg and length = 
750 mm 


BV =28 
These tools are usually not commercially available 


but are conceived or provided especially for certain 
purposes at the test. 


Table B-7 Electric Powered Tools, without Impact 
(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 

Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 

5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 

Weight 3.0 ke and Power consumption Power consumption 

Power consumption 800 W 1350 W 

550 W BV =25 
Plus an addition for 
a drilling-rig 

BV=7 BV=11 BV=11 


These are electrical tools used to drill or cut without 
impact option. 


Examples: Electric drill machine, jig saw, sabre saw 
etc. 


Table B-8 Electric Powered Rotary Tools, with 


Impact Option 
(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 
A B C 
Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 
Power consumption Power consumption 
_ 800 W 1350 W 
BV=11 BV =25 


These tools are used to drill or cut with or without 
impacting option. 

Examples: Electric hammer drill machine, jack 
hammers, concrete breakers etc. 


Table B-9 Electric Powered Impact Machine 
without Rotation Option 


(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 
Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 
Power consumption Power consumption 
= 800 W 1350 W 
BV=11 BV=25 


These tools are used for hammering, breaking up or 
deforming without rotation option. 


Examples: Building hammer etc. 


Table B-10 Electric Powered Grinding/Slitting 
Machine Tools 


(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 
Tool coefficient Tool coefficient Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 7.5 RU/min 10 RU/min 
Power consumption Power consumption 
800 W 2300 W and with: 
BV=14 Abrasive disc BV = 25 
Or 


Diamond disc BV = 35 


IS 17532 : 2021 


These tools are used for cutting, grinding or abrasion. 
Examples: Electric disc cutter machine. 
Table B-11 Oxy-acetylene Torch 
(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 


Tool coefficient 
10 RU/min 


Tool coefficient 
7.5 RU/min 


Tool coefficient 
5 RU/min 


Oxy-acetylene torch lance 
length 1300 mm, 
Nozzle diameter 2.8 mm 
BV=14 
(Recommended oxygen 
u consumption: 50 lit/minute BV=28 
+ 10 percent) (Recommended 
oxygen 
consumption: 
250 lit/minute 
+ 10 percent) 


Oxy-acetylene 
torch lance 
length 1300 mm, 


Nozzle diameter 
3.2 mm 


These tools are used for cutting, melting, blowing 
metal. 


Examples: Oxy-acetylene gas cutter. 


Table B-12 Accessories for Tools of 
Table B-1 up to B-11 


(BV = Basic Value in RU ) 


A B C 
HHS-drills HHS/Carbide tipped drills HHS/Carbide tipped 
BV= Bv=2 drills 
BV=3 
Saw blade Saw blade Chisel/bit 
BV= BV=2 BV=4 
Chisel Chisel/bit Disc diameter 230 mm, 
BV= BV=3 thickness 2 mm 
BV=5 
Wedge Disc diameter 125 mm, Diamond disc 
BV= thickness 2 mm diameter 230 mm 
BV=4 BV= 14 
Punch Nozzle Nozzle 
BV= BV=4 BV=5 


HSS = High speed steel. 


These are consumable and replaceable accessories, 
used with tools of Table B-1 up to B-11. 


Their use is represented by a basic value. 


IS 17532 : 2021 


IS No. 


277:2013 


513 (Part 1) : 2016 


513 (Part 2) : 2016 


1079 : 2017 


1875 : 1992 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 5 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Galvanized steel sheets 
(plain and corrugated) 


Cold rolled low carbon 


steel sheets and strips: 
Part 1 Cold forming 
and drawing purpose 


(sixth revision) 


Cold rolled low carbon 
steel sheets and strips: 
Part 2 High tensile and 
multi-phase steel (sixth 
revision) 

Hot rolled 
steel sheets, plates and 
strips — Specification 
(seventh revision) 


carbon 


Carbon steel billets, blooms, 
slabs and bars for forging 
(fifth revision) 


10 


2062 


5986 


6911 


5522 


6603 


IS No. 


: 2011 


:2017 


: 2017 


:2014 


:2001 


Title 


Steel for general structural 
purposes — Specification 
(seventh revision) 

Hot rolled 
plates and 
forming and flanging 
purpose — Specification 
(fourth revision) 


steel sheets, 
strips for 


Stainless steel plate, sheet 
and strip — Specification 


Stainless steel plate, sheet 
and strip for utensils — 
Specification 


Stainless steel bars and 
flats — Specification 


ANNEXD 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Security Equipments Sectional Committee, MED 24 


Organization 


Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai 
Bank of India, Mumbai 
Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Bank of India, Mumbai 
EMTAC Laboratories Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 


Guardwel Industries Private Limited, Mumbai 
Gunnebo India Private Limited, Thane, Mumbai 


Indian Banks Association, Mumbai 
Indian Overseas Bank, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Mumbai 


Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority, 
New Delhi 


Methodox Systems Limited, Indore 


NCR Corporation India Private Limited, Mumbai 
Punjab National Bank, New Delhi 


Safeage Security Products Private Limited, Mumbai 
Sherni Locks Manufactures Private Limited, Pune 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai 


Union Bank of India, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Edcuation, New Delhi 

In Personal Capacity (Plot No. 41, Block No. 5, 
Mehta Cottage, Dr Raut Road, Shivaji Park, 
Dadar, Mumbai) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. Kumar RAGHU (Chairman) 
CAPT AKHILESH KUMAR 


DR SUVIR SINGH 
Dr Rajiv Kumar (Alternate) 


CoL A. K. JHA 
SHRI SUPRIYO GANGULY 


SHRI PRASHANT C. 
SHRI PUSHKAR GOKHALE (Alternate) 


SHRI JOHN DMELLO 
Suri LEON GEORGE (Alternate) 


SHRI R. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. UNNIKRISHNAN 
Capt P. VENKATESAN 
Pror P. P. DATE 

Suri T. S. NAIK 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI KARN KATARIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK SHANKAR 


Capt B. K. Tyacı 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN VASANOI 
SHRI NARESH PANCHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI FAROKH KUTAR 
SHRIMATI ARTI GUPTA (Alternate) 


Dr TARSEM SINGH SIAN 


CAPT ARUN THAKUR 
CAPT SUSHIL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT MENON 
Suri R. K. RAGHAVAN (Alternate) 


BRIG ASHUTOSH SIROTHIA 
Suri M. A. U. KHAN 


SHRI AJIT G. NARAVANE 


IS 17532 : 2021 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms KHASHBOO KUMARI 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 24 (14253). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


