IS 13812 ( Part 19 ) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 ( 1990 )

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

MEDICALELECTRTCALEQUIPMENTPARTICULARREQUIREMENTSFORSAFETY
PART 19 BABY INCUBATORS

UDC

615478.5

: 614.825

@ BlS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

March 1994

Price Greup 10

Elictromedical

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

MHD 19

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard ( Part 19 ) which is identical to IEC Pub 601-2-19 ( 1990 ) `Medical electrifor safety of baby incubators' ( First edition ), cal equipment - -Part 2 : Particular requirements issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Electromedical Equipment Sectional Committee ( MHD 19 ) and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. This series of standards will consist of several parts and will cover the particular requirements for safety of various medical elec_trical equipment. Part 19 of this standard covers the requirements of baby incubators. The other parts will cover the requirements of other medical electrical equipment. This standard ( Part 19 ) is being issued in eleven sections which are listed below: 1 General 2 Safety requirements 3 Protection against electric shock hazards 4 Protection against mechanical hazards 5 Protection agianst hazards from unwanted or excessive radiation 6 Protection against hazards of explosions in medically used rooms 7 ;Protection against excessive temperatures, fires and other hazards, such as human errors Section 8 Accuracy of operating data and protection against incorrect ouiput Szction 9 Fault conditions causing overheating and/or mechanical damage; Environmental tests Section 10 Constructional requirements Section 11 Additional requirements The text of IEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication ar Indian Standard without deviations. Certain coventions are, however, not identical to those used in the Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Standard' or `IEC Publication' appear referring to a) Wherever the words `International this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'; b) Comma ( , ) has been used as decimal marker at some of the places while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain international standards-for which Indian The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their Standards also exist. place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated:
International Standard Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

Section Section Section Section Section Section Section

.

IEC Pub 601-l ( 1988 )

IEC Pub 65 1 ( 1979 )

IS 13450 ( Part I ) : 1994 Medical electrical equipment : Part 1 General requirements for safety IS 9779 : 1981 Sound level meters

Identical

Identical

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of following international standards referred to in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. IEC Pub 601-2-20 ( 1990 ) Medical electrical equipment - Part 2 : Particular requirements for safety of transport incubators of sound power level of noise sources. EngineerIS0 3743 : 1988 Acoustics - Determination ing methods for special reverberation test rooms IS0 7767 : 1988 Oxygen analyzers for monitoring ments of the International patient breathing Standard mixtures Safety requirewhile adopting

Only the English language text it in this Indian Standard.

has been retained

For the purposes of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. ( Continued on third cover )

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990)

Indian Standard
MEDICAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY
PART 19 BABY INCUBATORS

SECTION 1. Scope and object This clause of the General Standard
1.I

ONE -

GENERAL

applies except as follows:

Scope Addition: This Particular Standard specifies safety requirements clause 2.1.101 of this standard. This standard for INCUBATORS, as defined in Sub-

does not apply to EQUIPMENT which uses radiant heaters. incubators* used for the transportation of infants.

It also does not apply to transport 1.2 Object Addition:

The object of this Particular Standard is to establish requirements for INCUBATORS which minimize hazards to PATIENT and USER, and to specify tests by which compliance with the requirements can be verified. 2. Teqminology and definitions `This clause of the General Standard 2.1.5
APPLIED PAKT

applies except as follows:

Replacement: All parts within the BABY COMPARTMENT, contact with the baby, shall be considered Additional 2.1.101 definitions: which can intentionally an APPLIED PART. or unintentionally come into

i~cUi3~7DR

An enclosure, intended to contain a baby and having transparent section(s) which allow(s) for viewing of the baby, provided with means to control the environment of the baby primarily by heated air within the enclosure. 2.1.102
BABY COMPARTMENT

The portion 2.1.103

of an INCUBATOR intended to contain a baby.
INCUBATOR

AIR CONROLLED

INCUBATOR in which the air temperature sensor close to a value set by the USER.

is automatically

controlled

by an air temperature

2.1.104

BABYCONTROLLED

INCUBATOR

An air controlled INCUBATOR which has the additional capability of automatically controlling the INCUBATOR air temperature in order to maintain the temperature as measured by a SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR close to a value set by the USER.
1

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC: Pub 601-2-19 (1990) 2.9 Contr-o/s and limiting devices

Additional 2.9.101

defiinitions:
SENSOR

SKMTEMPERATURE

A sensing device intended 2.9.102
SKIN TEMPERATURE

to measure the baby's SKIN TEMPERATURE.

The temperature is placed. 2.9.103

of the skin of the baby at a point on which the

SUN

TEMPERATURE

SENSOR

A VERAGF TEMPERATURE The average of the maximum and minimum temperatures at any specified point in the BABY achieved during STEADY TEMPERATURE CONDITION.
CONTROL TEMPERATURE

COMPARTMENT

2.9.104

Temperature 2.9.105

selected at the temperature

control.

INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE

Temperature of the air at a point 10 cm ~above the centre of the mattress surface in the baby compartment (see figure 102, point A). 2.9.106 A .VERAGEINCUBAi'-OR TEMPERATURE The average of the maximum
STEADY TEMPERATURE

and minimum INCUBATOR CONDITION (See figure 101).

TEMPERA~JRES

achieved during

2.10

Operation of EQUIPMENT Additional definition:

2.10.101

STEXDYTEh4PERATURECONDITION

The condition reached when the INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE over a period of one hour (see figure 101). 3.
GeneA requirements

does not vary by more than 1 "C

This clause of the General Standard 3.6* Addition: Applicable SINGL.E FAULT CONDITICNS which _. cause sparks to occur, or -- increase the energy of sparks, or - increase temperatures. 4.
General requirements for tests

applies except as follows:

are short and open circuiting of components

or wiring,

This clause of the General Standard 4.5 Ambient

applies except as follows:

temperature, humidity and atmospheric pressure

Replacement: a) * If not otherwisespecified in this Particular Standar-d, all tests shall be carried out at an ambient temperature within the range of 21 "C to 26 "C.

2

IS 13812 (Fart 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19(1990)

4.6

Other conditions Additional aa) item:

If not otherwise specified the CONTROL TEMPERATURE shall be 34 "C +- 1 "C and shall always exceed the ambient temperature by at least 3 "C.

5.

Classification

This clause of the General Standard

applies.

6.

Identification,

marking

and documents

This clause of the General Standard 6.1 Addition:

applies except as follows:

6.1.101 * An INCUBATOR not equipped with an integral oxygen analyzer and which provides means for oxygen administration shall be marked in a prominent position with a text which states: "An oxygen analyzer should be used when oxygen is administered" 6.1.102 If a heater is accessible without the use of a tool a notice or marking shall be displayed adjacent to the heater giving warning of high surface temperature. 6.3 Addition: b) * Temperature controls shall be clearly marked with temperature settings on or adjacent to the control. The markings shall be provided at intervals of not greater than 0.5 "C for AIRCONTROLLEDINCUBATORS and notgreaterthan0.25 "C for BABYCONTROLLEDINCUBATORS.

Marking of the maximum and the minimum values of controls and -indicators shall be such that no confusion can arise with regard to the position of the ccntrol and/or the indicated values. 6.7 Addition: `a) An INCUBATOR shall be equipped applicable. 6.8 6.8.2 ACCOMPANYING
DOCUA4Eh'7s

with a yellow light according

to Sub-clause

54.101 when

Instructions for use Addition: aa) The instructions for use shall additionally contain: procedure and frequency for verifying confor-

- A recommended preventive maintenance mity with product specifications. *1.

A statement that an INCUBATOR should be used only by appropriately trained personnel and under the direction of qualified medical personnel familiar with currently known risks and benefits of INCUBATOR use. A warning that direct sunlight or other radiant heat sources can cause an increase in INCUBATOR temperature to dangerous levels.

*2.

*3.

A statement that the use of oxygen increases the danger of fire and that auxiliary equipment producing sparks shall not be placed in the INCUBATOR.

3

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990) *4.

A warning that even small quanc~t&$~f flammable agents, such x ether,?Ild ;~li~~h1. left in the INCUBATOR can cause fire in connection with oxygen. A specification clause 50.108.
of the warm-up time of the INCUBATOR measured as specified in Sub-

*5.

*6.

A recommendation of the position and method of use of the SKIN TEMPERATURESENSOR, including a warning against possible use as a rectal temperature sensor, if such a warning is applicable. Information humidity
BATOR. If the INCUBATOR is not supplied

*7.

about the range of control temperature and relative humidity of the INCUwith means for control of the degree of this shall be stated in the instructions for use. methods of establishing acceptable conditions according to Subequipment

*8.

Recommented clause 44.7.

*9.

When applicable, a statement qf the maximum allowed weight of additional which might be placed on shelves connected to the INCUBATOR. that particular care must be taken to ensure that additional to the baby is electrically safe. - When applicable, aninformation checked. equipment

- For TYPE B EQUIPMENT, where the baby may not be isolated from earth, a warning

connected

about how the audible agd visual alarms can be of oxygen may increase the noise level for.

- A warning stating that administration the baby within the INCUBATOR.

- An explanation of the operation of supplementary oxygen equipment supplied for use with the INCUBATOR or as specified in the ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS.

- A statement

that an oxygen analyzer shall be used when oxygen is delivered to the

baby.
7. Power Input

This clause of the General Standard applies.

SECIION 10.
10.2.1 Special environmental

TWO - SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

conditions

Environnernent Replacement: a) An ambient temperature
measures

between

+20 "C and +30 "C.

11.

Special

with respect to safety

This clause of the General Standard

applies.

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990) SEC-`-ION THREE PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK HAZARDS

Clauses 13 to 19 of the General Standard apply. 20. Dielectric strength This clause of the General Standard _20.2 applies except as follows:

Particular requirements for EQUIPMENT with an APPLIED PART Item B-b Amendment: This is not applicable Item B-d Addition: The reference voltage shall be a minimum of 250 V. Item B-e Addition: The test voltage shall be a minimum of 1500 V. to INCUB+TORS.

SEC-I-ION FOUR 21. Mechanical strength

-

PROTECTION

AGAINST

MECHANICAL

HAZARDS

This clause of the General Standard Additional sub-clauses:

applies except as follows:

by barriers such as 21.101 * The baby shall be safely retained ~within the BABY.COMPARTMENT walls or side panels. Barriers intended to be opened or removed to allow access to the baby, such as doors, ports etc., shall close so as not to open under the test conditions specified below. It shall not be possible for barriers to be insecurely closed or latched whilst appearing to be engaged. The mechanical integrity of the INCUBATOR shall be maintained under the following test conditions. Compliance Test I: With all access port doors deliberately made as insecure as possible, without the use of a TOOL, whilst still appearing to be engaged, a horizontal force shall be applied to the centre of the access port door. The force shall be increased gradually from zero to 20 N in an interval of 5 s - IO s and shall be held at maximum for 5 s. is checked by inspection and by the following tests:

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994

IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990) Test 2: With all doors and ports in their normally closed position, the INCUBATOR, mounted on a trolley as specified in the ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS, is propelled along its longitudinal axis at a constant velocity of 0,s rf: OJ m/s until its leading wheel meets a 20 mm thick plate, which is rigidly attached to an otherwise flat floor. The test shall be carried out: with the INCUBATOR'S long axis at right angles to the edge of the plate, and

- as shown in figure 103, with the INCVIMOR pulled along the direction of its long axis but with the axis at an angle to the plate such that a test rod, placed in contact with the leading edge of one front wheel and the trailing edge of the other, is parallel to the edge of the plate. The two types of movement are repeated twice with each pair of wheels first.

The mechanical integrity of the EQUIPMENT shall be maintained during the test and all doors shall remain closed. Addition: 21.102 Supports and mounting for their purpose. Compliance brackets for ACCESSORIES shall be suitable and of adequate
+

strength

is checked by inspection and by the following

test:

A gradually increasing force is applied so as to act vertically through the centre of the supports and mounting brackets, e.g. an accessoryshelf in the extendedposition with a manufacturer's recommended load. The force is increased from zero in a 5 s to 10 s interval, until it equals three times the recommended load and is sustainedfor a period of I min. There shall be no evidence of damage to the items under test. 22. Moving parts This clause of the General Standard 22.2 Amendment: b) This requirement is not applicable to an air circulating fan if it is accessible only when no baby is present in the INCUBATOR and appropriate EQUIPMENT parts are removed for cleaning. applies except as follows:

23.

Surfaces, corners and edges This clause of the General Standard applies.

24.

Stability

and transportability

This clause of the General Standard 24.1 Replacement:

applies except as follows:

INCUBATORS shall remain stable when tilted 5" in NORMAL

USE and when tilted 10" during

transportation.

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 19!)4 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990) 24.3

Re, b)

?ment: The EQu(pMENT isplaced in any ppssible position of NORMAL USE 011a plane inclined at an angle of 0.09 rad (5") to the horizontal plane. If wheels are present, they shall be temporarily fixed in their most disadvantageous position. Doors and drawers and the .like shall be placed in the most disadvantageous position during NORMAL USE. The mattress tray shall be extended outside the enclosure. The test shall be repeated at an angle of 0.18 rad (lo"), in which case the mattress tray shall not be extended outside the enclosure. Doors and drawers and the like shall be placed in their most disadvantageous position.

24.101

INCUBATORS shall withstand

the stresses caused during transport test:

over thresholds

and to 01

from elevators. Compliance is checked by the following

The INCUBATOR is pulled at a constant velocity of 0.5 t 0.1 m/s until its leading wheels nwet a 20 mm thick plate. The test shall be carried out: with the INCUBATOR
lorzgaxis

at right angles to the edge of the plare, and

- cls shown in figure 103, with the INCUBATOR pulled along the direction of its long uxis but with the axis at an,angle to the plate such that a test rod, placed in cotltact tc*ith the leading edge of one front &heel and the trailing edge of the other, is parallel to rhe edge of 2he plate. The above tests are repeated twice with each pair of wheels. the above tests, the [NCUBATOR shall be suitable for further NORhfAL USE. The INCUBATOR'S mechanical and structural integrity shall be verified, e.g. larches and Cioor~ shall remain closed and ancillary equipment supplied by or available from rhe manufaclurer shall remain secure. 24.102 The lateral force to cause the INCUBATOR to tip over shall be greater than 100 N. Compliance is checked by the following test: Following

With the INCUBATOR wheels locked and with the EQUIPMENT in the worst-case co&uration and accessories, a lateral force shali be applied and measured using a force gauge. The point of application shall be at the highest point of the body of the EQUIPMENT. The INCUBATOR &ail not tip over when the force is 100 N or less.

of parts

24.103 If the mattress tray can be extended outside the enclosure it shall be restrained to ensure that the tray remains attached to the INCUBATOR, is supported and does not tip under the weight of the baby. Compliance is checked by the following test:

A gradually increasing downward force is to be applied to the middle of the outside edge of the mattress tray whilst in the fully extended position. The force is to be increased over a 5 s IO s interval until it equals 100 N and is to be smtained for a period of I mill. The tray shall not incline by more than 5" to tlte horizontal axis of the INCUBATOR and there shall be 110 visible evidence of damage to the supporting structures.

7

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 EC Pub 601-2-19 (1990) 24.104 * If the EQUIPMENT

prevent movement Compliance

is mounted on wheels, the manufacturer shall provide a means to of the EQUIPMENT on a slope of at least 10" to the horizontal. test:

is checked by inspection and by the following

Place the EQUIPMFNT with its wheels in a locked position and with all accessories fitted, on a plane inclined at an angle of IO" to the horizontal. Report whether the EQUIPMENT is in a stable position. Clauses 25, 27 and 28 of the General Standard apply.

SECTION

FIVE

- PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS OR EXCESSIVE RADIATION apply.

FROM UNWANTED

Clauses 29 to 36 of the General Standard

SECTION

SIX -

PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS IN MEDICALLY USED ROOMS

OF EXPLOSIONS

Clauses 37 to 41 of the General Standard apply.

SECTION

SEVEN - PROTECTION AGAINST EXCESSlVE TEMPERATURES, FIRE AND OTHER HAZARDS, SUCH AS HUMAN ERRORS

42.

Excessive temperatures This clause of the General Standard applies except as follows:

42. I

Amendment: In Tabie Xa, delete from column 1: "EQUIPMENT parts which may in NORMAL brief contact with a PATIENT". Delete from column 2: "50" ("C).
USE have a

42.3

Ire/71 1) replace~lient: 1) The temperature of the surfaces intended to be in contact with the baby shall not exceed 40 "C. The temperature of other surfaces accessible to the baby shall not exceed 40 "C for metal surfaces and 43 "C for other materials. These requirements apply in NORMAL CONDITIONS and SINGLE FAULT CONDITIONS including: failure of the air circulation,
faihre Of

a THERMOSTAT, of the SKIN TEMPERATURESENSOR.

.- disconnection

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990)

Compliance

is checked by .fhe following

test:

The maximum temperature of surfaces intended to be in contact with and surfaces accessible to the baby shall be measured according to Sub-clause 42.4 of the General Standard and include test conditions as described in the compliarice test of Sub-clauses 101.1and 56.6 aa) of th& Particular Standard 43. *
Fire prevention

This clause of the General Standard Additional sub-clauses:

applies except as follows:

43.101 * In order to eliminate the risk of oxygen fires caused by electrical components which can be a source of ignition in enclosed cbmpartments of EQUIPMENT containing an oxygen' system, at least one of the following requirements shall apply: in which accumulations - Electrical components shall be separated from compartments oxygen can occur by a barrier complying with the requirements of Sub-clause 43.102. Compartments containing electrical components ments of Sub-clause 43.103. of

shall be ventilated according to the require-

- Electrical components which, in NORMAL USE or SINGLE FAULT CONDITION, can be a source z of ignition shall comply with the requirements of Sub-clause 43.104. 43.102 Any barrier required under the provisions of Sub-clause 43.101 shall be sealed at all joints and at any holes for cables or for other purposes. Compliance is checked by inspection and if applicable by the compliance test described in the General Standard, Sub-clause 40.5 e) for enclosures with restricted breathing. The internal overpressure of 4 mbar specified in Sub-clause 40.5 e) of the General Standard is not applicable when, in NORMAL CONDITION, a pressure difference exists between the spaces separated by the barrier. In such cases the compliance test of Sub-clause 43.103 of this Particular Standard applies. 43.103 * The ventilation required under the provisions of Sub-clause 43.101 shall be such that the oxygen concentration in the compartment containing electrical components shall not ~exceed 4 vol Vo above the ambient level. If this requirement is met by forced ventilation, means for an alarm in the event of malfunction shall be provided. Compliance is checked by the following test:

The oxygen concenrrarion shall be measured under the following condirionsand for such a period fhat rhe highest possible concentration of oxygen occurs. - SINGLE FAULT CONDITION including possible leakage qf oxygen. - Selection of rhe most unfavourable control settings. - Mains supply voltage deviations of +I0 %. The measuremenfs shall be repeated after 18 h during which time rhe supply voltage shall have been switched off and the gas supply shall have remained on. The rate of air exchange in the rest room shall be befween 3 and IO volumer per hour:

IS 13812(Part 19) : 1994 IEC: Pub 601-2.19(1990) 43.104 *

Electrical circuits which can produce sparks or generate increased surface temperatures and which might otherwise be a source of ignition shall be so designed that no ignition occurs. At least both of the following requirements shall be satisfied in NORMAL CONDITION and SINGLE
FAULT CONDITION:

- The product of the r.m.s. value of the no ldad voltage and the r.m.s. value of the short circuit current shall not exceed 10 VA. - The surface temperature Compliance of components shall not exceed 300 "C. test:

is checked by the following

Voltages and currents shall be measured or calculated and surface temperatures shall be measured in NORMAL CONDITIONS and SINGLEFAULTCONDITIONS.

44.

Overflow, spillage, leakage, humidity, ingress of liquids, cleaning, sterilization and disinfection This clause of the General Standard applies except as follows:

44.2

Overflow Amendment: In line 2 after "USE" add "including transit between periods of use".
1'

44.3

Spillage Replacement: *
INCUBATORS shall be so constructed

that spillage does not wet parts which if wetted might

Cause a SAFETY HAZARD.

Such spillage is considered Compliance

as a SINGLE FAULT CONDITION. test:

is checked by the following

The EQuIPMENTshall be positioned as for NORMAL USE with the canopy in the normal position; 200 ml of water is poured steadily on an arbitrary point of the top surface of the EQUIPMENT. After this test the EQCIIPMENTshall comply with the requirements of th& standard. 44.4 Leakage Addition : * An INCUBATOR shall be so constructed that liquids deposited on the inside surface of the BABY COMPARTMENT, including the baby tray, cannot reduce the safety of the INCUBATOR. Leakage of 200 ml is considered Compliance as NORMAL tests:
CONDITION.

is checked by the following

Such an amount of water shall be sprayed on all inner surfaces of the BABY COMPARTMENT thal drops coalesce and flow down the walls. In addition, 200 ml of water shall bepoured steadily on the baby tray. After this test EQUIPMENT shall satisfy all requirements of this standard.

10

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990)

44.7

Cleaning, sterilization and dtiinfection Addition: * A humidifier, if provided, shall be designed to permit the application effect microbiological decontamination between use.
of procedures that

45.

Pressure vessels and parts subject to pressure This clause of the General Standard applies.

46.

Human errors This clause of the General Standard applies except as follows:

Additional sub-clauses: 46.101 * All temperature
sensors (including SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSORS) shall be clearly marked with their intended function. It shall not be possible to connect a sensor to an inappropriate socket on the EQUIPMENT.

Compliance is checked by inspection. 46.102 * When a BABY CONTROLLED
there shall be a.clear .* indication
INCUBATOR operatesas an AIR CONTROLLED INCUBATOR tl

of the mode of operation

in use.

Compliance is checked by inspection 46.103 Each temperature
rotation control, if it has a rotary action, shall be so arranged produces an increase in temperature. that a clockwise

Compliance b checked by inspection.
49. Interruption of the power supply This clause of the General 49.2 Standard applies except as follows:

Replacement:
The EQUIPMENT shall be so designed, that an interruption .and a restoration supply do not change the CONTROL TI%PERATURE or other preset values. of the power

Compliance is checked by switching off and on the
EQUIPMEhT.

XJPPLY

MAINS,

and inspecting the

SECTION

EIGHT

- ACCURACY OF OPERATING DATA AND PROTECTION AGAINST INCORRECT OUTPUT

50.

Accuracy of operating data This clause of the General Standard applies except as follows:

Additional sub-clauses: 50.101 *
During STEADY TEMPERATURE CONDITION the INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE differ from the AVERAGE INCU_BATOR TEMPERATURE%~ more than 0.5 "C. shall not

IS 13812(Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19(1990)

Compliance ts checked by measurement at CONTROL TEMPERATURES of 32 "C and 36 "C over a period of at h. ' I h 50.102 * With~an
-points INCUBATOR~working as an AIR CONTROLLED INCUBATOR and the CONTROL TEMwithin its range, the AVERAGE TEMPERATURE in each of the PERATURE set at any temperature

A, B, C, D and E as specified in the test instruction shall not differ from the AVERAGE INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE by more than 0.8 "C in NORMAL USE. In any position of the tilted mattress it shall not differ by more than 1 "C.

Compliance is checked by the following test: Calibrated temperature sensors shall be placed at five points in a plane parallel to and 10 cm above the mattress surface. Point A shall be a point 10 cm above the centre of the mattress (see jig. 102, point A). The other points shall be the centres of the four areasformed by lines, which divide both the width and the length in two parts (seefig. 102, points B to E). The AVERAGE TEMPERATURE at each of these five points shull be measured at CONTROL TEMPERATURES of 32 "C and 36 "C.
PERATURE

The dtfferences bet ween the five measured values and the measured AVERAGE INCULGITOR TEMshall be compared as spectfied. The test shall be undertaken with the INCUbQtTOR mattress tray horizontal and at the two extremes of its tilt angles.
BABY CONTROLLED
INCUBATORS shall be equipped with a SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR

50.103 *

and the temperature measured by the sensor shall be continuously displayed and clearly visible. If, in addition, the display is used to present any other parameter, this shall be obtained only on demand using a momentary action switch. The displayed temperature'range shall minimally be 33 "C to 38 "C.

Compliance is checked by inspection. 50.104 * The accuracy
be within + of the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR for measuring skin temperature shall

0.3 "C.

Compliance is checked by the following test: The SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR shall be immersed in a water bath which has the capability of controlling the temperature of the water such that it fluctuates by less than + 0.1 "C around its controlled value. The water bath temperature shall be at a ncminal36 "C. A standard thermometer accurate to within f 0.05 "C of its reading shall be positioned with its bulb adjacent 10 the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR. The reading of the standard thermometer shall be compared with the displayed temperature and their drfferenceshall not exceed 0.3 "C less the standard thermometer error.
50.105 * With an INCUBATOR working in the BABY CONTROLLED INCUBATOR mode with horizontal
the temperature as measured by the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR shall not by more than 0.7 from the CONTROL TEMPERATURE mattress orientation

differ

"C in STEADY TEMPERATURE

CONDITION.

Compliance is checked by the following test: The SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR shall be freely suspended 10 cm above the centre of the mattrEss surface. The SKIN TEMPERATURE shall be measured at CONTROL TEMPERATURES of 36 "C.
If it can be demonstrated that an alternative test method is more relevant for this test the manufacturer may propose that method to verify the performance requirement.

12

IS 13812(Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19(1990)

50.106 * An indication of INCUBATOR TEMPERAIIJRE shall. be provided by a means which is independent of any device used for control of the INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE. Itshall be exclusively used for indication of INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE and it shallbe so iocated as to be easily read without opening the INCUBATOR even when working at a maximum humidity setting. A mercury-in-glass thermometer shall not be used The temperature measuring device reading shall not differ from the INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE measured by a standard thermometer by more than 0.8 "C less the standard thermometer error. The standard thermometer shall be accurate to within & 0.05 "C. It shall have a measuring range of at least 20 "C to 40 "C. If the temperature sensitive component of any device is located at a point where the air temperature consistently differs from the INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE, the device may be specially calibrated with an offset in order to meet the above requirements. However, in this case full details of the special calibration shall be specified in the ACCOMPANYI-NCDOCUMENTS.

Compliance ir checked by impection and measurement at CONTROL TEMPERATURES of 32 "C and 36 "C 50.107 Withan INCUBAToROperating asan AIRCONTROLLEDINCUBATOR TURE shall not differ from the CONTROL TEMPERATURE by more than temperature of between 21 "C and 25 "C. * the AVERAGETEMPERA-+ 1.5 "C at an ambient
$

Compliance is checked by measuring the AVERAGE INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE at a CONTROL TEMPERATURE of36"C andat STEADYTEMPERATURECONDITION. 50.108 * The warm-up time of the EQUIPMENT shall not differ ~by more than 20% from the warmup time specified in the instructions for use (see item aa) of Sub-clause 6.8.2). Compliance is checked by the foliowing test: With the CONTROL TEMPERATURE set to I2 "C above ambient temperature, the supply voltage being equal to the rated voltage, and the EQUIPMENT operating as an AIR COMROLLED INCUBATOR, the INCUBATOR-k switchedon, startingfrom COLDCONDITION. Thetimeforthe INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE to rise by II "C is measured (see figure 101). The humidity contra/, if fitted, shall be set to its maximum value. The water level of a humidfier water container shall be normal. The water in such a container shall be at ambient temperature. 50.109 * After adjustment of ~the CONTROL TEMPERATURE in the manner described in the following test, the overshoot in INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE shall not exceed 2 "C and STEADY TEMPERATURE CONDITION shall be restored within 15 min. Compliance is checked by the following test: The INCUBATOR b operatedasan AIR CONTRoLLEDINCUmmR al a CONTROL TEMPERATURE of 30 "C until STEADY TEMPERATURE CONDmON is reached. The temperature control is then adjustedtoa CONTROL TEMPERATURE of34 "C Theovershootof INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE and the time to reach the new STEADY TEMPERATURE CONDITION measured from the first passage of 34 "C shail be measured.

13

IS 13812(Fart 19) : 1994
IEC Pub 601-2-19(1990)

50.110 * Any indicated measured value.

value of relative humidity

shall have an accuracy

of +- 10 % of actual

Compliance is checked by the measurement of the relative humidity with a humidity measuring device at the centre of the enclosure. The CONTROL TEMPERATURE shall be set at a value between 32 "C and 36 "C 50.111 * Ifan oxygen analyzer is supplied as an integral part of the INCUBATOR, this shall conform with relevant IS0 Standards. Compliance ti checked by inspection Clauses 51 to 53 of the General Standard apply.

SECTION 54.

TEN

- CONSTRUCTlONAL

REQUIREMENTS

General
This clause of the General Standard Addition: applies except as follows:
rl

54.101

CONTROL

TEMPERATURE

ranges

* For an AIRCONTROLLED INCUBATOR the range of the CONTROL TEMPERATURE shall be from 30 "C or less to not more than 37 "C. The maximum CONTROLTEMPERATURE may be overridden by a special action of the operator up to 39 "C, in which case this mode of operation shall be indicated with an easily recognizable warning yellow light including or combined with relevant temperature range indication. The maximum setting of the CONTROLTEMPERATURE shall not be less than 36 "C.

Compliance is checked by inspection 54.102 * For a BABYCONTROLLEDINCUBATOR the range of the CONTROLTEMPERATURE shall he from 35 "C or less to not more than 37 "C. The CONTROLTEMPERATURE range may be overridden by a special action of the operator up to 38 "C. Compliance is checked by inspection. 55.

ENCLOSURES and covers
Addition :

55.3

The INCUBATOR shall have means by which the baby can be taken in and out without the need to rem~ove the canopy completely, or to disconnect tubes, cords, leads and the like from the baby.

56.

Components and general assembly
This clause of the General Standard applies except as follows:

14

IS 13812(Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19(1990)

56.6

Temperature zontrol devices Additional items: aa) * An INCUBATOR shall be equipped with a THERMAL
CUT-OUT which operates independently of any THERMOSTAT. Itshall be so arranged that the heater is disconnected and an audible and visual warning is given at an INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE which does nor exceed 38 "C. INCUBATORS with means for overriding the CONTROL TEMPERATURE lip to 39 "C according to Sub-clause 54.101,of this standard shall be equipped with a second THERMAL CUT-OUT function that works at an INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE of 40 "C. In this case the action of the 38 "C THERMALCUTOUT will be inhibited automatically or by means of a special action of the operator.

- The THERMAL CUT-OUT(S) shall be non-self-resetting or

but capable of being manually reset,

- shall be self-resetting at an INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE between 39 "C and 34 "C and the alarm shall operate continuously until manually reset.

Compliance is checked by inspection and the following t&s: Rst I as an AIR CONTROLLEDINCU.lDR t/W THERMOSTAT the alarm operates the INCUBATOR above and the supply to the heate) shall be disconnected. The heater supply shall not be restored until either:
Set 10 Opmate

With tee INCURAToR

ivdisableii and the INCUBATOR switched on. At the time TEMPERATURE shall not exceed the temperature specified

-

the THERMAL cm-OUT(S) is (are) manually reset, or

- the INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE falls below 39�C Test 2 With the INCUBATOR set to operatema ~ABYCONTROLLEDINCUBATOR the THERMOSTAT is dkabled and the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR isseparalely maintained at a temperature belowthe CONTROLTEIMPERATURE. Atthetimethealarmoperatesthe INCURA~DRTEMPERATURE shall not exceed the temperature specified above and the supply to the heater shall be disconnected. The heater supply shall not be restored until either:
-

the THERMAL c~rr-OUT& manually r&et, or falls below 39�C

- the IN~JBATDR TEMPERAWRE

1s

IS 13812(Pnrt 19) : 1994 IEC I'ub 601-2-19(1990)

66)

In the normal operation of a BABY CONTROLLED INCUBATOR where the baby temperature as measured by the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR iS below the CONTROL TEMPERATURE, STEADYTEMPERATURECONDITION shalIbeachievedwithouttheoperationofthe THERMAL
CUT-OUT.

Compliance is checked-by temperature measurement and functional check with the INCUBATOR settoopemteasa BABYCONTROLLEDINCU&vvR at t?IaximUm CONTROL TEMPERATURE and the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR sepamtely maintained at least 2 "C below
CONTROL TEMPERATURE.

Addition: 56.10 b) Where the relative movement of any control knob and its actuating mechanism can affect the setting of the INCUBATO`RTEMPERATURE, they shall be positively secured together to prevent the possibility of being fixed in the incorrect position. apply.

Clauses 57 to 59 of the General Standard

Additional

section: SECTION ELEVEN - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
z

101. 101.1

Alarms

* If the INCUBATOR is provided with an air circulation fan, an audible alarm, visually identifiable, shall be given and the supply to the heater shall be disconnected before a hazard is created in the event of: - failure of the ~fan to rotate, or - blocking of the air outlets from the INCUBATOR COMPARTMENT, - when possible blocking of the air inlet. and

In the event of a failure of the fan, the EQUIPMENT shall not emit flames, molten metal, or poisonous or ignitable gas, and the parts accessible to the baby shall not exceed the temperatures specified in Sub-clause 42.3 of this Particular Standard. Compliance is checked by running the INCUBATOR as an AIR CONTROLLED INCUBA~R until SWADYTEMPERATURECONDITIONiS achievedata CONTROLTEMPERATURE of34"C.Itshalithen be checked that the requirement is met when in turn: - the fan is disabled; - the air circulation outlet to the BABY COMPARTMENT woven cloth
Where a number

enclosure is blocked by a piece of closely inadvertent blockage,

ofseparated air inputs are provided or ifprotectedfrom

the second part of the test is not required; blocking of the air inlet when applicable.

16

Is 13812 (Pad 19) :1994 lEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990] * A BABY CONTROLLED INCUBATOR shall be provided with an audible alacrn visually TEMPERATURESENSOR identifiable, which sounds in the event of the connector to the SILHQ
becoming having having electrically disconnected, leads, or

10].2

open-circuited

short-circuited

leads. or the iFiCUEtATOR shall he aLLlOTEMPERAWRE of

The supply m the heater shall be automatically disconnected
ma[icitlly switched over tO the air

con[rol mode with a CONTROL & 0.5 `C or a CONTROL TEMPERATURE se[by the user.

36 GC

C~mp]iance is checked h) simulating the spec(fied fau!l conditions and observing the eff2c[s. urer's recommended sensor shall be ccmne.cwd to the control unit by skwly inser:ing its piug inm the corresponding socket in order to determine it' there are any inle[ mediate imsitions that inhibit an aiarrn ac~ivation.
The rnanufa~t

101.3

Audible alarm and visibie indication

shall be provided to give

warning in the evenL 0[ i-n[erruption

of the power supply to the

INCUBATOR.

Ccwnpliance is checked by discmnectirig

the power supp!]' while [he i.NCUUAZM/ix switched on.

In both cases an audible and visual indicaciorrof [heJhi!ure

0J6

pow6?rsup.oi~siwz[[ be provided
visual indication.

for a fninimutn lime of W min. I(H.4 Deliberately siieficed audibk
alarms shall have a maintained

Such alarms shall automatically mancfacwkrer.

resume Lheir normal funclion wi(hin a time specified by Lhc this time may be 30 min.

from COLD CONDITION For warming up the [! WLJBATOi?

Compliance is verified bj Junctional check and iime nwosuremen~.
101.5 Means shall be provided for the USER to check the operation of audible and Such means may consist of information contained -in the inst[ uctions fcr use.
visual a\sYms.

Compliance is checked b-yinspection
102.

Sound pressure level * In N2RMAL USE the sound ievel within the BABY CO\fPARTh'tERTshall nol ex::eed an A weighted sound pressure level of 60 dB except as specified in Sub-clause 102.?.

102.1

With [he microphone of a sound level meter complying wi;h ~pe iIl requirements Of I E C

Pithli-

ca[iorr6S1,positioned 100 mm to HO mm above the cen[re@the baby way, the measared ~~iifid level shall noc exceed the spect~ied values. For this test the INCUBATOR shun be opera[ed Gi a COIWROL TEMPERATURE of .30`C to 33 "C and ai a maximum humidity. The backgrmmd s~i(it<~ level measured inside rhe EW3Y COMPARTMENT shall be of least 10dll below rhat which is measured during (h2 $est.

17

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990) 102.2 When any INCUBATOR ahn is sounding, the sound level in the BABY COMPARTMENT not exceed an A-weighted sound pressure level of 80 dBA. shall

Compliance L.v checked by the following test: The alarm shall be actuated and the measurement shall be carried out as described in Sub-clause 102.1. 102.3 Audible alarms shall have a sound level df at least an A-weighted 65 dBA at a distance of 3 m
perpendicular be adjustable to the front of the control unit (e.g. IS0 3743). The audible alarm level shall not without the use of a TOOL.

Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement of the audible alarm level using a sound level meter as required in Sub-clause 102.1of this Particular Standard, placed I.5 m above the floor and 3 m from the control unit. 103. Humidifying
103.1 unit

* If a water reservoir is provided as an integral part of the INCUBATOR, it shall have a water level indicator with "max" and "min" markings if the level of the water in the tank cannot be seen. The tank shall be so designed that it may be drained without tilting the INCUBATOR.

Compliance is checked by inspection
104. 104.1 Maximum. air velocity in the enclosure * In NORMAL
IJSE the air velocity over the mattress

shall not exceed 0.33 m/s.

Compliance is checked by measurement at the four points specified in the test specification of Sub-clause 50.102. 105. Concentration
105.1 of carbon dioxide (Cot)

* The manufacturer shall specify in the ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS the maximum CO? concentration which will occur in the BABY COMPARTMENT during the following test under NORMAL-CONDITIONS.

Compliance is checked by the following test: A 4 % mixture of CO1 in air shall be administered at a rate of 750 ml/min at a point 10 cm above the centre of the mattress (seefigure 102,point A) through an 8 mm diameter tube in vertical direction from the mattress to the top. COZ-concentration at a point 1.5cm from point A shall be measured when stability is achieved.

18

Incubator temperature

A
Temperature variation with tilted mattress

I

temperature

ITime Steady temperature condition Warm ip time

Figure 101

IS 13812(Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19(1990)

The measuring

points A to D are in a plane parallel to and at a distance of 10 cm from the jmattress.

Figure 102

Edge of plate

Figure 103

IS 13812(Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19(1990)

APPENDIX AA
RATIONALE The numbering 3.6. 4.5 of the following rationale corresponds to the numbering specially of this standard. 43.104 of

The additional specified this Particular Standard. a)

SINGLE FAULT CONDITIONS apply

Io Sub-clause

Relatively precise requirements on temperature accuracy and constancy of baby INCUBATORS are of great importance for satisfactory treatment of the PATIENT. Itis considered that these requirements should be as restrictive as generally technically possible within the ambient temperature range, which is normal for baby INCUBATORS within the scope of this standard. The test ambient temperature range has therefore been limited to 21 "C - 26 "C.

6.1.101 Infants requiring supplemental oxygen are at added risk since their arterial oxygenation is not considered adequate while breathing ambient air. Inadequate amounts of supplemental oxygen may result in brain damage or death, and excessive amounts of supplemental oxygen have been associated with an increased risk of retrolental fibroplasia (RLF). While known concentrations of oxygen cannot be directly related to the adequacy of arterial blood gas values, it is important that attending personnel be aware of inspired concentrations (as well as other factors influencing arterial oxygenation) in order to be able to determine the reason for observed changes in the physiologic state of the infant. 6.3 b) In the clinical situation the range of temperature used for BABY CONTROLLED INCUBATORS is usually between 35 "C and 37 "C. Therefore narrower intervals are required for BABY
CONTROLLED INCUBATORS.

Situations have been reported whereby incorrect settings of the oxygen control have been made due to close proximity of the "max" and "min" markings on the control knob scale. 100% oxygen has thus been administered instead of 21070,which was intended. 6.8.2 aa) *l. It is inherent in INCUBATOR design and function that in order for it to be effective for one PATIENT, it may be potentially harmful to another. It is necessary therefore, that qualified personnel with the necessary individual PAT!ENT information and medical knowledge be responsible for ordering all aspects of INCUBATOR use. The air temperature control system of an INCUBATOR cannot be expected to provide protection against overheating of the infant due to direct radiation from sunlight or other radiant sources. The infant being essentially a black body would be heated more rapidly than the air resulting in infant overheating. Protection against this hazard can only be achieved by preventing its occurrence.

*2.

Several oxygen fire accidents in INCUBATORS have been reported (M. Cara, *3./*4. La Nouvelle Presse Medicale, 22 april 1978, 7, No. 16). Alcohol left in the enclosure after a cleaning procedure is suspected to be the primary ignited material. Arcs from contacts in the thermostat are thought to be the source of ignition.

21

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990)
*5.

It is necessary to know the warm-up time in order to prepare the INCUBATOR function.

for its

*ii.

Improper location or means of attachment of the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR could cause an incorrect temperature reading or inadequate control of SKIN TEMPERATURE which would result in possible hypothermia or hyperthermia. See rationale As methods
EQUIPMENT

*7. *8.

to Sub-clause

50.110.

for cleaning, sterilization and disinfection depend on the design of the it is necessary to have specifications of these methods in the instructions tipping over or mechanical

for use.
*9.

The overloading of-shelves could result in the INCUBATOR damage which could result in a hazard.

!21.101 A baby can crawl out of an open INCUBATOR port and can fall to the floor. Side panels can collapse allowing a baby to roll out of a bassinet. Poorly designed barriers may fail to retain the baby. 24.104 The ability to lock wheels eliminates unintentional could constitute a hazard for the PATIENT. 43. movement of the EQUIPMENT, which

Reports of fires in oxygen enriched atmosphere in medical EQUIPMENT are relatively unusual. However, when such fires do occur they can be severe and very dangerous. See also Sub-clause 6.8.2 aa) *3./*4. of this rationale. A component may be a source of ignition only if materials which may ignite are present. However, materials which do not ignite in air may ignite and burn violently in oxygen.

43.101

43.103 When the concentration of oxygen in nitrogen exceeds 26% to 28%, the speed of combustion of flammable materials increases significantly above that in air. Allowing for experimental errors, it seems advisable that concentrations of 4 volume percentage above that of ambient air should not cause a hazardous increase in speed of combustion. 43.104 The hazards of ignition caused by electrical sparks increase - in purely resistive circuits by electrical power of the spark, - in inductive and capacitive circuits with the stored energy which is transferred to @e spark.

Because of the great variety of ignitable materials and designs of EQUIPMENT it is not possible to specify uniquely the maximum power and/or energy of electrical circuits which will not cause fires in oxygen. For guidance see literature: National Fire Protection S3M, "Fire hazards in oxygen enriched atmospheres". The requirement that the product of exceed the value 10 VA does not have standard VDE 0750, `Ril 1, 1977 (see German standard, this requirement has too onerous for manufacturers. Association (NFPA), USA, Publication

open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current should not complete experimental basis, but is specified in German item 34 of this standard). In EQUIPMENT made to this proved to minimize the risk of oxygen fires without being

22

r

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 @X: Pub 601-2-19 (1990)

The maxim -I surface temperature of 300 "C corresponds tures specified in NFPA Publication 53hri, Table 5-2. 44.3 INCUBATORSare considered placed on the canopy. to be liable to accidental

to the maximum

surface tempera-

spillage due to fluid filled vessels being

The test is designed to simulate typical spillage. 44.4 NORMAL USE quantities of liquid are likely to be deposited PAKI-MENT, particularly on the baby tray. During inside the BABY COM-

Quantities of up to 200 ml are considered as NORMALCONDITION and, therefore, all protective measures should prevent the ingress of liquid into the INCUBATORcontrol system. 44.7 See also rationale 6.8.2 aa) *8.

46.101 The response of the rectal temperature of the baby to environmental temperature changes is slow and is not suitable for controlling the INCUBATORTEMPERATURE. The requirement of this sub-clause is intended to eliminate wrong applications of the SKIN TEMPERATURE
SENSOR. 46.102 Lack of information

about the control mode may result in a hazard for the PATIENT.

TEMPFRATURE. While' 50.101 It is recognized that apnoea can result from variations in INCUBATOR there is no scientific evidence to show that temperature variations normally encountered in MCUBATORS result in apnoea, a conservative value has been selected. 50.102 Long experience of both the medical and technical requirements for infant INCUBATORS has shown that this level of performance (1 "C) is satisfactory in maintaining the temperature of the baby and readily achievable technically. 50.103 Even if it cannot be assumed that in all situations the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR is measuring the true skin temperature, clear visibility of this parameter is required to enable rhe operator to supervise the function of the control system.

50.104 The SKIN TEMPERATURESENSOR indication of temperature error is only a part of the total error associated with skin surface temperature measurement. Other errors can be introduced by variation of the area of sensor contact, contact pressure and heat exchange between the sensor and its environment. 50.105 Accuracy to this degree is required to establish the best possible function PERATURESENSOR Control System. of the SKlN TEM-

It is recognized that the recommended compliance check method does not simulate the situation of NORMAL USE of EQUIPMENT. The uncertainties mentioned in Sub-clause 50.104 of this rationale, especially the different heat exchanges between the SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSOR and its environment, make it difficult to specify such a check method. However, the specified check method is considered to be gradually m ,re representative for measurement of the true skin surface temperature the more the skin surface temperature has converged towards the temperature of the ambient air.

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990)

50.106

For the safe use of an INCUB...I-OR it is necessary to be able to check the INCUBATOR TEMPERATURE independently of the CONTROL TEMPERATURE, particularly when it is working as a BABYCONTROLLEDINCUBATOR orifthe THERMOSTAThaS failed. See ak0 the rationale for Subclause 50.103.

50.107 See figure 101. This requirement ensures that the INCUBATOR runs at a temperature as close as possible to that set by the USER and that simultaneously the environment temperature for different parts of the INCUBATOR is as constant as possible. 50.108 50.109 It is necessary to know the warm-up time in order to prepare the INCUBATOR for its function.
Addition:

TEMPERATURE

Following the changes in ambient temperature described in the following test, the INCUBATOR shall not differ from the CONTROLTEMPERATURE by more than 2�C. See rationale to Sub-clause 50.101.

50.110 Knowledge of the hovel of relative humidity is important for respiratory care of the infant and for assessing air temperature requirements. lnfant heat loss is reduced as the relative humidity is increased while maintaining air temperature constant. 50.111 The ISQ 7767 deals with minimum performance and safety of oxygen analysers or monitors intended for monitoring oxygen levels in a patient breathing-mixture. This also includes applications in anaesthesia machines, lung ventilators and paediatric incubators. 54.101 The specific requirements are considered to meet current medical needs whilst limiting hazards resulting from wrong temperature settings. 54.102 56.6 See rationale
aa)

to Sub-clause

54.101.

The air an infant breathes shall not exceed 40 "C at any time. Tracheal inspired air temperatures above 40 "C appear to increase the work of breathing and the incidence of laryngeal spasm.
TEMPERATURE,

In the event of failure of the primary THERMOSTAT and subsequent rise of INCUBATOR an alarm must sound to alert personnel to the danger of over-heating the infant.

101.1 Air circulation patterns, altered when fans have failed or when air vents have been blocked by blankets, have, in reported cases, caused the baby's environment temperature to exceed safe levels without alarm activation or heater safety cut-off. 101.2
SKIN TEMPERATURE SENSORS are fragile, and the wires which connect the sensors to the control unit may break after a period of use, causing an open circuit. Also, the insulation separating the two wires may deteriorate or moisture could short-circuit the sensor. The use of open- or short-circuited or defective sensors or the incorrect connection of a sensor to the control unit can cause errors in the operation of the control system.

24

IS 13812 (Part 19) : 1994 IEC Pub 601-2-19 (1990) 102.1 It is recognized that hearing loss can result from continuous exposure to high sound levels. While there is no scientific evidence or specific incident to show that exposure to the noise levels normally encountered in INCUBATORS currently used results in hearing impairment, a conservative value based on current expert opinion on human tolerance to high sound levels was selected.

103.1

"Min" indication is required because lack of humidity may be hazardous "Max" indication is needed to prevent overfilling and spillage.

for the PATIENT.

104.1

The temperature distribution requirements should not be met at the expense of high air velocities which will increase evaporative water loss of the PATIENT. The limit 0.35 m/s is derived from measurements on units considered as acceptable in this respect. It is considered that a general test, applicable to all INCUBATORS, should be prescribed, giving definite performance features. It was recognized that mixing of COZ within the air of the BABY COMPARTMENT is not so easy to realize and therefore a mixture of CCL/air should be administered, instead.

105.1

( Continued from second cover )

NATIONAL

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This Particular Standard concerns the safety of baby incubators. It supplements IS 13450 ( Part 1 ) : 1994/ IEC 601-l (1988 ) `Medical electrical equipment : Part 1 General requirements The requirements of this Particular for safety', herein referred to as the General Standard. Standard take priority over those of the General Standard. Where it is intended that any part of the General Standard, although possibly relevant, be applied, a statement to that effect is given in this Particular Standard. The numbering of sections, clauses and sub-clauses of this Particular that of the General Standard. Standard is not to with

corresponds

Sub-clauses or figures which are additional to those of the General Standard are numbered starting from 101; additional appendices are lettered AA, BB, etc, and additional items au), bb), etc. In this Standard, Requirements, the following compliance print types are used: in roman type.
in smaller roman type.

with which can be tested and definitions:
general statements, exceptions

Explanation, advice, introductions,
Test speci$cations

and references:

and headings of sub-clauses : in italic type.

TERMS DEFINED IN CLAUSE 2 OF THE GENERAL STANDARD: SMALL CAPITALS The requirements are followed by specifications
I

STANDARD tests.

OR THIS PARTICULAR

for the relevant

A rationale for the more important requirements, where appropriate, is given in Appendix AA. It is considered that a knowledge of the reasons for these requirements will not only facilitate the proper application of the standard but will, in due course, expedite any revision necessitated by changes in clinical practice or as a result of developments in technology. However, this appendix does not form part of the requirements of this standard. The sub-clauses which have corresponding rationale statements are marked with an asterisk@Jafter their number.

Boreao of Ml-m Standards BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, promote harmonious development of the activities of stadardization, marking and certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries or grade designations. relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and lstandards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. MHD 19 ( 2228 ).
1986 to

quality

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue z Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Officer ) Telephone j-331 01 31 1 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 153 38 43, I 53 23 84 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

J235 02 16,
C 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

~235 15 19,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed

at

Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

