Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO PAPER AND PULP BASED PACKAGING MATERIALS
( First Revision)

ICS

01.040.55; 55.040; 85.080

0 BIS 2001

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

IN DIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
Pdce Group

October

2001

4

Paper and Pulp Based Packaging Sectional Committee, CHD 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Paper and Pulp Based Packaging Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. This standard was formulated in 1967 with a view to eliminate ambiguity and confusion arising from different interpretation of terms used in paper and pulp based packaging materials trade and establishing a generally recognized usage. Because of the changes in the technology since the last thee decades the committee felt an urgent need to revise the standard to accommodate the terms used presently in the trade and also to modify certain terms in line with International Standards. Should there be any difference between the definitions in this glossary and those in the standads for the individual materials, the later shall prevail. Them is no 1S0 standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on indigenous data/ practices prevalent in the field in India. The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A.

AMENDMENT NO. 1 NOVEMBER 2011 TO IS 4261 : 2001 GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO PAPER AND PULP BASED PACKAGING MATERIALS
( First Revision ) (Page 1, col 1 Definition of `Board') -- Substitute the following for the existing definition: "Board (Paper Board) -- Generic term applied to certain types of paper frequently characterized by their relatively high rigidity.
NOTES 1 In the generic sense, the term `paper' may be used to describe both paper and board. The primary distinction between paper and board is normally based upon thickness or grammage, though in some instances the distinction will be based on the characteristics and/or end-use. For example, some materials of lower grammage, such as certain grades of folding box board and corrugating raw materials, are generally referred to as `board', while other materials of higher grammage, such as certain grades of blotting paper, felt paper and drawing paper, are generally referred to as `paper'. 2 For some purposes, materials of grammage less than 224 g/m2 or thickness less than 0.3 mm are considered to be paper and materials of grammage 224 g/m2 or above or thickness 0.3 mm or above are considered to be board."
2 2

(Page 4, col 2 Definition of `Paper') -- Substitute the following for the existing definition: ``Paper -- Generic term for a range of materials in the form of a coherent sheet or web, excluding sheets or laps of pulp as commonly used for paper making or dissolving purposes, and non-woven products, made by deposition of vegetable, mineral, animal or synthetic fibres, or their mixtures, from a fluid suspension onto a suitable forming device, with or without the addition of other substances.
NOTES 1 Papers may be coated, impregnated or otherwise converted, during or after their manufacture, without necessarily losing their identity as paper. In conventional paper making processes, the fluid medium is water; new developments, however, include the use of air and other fluids. 2 In the generic sense, the term `paper' may be used to describe both paper and board. The primary distinction between paper and board is normally based upon thickness or grammage, though in some instances the distinction will be based on the characteristics and/or end-use.

1

Amend No. 1 to IS 4261 : 2001

NOTES For example, some materials of lower grammage, such as certain grades of folding boxboard and corrugating raw materials, are generally referred to as `board', while other materials of higher grammage, such as certain grades of blotting paper, felt paper and drawing paper, are generally referred to as `paper'. 3 For some purposes, materials of grammage less than 224 g/m or thickness less than 0.3 mm are considered to be paper and materials of grammage 224 g/m or above or thickness 0.3 mm or above are considered to be board.''

(CHD 15) 2
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

IS 4261:2001

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO PAPER AND PULP BASED PACKAGING MATERIALS
(First Revision)
1 SCOPE This standard defines the terms relating to a paper and pulp based packaging materials. 2 TERMINOLOGY A Adhesive-- A substance capable of holding materials together by surface attachment. Ash Content -- The amount of residue of a material left after incineration, determined and expressed according to the appropriate standard method of test. B Bag -- A flat or gussetted paper container, with or without flaps and sometimes with a pre-formed base to assist quick opening. It is usually in size to carry materials up to 10 kg. Banding -- Covering the ends and sides of a box or lid with paper glued all over. Basis Weight (Grammage) --The mass of a unit area of paper or board determined by the standard method of test. It is expressed in grams per square metre. Bending Boxes -- In the production of setup paper boxes, the process of bending or folding scored blanks at the score marks, preliminary to staying or endhg. Blister -- Local visible deformation of the surface of a paper or in the coating caused by a bubble produced by the rapid evaporation of water contained in the sheet. Board -- A generic term applied to certain types of paper of frequently characterized by their relatively high rigidity.
NOTES 1 In the generic sense the name papr may be used to describe both paper and board. 2 For some puqxxes, materials of grammage less than 225 g/m2 are considered to k paper, and materiats of grammage of 225 g/m2 or above are considered to be board.

Board, Greaseproof -- Board which has good to high resistance to penetration by grease or fat. Any paperboard upon which there has been adhered a paper that is greaseprcwf. Board Machine Coated (also known as Board, Coated) Board that has been given a coating in the fluid form and adhered to surface to improve printability and appearance. Board, Pressing -- Board specially prepared for forming, by pressing between dies, a substantially three-dimensional article, for example, the bottom or lid of a box. Board Stencil -- Stiff oiled kraft board, meant for perforation to produce bettering and numbers as desired. The non-perforated portion serves as a mask when ink or paint is applied. Box -- A rigid container having closed faces used mainly as an exterior container for transportation. It can also be a set up box, three-dimensional and rigid in construction having a base and a lid and delivered in a finished form. Boxboard -- A class of board frequently lined on one or both sides, with good folding properties and used for making boxes and cartons. Breaking Length -- The calculated limiting length of a strip of paper or board of uniform width beyond which, if such a strip were suspended by one end, it would break by its own weight. It is usually expressed in metres. Bulk Density -- The weight of a unit volume of a material expressed in g/cm3. Bulk density is not the true density of the material. It is an important factor in the case of powders, granules or lumps with considerable air spaces or voids between particles. Burst Factor -- The quotient of the bursting strength (expressed in g/cm2) and the substance of paper or board (expressed in g/m2) determined by standard methods of test (see also `Bursting Strength'). Burst Index -- The quotient of the bursting strength expressed in kilopascals (kPa) and the substance 1

Board Bristol -- A well sized board, characterized by its smoothness, stiffness, clean appearance and even look-through.

IS 4261:2001 expressed in g/m2 determined by standard methods of test. Bursting Strength -- The maximum uniformly distributed pressure applied at right angles to its surface that a test piece will stand before it breaks under the conditions defined in the standard methods of test. of paper in between separate sheets, usually of kraft. This haa the following classifications: a) Single Face C&wgated Fibreboard -- Board made upon one sheet of fluted paper stuck to one sheet of paper or facing. b) Single Wall Corrugated Fibreboard (also know as Double Face) -- Board made up of a sheet of fluted paper stuck between two sheets of paper or facing. Corrugation (also known as Flute) -- It is the configuration of fluting. Particulars of the most commonly used flutes are as unden
Flute Approximate Corrugations per 30 cm Height of Corrugation (Exclusive of Liner), mm

c
Calendered -- Paper or board to which some degree of smoothness and gloss has been imparted by passing between rolls. Caliper-- The distance between one surface of board and the other, when determined by standard method of test, when a static load is applied. Carton -- A form of package used as interior packing made from bending grade of paperboard, corrugated or solid fibreboard having a thickness between 0.30 and 2.00 mm. A carton is never used as an exterior container for transportation. Case Liner -- A waterproof bag made to slip inside a rigid container and after scaling, provide waterproof protection of contents. Cellulose Wadding -- Loosely textured, absorbent fibrous produce obtained by placing on top of each other several plies of a loose textured, finely creped, thin fibrous web of high extensibility. Chipboard -- Board made on a continuous machine mainly from low grade waste paper. Coating -- The process of covering a paper or board with one or more surface layers of a mixture with a mineral base. The term is also used when the surface layers are cellulose derivatives, vinyl polymers and copolymers, polyethylene and wax or resin mixes. Composite -- A container with walls based on a fibrous material, for example pulpboard and having two ends of metals. Composite Can -- A rigid container with the body made of fibre board and one or book ends of metals, plastic or other material. Composite Container -- A container which employs different materials or its main structural parts including the ends. A rigid container with the body made of fibre board and one or both ends of metal, plastic or other material. Container -- Any receptacle which holds, restrains or encloses any article or commodity or articles or commodities to be stored or transported. Corrugated Fibreboard -- Fibreboard consisting of one or more sheets of fluted paper stuck to a flat sheet 2

`A' flute (Coarse) `B' flute (Fine) `C' flute (Medium)

32 to 38 50 to 56 38 to 44

4.5 to 4.7 2.1 to 2.8 3.6 to 3.8

Crease Carton -- An indentation in the board to give the line of fold. Crease -- Line or mwk made in a sheet of any material, usually for the purpose of providing a bending line. Creping -- The process of producing minute corrugation or folds in sheet material so that the sheet can be stretched to a considerable extent without tearing.

--To fold in squeeze or tighten by a series of crimp corrugation so as to hold one part against another.
Crimp Seal-A method of heat sealing thermoplastic coated papers or thermoplastic films with pressure exerted by knurl wheels or bars having a corrugated surface. Crimp Wrapping -- A method of wrapping in which the wrapper is heat sealed and crimped at both ends by serrated dies which are heated by electric cartridge heaters. It is suitable for any heat-sealable wrapping material. Cross-Dhction-The direction in the plane of paper at right angles to the machine directions. Cushioning Material -- The material applied to mitigate shock to protect surfaces from abrasion or to position an article or to satisfy all these conditions. Cushioning Test -- A test for measuring the shock absorbed by a material with the help of a cushion meter by permitting blocks of various weights and shapes to fall upon it, with cushion meter head attached. D Die-Cut -- A method of preparation in which a part of container has been cut slotted and/or scored by custom-made dies.

IS 4261:2001

Display Carton -- A carton sufficiently decorated to act as a display features. Drop Test -- A test which consists of releasing a loaded container or package from a known height on to a concrete floor or flat metal plate and studying the effect on the package and the contents. Dry Finish -- A finish obtained on paperboard that has not been dampened before going through the calender rolls. Duplex Paper or Board -- Paper or board consisting of two furnish layers fitted together during manufacture by pressure while still moist without the use of adhesive. E Embosed Paper -- Paper on which a raised and depressed design has been produced by pressure from an engraved roll or plate. End Folding -- A method in which the wrapping is neatly folded over the ends of the article being wrapped. It is also called `Envelope Folding'. End Sealing -- The process of treating the inside of the open and of a tube with a band of a suitable medium to give hermetically tight seal when the tube is folded. Envelope Folding -- See `End Folding'.
F

Fluting -- Fluted paper after undergoing a process resultingin apattem of ~gular and permanentundulations. Folding Boxboard -- Thin board between 0.25 mm and 1.1 mm thick suitable for making cartons. It is also known as `Carton Board'. G Glassine -- Paper made from chemical pulp, having high degree of hydration obtained by suitably dampening and highly super calendering greaseproof paper. It is very smooth and glossy on both sides and has high resistance to the passage of oils and grease. It is naturally translucent, but may be coloured or rendered opaque in the stock. Glazing -- The operation of imparting a lustre to paper or board by means of any appropriate drying or mechanical finishing process.
Glazed Imitation Parchment (GIP) -- A strong glazed paper made from cellulose pulp. The term, particularly its abbreviation (GIP) is normally used for paper made from bleached pulp only. Glue -- A general term for adhesives. Without qualifications, it often means dry animal glue. Qualifications are generally self-explanatory, for example, jelly glue, casein glue, dextrine glue, etc. Glue-End Carton -- A carton which has its seam either glued or stitched, and which has at each end four square-cut or tapered flaps which are glued to effect the closure. It is also known as `Plain-End Carton'. Greyboard -- A homogeneous board made usually of mixed waste papers with or without screenings and mechanical pulp on a continuous board machine, in thickness not greater than 1 mm. Gummed Paper Tapes" -- Paper tape usually obtained from kraft paper, coated on one side by water-remoistenable or solvent activated adhesive. The adhesive could be dextrine, animal glue ora blend. Gusset Envelope -- That style of envelope which, in either pocket or banker shape, incorporates pleats to allow for expansion. I Intermittent Board Machine -- A machine for forming sheetsof board. It consists of eithera Fourdrinier former or one or more cylinder moulds or vats. The wet web is wound on a drum forming a continuous mat of several layers. When the required thickness is obtained, the sheet is cut and stripped from the drum. K Kraft Liner -- A liner made almost entirely from

Facing Paper -- A paper facing treated with either lacquer or wax chosen for its resistance to the product to be packed. Fall Front Box -- A box having a position or hole of the front hinged to enable it to fall and thus display the contents. Fibre Composition -- The fibrous constituents of a paper or board and their various proportions in it. It is usually expressed in percentage figures by weight, taking the total fibrous material of the paper or board as 100 parts. Fibreboard -- See `Corrugated Fibreboard' and `Solid Fibreboard'. Flat Crush Test -- A test for measuring the force required to crush the corrugations in a sheet of combined fibreboard specimens of a known area by subjecting it to an increasing force in a small compressing machine. Facings -- A form of lineboard that is used as the flat member of corrugated fibreboard. Flute -- The configuration of the undulation in fluted paper or in a corrugated fibreboard. 3

kraft pulp.

IS 4261:2001

Kraft Paper -- Paper of high mechanical strength made entirely from self word unbleached sulphate pulp. Kraft Pulp -- Unbleached sulphate pulp of high mechanical strength used for the manufacture of kraft paper (see also Kraft Paper).
.
L

Moisture Proof -- Offering high resistance passage or absorption of water vapours.

to

0
Case -- A fibreboard case, with one manufacturer's joint, constructed as a complete (sleeve) top and bottom, each being formed by four flaps. The inner flaps may meet or have a gap between them which the outer ones may meet or overlap either partially or completely. One-piece Overwrap -- A complete wrapping over one or more

Lambert -- A tibreboard case consisting of one or two creased sheets placed within an outer sleeve to which it is (they are) stitched or taped. The outer sleeve forms the body and the creased sheet(s) form(s) the bottom and lid, and at the same time strengthen(s) the sides. Laminate -- The product made by binding together two or more layers of material or materials. Lamination --The operation of combining, by means of an appropriate material that possesses the necessaty adhesive properties, the whole of the surface(s)of a paper or board with other suitable sheet materials. Liner -- A generic term for any paper or board intended for covering another paper or board material by adhesion to become a part of the finished product.
NOTE -- This term include paper smd board intended to be struck to the flutes in corrugated fibreboard.

packs.
P -- The product of a complete series of

Package

packaging operations or a unit consisting of a number of such products.
Package Life --The comparative or estimated period

assessed under standard test or simulated marketing conditions of temperature and humidity over which a package would allow the contents to remain satisfactory or saleable by providing resistance against the transmission of moisture, atmospheric gases and odours which cause physical, physico-chemical, micro-biological, chemical and enzymetic changes in the packed goods.
Packaging -- The art of and operations involved in the preparation of articles or commodities for carriage, storage and delivery to the consumer.

Liner Board -- Paperboard used for flat facing in corrugated fibreboard, also as the outer ply or plies of solid fibreboard. M Machine Direction -- The direction in a paper or board corresponding to the direction of travel of the web on the paper or board machine. Machine Finished (M.F.) -- Paper or board treated mechanically on a paper machine to obtain a smoother and more uniform appearance on both sides than that on the unfinished paper. Machine Glazed (M. G.) -- Paper or board one side of which has been made smooth and glossy by drying on a heated, polished, polished metal cylinder, forming part of the drying section of the machine. The other side remains relatively rough. Manufacturer's Joint -- The same of a corrugated fibreboard box which is joined together by the manufacturer by taping, stitching or gluing. Millboard -- A generic term for a homogeneous board made usually from mixed waste paper on an intermittent. Mixed Waste Paper -- Pieces of paper or board that may be reclaimed after use or from a concerting process for re-ptdping and making again into paper or board. 4

Packet -- Same as `Package'. -- The operation of packaging by which articles or commodities are enveloped in wrapping and/or enclosed in containers or otherwise secured. Packing Paper -- A generic term for all kinds of matter and

felted sheets of fibre (usually vegerable) formed on a fine wire screen from a water suspension.
NOTE -- The distinction between paper and board is primarily made on the basis of the characteristics of a material and in some cases its use. Ckmerall y speaking paper is lighter in basis weight, thinner and more flexible than board.

Paper, Acid-Free -- Paper which does not contain any free acid; also a paper having a pH value of not less than 6.
Paper, Anti Tarnish -- A paper used for wrapping

silverware, aluminium goods, leaded glass, hardware, razorblocks, needles, etc. It is relatively free from acids, alkalies and sulphur. The pulp used could be sulphite or sulphate. Sometimes copper salts or inhibitors, including vapour phase inhibitors are used.
Paper, Asphalt-Laminated Kraft -- Two sheets of kraft paper bonded together with a middle layer of

IS 4261:2001

asphalt giving the combined sheets special water barrier qualities. Paper, Coated -- Paper which has undergone a coating process on one or both sides. Paper, Creped -- Paper that has been subjected to creping (see also `Creping'). Paper, Flint-Finished -- A coated paper to which has been imparted a brilliant polish by rubbing a smooth stone called, `Flint stone' over the surface. It is used for box coverings, labels, greeting cards, etc.
Paper, Foil -- A paper laminated with metal foil. Paper, Greaseproof -- Paper free from mechanical pulp and having a high resistance to penetration by grease. This resistance is obtained by producing highly hydrated pulp which also gives the paper thg appearance of vegetable parchment. Paper Laminated -- Any laminated structure in which at least one ply is paper. Paper, Mat-Coated -- A dull mat finish coated paper

Ply (of Paper or Board) -- Fibrous web of consistent

composition formed on the wire of the paper or board making machine.
Porosity -- The ratio of the volume of the interstices

of the material to the volume of the mass; also the rate of air movement through a test specimen.
Powder Pocket -- A pocket or bag made by special cutting and folding of the comers designed to prevent spillage of powders or granular substances. Pressure-Sensitive Tape -- A tape which utilizes adhesives that adhere by simple contact and do not rely on physical or chemical change for adhesion. It is usually a strip of paper, fabric or flexible film coated with a pressure sensitive adhesive which is normally supplied in rolled form. These are also known as `Self-Adhesive Tapes'. Pulp Board -- See `Paperboard'.

R Ret-- Any portion of container head or body which, for some purpose, is pressed into a plane different from the contour of the head or body in general. Area around fittings is often recessed. Recess is also sometimes referred to as pocketing .
Ring Crush Test -- A test which measures the stiffness or rigidity of paper to edgewise crushing. It is particularly valuable in estimating the rigidity of uncombined liners and corrugated materials before they are made into board.

produced on a roll or brush coating machine, generally produced on a sulphite base stock.
Paper, Metal-Coated -- Paper coated with metal

powders. Paper, Metallic -- Paper to which metallic tints have been given.
Paper, Mica-Coated -- A paper coated with ground mica in a suitable adhesive to give it a sparkling appearance.

s
Sack (Paper) -- A flat paper container, normally two or more plies, that is, separate sheets, with without a gusset. It is generally made for weights 25 to 50 kg, although sacks are made for weights low as 5 kg.

Paper, Processed -- A paper that is glazed embossed, impregnated or treated for a specific end use. Paper, Pyroxylin-Coated -- A water-repellant pyroxlin lacquer coated paper produced in gold, platinum and copper-coloured metallic and non-metallic colours. It is used for box covers, greeting cards, food wrappers, etc.
Paper, Textile -- A general term for strong wrapping papers of various weights, colours and furnishes, it is used for wrapping bulk textiles. Paper, Wax -- Sulphite or sulphate paper containing

of or of as

Satchel Bag -- A gussetted tube with a bottom closed by turning up this tube and gumming the turning up to the outside of the bag so formed.

Score -- A light incision partially through the thickness of a board, usually to facilitate folding.
Sealing -- A method of providing additional security to a wrapping or container with the object of retaining the contents and protecting them against factors causing deterioration of loss. Seam -- A line of junction of the edges of flaps andlor

wax. The wax may be applied either in the form of wax emulsion in the beaters or as an impregnation and surface coating or both after the paper is made.
Paperboard -- Commonly known as `Pulp Board' it is a board manufactured in one thickness or by bringing two or more plies of the same furnish into a single structure in the wet state without adhesive. Pasted Board -- Board produced by pasting sheets

a container at which the sealing of the closure is affected.
Self-Adhesive Tape -- See

`Pressure-Sensitive

with an adhesive in subsequent operation as distinct from the material produced by pressing together in wet state without the use of an adhesive. 5

Tape'.
Set-Up Box -- A container of rigid construction formed or `set-up' ready for use, as distinguished from

IS 4261:2001

a folding carton; also shipping container of corrugated or solid fibreboard. between application of the adhesive and the moment when the joint is sufficiently firm to handle temporarily.
Setting Time Shelf Life -- Same as `Package Life'. Shell -- A sheet of corrugated or solid fibreboard -- The period clasping

Substance -- Same as `Basis Weight'. T
Tensile Strength -- The maximum tensile force that

a test piece will stand befote it breaks under the conditions defined in the standard method of test. -- Thin, soft light weight paper made `uSue `aPer from strong cellulose fibrous materials and of a substance usually between 12 and 30 g/m2.
Top Side -- The face of a web or sheet of paper or board opposite to the wire side.
NOTE -- This term is not necessarily relevant to paper formed between two wires.

.

scored and folded to form a joined or unjoined tube open at both ends. which is sufficiently strong to be used in commerce for packing, storing and shipping commodities.
Shipping Container Shrinkage -- The difference in dimensions, expressed in cm per cm, between a moulding and the mould cavity in which it was moulded, both the mould and the moulding being at normal room temperature when measured. Sizing -- The addition of materials either to the stock -- A container

v
Vapour-Phase Inhibitor Paper -- Paper which has ken tma~ with ~ inhibitor, va~ur from which will

(engine sizing) or to the surface of the Paper or ~~d (surface sizing) in order to increase its resistance to the penetration of aqueous liquids, particularly writing ink, and to surface spreading of such liquids.
Skillet -- A plain, glue-end carton, that is intended to be overwrapped. .Solid Fibreboard -- Pasted or laminated board of

provide, protection against corrosion for ferrous metals in proximity to it. VW~b~ P=chment -- Paper that has acquired, by the action of sulphuric acid, a continuous texture. This texture gives it a high degree of resistance to penetration by grease and render it resistant to disintegration by water even at boiling point.

w.
Waterproof Paper -- Paper offering high resistance to the passage .or absorption of water.

heavy substance, usually with a kraft facing on one or both sides in addition to the plies.
Spiral Winding -- A style of continuous angular winding to make a tube having the various piles partially overlapping one another. Strawboard -- Board made from partially cooked

Web -- The continuous length of paper of board during manufacture or conversion.

straw, bagasse or grass or a mixture of these used for corrugating medium because of its high rigidity.
Stretch -- Extensibility of paper or board under

Wme Side -- The face of a web or sheet of paper or board which was in contact with the forming wire during manufacture. NOTE -- This term is notnecessarily relevant to paper formed
between two wires.

tension. It is usually determined in tensile testing equipment and is recorded as the percentage of extension before the sheet breaks.

WrappingT~ue-Thin, soft, relatively tough paper generally intended for packaging delicate articles. Its substance is between 12 and 30 g/m2.

6

ANNEX

A

( Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Paper and Pulp Based Packaging Sectional Committee, CHD 16
Organizations Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai All India PaDer & Allied Products Manufacturers' Association. Mumbai All lndia S;all Paper Mills Association, Mumbai Balkrrpur Industries Limited, New Delhi Representative (s) SHRIP. V. NARAYANAN (Chairman) SHRIA. S. NARAYANAN SHRIAMBRISH BHARGAVA SHRISANIAY VERMA (Alternate) SHRIA. C. TANEIA SHRIS. SHARMA (Alternate) SHRIB. S. CHATTERJEE SHRI A. CHOWDHURY (Alternate) SHRJA. Q. AJMERA SHRJS. B. AJMERA (Alternate) SHRIRAJIVSHAH SHRIN. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) DR S. K. KAPGGR SHRJ Y. V. SOOD (Alternate) SHRJV. BALASUBRAMANJAM SHSU H. M. RATHI (Alternate) DR K. L.GABA SHRIK. C. GUPTA (Alternate) SHRJP. D. SHAH SHRIM. L. MEHRA (Alternate) DR RtTADHAWAN SHRIS. MAHAJAN (Alternate) SHRIM. K. LAHIRI SHRIA. ROY (Alternate) SHRID. K. BORAL SHRJ B. BOSE(Alternate) SHRI J. S. MATHARU SHRIK. B. GUPTA SHRIL P. NARANG SHRI S. K. GUPTA (Alternate) SHRI M. V. G. RAO SHRI MANOJ Drmr (Alternate) DR M. B. JAUHARJ DR A. G. KULKARNI (Akernate) SHRI P. P. StNGH SHRJP. K. VUAYANATHAN (Alternate) DR S. N. PANDEY DR A. DEY (Alternate) SHRIP. R. KOTHARJ SHRJR. P. SOGCHAK (Alternate) REPRESENTATIVE SHRJK. K. GHAI SHRIJ. K. SJNHA (Alternate) SHRI ANILAGGARWAL SHRIS. N. SRWASTAVA (Alternate) REPRESENTATtVE SHRIV. K. SOOD SHRIV. K. GERA(Alternate) SHRJ DEEPAK KUMAR SHRJD. DEB (Alternate) REPRESSNTATWE REptt~Et+TAmvE DR A. N. NAYER SHRISANJAY NAYER(Alternate) SHRJ V. R. FADNAWS SHRtJAJINDER SINGH, Director & Head (CHD) [Representing Dmctor General (Er-oflicio)]

B & A Multiwall Packaging Limited, Kolkata Card Board Box Manufacturing Central Pulp Mills, Songad Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute, Saharanpur Directorate General of Supplies& Federation of Biscuit Manufacturers Dkposals, New Delhi Co, Kolkata

Association, New Delhi of India, Mumbai

Federation of Corrugated Box Manufacturers

Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Debra Dun Hindustan Liver Limited, Mumbai India Foils L]mited, Kolkata Indian Agro Paper Mills Association, New Delhi Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai Indian Oil Corporation, Faridabad Indian Paper Manufacturers Association, Kolkata Saharanpur

Indian Pulp & Paper Technical Association, LT.C. Limited, Kolkata

Jute Technological L & T Limited,

Research Laboratory, Kolkata

Mumbai

Metal Box Company of India Limited, Kolkata Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi Ministry of Defence (DRDO), New Delhi New Delhi

National Alliance of Young Enterpreneurs, Nestle India Limited, New Delhi

Pesticides Association of India Limited, New Delhi Procter & Gamble Limited, Mumbai Ranbaxy Laboratories Limited, New Delhi Skan Packaging Consultants, New Delhi TELCO, Jamshedpur BIS Directorate General .

Member-Secretary SHRJN. K. PAL Director (CHD), BIS

7

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Zndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright
BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed fi-om Doc : No. of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standtids or edition by referring to the latest issue of

CHD 16( 842).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 { 3233841 3378499,3378561 3378626,3379120 { 603843 { 602025 2541216,2541442 { 2542519,2541315 [832 1832 9295.8327858 7891; 8327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131,3233375,323 9402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) . . MUMBAi 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD, BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARI-I. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Prmtwlat Prabhat Offset Press. New Delhi-2

