UDC

621'822'5-122'001'4

IS:l0260(Partl)-1982 Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

m

1

I

AND

TE~RMS, DEFINITIONS * CLASSIFICATION OF -PLAIN BEARING
PART I CONSTRUCTION

1. Scope - Covers the most commonly used terms with to construction of plain bearings.

their definitions

and classification,

applied

1 .l For some of the terms and word-combinations their short forms are given which are recommended Self-explanatory terms are given without definitions. for use when they are unambiguous. 2. General Terms

2.1 Bearing - A support or a guide by means of which a moving part is located with respect to other parts of a mechanism. 2.2 Plain Bearing A support or a guide in which only sliding friction takes place. thick wall to enable it to rigid and does not deform

2.2.1 Thick walled ha/f bearing -A bearing liner having sufficiently withstand the imposed leads without distortion. The bearing is sufficiently to take the shape of the housing into which it is fitted.

bearing liner which has the ability to take the shape of the housing 2.2.2 Thin walled bearing -A into which it is fitted for the geometrical truth of the working surface that is bearing bore. 2.3 Plain Bearing Unit 3. Types of Plain Type of a tribological system including a plain bearing.

Bearings types

3.1 Plain bearings are the foltowing 3.1.1

According to the direction of the supported load :
a)

Journal bearing,

b) Thrust bearing, and c) Thrust-journal plain bearing. 3.1.2 According to the type of lubrication
a) Aerodynamic bearing, b) Aerostatic bearing,

:

c) Hydrodynamic bearing, d) Hydrostatic bearing, e) Bearing with solid lubricant, f) Unlubricated 3.1.3 bearing.

and

According to the design : a) Plain self-aligning bearing, b) Tilting pad journal bearing, c) Pad thrust bearing, d) Pad journal bearing, e) Tilting pad thrust bearing. f) Lobed plain bearing, g) Self-lubricating bearing, h) Porous bearing, and j) Porous self lubricating bearing.

Adopted

12

June 1982
INDIAN
MANAK

@

June 1983, ISI

Gr 2 I

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS: IO260( Part I)-

1982
-Plain bearing in which the load acts in a radial acts the along axial of or parallel and radial aerodyna-

3.2 Plain Journal Bearing (Journal Bearing) direction with respect to the axis of rotation. 3.3 Plain Thrust Bearing ( Thrust Bearing) to the axis of rotation. 3.4 Thrust -Journal Plain Bearing directions. 3.5 Aerodynamic mic lubrication. Bearing -

Plain bearing in which

in which

the load

Plain bearing

the load acts in both

Plain bearing

designed for

for operation operation for for

under the conditions under the conditions purely hydrostatic solid

3.6 Aerostatic Bearing lubrication.

Plain bearing Plain

designed bearing

of aerostatic hydrodynamic lubrication

3.7 Hydrodynamic Bearing lubrication conditions. 3.8 Hydrostatic conditions. Bearing -

designed designed

operation operation for operation

under under with

Plain

bearing

3.9 Bearing with Solid Lubricant 3.10 Unlubricated Bearing minary applied lubricant.

Plain bearing designed in which

lubricant. without preli-

Plain bearing

the relatively

moving

parts

slide

3.11 Plain Self Aligning Bearing - Plain bearing of a liner with respect to the opposing surface. 3.12 Pad Journal Bearing pads. 3.13 Pad Thrust Bearing Plain journal Plain thrust

the design

of

which

provides of which

for

self-alignment of several

bearing the bearing

surface

consists

bearing the bearing surface of which

consists

of several pads.

3.14 Tilting Pad Journal BearingPlain journal bearing the bearing surface of which consists -of several pads and each of them is free to align with respect to the opposing working surface of journal under the action of hydrodynamic ( aerodynamic ) pressure or load. 3.15 Tilting Pad Thrust Bearing - Plain thrust bearing the bearing surfaces of which cansist of several pads each of which is free to align with respect to the opposing working surface under the action of hydrodynamic ( aerodynamic ) pressure or load. 3.16 Lobed Plain Bearing ( Lobed Bearing) - Plain journal bearing in which several hydrodynamic wedges are developed round its periphery during operation, which is achieved with a special shape of the sliding surface. 3.17 Self-lubricating Bearing - Plain bearing lubricated by means ~bearing material components like grease, solid and fluid lubricants. 3.18 Porous Bearingof which may be filled of the bearing material the and of

Plain bearing ( bearing bush ) made from sintered with a lubricant. Bearing Porous bearing with pores filled

bearing material with a lubricant

pores

3.19 Porous Self-lubricating from the surface. 4. Structural 4.1 Journaf Elements Portion

accessible

of Plain

Bearings by a plain journal bearing. supported by a plain thrust

of a shaft ( axis ) supported

4.2 Thrust CollarDetail connected with a shaft or a part of a shaft bearing and transmitting the load acting in the direction of the axis. 4.3 Plain Bearing Housing (Bearing Housing) Housing into which Replaceable

a liner ( a bush ) is fitted. part of a plain bearing, the

4.4 Plain Bearing Liner, Bearing Liner, Liner, Insert Liner inner surface of which is a rubbing surface. 4.5 Plain Bearing Bush, Bearing Bush, Bush -Tubular the inner surface of which is the bearing bore.

element

of one piece plain journal

bearing,

4.6 Wrapped Bush - It is a cylindrical bearing, having a continuous split from one end to the other, manufactured from rolled material. This split may or may not be parallel to the axis of the cylinder. In its free stage, the wrapped bush may not be perfectly cylindrical, and its split may be open. The split Is closed when the wrapped bush is fitted in housing. 2

IS: 10260(PartI)- 1982
4.7 Flanged Bearing Liner (Bush ), Flanged fkWle at one or both ends. 4.8 Thrust WasherAnnular plate usually Liner (Bush) Plain bearing liner ( bush ) with axial load. a

used with a plain journal bearing, to support
if combined with another similar

4.9 Thrust Half- Washer washer.

Part of a plate which,

part, forms a thrust liner extenda complete

4.g9 plain Bearing Half Liner, Bearing Half Liner, Half Liner - Part of a plain bearing ing `80" around the journal which, if combined with another similar part, forms plain bearing. 4.11 Solid Liner (Bush) Plain bearing liner ( bush ) made of one material. bearing liner made of layers

4.12 Multilayer materials.

Bearing Liner ( A/lultilayer Liner) -Plain

of different liner with a

4.13 Bearing Liner Backing, Liner Backing, Backing -Layer in a multilayer bearing bearing alloy applied on it that gives the bearing the required strength and/or stiffness. 4.14

BearingAnti-Friction

Layer, Anti-Friction

Layer -

Layer of a bearing

material

in a multilayer liner. over, layer

4.15 Overlay Plating -An extra layer of soft metal ( such as Lead-tin, and Lead-tin-Copper) The thickness of such soft what would otherwise be the sliding surface of bearing liner. is UsuallY 0'025 mm and~does not exceed 0.1 mm.

4.18 Flashing LayerA very thin flash of pure tin or lead-tin applied to finished bearing as an protective anti-corrosive layer. The thickness of such flash which is electrolytically deposited, Usually does not exceed one. 4.17 Bimeral ( Tri-metal) or alloys.

Bearing Liner - A multilayer

bearing

liner

made of two ( or three ) metals lining (bush thickness is to0 thin

4.18 Micro Bearing LinerA bearing liner in which the white-metal ( usually below 0.175 mm ) to give them extra fatigue strength. bearing liner 4.19 Pre-finished Bearing Liner (Bush ) - A pre-finished fitted to the housing and used without further scrapping or machining. 4.20 Un-bored bored/machined

) is one which

can be

bearing liner ( bush ) is one that Bearing Liner (Bush ) - An un-bored to the required size by user in order to use it in assembly.

has to be

4.21 Semi-Finished or Line Bored Bearing Liner (Bushes) - Bearing liners ( bushes ) which are semi-machined and the machining allowance so kept is suitable for reaming, burnishing, broaching The machining allowance for such bearing liners ( bushes ) or line boring for using in an assembly. is less than that for un-bored bearing liners ( bushes ). 5. Dimensional Characteristics Maximum of Plain diameter Bearings of bearing housing. Diameter of a sliding surface of a plain journal bearing.

5.1 Gauge Diameter -

5.2 Plain Journal Bearing Inside Diameter5.3 Bearing Spread-

Outside dimension across parting line when measured in the free state. exceeds one-half of the

5.4 Bearing Crush - Amount of peripheral length of half bearing which circumference of the high limit bore, measured under specified load.

5.5 Eccentricity - A gradual reduction in bearing wall thickness from centre of bearing half to Parting line relief creating additional theoretical clearance between bearing and journal to allow for bore distortion created by bearing crush and load deflection. 5 6 Parting Line (Joint Face ) The contacting surfaces between the two mating bearing halves.

5.7 Parting Line Height (Joint Face Height) - Dimension from plane of parting line to outside radius of back at centre of bearing with measured under load as specified by manufacturer. 5.8 Parting Line Relief (Joint Face Relief) - Moderate reduction in wall thickness adjacent to Parting line to allow lubricant flow and prevent scrapping of oil film on journal as also to allow for bore distortion created by bearing crush. 5.8 Bearing Liner ( Bush ) Width, Liner ( Bush ) Width measured axially. 3 Overall dimension of a bearing liner ( bush 1

5.10 Diametral Plain Journ&i Bearing Clearance, Journal Bearing Clearance, Clearance - Difference between the inside diameter of the plain journal bearing bore and the diameter of the journal. NoteA diametral
plain journal bearing clearance may be either "calculated"

or "actual". is the sum flanged thrust of back bearing the thickness, which is lug

5.11 Bearing Wall Thickness - Total thickness lining thickness and overlay thickness. 5.12 Straddle Gage - Inside dimension also referred to as "bar gage". 5.13 Locating Notch of -bearing. between

of bearing flanges housing

half which

of a double

A recess in the bearing

bore provided

to receive

locating

5.14 Locating Lug (Locating provided to locate it during prevent rotation.

Nick) -The projection at the joint face/parting The locating assembly, in the bearing housing.

line of a half liner lug is not meant to dowel

5.15 Locating Dowel Hole -When there is no provision of locating lug or nick in the bearing, holes are provided to locate it during assembly, in the bearing housing. 5.16 Locating EarA projection on a thrust washer for locating housing it in the housing. provided to receive the

5.17 Locating Slot --A of a thrustwasher. 5. Special Materials

recess in the side of the bearing

locating

ear

for Plain

Bearings

and Their -Properties Material possessing a complex of special properties for use with

6.1 Anti-Friction Material (Bearing Materia/) providing for its use in plain bearings. 6.2 Sintered Bearing Material in plain bearings. Material

made from compressed -Ability

or sintered

powders to prevent

suited

6.3 Frictional Compatibility (Compatibility) the material of the shaft during friction. 6.4 Frictional unsatisfactory Conformability initial adjusting

of a bearing material

adhesion

( Conformability ) - Ability of a bearing material to compensate for to the mating surface by elastic and plastic deformation of the layer. material to provide for embedding of hard particles temperature friction materials to reduce and wear ex-

-6.5 Embeddability - Ability of a bearing their scoring or abrasion action. 6.6 Running in Ability - Ability intensity during running in.

of a bearing

material

to reduce friction

force,

6.7 Wear Resistance -Ability of a material to resist wear under pressed as the reciprocal of the wear rate of the wear intensity. 6.8 Relative Wear Resistanceunder similar conditions. Ratio of wear resistances of two
material.

specified bearing

conditions, when

they wear

Note - Usually one of the materials Is referred to as a standard

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

The Content of this standard was earlier mostly covered in IS : 4757-1968 `Dimensions for wrapped bushes and thrust washers' and IS : 4774-l 968 `Thin-walled bearing and thrust half-washers'. On the basis of the current international practices, the concerned committee felt the necessity to bring out a separate standard on Plain Bearing terminol~ogy to make it in line with ISO/DIS 437811 `Plain bearing vocabulary - Part 1 -- Construction' ISO/DIS 4378/2 `Plain Bearing -Vocabulary Part 2 - Friction and wear' and lSO/DlS 4378/3 `Plain Bearing -Vocabulary Part 3 -Lubrication' issued by the International Organisation for Standardization. The standard consists of the following parts : IS : 10260 IS : 10260 ( Part I ) - 1982 Terms, definitions and classifications and classifications and classifications of plain bearing : Part I Construction of plain bearing : Part If Friction Terms, definitions and wear IS : 10260 ( Part I II ) - 1982 Terms, definitions ( Part II ) - 1982

of plain bearing

: Part III Lubrication to

These standards have been prepared for the guidance of the manufacturers and consumers assist them for the correct interpretation of the terminology related to the plain bearings. 4
Printed at

Oolhl Printers.

Delhi. India

