IS 15889 : 2011

Hkkjrh; ekud

fjdkWfEcusUV Mh ,u , lw{ethoksa osQ �;ksx ls mRikfnr [kk| inkFkks� osQ [kk| lqj{kk vkdyu osQ lapkyu osQ fy, fn'kkfuns' Zk
Indian Standard GUIDELINE FOR THE CONDUCT OF FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF FOODS PRODUCED USING RECOMBINANT-DNA MICRO-ORGANISMS

ICS 67.020

� BIS 2011

B U R EAU O F I N D IAN STAN DAR D S
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

May 2011

Price Group 6

Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture Sectional Committee, FAD 23

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. A variety of micro-organisms used in food production have a long history of safe use that predates scientific assessment. Few micro-organisms have been assessed scientifically in a manner that would fully characterize all potential risks associated with the food they are used to produce, including, in some instances, the consumption of viable micro-organisms. Furthermore, the principles of risk analysis, particularly those for risk assessment, are primarily intended to apply to discrete chemical entities such as food additives and pesticide residues, or specific chemical or microbial contaminants that have identifiable hazards and risks; they were not originally intended to apply to intentional uses of micro-organisms in food processing or in the foods transformed by microbial fermentations. The safety assessments that have been conducted have focused primarily on the absence of properties associated with pathogenicity in these micro-organisms and the absence of reports of adverse events attributed to ingestion of these micro-organisms, rather than evaluating the results of prescribed studies. Further, many foods contain substances that would be considered harmful if subjected to conventional approaches to safety testing. Thus, a more focused approach is required where the safety of a whole food is being considered. This standard has been aligned with the Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods Produced Using Recombinant-DNA Micro-organisms (CAC/GL 46-2003) and is identical to it. This approach is based on the principle that the safety of foods produced using recombinant-DNA microorganisms, is assessed relative to the conventional counterpart having a history of safe use, not only for the food produced using a recombinant-DNA micro-organism, but also for the micro-organism itself. This approach takes both intended and unintended effects into account. Rather than trying to identify every hazard associated with a particular food, the intention is to identify new or altered hazards relative to the conventional counterpart. This standard supports the IS 15887 : 2010 `Principles for the risk analysis of foods derived from modern biotechnology'. It addresses safety and nutritional aspects of foods produced through the actions of recombinant-DNA micro-organisms. The recombinant-DNA micro-organisms that are used to produce these foods are typically derived using the techniques of modern biotechnology from strains that have a history of safe, purposeful use in food production. However, in instances where the recipient strains do not have a history of safe use their safety will have to be established. Such food and food ingredients may contain viable or non-viable recombinant-DNA micro-organisms or may be produced by fermentation using recombinantDNA micro-organisms from which the recombinant-DNA micro-organisms may have been removed. If a new or altered hazard, nutritional or other food safety concern is identified by the safety assessment, the risk associated with it would first be assessed to determine its relevance to human health. Following the safety assessment and if necessary further risk assessment, the food or the component of food, such microorganisms used in production would be subjected to risk management considerations in accordance with IS 15887 before it is considered for commercial distribution. Clauses 3.1.5 and 3.1.6 refer to the concept of `substantial equivalence' as described in the report of the 2000 joint FAO /WHO expert consultations (Document WHO/SDE/PHE/FOS/00.6, WHO, Geneva, 2000). Report of Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Allergenicity of Foods Derived from Biotechnology (2001), which includes reference to several decision trees, was used in developing the Annex to these guidelines. Clause A-3.3 of this standard may also require reference to Section 6.4 `Pepsin Resistance' of Report of Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation, 2001. While this Guideline is designed for foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms or their components, the approach described could, in general, be applied to foods derived from micro-organisms that have been altered by other techniques.

IS 15889 : 2011

Indian Standard GUIDELINE FOR THE CONDUCT OF FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF FOODS PRODUCED USING RECOMBINANT-DNA MICRO-ORGANISMS
1 SCOPE 1.1 The standard describes approaches recommended for making safety assessments of foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms, using comparison to a conventional counterpart, and identifies the data and information that are generally applicable to making such assessments. 1.2 This standard does not address, a) safety of micro-organisms used in agriculture (for plant protection, biofertilizers, in animal feed or food derived from animals fed the feed, etc); or rendered non-viable during processing; or food produced using the traditional food production micro-organisms for which there is experience of establishing safety based on common use in food production.
NOTE -- It is recognized that for the foreseeable future, micro-organisms derived from modern biotechnology will not be used as conventional counterparts.

3 INTRODUCTION TO FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT 3.1 General 3.1.1 Most foods produced as a result of the purposeful growth of micro-organisms have their origins in antiquity, and have been deemed safe long before the emergence of scientific methods for assessing safety. Micro-organisms possess properties, such as fast growth rates, that enable genetic modifications, whether employing conventional techniques or modern biotechnology, to be implemented in short time frames. Microorganisms used in food production derived using conventional genetic techniques have not customarily been systematically subjected to extensive chemical, toxicological, epidemiological, or medical evaluations prior to marketing. Instead microbiologists, mycologists, and food technologists have evaluated new strains of bacteria, yeasts and filamentous fungi for phenotypic characteristics that are useful in relation to food production. 3.1.2 Safety assessments of recombinant-DNA micro-organisms should document the use of related micro-organisms in foods, the absence of properties known to be characteristic of pathogens in the recombinant-DNA micro-organisms or the recipient strains used for constructing the recombinant-DNA micro-organisms, and known adverse events involving the recipient or related organisms. In addition, when a recombinant DNA micro-organism directly affects or remains in the food, any effects on the safety of the food should be examined. 3.1.3 The use of animal models for assessing toxicological effects is a major element in the risk assessment of many compounds, such as pesticides. In most cases, however, the substance to be tested is well characterized, of known purity, of no particular 1

b) risks related to environmental releases of recombinant-DNA micro-organisms used in food production; c) safety of substances produced by microorganisms that are used as additives or processing aids, including enzymes for use in food production;

d) specific purported health benefits or probiotic effects that may be attributed to the use of micro-organisms in food; or e) issues relating to the safety of food production workers handling recombinantDNA micro-organisms.

1.3 The criterion for establishing the safety of microorganisms used in the production of foods where there is no history of safe use is beyond the scope of this standard. 2 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Recombinant-DNA Micro-organism -- Bacteria, yeasts or filamentous fungi in which the genetic material has been changed through in vitro nucleic acid techniques including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles. 2.2 Conventional Counterpart -- A micro-organism/ strain with a known history of safe use in producing and/or processing the food and related to the recombinant-DNA strain. The micro-organism may be viable in the food or may be removed in processing

IS 15889 : 2011 nutritional value, and human exposure to it is generally low. It is therefore relatively straightforward to feed such compounds to animals at a range of doses some several orders of magnitude greater than the expected human exposure levels, in order to identify any potential adverse health effects of importance to humans. In this way, it is possible, in most cases, to estimate levels of exposure at which adverse effects are not observed and to set safe intake levels by the application of appropriate safety factors. 3.1.4 Animal studies cannot readily be applied to testing the risks associated with whole foods, which are complex mixtures of compounds, and often characterized by a wide variation in composition and nutritional value. Due to their bulk and effect on satiety, they can usually only be fed to animals at low multiples of the amounts that might be present in the human diet. In addition, a key factor to consider in conducting animal studies on foods is the nutritional value and balance of the diets used, in order to avoid the induction of adverse effects that are not related directly to the material itself. Detecting any potential adverse effects and relating these conclusively to an individual characteristic of the food can therefore be extremely difficult. If the characterization of the food indicates that the available data are insufficient for a thorough safety assessment, properly designed animal studies could be requested on the whole food. Another consideration in deciding the need for animal studies is whether it is appropriate to subject experimental animals to such a study if it is unlikely to give rise to meaningful information. Animal studies typically employed in toxicological evaluations also cannot be readily applied to testing potential risks associated with ingestion of microorganisms used for food production. Microorganisms are living entities, containing complex structures composed of many biochemicals, and therefore are not comparable to pure compounds. In some processed foods, they can survive processing and ingestion and can compete and, in some cases, be retained in the intestinal environment for significant periods of time. Appropriate animal studies should be used to evaluate the safety of recombinant-DNA micro-organisms where the donor, or the gene or gene product do not have a history of safe use in food, taking into account available information regarding the donor and the characterization of the modified genetic material and the gene product. Further, appropriately designed studies in animals may be used to assess the nutritional value of the food or the bioavailability of the newly expressed substance in the food. 3.1.5 Due to the difficulties of applying traditional toxicological testing and risk assessment procedures to whole foods, a more focused approach is required for the safety assessment of foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms. This has been addressed by the development of a multidisciplinary approach for assessing safety that takes into account the intended effect, the nature of the modification and detectable unintended changes that may occur in the micro-organism or in its action on the food, using the concept of substantial equivalence. 3.1.6 While the focus of a safety assessment will be on the recombinant-DNA micro-organism, additional information on its interaction with the food matrix should be taken into consideration when applying the concept of substantial equivalence, which is a key step in the safety assessment process. However, the concept of substantial equivalence is not a safety assessment in itself. Rather it represents the starting point that is used to structure the safety assessment of both a recombinant-DNA micro-organism relative to its conventional counterpart and the food produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organism relative to its conventional counterpart. This concept is used to identify for evaluation similarities and differences between a recombinant-DNA microorganisms used in food processing as well as the food produced using the recombinant-DNA microorganisms and their respective conventional. It aids in the identification of potential safety and nutritional issues and is considered the most appropriate strategy to date for safety assessment of foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms. The safety assessment carried out in this way does not imply absolute safety of the new product; rather, it focuses on assessing the safety of any identified differences so that the safety of the recombinantDNA micro-organism and the food produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organism can be considered relative to their respective conventional counterparts. 3.2 Unintended Effects 3.2.1 In achieving the objective of conferring a specific target trait (intended effect) to a microorganism by the addition, substitution, removal, or rearrangement of defined DNA sequences, including those used for the purpose of DNA transfer or maintenance in the recipient organism, additional traits could, in some cases, be acquired or existing traits could be lost or modified. The potential for occurrence of unintended effects is not restricted to the use of in vitro nucleic acid techniques. Rather, it is an inherent and general phenomenon that can also occur in the development of strains using traditional genetic techniques and procedures, or from exposure

2

IS 15889 : 2011 of micro-organisms to intentional or unintended selective pressures. Unintended effects may be deleterious, beneficial, or neutral with respect to competition with other micro-organisms, ecological fitness of the micro-organism, the micro-organism's effects on humans after ingestion, or the safety of foods produced using the micro-organism. Unintended effects in recombinant-DNA microorganisms may also arise through intentional modification of DNA sequences or they may arise through recombination or other natural events in the recombinant-DNA micro-organism. Safety assessment should include data and information to reduce the possibility that a food derived from a recombinant-DNA micro-organism would have an unexpected, adverse effect on human health. 3.2.2 Unintended effects can result from the insertion of DNA sequences new to a micro-organism into the microbial genome; they may be compared with those observed following the activity of naturally occurring transposable genetic elements. Insertion of DNA may lead to changes in expression of genes in the genome of the recipient. The insertion of DNA from heterologous sources into a gene may also result in the synthesis of a chimeric protein, also referred to as a fusion protein. In addition genetic instability and its consequences need to be considered. 3.2.3 Unintended effects may also result in the formation of new or changed patterns of metabolites. For example, the expression of enzymes at high levels or the expression of an enzyme new to the organism may give rise to secondary biochemical effects, changes in the regulation of metabolic pathways, or altered levels of metabolites. 3.2.4 Unintended effects due to genetic modification may be subdivided into two groups: those that could be predicted and those that are "unexpected". Many unintended effects are largely predictable based on knowledge of the added trait, its metabolic consequences or of the site of insertion. Due to the expanding knowledge of microbial genomes and physiology, and the increased specificity in function of genetic materials introduced through recombinantDNA techniques compared with other forms of genetic manipulation, it may become easier to predict unintended effects of a particular modification. Molecular biological and biochemical techniques can also be used to analyse changes that occur at the level of transcription and translation that could lead to unintended effects. 3.2.5 The safety assessment of foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms involves methods to identify and detect such unintended effects and procedures to evaluate their biological 3 relevance and potential impact on food safety. A variety of data and information is necessary to assess unintended effects, because no individual test can detect all possible unintended effects or identify, with certainty, those relevant to human health. These data and information, when considered in total, should provide assurance that the food is unlikely to have an adverse effect on human health. The assessment of unintended effects takes into account the biochemical, and physiological characteristics of the micro-organism that are typically selected for improving strains for commercial food or beverage uses. These determinations provide a first screen for micro-organisms that exhibit unintended traits. Recombinant-DNA micro-organisms that pass this screen are subjected to safety assessment as described in 4. 3.3 Framework of Food Safety Assessment 3.3.1 The safety assessment of a food produced using a recombinant-DNA micro-organism is based on determining the safety of using the microorganism, which follows a stepwise process of addressing relevant factors that include, a) description of the recombinant-DNA microorganism;

b) description of the recipient micro-organism and its use in food production; c) description of the donor organism(s);

d) description of the genetic modification(s) including vector and construct; e) f) characterization of modification(s); and safety assessment: 1) expressed substances: assessment of potential toxicity and other traits related to pathogenicity; compositional components; analyses of key the genetic

2) 3) 4) 5) 6)

evaluation of metabolites; effects of food processing; assessment of immunological effects; assessment of viability and residence of micro-organisms in the human gastrointestinal tract; antibiotic resistance and gene transfer; and nutritional modification.

7) 8)

IS 15889 : 2011 3.3.2 In certain cases, the characteristics of the micro-organisms and/or the foods produced/ processed using these micro-organisms may necessitate generation of additional data and information to address issues that are unique to the micro-organisms and/or food products under review. Experiments intended to develop data for safety assessments should be designed and conducted in accordance with sound scientific concepts and principles, as well as, where appropriate, good laboratory practice. Primary data should be made available to regulatory authorities upon request. Data should be obtained using sound scientific methods and analysed using appropriate statistical techniques. The sensitivity of all analytical methods should be documented. 3.3.3 The goal of each safety assessment is to provide assurance, in the light of the best available scientific knowledge, that the food will not cause harm when prepared or consumed according to its intended use, nor should the organism itself cause harm when viable organisms remain in the food. Safety assessments should address the health aspects for the whole population, including immunocompromised individuals, infants, and the elderly. The expected endpoint of such an assessment will be a conclusion regarding whether the new food and/ or micro-organisms are as safe as the conventional counterparts taking into account dietary impact of any changes in nutritional content or value. Where the micro-organism is likely to be viable upon ingestion, its safety should be compared to a conventional counterpart taking into account residence of the recombinant-DNA micro-organism in the gastrointestinal tract, and where appropriate, interactions between it and the gastrointestinal flora of mammals (especially humans) and impacts of the recombinant-DNA micro-organism on the immune system. In essence, the outcome of the safety assessment process is to define the product under consideration in such a way as to enable risk managers to determine whether any measures are needed to protect the health of consumers and if so to make well-informed and appropriate decisions in this regard. 4 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 4.1 Description of the Recombinant-DNA Microorganism A description of the bacterial, yeast, or fungal strain and the food being presented for safety assessment should be provided. This description should be sufficient to aid in understanding the nature of the organism or food produced using the organism being submitted for safety assessment. Recombinant-DNA micro-organisms used in food production or 4 contained in food should be conserved as stock cultures with appropriate identification using molecular methods, and preferably, in established culture collections. This may facilitate the review of the original safety assessment. Such stock cultures should be made available to regulatory authorities upon request. 4.2 Description of the Recipient Micro-organism and Its Use in Food Production 4.2.1 A comprehensive description of the recipient micro-organism or micro-organism subjected to the modification should be provided. Recipient microorganisms should have a history of safe use in food production or safe consumption in foods. Organisms that produce toxins, antibiotics or other substances that should not be present in food, or that bear genetic elements that could lead to genetic instability, antibiotic resistance or that are likely to contain genes conferring functions associated with pathogenicity (that is also known as pathogenicity islands or virulence factors) should not be considered for use as recipients. The necessary data and information should include, but need not be restricted to: a) identity: scientific name, common name or other name(s) used to reference the microorganism, strain designation, information about the strain and its source, or accession numbers or other information from a recognized culture repository from which the organism or its antecedents may be obtained, if applicable, information supporting its taxonomical assignment; b) history of use and cultivation, known information about strain development (including isolation of mutations or antecedent strains used in strain construction); in particular, identifying traits that may adversely impact human health; c) information on the recipient microorganism's genotype and phenotype relevant to its safety, including any known toxins, antibiotics, antibiotic resistance factors or other factors related to pathogenicity, or immunological impact, and information about the genetic stability of the micro-organism; d) history of safe use in food production or safe consumption in food; and e) information on the relevant production parameters used to culture the recipient micro-organism. 4.2.2 Relevant phenotypic and genotypic information should be provided not only for the

IS 15889 : 2011 recipient micro-organism, but also for related species and for any extra-chromosomal genetic elements that contribute to the functions of the recipient strain, particularly if the related species are used in foods or involved in pathogenic effects in humans or other animals. Information on the genetic stability of the recipient micro-organism should be considered including, as appropriate, the presence of mobile DNA elements, that is, insertion sequences, transposons, plasmids, and prophages. 4.2.3 The history of use may include information on how the recipient micro-organism is typically grown, transported and stored, quality assurance measures typically employed, including those to verify strain identity and production specifications for micro-organisms and foods, and whether these organisms remain viable in the processed food or are removed or rendered non-viable as a consequence of processing. 4.3 Description of the Donor Organism(s) Information should be provided on the donor organism(s) and any intermediate organisms, when applicable, and, when relevant, related organisms. It is particularly important to determine if the donor or intermediate organism(s) or other closely related species naturally exhibit characteristics of pathogenicity or toxin production, or have other traits that affect human health. The description of the donor or intermediate organism(s) should include: a) identity: scientific name, common name or other name(s) used to reference the organism, strain designation, information about the strain and its source, or accession numbers or other information from a recognized culture repository from which the organism or its antecedents may be obtained, if applicable, and information supporting its taxonomic assignment; b) information about the organism or related organisms that concerns food safety; c) information on the organism's genotype and phenotype relevant to its safety including any known toxins, antibiotics, antibiotic resistance factors or other factors related to pathogenicity, or immunological impact; and d) information on the past and present use, if any, in the food supply and exposure route(s) other than intended food use (for example, possible presence as contaminants). 4.4 Description of the Genetic Modification(s) Including Vector and Construct 4.4.1 Sufficient information should be provided on the genetic modification(s) to allow for the 5 identification of all genetic material potentially delivered to or modified in the recipient microorganism and to provide the necessary information for the analysis of the data supporting the characterization of the DNA added to, inserted into, modified in, or deleted from the microbial genome. 4.4.2 The description of the strain construction process should include, information on the specific method(s) used for genetic modification; b) information on the DNA used to modify the micro-organism, including the source (for example plant, microbial, viral, synthetic), identity and expected function in the recombinant-DNA micro-organism, and copy number for plasmids; and c) intermediate recipient organisms including the organisms (for example other bacteria or fungi) used to produce or process DNA prior to introduction into the final recipient organism. 4.4.3 Information should be provided on the DNA added, inserted, deleted, or modified, including, a) characterization of all genetic components including marker genes, vector genes, regulatory and other elements affecting the function of the DNA; b) size and identity; c) location and orientation of the sequence in the final vector/construct; and d) function. 4.5 Characterization of the Genetic Modification(s) 4.5.1 In order to provide clear understanding of the impact of the genetic modification on the composition and safety of foods produced using recombinantDNA micro-organisms, a comprehensive molecular and biochemical characterization of the genetic modification should be carried out. To facilitate the safety assessment, the DNA to be inserted should be preferably limited to the sequences necessary to perform the intended functions. 4.5.2 Information should be provided on the DNA modifications in the recombinant DNA microorganism; this should include, a) characterization and description of the added, inserted, deleted, or otherwise modified genetic materials, including plasmids or other carrier DNA used to transfer desired genetic sequences. This should include an analysis of the potential for mobilization of any plasmids or other genetic elements used, the locations of the a)

IS 15889 : 2011 added, inserted, deleted, or otherwise modified genetic materials (site on a chromosomal or extra-chromosomal location); if located on a multi-copy plasmid, the copy number of the plasmid; b) number of insertion sites; c) organization of the modified genetic material at each insertion site including the copy number and sequence data of the inserted, modified, or deleted material, plasmids or carrier DNA used to transfer the desired genetic sequences, and the surrounding sequences. This will enable the identification of any substances expressed as a consequence of the inserted, modified or deleted material; 4.5.4 a) In addition, information should be provided, to demonstrate whether the arrangement of the modified genetic material has been conserved or whether significant rearrangements have occurred after introduction to the cell and propagation of the recombinant strain to the extent needed for its use(s) in food production, including those that may occur during its storage according to current techniques;
NOTE -- Microbial genomes are more fluid than those of higher eukaryotes; that is, the organisms grow faster, adapt of changing environments, and are more prone to change. Chromosomal rearrangements are common. The general genetic plasticity of micro-organisms may affect recombinant DNA in micro-organisms and must be considered in evaluating the stability of recombinant DNA micro-organisms.

d) identification of any open reading frames within inserted DNA, or created by the modifications to contiguous DNA in the chromosome or in a plasmid, including those that could result in fusion proteins; and e) particular reference to any sequences known to encode, or to influence the expression of, potentially harmful functions.

4.5.3 Information should be provided on any expressed substances in the recombinant-DNA micro-organism; this should include, a) the gene product(s) (for example a protein or an untranslated RNA) or other information such as analysis of transcripts or expression products to identify any new substances that may be present in the food; the phenotypic description of the new trait(s);

b) to demonstrate whether deliberate modifications made to the amino acid sequence of the expressed protein result in changes in its post-translational modification or affect sites critical for its structure or function; c) to demonstrate whether the intended effect of the modification has been achieved and that all expressed traits are expressed and inherited in a manner that is stable for the extent of propagation needed for its use(s) in food production and is consistent with laws of inheritance. It may be necessary to examine the inheritance of the inserted or modified DNA or the expression of the corresponding RNA if the phenotypic characteristics cannot be measured directly;
NOTE -- Modified strains should be maintained in a manner to enable verification of the genetic stability.

b) the gene product's function; c)

d) the level and site of expression (intracellular, periplasmic -- for Gram-negative bacteria, organellar -- in eukaryotic micro-organisms, secreted) in the micro-organism of the expressed gene product(s), and, when applicable, the levels of its metabolites in the organism; e) the amount of the inserted gene product(s) if the function of the expressed sequence(s)/ gene(s) is to alter the level of a specific endogenous mRNA or protein; and the absence of a gene product, or alterations in metabolites related to gene products, if applicable to the intended function(s) of the genetic modification(s).

f)

d) to demonstrate whether the newly expressed trait(s) is expressed as expected and targeted to the appropriate cellular location or is secreted in a manner and at levels that is consistent with the associated regulatory sequences driving the expression of the corresponding gene; e) to indicate whether there is any evidence to suggest that one or more genes in the recipient micro-organism has been affected by the modifications or the genetic exchange process; and f) to confirm the identity and expression pattern of any new fusion proteins. 4.6 Safety Assessment 4.6.0 The safety assessment of the modified microorganism should be performed on a case by case

6

IS 15889 : 2011 basis depending on the nature and extent of the introduced changes. Conventional toxicology studies may not be considered necessary where the substance or a closely related substance has, taking into account its function and exposure, been consumed safely in food. In other cases, the use of appropriate conventional toxicology or other studies on the new substance may be necessary. Effects of the recombinant-DNA micro-organism on the food matrix should be considered as well. If the characterization of the food indicates that the available data are insufficient for a thorough safety assessment, properly designed animal or in vitro studies with the recombinant-DNA micro-organism and/or the food produced using it could be considered necessary. 4.6.1 Expressed Substances: Assessment of Potential Toxicity and Other Traits Related to Pathogenicity 4.6.1.1 When a substance is new to foods or food processing, the use of conventional toxicology studies or other applicable studies on the new substance will be necessary. This may require the isolation of the new substance from the recombinantDNA micro-organism, the food product if the substance is secreted, or, if necessary, the synthesis or production of the substance from an alternative source, in which case the material should be shown to be structurally, functionally, and biochemically equivalent to that produced in the recombinant-DNA micro-organism. Information on the anticipated exposure of consumers to the substance, the potential intake and dietary impact of the substance should be provided. 4.6.1.2 The safety assessment of the expressed substance should take into account its function and concentration in the food. The number of viable micro-organisms remaining in the food should be also determined and compared to a conventional counterpart. All quantitative measurements should be analysed using appropriate statistical techniques. Current dietary exposure and possible effects on population sub-groups should also be considered. 4.6.1.3 In the case of proteins, the assessment of potential toxicity should take into account the structure and function of the protein and should focus on amino acid sequence similarity between the protein and known protein toxins and anti-nutrients (for example, protease inhibitors, siderophores) as well as stability to heat or processing and to degradation in appropriate representative gastric and intestinal model systems. Appropriate oral toxicity studies may be carried out in cases where the protein is present in the food, but is not closely similar to proteins that have been safely consumed in food, 7 and has not previously been consumed safely in food, and taking into account its biological function in micro-organisms where known. 4.6.1.4 Potential toxicity of non-protein substances that have not been safely consumed in food should be assessed in a case-by-case basis depending on the identity, concentration, and biological function of the substance and dietary exposure. The type of studies to be performed may include evaluations of metabolism, toxicokinetics, chronic toxicity/ carcinogenicity, impact on reproductive function, and teratogenicity. 4.6.1.5 The newly expressed or altered properties should be shown to be unrelated to any characteristics of donor organisms that could be harmful to human health. Information should be provided to ensure that genes coding for known toxins or anti-nutrients present in the donor organisms are not transferred to recombinant-DNA micro-organisms that do not normally express those toxic or anti-nutritious characteristics. 4.6.1.6 Additional in vivo or in vitro studies may be needed on a case-by-case basis to assess the toxicity of expressed substances, taking into account the potential accumulation of any substances, toxic metabolites or antibiotics that might result from the genetic modification. 4.6.2 Compositional Analysis of Key Components Key nutrients or key anti-nutrients are those components in a particular food that may have a substantial impact in the overall diet. They may be major nutritional constituents (fats, proteins, carbohydrates), enzyme inhibitors as anti-nutrients, or minor compounds (minerals, vitamins). Key toxicants are those toxicologically significant compounds known to be produced by the microorganism, such as those compounds whose toxic potency and level may be significant to health. Microorganisms traditionally used in food processing are not usually known to produce such compounds under production conditions. Analysis of concentrations of key components (key nutrients, key anti-nutrients and key toxicants) of foods produced by recombinant-DNA micro-organisms should be compared with an equivalent analysis of a conventional counterpart produced under the same conditions. The statistical significance of any observed differences should be assessed in the context of the range of natural variations for that parameter to determine its biological significance. Ideally, the comparator(s) used in this assessment should be food produced using the near isogenic parent strain. The purpose of this comparison, in conjunction with an exposure assessment as

IS 15889 : 2011 necessary, is to establish that substances that can affect the safety of the food have not been altered in a manner that would have an adverse impact on human health. 4.6.3 Evaluation of Metabolites 4.6.3.1 Some recombinant-DNA micro-organisms may be modified in a manner that could result in new or altered levels of various metabolites in foods produced using these organisms. Where altered metabolite levels are identified in foods, consideration should be given to the potential impacts on human health using conventional procedures for establishing the safety of such metabolites (for example procedures for assessing the human safety of chemicals in foods). 4.6.3.2 New or altered levels of metabolites produced by a recombinant-DNA micro-organism may change the population of micro-organisms in mixed culture, potentially increasing the risk for growth of harmful organisms or accumulation of harmful substances. Possible effects of genetic modification of a micro-organism on other microorganisms should be assessed when a mixed culture of micro-organisms is used for food processing, such as for production of natural cheese, miso, soy sauce, etc. 4.6.4 Effects of Food Processing The potential effects of food processing, including home preparation, on foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms should also be considered. For example, alterations could occur in the heat stability of an endogenous toxicant or the bioavailability of an important nutrient after processing. Information should therefore be provided describing the processing conditions used in the production of a food. For example, in the case of yoghurt, information should be provided on the growth of the organism and culture conditions. 4.6.5 Assessment of Immunological Effects 4.6.5.1 When the protein(s) resulting from an inserted gene is present in the food, it should be assessed for its potential to cause allergy. The likelihood that individuals may already be sensitive to the protein and whether a protein new to the food supply will induce allergic reactions should be considered. A detailed presentation of issues to be considered is presented in Annex A. 4.6.5.2 Genes derived from known allergenic sources should be assumed to encode an allergen and be avoided unless scientific evidence demonstrates otherwise. The transfer of genes from organisms known to elicit gluten-sensitive enteropathy in sensitive individuals should be avoided unless it is 8 documented that the transferred gene does not code for an allergen or for a protein involved in glutensensitive enteropathy. 4.6.5.3 Recombinant-DNA micro-organisms that remain viable in foods may interact with the immune system in the gastrointestinal tract. Closer examination of these interactions will depend on the types of differences between the recombinant-DNA micro-organism and its conventional counterpart. 4.6.6 Assessment of Viability and Residence of Micro-organisms in the Human Gastrointestinal Tract 4.6.6.1 In some foods produced using recombinantDNA micro-organisms, ingestion of these microorganisms and their residence may have an impact on the human intestinal tract. The need for further testing of such micro-organisms should be based on the presence of their conventional counterpart in foods, and the nature of the intended and unintended effects of genetic modifications. If processing of the final food product eliminates viable micro-organisms (by heat treatment in baking bread, for example), or if accumulations of end-products toxic to the microorganism (such as alcohol or acids) eliminate viability, then viability and residence of micro-organisms in the alimentary system need no examination.
NOTE -- Permanent life-long colonization by ingested micro-organisms is rare. Some orally administered microorganisms have been recovered in faeces or in the colonic mucosa weeks after feeding ceased. Whether the genetically modified micro-organism is established in the gastrointestinal tract or not, the possibility remains that it might influence the microflora or the mammalian host.

4.6.6.2 For applications in which recombinant-DNA micro-organisms used in production remain viable in the final food product (for example, organisms in some dairy products), it may be desirable to demonstrate the viability (or residence time) of the micro-organism alone and within the respective food matrix in the digestive tract and the impact on the intestinal microflora in appropriate systems. The nature of intended and unintended effects of genetic modification and the degree of differences from the conventional counterpart will determine the extent of such testing. 4.6.7 Antibiotic Resistance and Gene Transfer 4.6.7.1 In general, traditional strains of microorganisms developed for food processing uses have not been assessed for antibiotic resistance. Many micro-organisms used in food production possess intrinsic resistance to specific antibiotics. Such properties need not exclude such strains from consideration as recipients in constructing recombinant-DNA micro-organisms. However, strains in which antibiotic resistance is encoded by

IS 15889 : 2011 transmissible genetic elements should not be used where such strains or these genetic elements are present in the final food. Any indication of the presence of plasmids, transposons, and integrons containing such resistance genes should be specifically addressed. 4.6.7.2 Alternative technologies, demonstrated to be safe, that do not rely on antibiotic resistance marker genes in viable micro-organisms present in foods should be used for selection purposes in recombinant-DNA micro-organisms. In general, use of antibiotic resistance markers for constructing intermediate strains should pose no significant hazards that would exclude the use of the ultimate strains in food production, provided that the antibiotic resistance marker genes have been removed from the final construct. 4.6.7.3 Transfer of plasmids and genes between the resident intestinal microflora and ingested recombinant-DNA micro-organisms may occur. The possibility and consequences of gene transfer from recombinant-DNA micro-organisms and food products produced by recombinant-DNA microorganisms to gut micro-organisms or human cells should also be considered. Transferred DNA would be unlikely to be maintained in the absence of selective pressure. Nevertheless, the possibility of such events cannot be completely discounted. 4.6.7.4 In order to minimize the possibility of gene transfer, the following steps should be considered: a) Chromosomal integration of the inserted genetic material may be preferable to localization on a plasmid; b) Where the recombinant-DNA microorganism will remain viable in the gastrointestinal tract, genes should be avoided in the genetic construct that could provide a selective advantage to recipient organisms to which the genetic material is unintentionally transferred; and c) Sequences that mediate integration into other genomes should be avoided in constructing the introduced genetic material. 4.6.8 Nutritional Modification 4.6.8.1 The assessment of possible compositional changes to key nutrients, which should be conducted for all foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms, has already been addressed under 4.6.2 . If such nutritional modifications have been implemented, the food should be subjected to additional testing to assess the consequences of the changes and whether the nutrient intakes are likely to be altered by the introduction of such foods into the food supply. 9 4.6.8.2 Information about the known patterns of use and consumption of a food and its derivatives should be used to estimate the likely intake of the food produced using the recombinant-DNA microorganism. The expected intake of the food should be used to assess the nutritional implications of the altered nutrient profile both at customary and maximal levels of consumption. Basing the estimate on the highest likely consumption provides assurance that the potential for any undesirable nutritional effects will be detected. Attention should be paid to the particular physiological characteristics and metabolic requirements of specific population groups such as infants, children, pregnant and lactating women, the elderly and those with chronic diseases or compromised immune systems. Based on the analysis of nutritional impacts and the dietary needs of specific population subgroups, additional nutritional assessments may be necessary. It is also important to ascertain to what extent the modified nutrient is bioavailable and remains stable with time, processing, and storage. 4.6.8.3 The use of modern biotechnology to change nutrient levels in foods produced using microorganisms could result in broad changes to the nutrient profile. The intended modification in the micro-organism could alter the overall nutrient profile of the product, which, in turn, could affect the nutritional status of individuals consuming the food. The impact of changes that could affect the overall nutrient profile should be determined. 4.6.8.4 When the modification results in a food product with a composition that is significantly different from its conventional counterpart, it may be appropriate to use additional conventional foods or food components (that is, foods whose nutritional composition is closer to that of the food produced using the recombinant-DNA micro-organism) as appropriate comparators to assess the nutritional impact of the food. 4.6.8.5 Some foods may require additional testing. For example, animal-feeding studies may be warranted for foods produced using recombinantDNA micro-organisms if changes in the bioavailability of nutrients are expected or if the composition is not comparable to conventional foods. Also, foods designed for health benefits, may require an assessment beyond the scope of these standards such as specific nutritional, toxicological or other appropriate studies. If the characterization of the food indicates that the available data are insufficient for a thorough safety assessment, properly designed animal studies could be requested on the whole food.

IS 15889 : 2011 5 REVIEW OF SAFETY ASSESSMENTS The goal of the safety assessment is a conclusion as to whether the food produced using a recombinantDNA micro-organism is as safe as the conventional counterpart taking into account dietary impact of any changes in nutritional content or value. Nevertheless, the safety assessment should be reviewed in the light of new scientific information that calls into question the conclusions of the original safety assessment.

ANNEX A (Clause 4.6.5.1)
ASSESSMENT OF POSSIBLE ALLERGENICITY A-1 INTRODUCTION A-1.1 All newly expressed proteins produced by recombinant-DNA micro-organisms that could be present in the final food should be assessed for their potential to cause allergic reactions. This should include consideration of whether a newly expressed protein is one to which certain individuals may already be sensitive as well as whether a protein new to the food supply is likely to induce allergic reactions in some individuals.
NOTE -- This assessment strategy is not applicable for assessing whether newly expressed proteins are capable of inducing gluten-sensitive or other enteropathies. The issue of enteropathies is already addressed in 4.6.5.2 of this standard. In addition, the strategy is not applicable to the evaluation of foods where gene products are down regulated for hypoallergenic purposes.

not limited to, its susceptibility to enzymatic degradation, heat stability and/or, acid and enzymatic treatment. A-2.2 As there is no single test that can predict the likely human IgE response to oral exposure, the first step to characterize newly expressed proteins should be the comparison of the amino acid sequence and certain physicochemical characteristics of the newly expressed protein with those of established allergens in a weight of evidence approach. This will require the isolation of any newly expressed proteins produced by recombinant-DNA micro-organisms, or the synthesis or production of the substance from an alternative source, in which case the material should be shown to be structurally, functionally and biochemically equivalent to that produced by recombinant-DNA micro-organisms. Particular attention should be given to the choice of the expression host, since post-translational modifications allowed by different hosts (that is, eukaryotic versus prokaryotic systems) may have an impact on the allergenic potential of the protein. A-2.3 It is important to establish whether the source is known to cause allergic reactions. Genes derived from known allergenic sources should be assumed to encode an allergen unless scientific evidence demonstrates otherwise. A-3 INITIAL ASSESSMENT A-3.1 Source of the Protein As part of the data supporting the safety of foods produced using recombinant-DNA micro-organisms, information should describe any reports of allergenicity associated with the donor organism. Allergenic sources of genes would be defined as those organisms for which reasonable evidence of IgE mediated oral, respiratory or contact allergy is

A-1.2 At present, there is no definitive test that can be relied upon to predict allergic response in humans to a newly expressed protein, therefore, it is recommended that an integrated, stepwise, case by case approach, as described below, be used in the assessment of possible allergenicity of newly expressed proteins. This approach takes into account the evidence derived from several types of information and data since no single criterion is sufficiently predictive. A-1.3 The endpoint of the assessment is a conclusion as to the likelihood of the protein being a food allergen. A-2 ASSESSMENT STRATEGY A-2.1 The initial steps in assessing possible allergenicity of any newly expressed proteins are the determination of: the source of the introduced protein; any significant similarity between the amino acid sequence of the protein and that of known allergens; and its structural properties, including but

10

IS 15889 : 2011 available. Knowledge of the source of the introduced protein allows the identification of tools and relevant data to be considered in the allergenicity assessment. These include: the availability of sera for screening purposes; documented type, severity and frequency of allergic reactions; structural characteristics and amino acid sequence; physicochemical and immunological properties (when available) of known allergenic proteins from that source. A-3.2 Amino Acid Sequence Homology A-3.2.1 The purpose of a sequence homology comparison is to assess the extent to which a newly expressed protein is similar in structure to a known allergen. This information may suggest whether that protein has an allergenic potential. Sequence homology searches comparing the structure of all newly expressed proteins with all known allergens should be done. Searches should be conducted using various algorithms such as FASTA or BLASTP to predict overall structural similarities. Strategies such as stepwise contiguous identical amino acid segment searches may also be performed for identifying sequences that may represent linear epitopes. The size of the contiguous amino acid search should be based on a scientifically justified rationale in order to minimize the potential for false negative or false positive results. Validated search and evaluation procedures should be used in order to produce biologically meaningful results.
NOTE -- It is suggested to move from 8 to 6 identical amino acid segments in searches. The smaller the peptide sequence used in the stepwise comparison, the greater the likelihood of identifying false positives, inversely, the larger the peptide sequence used, the greater the likelihood of false negatives, thereby reducing the utility of the comparison.

to known allergens. A result indicating absence of significant sequence homology should be considered along with the other data outlined under this strategy in assessing the allergenic potential of newly expressed proteins. Further studies should be conducted as appropriate. A positive sequence homology result indicates that the newly expressed protein is likely to be allergenic. If the product is to be considered further, it should be assessed using serum from individuals sensitized to the identified allergenic source. A-3.3 Pepsin Resistance A-3.3.1 Resistance to pepsin digestion has been observed in several food allergens; thus a correlation exists between resistance to digestion by pepsin and allergenic potential. Therefore, the resistance of a protein to degradation in the presence of pepsin under appropriate conditions indicates that further analysis should be conducted to determine the likelihood of the newly expressed protein being allergenic. The establishment of a consistent and well-validated pepsin degradation protocol may enhance the utility of this method. However, it should be taken into account that a lack of resistance to pepsin does not exclude that the newly expressed protein can be a relevant allergen. A-3.3.2 Although the pepsin resistance protocol is strongly recommended, it is recognized that other enzyme susceptibility protocols exist. Alternative protocols may be used where adequate justification is provided. A-4 SPECIFIC SERUM SCREENING A-4.1 For those proteins that originate from a source known to be allergenic, or have sequence homology with a known allergen, testing in immunological assays should be performed where sera are available. Sera from individuals with a clinically validated allergy to the source of the protein can be used to test the specific binding to IgE class antibodies of the protein in in vitro assays. A critical issue for testing will be the availability of human sera from sufficient numbers of individuals. A minimum of 8 relevant sera is required to achieve a 99 percent certainty that the new protein is not an allergen in the case of a major allergen. Similarly, a minimum of 24 relevant sera is required to achieve the same level of certainty in the case of a minor allergen. It is recognized that these quantities of sera may not be available for testing purposes. In addition, the quality of the sera and the assay procedure need to be standardized to produce a valid test result. For proteins from sources not known to be allergenic, and which do not exhibit sequence homology to a known allergen, targeted serum screening may be considered where such tests are available. 11

A-3.2.2 IgE cross-reactivity between the newly expressed protein and a known allergen should be considered a possibility when there is more than 35% identity in a segment of 80 or more amino acids or other scientifically justified criteria. All the information resulting from the sequence homology comparison between the newly expressed protein and known allergens should be reported to allow a caseby-case scientifically based evaluation. A-3.2.3 Sequence homology searches have certain limitations. In particular, comparisons are limited to the sequences of known allergens in publicly available databases and the scientific literature. There are also limitations in the ability of such comparisons to detect non-contiguous epitopes capable of binding themselves specifically with IgE antibodies. A-3.2.4 A negative sequence homology result indicates that a newly expressed protein is not a known allergen and is unlikely to be cross-reactive

IS 15889 : 2011 A-4.2 In the case of a newly expressed protein derived from a known allergenic source, a negative result in in vitro immunoassays may not be considered sufficient, but should prompt additional testing, such as the possible use of skin test and ex vivo protocols ( Ex vivo procedure is the testing for allergenicity using cells or tissue culture from allergic human subjects). A positive result in such tests would indicate to a potential allergen. A-5 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS A-5.1 The absolute exposure to the newly expressed protein and the effects of relevant food processing will contribute toward an overall conclusion about the potential for human health risk. In this regard, the nature of the food product intended for consumption should be taken into consideration in determining the types of processing which would be applied and its effects on the presence of the protein in the final food product. A-5.2 As scientific knowledge and technology evolves, other methods and tools may be considered in assessing the allergenicity potential of newly expressed proteins as part of the assessment strategy. These methods should be scientifically sound and may include targeted serum screening (that is the assessment of binding to IgE in sera of individuals with clinically validated allergic responses to broadly-related categories of foods); the development of international serum banks; use of animal models; and examination of newly expressed proteins for T-cell epitopes and structural motifs associated with allergens.

12

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. : FAD 23 (1794). Amendments Issued Since Publication ______________________________________________________________________________________ Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected ______________________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________________________ BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in Regional Offices: Central Eastern : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Telephones 7617 { 2323 2323 3841

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

8499, 2337 8561 {2337 2337 8626, 2337 9120 3843 {260 260 9285 1216, 2254 1442 {2254 2254 2519, 2254 2315 9295, 2832 7858 {2832 2832 7891, 2832 7892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANATHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
K.G. Computers, Ashok Vihar, Delhi

