IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Hkkjrh; ekud

xq.krk izcU/ku -- miHkksDrk larqf"V -- laxBuksa ls ckgj fooknksa dks gy djus ds fn'kk&funsZ'k
Indian Standard QUALITY MANAGEMENT -- CUSTOMER SATISFACTION -- GUIDELINES FOR DISPUTE RESOLUTION EXTERNAL TO ORGANIZATIONS

ICS 03.120.10

� BIS 2011

B U R E A U O F I N D I A N S TA N D A R D S
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002 February 2011 Price Group 11

Quality Management Sectional Committee, MSD 2

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 10003 : 2007 `Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for dispute resolution external to organizations' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Quality Management Sectional Committee and approval of the Management and Systems Division Council. The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. In this adopted standard, reference appears to the certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their respective places are given below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard ISO 9000 : 2005 Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary ISO 9001 : 2008 Quality management systems -- Requirements Corresponding Indian Standard IS/ISO 9000 : 2005 Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary (third revision) IS/ISO 9001 : 2008 Quality management systems -- Requirements (third revision) IS/ISO 9004 : 2000 Quality management systems -- Guidelines for performance improvements ( fifth revision) IS/ISO 10001 : 2007 Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for codes of conduct for organizations IS/ISO 10002 : 2004 Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations do ISO 10015 : 1999 Quality management -- Guidelines for training IS/ISO 10015 : 1999 Quality management -- Guidelines for training Degree of Equivalence Identical

do

ISO 9004 : 2000 Quality management systems -- Guidelines for performance improvements

do

ISO 10001 : 2007 Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for codes of conduct for organizations

do

do ISO 10002 : 2004 Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations

Annexes A, B, J, K, L and M of this standard are for information only, whereas Annexes C, D, E, F, G, H and I of this standard are an integral part of this standard.

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Introduction
0.1 General

This International Standard provides guidance for organizations to plan, design, develop, operate, maintain and improve effective and efficient external dispute resolution for product-related complaints. Dispute resolution gives an avenue of redress when organizations do not remedy a complaint internally. Most complaints can be resolved successfully within the organization, without the need for further time-consuming and more adversarial procedures.
NOTE 1 Organizations are encouraged to develop an effective and efficient internal complaints-handling process consistent with ISO 10002.

There are different methods for resolving disputes and different terms used to describe them. These methods are facilitative, advisory or determinative (see Annex A). Each method can be used by itself or the methods can be used in sequence. This International Standard can be used to a) b) design a dispute-resolution process and decide when to offer dispute resolution to complainants, and select a dispute-resolution provider (hereinafter referred to as "provider"; see 3.9) that is able to meet an organization's specific needs and expectations.

NOTE 2 Providers from the public and private sectors can take various forms around the world, including industrysector specific associations, ombudsmen and multi-sector associations.

While this International Standard is directed towards organizations, providers can also benefit from knowing what guidance is being given to organizations. Providers can also use the guidance in their dispute-resolution process. Organizations are encouraged to plan, design, develop, operate, maintain and improve a dispute-resolution process in conjunction with a customer satisfaction code of conduct and internal complaints-handling process, and to integrate them with the organization's quality or other management systems. This International Standard can assist individuals and organizations in evaluating the effectiveness, efficiency and fairness of an organization's dispute-resolution process. Implementation of this International Standard can:         provide flexible dispute resolution that, in comparison with court-based processes, can be less expensive, easier and quicker, especially in disputes across borders; help to enhance customer satisfaction and loyalty; provide a benchmark against which individuals and organizations can evaluate claims by organizations and providers that they operate in an effective, efficient and fair manner; help to inform potential users of dispute resolution about the conditions of access, cost and the legal consequences; enhance the ability of an organization to identify and eliminate causes of disputes; improve the way complaints and disputes are handled in the organization; provide additional information that can contribute to improvement of the organization's processes and products; improve the organization's reputation or avoid damage to it;

i

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007
  improve domestic and international competitiveness; provide confidence of fair and consistent treatment of disputes throughout the global marketplace.

Note that external dispute resolution can be the subject of statutory and regulatory requirements.
NOTE 3 Terminology used in connection with dispute resolution is not always the same throughout the world. Annex A provides a glossary of some of the equivalent terms.

0.2

Relationship with ISO 9001 and ISO 9004

This International Standard is compatible with ISO 9001 and ISO 9004 and supports the objectives of these two standards through the effective and efficient application of a dispute-resolution process. This International Standard can also be used independently of ISO 9001 and ISO 9004. ISO 9001 specifies requirements for a quality management system that can be used for internal application by organizations, or for certification, or for contractual purposes. The dispute-resolution process described in this International Standard (ISO 10003) can be used as an element of a quality management system. This International Standard is not intended for certification or for contractual purposes. ISO 9004 provides guidance on continual improvement of performance regarding quality management systems. The use of this International Standard (ISO 10003) can further enhance performance in resolving disputes with complainants and increase the satisfaction of customers, complainants and other interested parties. It can also facilitate the continual improvement of the quality of processes and products based on feedback from customers, complainants and other interested parties.
NOTE Apart from customers and complainants, other interested parties can include suppliers, industry associations and their members, consumer organizations, relevant government agencies, personnel, owners and others who are affected by the dispute-resolution process.

0.3

Relationship with ISO 10001 and ISO 10002

This International Standard is compatible with ISO 10001 and ISO 10002. These three standards can be used either independently or in conjunction with each other. When used together, ISO 10001, ISO 10002 and this International Standard can be part of a broader and integrated framework for enhanced customer satisfaction through codes of conduct, complaints handling and dispute resolution (see Annex B). ISO 10001 contains guidance on customer satisfaction codes of conduct for organizations. Such codes, in setting out what customers can expect from the organization and its products, can decrease the likelihood of problems arising and can eliminate causes of complaints and disputes. When complaints and disputes do arise, the existence of codes of conduct can assist the parties in understanding customer expectations and the organization's attempts to meet those expectations. ISO 10002 contains guidance on the internal handling of product-related complaints. This International Standard (ISO 10003) can be used when complaints are not resolved internally.

0.4

Statements regarding conformity

This International Standard is designed to be used solely as a guidance document. Where all applicable guidance provided in this International Standard has been implemented, statements that a dispute-resolution process is based on that guidance can be made. However, any statements claiming or implying conformity to this International Standard are inconsistent with this International Standard, and it is therefore inappropriate to make such statements.
NOTE Statements claiming or implying conformity to this International Standard are thus inappropriate in any promotional and communication material, such as press releases, advertisements, marketing brochures, videos, staff announcements, logos, slogans and catch lines for diverse media, ranging from print and broadcasting to Internet and multi-media applications, to product labels, signs and banners.

ii

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Indian Standard QUALITY MANAGEMENT -- CUSTOMER SATISFACTION -- GUIDELINES FOR DISPUTE RESOLUTION EXTERNAL TO ORGANIZATIONS
1 Scope

This International Standard provides guidance for an organization to plan, design, develop, operate, maintain and improve an effective and efficient dispute-resolution process for complaints that have not been resolved by the organization. This International Standard is applicable to:  complaints relating to the organization's products intended for, or required by, customers, the complaintshandling process or dispute-resolution process;

NOTE 1 Throughout this International Standard, the term "product" encompasses services, software, hardware and processed materials.



resolution of disputes arising from domestic or cross-border business activities, including those arising from electronic commerce.

This International Standard is intended for use by organizations regardless of type, size and product provided, and deals with       guidance on determining when and how organizations can participate in dispute resolution, guidance on the selection of providers and use of their services, top management involvement in, and commitment to, dispute resolution and deployment of adequate resources within the organization, the essentials for fair, suitable, transparent and accessible dispute resolution, guidance on management of an organization's participation in dispute resolution, and monitoring, evaluating and improving the dispute-resolution process.
This International Standard is particularly aimed at dispute resolution between an organization and

NOTE 2  

individuals purchasing or using products for personal or household purposes, or small businesses.

This International Standard is not intended for certification or for contractual purposes. It does not apply to the resolution of other types of disputes, such as employment disputes. It is not intended to change any rights or obligations provided by applicable statutory and regulatory requirements. This International Standard does not apply to complaints handling within an organization.

1

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

2

Normative references

The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. ISO 9000:2005, Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary

3

Terms and definitions

For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in ISO 9000:2005 and the following apply. 3.1 association organization (3.8) consisting of member organizations or persons 3.2 complainant person, organization (3.8), or their representative, making a complaint (3.3)
NOTE 1 In this International Standard, customers who refer their complaints to a provider in the first instance are also considered to be "complainants". NOTE 2 This definition clarifies the definition given in ISO 10002, in that a representative can represent a person or an organization.

3.3 complaint expression of dissatisfaction made to an organization (3.8), related to its products, or the complaints-handling process itself, where a response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected [ISO 10002:2004, 3.2]
NOTE Complaints can be made in relation to the dispute (3.6) resolution process.

3.4 customer organization (3.8) or person that receives a product
EXAMPLE NOTE 1 NOTE 2 NOTE 3 Consumer, client, end-user, retailer, beneficiary or purchaser. A customer can be internal or external to the organization. For the purposes of this International Standard, the term "customer" includes potential customers. Adapted from ISO 9000:2005, 3.3.5.

3.5 customer satisfaction customer's (3.4) perception of the degree to which the customer's requirements have been fulfilled
NOTE 1 Customer complaints (3.3) are a common indicator of low customer satisfaction but their absence does not necessarily imply high customer satisfaction. NOTE 2 Even when customer requirements have been agreed with the customer and fulfilled, this does not necessarily ensure high customer satisfaction.

[ISO 9000:2005, 3.1.4]

2

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

3.6 dispute dispute resolution disagreement, arising from a complaint (3.3), submitted to a provider (3.9)
NOTE Some organizations (3.8) allow their customers (3.4) to express their dissatisfaction to a provider in the first instance. In this situation, the expression of dissatisfaction becomes a complaint when sent to the organization for a response, and becomes a dispute if not resolved by the organization without provider intervention. Many organizations prefer their customers to first express any dissatisfaction to the organization before utilizing dispute resolution external to the organization.

3.7 dispute resolver individual assigned by a provider (3.9) to assist the parties in resolving a dispute (3.6)
NOTE Dispute resolvers can be staff, volunteer or contract individuals.

3.8 organization group of people and facilities with an arrangement of responsibilities, authorities and relationships
EXAMPLE Company, corporation, firm, enterprise, institution, charity, sole trader, association (3.1), or parts or combination thereof. NOTE 1 This International Standard pertains to different types of organizations, each with very different roles in the dispute (3.6) resolution process. They include organizations that have unresolved complaints (3.3), providers (3.9) of dispute resolution, and associations (3.1) that provide or sponsor dispute-resolution processes. For convenience, in this International Standard, the term "organization" used alone means the entity against which an unresolved complaint has been made and that is now or can be in the future a party to a dispute. The terms "provider" and "association" are used to describe the other types of organizations. NOTE 2 Adapted from ISO 9000:2005, 3.3.1.

3.9 provider dispute resolution person or organization (3.8) that supplies and operates a dispute (3.6) resolution process, external to the organization
NOTE 1 In general, a provider is a legal entity, separate from the organization and the complainant (3.2). In this way, the attributes of independence and fairness are emphasized (see 4.5). In some situations, a separate unit is established within the organization to handle unresolved complaints (3.3). This International Standard is not intended for that situation, but it can be useful. NOTE 2 The provider contracts with the parties to provide dispute resolution, and is accountable for performance. The provider supplies dispute resolvers. The provider also utilizes support, executive and other staff to supply financial resources, clerical support, scheduling assistance, training, meeting rooms, supervision and similar functions. NOTE 3 Providers can take many forms, including not-for-profit, for-profit and public entities. An association (3.1) can also be a provider.

4
4.1

Guiding principles
General

The foundation of effective and efficient dispute resolution is based on adherence to the guiding principles set out in 4.2 to 4.12.

3

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

4.2

Consent to participate

Participation of the complainants in dispute resolution offered by an organization should be voluntary. Consent to participate should be based on full knowledge and understanding of the process and possible outcomes. When the customer is an individual purchasing or using products for personal or household purposes, consent to participate should not be a required condition for receiving them (see Annex C)
NOTE 1 NOTE 2 world. Consent to participate in dispute resolution can be a required condition in business-to-business contracts. Consent to participate can be subject to different statutory and regulatory requirements in different parts of the

4.3

Accessibility

A dispute-resolution process should be easy to find and use (see Annex D).

4.4

Suitability

The type of dispute-resolution method offered to parties to a dispute (see Annex A) and the potential remedies available to a complainant should be suitable to the nature of the dispute (see Annex E).

4.5

Fairness

The organization should engage in dispute resolution with the intent of fairly and honestly resolving the dispute with the complainant. The organization should select a provider whose dispute-resolution personnel and dispute resolvers engaged in dispute resolution are impartial and objective, so that processes, recommendations and determinative decisions are fair to both parties and are recognized as being made independently (see Annex F).

4.6

Competence

Organization personnel, providers and dispute resolvers should have the personal attributes, skills, training and experience necessary to discharge their responsibilities in a satisfactory manner (see Annex G).

4.7

Timeliness

Dispute resolution should be delivered as expeditiously as feasible, given the nature of the dispute and of the process used (see Annex H).

4.8

Confidentiality

Personally identifiable information should be kept confidential and protected, unless disclosure is required by law, or consent for disclosure is obtained from the person concerned. Similarly, trade secrets should be kept confidential and protected, unless disclosure is required by law, or consent for disclosure is obtained from the party that has the trade secret.
NOTE 1 Personally identifiable information is information that when associated with an individual can be used to identify him, or her, and is retrievable by the individual's name, address, email address, telephone number or similarly specific identifier. The precise meaning of the term differs around the world. NOTE 2 This principle can be applied through a policy governing the use and disclosure of information obtained during a dispute, and providing notice of that policy to the parties to the dispute. NOTE 3 To encourage the voluntary participation of organizations in dispute resolution, it is sometimes necessary to protect the identity of the organization, unless disclosure is required by law.

4

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

4.9

Transparency

Sufficient information about the dispute-resolution process, the provider and its performance should be disclosed to complainants, organizations and the public (see Annex I).
NOTE Transparency refers to information about the dispute-resolution process, the provider and its performance, as opposed to personal information about the complainant and trade secrets of the organization.

4.10 Legality
A dispute-resolution process should be operated in accordance with applicable law and the agreement of the parties.

4.11 Capacity
Sufficient resources should be made available and committed to dispute resolution, and managed effectively and efficiently.

4.12 Continual improvement
Increased effectiveness and efficiency of the dispute-resolution process should be a permanent objective.

5
5.1

Dispute-resolution framework
Commitment

The organization should be committed to an effective and efficient dispute-resolution process that conforms to the organization's dispute-resolution policy (see 5.2). It is particularly important that top management demonstrate and promote this commitment. An unambiguous commitment to dispute resolution can be a useful supplement to the organization's internal complaint handling process, and can allow both personnel and complainants to contribute to the improvement of the organization's processes and products. This commitment should be reflected in the establishment and dissemination of policy and procedures for the resolution of disputes, and by the provision of adequate resources, including training. An organization should also be committed to selecting effective and efficient providers that can deliver dispute resolution consistent with the organization's objectives and process design (see Annex J).
NOTE When the provider is an association, it is advisable that it evaluates its own experience and capacity in the same way an organization would evaluate potential providers.

5.2
5.2.1

Dispute-resolution policy
Policy establishment

Top management should establish a dispute-resolution policy that is clear and unambiguous. That policy should describe under which circumstances the organization will inform customers about the disputeresolution process and offer dispute resolution to complainants (see Annex K). The organization should also determine whether it will require complainants to use the internal complaints-handling process before initiating a dispute-resolution process. The policy should be made available to all relevant personnel, complainants, customers and other interested parties. The policy should be supported by procedures and objectives for each function and personnel role included in the process.
NOTE The organization can agree to offer dispute resolution in advance of a dispute arising, or on a case-by-case basis after a dispute has arisen, under criteria set by the organization. An organization can make such a commitment for all cases or only for certain categories of cases. Advance commitments can be made in different ways, such as the commitment in warranties or a customer contract (see Annex C), in advertised "pledges", or agreements with a provider.

5

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

In setting the dispute-resolution policy, the organization should consider:        any relevant statutory and regulatory requirements; financial, operational and organizational needs; the policy's estimated impact on customer satisfaction; the competitive environment; the input of complainants, customers, personnel and other interested parties; quality management processes, customer satisfaction codes of conduct and complaints-handling processes in the organization; alternatives for resolving disputes, such as the courts. Policy review

5.2.2

The policy should be reviewed at regular intervals and updated as necessary. 5.2.3 Policy consistency

The policies related to quality, complaints handling and dispute resolution should be consistent.

5.3

Top management responsibilities

Top management should ensure that:        dispute-resolution policy is communicated within the organization and objectives are established at relevant functions and levels; the dispute-resolution process is planned, designed, developed, operated, maintained and improved in accordance with these objectives; personnel understand the relationship of the dispute-resolution process to the organization's overall customer satisfaction efforts; the organization determines and allocates the resources needed for an effective, fair, lawful and efficient dispute-resolution process, including appropriate training; the dispute-resolution process is promoted and communicated to all appropriate personnel in the organization, and to customers and complainants (see 4.3, 4.9, and Annexes D and I); responsibility and authority for dispute resolution are clearly defined throughout the organization; notification is given rapidly and effectively of any significant complaints about the dispute-resolution process, the organization's representatives in the dispute-resolution process, the provider or any outcome.

6
6.1

Planning, design and development
General

The organization should plan, design and develop an effective and efficient dispute-resolution process. This includes the creation of necessary procedures for the dispute-resolution process.

6

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

6.2

Objectives

The organization should determine the objectives to be achieved by dispute resolution. These objectives should be consistent with the dispute-resolution policy (see 5.2), and their fulfilment should be measurable using suitable performance indicators. These objectives should be reviewed at regular intervals and updated as necessary.

6.3
6.3.1

Activities
Diagnosis

The organization should evaluate its current efforts to resolve complaints and disputes, in order to determine whether additional resources or changes are needed. Such evaluation can consider:      the nature and frequency of complaints and disputes; how disputes are currently dealt with; ways in which the organization is successful and not successful in dealing with disputes; the costs and benefits of success and failure in resolving disputes; the costs and benefits of adopting an external dispute-resolution process. Design

6.3.2

The organization should design the dispute-resolution process based on the analysis of its complaint handling and dispute-resolution activities, resources and dispute-resolution policy. The dispute-resolution process can be linked to, and should be consistent with, other processes of the quality management system of the organization. The design should take into account the best practices of other organizations with regard to dispute resolution, and should involve any providers that it expects to engage in dispute resolution (see Annex L). Factors to be taken into account include:          the principles described in Clause 4; the types of disputes to be resolved (e.g. which categories of customers and complainants, or which products); possible remedies that will be considered; types of dispute-resolution methods to be offered (facilitative, advisory and/or determinative); whether the organization will make an advance commitment to participating in dispute resolution, or make its decisions on a case-by-case basis; qualifications of dispute resolvers; fees, if any, to be charged to complainants (see Annex D); how the parties will participate (e.g. in person, written submission, telephone and/or Internet); the criteria against which the dispute will be evaluated (statutory and regulatory requirements, codes of conduct and/or fairness or equity).
Associations also design dispute-resolution processes for members and others.

NOTE

7

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

6.3.3

Testing

An organization should consider testing the design features of the dispute-resolution process with a subset of complainants before application to the full range of complainants. Testing can be done in a limited geographic area and/or with more than one provider. The results of any testing should be analysed with a view to making improvements to the design features, so that the organization's policy and objectives can best be accomplished.

6.4

Resources

An organization should acquire and deploy resources such as personnel, information, materials, funding and infrastructure, so that the organization can effectively and efficiently     select an appropriate provider, contribute to the proper functioning of the provider, participate in the dispute-resolution process, and evaluate the performance of the provider, its resolvers and the dispute-resolution process.

7
7.1

Operations
General

An organization should apply its procedures for dispute resolution in a fair, efficient and effective manner. Where necessary, the provider and organization should adjust their operational procedures to ensure coordination with respect to dispute initiation, dispute tracking, dispute acknowledgement, initial dispute assessment, dispute resolution (including procedures for gathering relevant evidence), implementation of the resolution and follow-up. A flowchart showing the various steps of dispute resolution is provided in Annex M.

7.2

Complaint referral

An organization should apply the procedure for referring unresolved complaints to the provider. An organization can refer complaints that have been handled and not resolved internally by the organization. Referrals can also be made in situations where complainants inform the organization that they want their complaint to be handled initially by the provider rather than by the organization, and the organization's dispute-resolution policy allows such referrals. The organization should evaluate the complaint against the criteria specified by the organization in its agreement with the provider or in a customer contract. It should refer the complaint to the provider if the complaint meets the criteria. If not, the organization should close the complaint using appropriate closing procedures. The organization should also ensure that it keeps track of all the complaints it refers to the provider, so that all of the complaints are addressed.

7.3

Receipt of dispute notice

When dispute resolution has been initiated, the organization should inform the appropriate personnel. In addition to the individuals responsible for dispute resolution, others who can be informed include those with specific responsibilities for quality assurance, complaints handling, customer service and legal matters.

8

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

7.4
7.4.1

Formulation of the organization's response
Evaluation of dispute

The organization should take the necessary steps to evaluate the dispute. These can include:  obtaining records of the transaction or process that gave rise to the dispute, including sales records or advertising copy (as appropriate), inspection or repair records, any resulting complaints-handling records, and information regarding other complaints (if any) filed by the complainant; consulting with technical, legal, sales, marketing, complaints-handling and other personnel working on behalf of the organization, as appropriate to the dispute.



NOTE It is advisable that an organization keeps transaction, complaint and related records in easily convertible formats, so that the records can be handed over to the provider, dispute resolver and/or other party in an appropriate format.

7.4.2

Development of initial position

After collecting relevant records and needed input, the organization should develop its initial position in the matter with respect to its potential liability and the remedies, if any, it is willing to provide to the complainant. Consistent with the dispute-resolution procedures, the organization should communicate its position to the provider, or directly to the complainant (with a copy to the provider). The initial position can be to    resolve the matter as requested by the complainant, provide some but not all of the remedies requested, or provide none of the remedies requested.

NOTE In dispute resolution, it is not unusual for an organization to decide to offer a complainant one or more remedies that the organization does not believe are required by law, codes of conduct or other bases. The organization can do this as a goodwill gesture, as part of a customer satisfaction policy, or in recognition of the possibility that the dispute resolver, an association administering a code of conduct or a court can view the situation differently.

7.5
7.5.1

Resolution of dispute
Facilitative method

In the facilitative method (see Annex A), after the organization communicates its initial position, the organization should be prepared to receive an offer or counter-offer to settle the matter. The organization can receive such offers either directly from the complainant or through the efforts of the dispute resolver. If the organization receives a proposal for settlement, it should inform appropriate personnel of the complainant's position (see 7.3). The organization can conduct additional evaluation and obtain additional input (see 7.4) regarding the proposed settlement. The organization should decide whether to accept the proposed settlement, to reject it or to make a counter-offer. The organization should inform the complainant and/or the dispute resolver in a manner that is consistent with the provider's procedures. If accepted, the organization should refer the matter to appropriate personnel, such as a legal advisor and those involved with carrying out the resolution (see 7.6). If a resolution is not agreed upon at this stage, the organization should determine what further disputeresolution methods, if any, are appropriate and applicable to the dispute, and inform the provider of its understanding in this respect.

9

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

7.5.2

Advisory and determinative methods

If an advisory or determinative method (see Annex A) is to be used, the organization should schedule and prepare for its participation in the process in an effective and efficient manner. Examples of steps it should take include:           assigning a case administrator; determining the preferred manner of participation consistent with the dispute-resolution procedures (e.g. in person, by telephone, by written material); conducting further investigation, if needed; compiling and organizing the evidence; identifying potential witnesses and documentary evidence; identifying a range of resolutions to the dispute that are acceptable to the organization; determining who has settlement authority in the matter; developing an oral and/or written presentation, as appropriate; assessing the potential for reaching a settlement before the process concludes; participating in the process. Settlement

7.5.3

If the process results in a settlement, the organization should refer the matter to appropriate personnel, such as a legal advisor and those involved with carrying out the resolution (see 7.6). 7.5.4 Acceptance of recommendation

If the process concludes with a recommendation (see Annex A), the organization should give serious consideration to the recommendation and determine whether to accept it. The organization's acceptance or rejection should be communicated to the provider and complainant in accordance with the dispute-resolution procedures and relevant codes of conduct. If accepted by the organization and complainant, the matter should be referred for implementation (see 7.6). If rejected, the organization should communicate its reasons for rejection to the provider and complainant. 7.5.5 Review of determinative decision

If the process concludes with a determinative decision, the organization should decide whether to seek a review of the decision if such a review is available under the dispute-resolution procedures or applicable law. The purpose of this review is to evaluate whether the relevant dispute-resolution principles (see Clause 4) and procedures were followed correctly. If there is no review available, or if the organization decides not to seek such a review, the decision should be referred to appropriate personnel within the organization to ensure that the resolution is carried out (see 7.6).

10

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

7.6

Implementation of resolution

After the dispute is resolved, the organization should take whatever steps are necessary to carry out the resolution in a manner that is consistent with the settlement, recommendation or determinative decision. These steps should include:  determining if any specific actions are required for implementation of the resolution by the organization (e.g. the payment of a refund or other amount, repair of the product, or taking other specific action that has been ordered or agreed upon);
NOTE 1 There can be specific actions the complainant needs to take for the settlement, recommendation or determinative decision to be implemented (e.g. returning the product as a condition of a refund, or bringing the product to a repair facility designated by the organization).



assigning responsibilities for such actions to appropriate personnel within and outside the organization (e.g. customer relations, financial officer, distributors, franchisees, sales and manufacturing) and informing this personnel of applicable deadlines or expected implementation time frames, as appropriate; coordinating the implementation of the resolution among responsible personnel, the complainant and others, and monitoring the progress of implementation of the resolution by each; confirming necessary actions have been completed; notifying the provider when implementation of the resolution has been completed or, if implementation is delayed, with reasons for such delay; determining the complainant's satisfaction with implementation of the resolution and closing the dispute if the complainant is satisfied, and determining what, if any, additional action is needed if the complainant is not satisfied with implementation of the resolution.
NOTE 2 Additional action can include further steps to ensure implementation of the resolution, or a resumption of the dispute-resolution process.

   

7.7

Closing the file

When the resolution of the dispute has been satisfactorily implemented, or if the process concludes without redress, the organization may close its file on the dispute and inform appropriate personnel within and outside the organization. Records of the dispute should be maintained consistent with the organization's record retention policy and applicable legal requirements.

8
8.1

Maintenance and improvement
Monitoring

The organization should collect and record information on the nature, progress and results of all disputes. The organization can maintain its own dispute-resolution data or use data obtained from the provider.

8.2

Analysis and evaluation

The organization should regularly analyse the dispute-resolution information that it collects or obtains to identify systemic and unique problems and trends in the organization's products, customer satisfaction efforts, complaints-handling and dispute-resolution procedures, representation in dispute resolution, and provider selection.

11

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

8.3
8.3.1

Management review
General

Top management should regularly review the organization's dispute-resolution process to     maintain the suitability, adequacy, effectiveness and efficiency of the dispute-resolution process, deal with instances of serious non-compliance with settlements, recommendations and determinative decisions made in dispute resolution, identify and correct deficiencies in the organization's representation in the dispute-resolution process, and assess opportunities for improvement to processes, products and customer satisfaction efforts. Input

8.3.2

Management reviews should consider information related to dispute resolution on       internal factors, e.g. changes in policy, objectives, organizational structure, available resources, processes and products offered, external factors, e.g. changes in legislation, practices of competitors or technological innovations, the overall performance of the dispute-resolution process, results of assessments of the provider's methods, status of preventive and corrective actions, and actions decided at previous reviews.

NOTE The information on the overall performance of the dispute-resolution process could include effectiveness, efficiency, customer confidence in the organization, customer satisfaction, percentage of complaints resolved, costs (including in comparison to potential court costs), and the results of the continual evaluation of the provider.

8.3.3

Output

The output from management reviews should include decisions on such matters as:    improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency of the dispute-resolution, complaints-handling and other processes, and in products; competence, performance and suitability of the current dispute-resolution provider; dealing with identified organizational needs and deficiencies (e.g. training programmes) related to dispute resolution.

Records of management reviews should be established and maintained.

8.4

Continual improvement

The organization should continually improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the dispute-resolution process. This can be achieved through preventive and corrective actions and innovative improvements. The organization should take action to eliminate the causes of existing and potential problems leading to complaints, in order to prevent recurrence and occurrence, respectively.

12

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

The organization should:      explore, identify and apply best practices in the dispute-resolution process; foster a customer-focused approach within the organization; encourage innovation in the development of dispute resolution; inform those responsible for developing the dispute-resolution process of any problems in the process; recognize instances where dispute resolution was provided in an exemplary manner.

NOTE For additional guidance on a generic methodology for continual improvement, organizations can refer to ISO 9004:2000, Annex B.

13

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex A (informative) Guidance on dispute-resolution methods

A.1 General
The terminology used to describe the different types of dispute-resolution methods varies throughout the world 1). The same term is sometimes used to describe a particular method in one country, and to describe a different method in another country. To avoid terms that are used inconsistently, this International Standard uses the function-based terms "facilitative", "advisory" and "determinative" to describe the various methods. This annex provides guidance on important characteristics of the different methods, and identifies different terminology used around the world to describe those methods.

A.2 Facilitative method
A facilitative method is one in which the parties receive assistance in reaching an agreement on the resolution of the dispute. In general, no particular outcome is recommended by the dispute resolver. No determination of an outcome is made. Facilitative methods can range from passive to active. The more passive method is one in which assistance from the provider's personnel is limited to helping the parties in their communications. Such assistance can involve the use of a provider's software technology, such as an online dispute-resolution platform that is Internet-based. In a passive method, the provider's personnel or technology only transmits the parties' positions and proposed solutions and incorporates and records any agreement, which can then be enforceable as a contract. Such facilitation is often called conciliation or assisted negotiation. In some parts of the world, however, the more passive method is called mediation. The more active method entails the active participation of a dispute resolver intended to assist the parties to identify the issues, to generate options, to consider alternatives and to endeavour to reach an agreement, which can be enforceable as a contract. This more active facilitative method is often called mediation. In some parts of the world, however, the more active method is called conciliation. The dispute resolver using an active facilitative method is sometimes called a facilitator, conciliator, mediator or neutral.

A.3 Advisory method
An advisory method is one in which the parties are given suggestions on how factual, legal and other issues should be resolved, on possible outcomes and how they can be achieved and, in some cases, recommendations. This type of method is sometimes called non-binding arbitration, evaluation or "mini-trial ". Adherence by an organization to the recommendation of an advisory process, even though not legally binding, is sometimes taken into account in determining whether a code of conduct to which the organization has committed has been satisfied (see ISO 10001). The dispute resolver using an advisory method can be called an adviser, arbitrator, panel, evaluator, neutral or ombudsman.

1)

National standards bodies can supplement this annex with one containing terminology used in the nation concerned.

14

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

A.4 Determinative method
A determinative method is one in which the dispute is evaluated, factual issues are resolved and sometimes documented, and a decision is given on how the dispute should be resolved. This method is legally binding on the parties and enforceable in court: a) b) c) in the absence of further action by either party; or if accepted within a certain period of time, by the complainant; or if not rejected within a certain period of time, by either party.

NOTE 1 The situation described in bullet a) is typically referred to as (binding) arbitration or evaluation; the situations described in bullets b) and c) are sometimes referred to as conditionally binding arbitration or evaluation. NOTE 2 As indicated elsewhere, in some parts of the world it is not permitted to bind some complainants legally.

The dispute resolver using a determinative method can be called an adviser, arbitrator, panel, evaluator, neutral or ombudsman.
NOTE 3 In some parts of the world, the same dispute resolver can conduct more than one method of dispute resolution in the same dispute, e.g. a facilitator can move from active facilitation to providing advice (at that time becoming an adviser) if the complainant has not been satisfied in the facilitative process. Similarly, a facilitator can render a decision if the facilitative process has not resolved the case. In other parts of the world, statutory or regulatory requirements do not allow the dispute resolver to conduct more than one type of dispute-resolution process in the same dispute.

15

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex B (informative) Inter-relationship of ISO 10001, ISO 10002 and ISO 10003

Figure B.1 illustrates the organization's processes related to code of conduct, complaint handling and external dispute resolution.
NOTE A complaint can be initiated by a customer or another complainant.

Figure B.1 -- Inter-relationship of ISO 10001, ISO 10002 and ISO 10003

16

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex C (normative) Guidance on consent to participate

C.1 General
Participation of complainants in dispute resolution offered by an organization should be voluntary. Consent to participate should be based on full knowledge and understanding of the process and possible outcomes. When the customer is an individual purchasing or using goods, property or services for personal or household purposes, consent to participate should not be a required condition for receiving the product. Voluntary consent to participate is based on both the parties' full knowledge and understanding of the process and possible outcomes. There are two significant issues regarding consent to participate:   what information should be provided to the customer and complainant so that consent to participate is based on full knowledge and understanding (see C.2); when is it appropriate to obtain consent to participate (see C.3 regarding consent to participate before the dispute arises; see C.4 regarding consent to participate after the dispute has arisen).

C.2 Information prior to consent to participate
Information about dispute resolution provided to customers and complainants prior to consent to participate should include:           the method(s) of dispute resolution used; the scope of authority of the provider; the fees, if any, complainants will have to pay; possible types of remedies, maximum compensation that can be awarded and possible reimbursement for expenses that have been incurred in dispute resolution; the criteria against which the dispute will be evaluated (e.g. codes of conduct, legal principles, equity); significant differences from court procedures; a statement of the precise dispute or type(s) of dispute to which the consent to participate applies; the name of the provider, how to access the process and how to obtain a copy of the applicable disputeresolution procedures; expected time frames for the completion of each different method; whether the complainant will be giving up the right to go to court if not satisfied with the determinative decision.
In some parts of the world, asking the complainant to give up the right to go to court is not lawful.

NOTE

17

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

C.3 Consent to participate prior to the dispute arising
A condition in a sales contract sometimes requires a customer to use binding dispute resolution and to give up his right to use the courts. This is frequently included in contracts between organizations. In some parts of the world, this type of contract is unlawful, where the customer purchases the product for personal or household purposes. Organizations wishing to enhance customer satisfaction can consider other dispute-resolution techniques that can achieve many of the benefits of pre-dispute clauses, but which do not require the parties to give up their right to use the court system. These other techniques include:     facilitative methods that aim to achieve voluntary resolution by the parties; methods that result in recommendations that become binding if both parties agree; determinative methods that are binding only when the complainant accepts the decision; agreements to participate in dispute resolution made after the dispute arises.

C.4 Consent to participate after the dispute arises
Where consent to participate in determinative dispute resolution is obtained after a dispute arises, the parties should sign an agreement to participate, which should contain a description of the dispute to be submitted to the dispute-resolution process, the name of the provider and how to obtain a copy of the applicable disputeresolution procedures, and the scope of the dispute resolver's authority.

18

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex D (normative) Guidance on accessibility

D.1 General
A dispute-resolution process should be easy to find and use. Accessibility to dispute resolution depends on effective communications and promotion regarding the availability of the process, affordable costs for using the process, and absence of barriers to invoking and participating in the process. D.2 to D.7 give examples of different ways of making the dispute-resolution process reasonably accessible.

D.2 Communication
The availability of dispute resolution should be communicated widely to complainants, other customers and other relevant interested parties. Information and assistance should be made available in whatever languages or formats are used in the information pertaining to the products when offered or delivered. Information should be written in clear and unambiguous language, and it should be available in alternative formats, such as audio, large print, large raised letters, Braille, by email or on an accessible website.
NOTE An alternative format describes a different presentation or representation intended to make information accessible through a different modality or sensory ability. By providing all input and all output (i.e. information and functions) in at least one alternative format (e.g. visual and tactile), more people, including some with language/literacy problems, can be helped. Presentation factors that can affect legibility and ease of understanding include     layout, print colour and contrast, size and style of font and symbols, and the choice and use of multiple languages.

See ISO/IEC Guide 37.

Communications can be made by an organization at various times, such as at the point of sale and at the time a complaint is filed with the organization. As a minimum, the organization should communicate at the end of unsuccessful internal complaint handling processes. These communications are most effective if placed in multiple locations, such as in customer satisfaction codes of conduct, on store displays, websites, complaint forms, sales contracts and documents ending an internal complaint handling process.

D.3 Fees
Providing dispute resolution to customers at no cost, or at a cost that is reasonable given the value of the dispute, should result in an affordable process.

19

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

D.4 Invoking process and participation
Unsatisfied complainants should be given an opportunity to invoke and participate in the dispute-resolution process in as many ways as is reasonably possible. Telephone, mail, fax or online submissions are all valuable methods that should be considered. The methods selected should be convenient for case filings, accessing case information or obtaining answers to questions. In cross-border dispute resolution and other circumstances where the organization and the complainant reside at great distance from each other, it is especially important that methods of dispute resolution are used that facilitate participation without requiring travel.

D.5 Information
Easy-to-understand and complete forms for initiation of dispute resolution, and other literature that describe the dispute-resolution process and explain how parties can best participate, should be made available. Information and forms should be provided in the same languages as those used to market the products.

D.6 Trained personnel
Trained personnel and other resources to assist all parties with any aspect of the dispute-resolution process, including filing a dispute, presentation of the case and explanation of the scope of the process, should be available. The assistance provided should also consider the needs of persons with disabilities or other special needs, so that they can participate effectively.

D.7 Informality
The process should be kept as informal as appropriate to the circumstances of the dispute. Formal rules, as applied in a court of law, need not be followed. The parties should be allowed to present their own positions, arguments and evidence and to hear or see the substantive part of those of the other party, although a dispute resolver can limit the evidence, if it is irrelevant or repetitive. Parties should be allowed to be represented or assisted by any person of their choice, unless local law would not allow such representation. The provider should confirm that the choice has been made voluntarily. It is also helpful for a represented party to appear personally during the process, as that usually results in the best evidence being presented and assures that someone with the authority to settle the dispute is available. Presentations can be made in person, by telephone or other electronic communication, or in writing. The parties should be given flexibility in the manner of their presentation.

20

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex E (normative) Guidance on suitability

E.1 General
The type of dispute-resolution method offered to parties to a dispute, and the potential remedies available to a complainant, should be suitable to the nature of the dispute.

E.2 Suitability of methods
Organizations can choose to offer complainants one or more types of dispute-resolution methods, depending on such factors as:               organizational needs and circumstances; customer preferences; provider recommendations; the likely duration of dispute resolution; costs; the complexity of the issues; the need for confidentiality; the desire or need for a continuing relationship between the parties; relative bargaining strengths of the parties; the need for flexible outcomes; the need for a decision or findings on conflicting evidence; the need for external enforcement; the need for technical or other experts and the importance of legal issues; the need for public scrutiny of the outcome.

A provider that offers a facilitative method in accordance with the organization's dispute-resolution policy should generally offer that method as a preferred means of resolving a dispute. Facilitative methods are very often faster, less expensive and less adversarial. If facilitative methods do not resolve the dispute and the organization has chosen to make other dispute-resolution methods available, these other methods should be offered.

21

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

E.3 Suitability of remedies
The organization should authorize the provider to award remedies at least sufficient to compensate for the problem that created the complaint. Remedies that should be considered and offered, if appropriate, include     repair of a product, refund of a product's cost, rescission of the contract of sale, and a directive to one of the parties to take specific action to rectify the problem.

Additional remedies can be permitted or required by local law, e.g. lawyer's and other representative's fees, related damages and other damages.

22

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex F (normative) Guidance on fairness

The organization should engage in dispute resolution with the intent of fairly and honestly resolving the dispute with the complainant. The organization should select a provider whose dispute-resolution personnel and dispute resolvers engaged in dispute resolution are impartial and objective, so that processes, recommendations and determinative decisions are fair to both parties and are recognized as being made independently. Dispute resolvers and dispute-resolution personnel should be insulated from influence by parties at all times in the process, so that their efforts to determine eligibility and to reach a resolution of a dispute are the result of independent judgment. Impartiality, objectivity and fairness can be best achieved by a combination of activities.
NOTE 1 In most private sector "business-to-customer" dispute-resolution schemes, funding comes from an association and/or the business party to a particular dispute. This funding can represent all or a substantial part of the cost of the process. In addition, an association providing or endorsing a dispute-resolution process is likely to be governed by members, who can from time to time be parties to dispute resolution under the scheme. This "fairness" principle is intended to assure that efforts to resolve any dispute are not influenced by these financial or membership relationships. NOTE 2 The term "dispute-resolution personnel" is used in recognition of the fact that a provider is likely to have executive level personnel not engaged in dispute resolution (e.g. the chief executive officer, chief operations officer or chief financial officer), but who negotiate contracts and engage in other relationships with business participants that are unrelated to the handling of any dispute. The fairness and independent judgment requirement is pertinent to the resolution of particular disputes.

Fairness can be best achieved by a combination of activities, such as the following:  applying advisory or determinative methods according to published procedures that are made available to the parties prior to initiation of any process; such procedures and their application should provide all parties with full, fair and equivalent opportunities to participate in any methods, and should ensure that any recommendations or decisions are based on the evidence and arguments presented to the dispute resolver; adopting conflict of interest policies and ethical codes for personnel and dispute resolvers, and only assigning dispute resolvers to a dispute-resolution process where they can be expected to be objective; a dispute resolver's personal feelings, opinions or interests should not influence his/her conduct, e.g. if a dispute resolver is employed by one party to a dispute, this can affect the ability of the dispute resolver to maintain objectivity; assuring that compensation (if any) of dispute resolvers is not affected by the nature of particular settlements, recommendations, or determinative decisions; not relieving dispute resolvers of duties without just cause; assigning dispute resolvers in a way that minimizes repeated service with any particular party; when a provider is funded in whole or part by an organization that is a party to the dispute, assuring that funding considerations do not influence the resolution of particular disputes; disclosing to the parties the identity of the dispute resolver selected to resolve a dispute, along with any relationship the dispute resolver has with either party that can reasonably be perceived as affecting impartiality; the parties should be allowed an opportunity to challenge the selection of any dispute resolver for good cause;



  




23

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007
     making available to complainants the services of technical experts (including legal experts), where appropriate and necessary for the fair resolution of the dispute; where allowed by local law, providing for compulsion of testimony in an application of a determinative method, when needed for the fair resolution of a dispute; clearly communicating to the parties the dispute resolver's scope of authority and assuring that any recommendation or determinative decision is within the scope of that authority; disclosing to the parties in advance the criteria used for recommendations or determinative decisions; communicating in plain language and in writing the recommendation or decision, and its rationale, to the organization and complainant, with sufficient detail so that it can be effectively implemented;
NOTE 3 When not contrary to applicable law, determinative decisions can be based on legal principles, equity, codes of conduct, or a combination of these.

 

where a recommendation for settlement is accepted by the parties, documenting it in writing so that it is enforceable under applicable law; determining whether the parties have complied with any settlement or determinative decision.

24

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex G (normative) Guidance on competence

G.1 General
Organization personnel, providers and dispute resolvers should have the personal attributes, skills, training and experience necessary to discharge their responsibilities in a satisfactory manner. These should be maintained and improved through means such as additional work experience, continual training including supervision, and periodic re-evaluation. Competence can be assured through a number of techniques. These are set out below.

G.2 Qualifications
Qualifications for personnel and dispute resolvers should be established such that they ensure the skill level appropriate to the disputes to be heard by the provider, and they emphasize diligence and honesty as important qualifications.

G.3 Training
Training should be provided to personnel and dispute resolvers in required knowledge and skills, e.g.      any applicable eligibility requirements pertinent to disputes to be heard by the provider; the importance of fairness and methods to achieve it; the techniques available to assist the parties; the policies and procedures applicable to the conduct of each method of dispute resolution in which they will engage; any applicable legal principles, codes of conduct or principles of equity that apply in a dispute.

NOTE Depending on the type of disputes to be heard, the bases of recommendations or determinative decisions, and the preferences of the organization, formal legal training and professional licensing of dispute resolvers, is not always necessary, unless required by local law.

G.4 Periodic evaluation
Periodic evaluation of the performance and qualifications of dispute resolvers, and of the criteria established by the provider for dispute resolvers' qualifications, should be undertaken.
NOTE Additional guidance concerning the competence of personnel is provided in ISO 10015.

25

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex H (normative) Guidance on timeliness

Dispute resolution should be delivered as expeditiously as feasible given the nature of the dispute and the nature of the process used. In applying this principle, it is helpful to establish expected time frames for the completion of each different method offered, and to communicate them to all relevant parties. Time frames should be sufficiently flexible to take account of the differences in the complexity of disputes and the different needs of parties in a particular dispute. Time frames can be affected by applicable legal requirements. The parties and the provider share accountability for compliance with established time frames. It is also helpful if the progress of the dispute is tracked and the parties are informed of the progress, or such tracking information is made available to the parties and to the dispute resolvers. Timeliness is also important when the parties are entitled to use judicial procedures or the methods of another provider within a certain time period. If the dispute-resolution process is prolonged, the ability to file a case in court could be impeded. Timeliness can be best achieved when the organization's representative in a disputeresolution process is either vested with clearly defined authority to settle disputes, or can quickly obtain authorization from others in the organization.

26

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex I (normative) Guidance on transparency

I.1 General
Sufficient information about the dispute-resolution process, the provider and its performance should be disclosed to complainants, organizations and the public. Organizations should ensure that this information is made available to all interested parties.

I.2 Information about process, methods and performance
Useful information about the provider's services and performance can include:           complete contact information for the provider; types of disputes handled and types of methods provided; the manner in which particular methods of dispute resolution can be initiated, including any fees imposed; the manner of participation by the parties (in person or by telephone, by mail or online); the manner of qualifying, selecting and challenging the qualifications and impartiality of dispute resolvers; bases for deciding disputes (e.g. law, equity, codes of conduct) and available remedies; time frames that will be observed; identification of the steps leading to the enforcement of a determinative decision or award; the policy as to confidentiality; whether a provider receives funding from the organization that is a party to a dispute, and what safeguards are in place to ensure that this funding does not affect particular settlements, recommendations or determinative decisions.

I.3 Annual report
Organizations should recognize that publication of a provider's annual report can give a meaningful evaluation of a provider and its performance. The annual report can include:  the number of disputes received, the number resolved and not resolved in each dispute-resolution method, and the number of recommendations or determinative decisions providing all, some or none of the relief requested; the timeliness of case resolutions; identification of systemic problems identified through the dispute-resolution process.

 

Published data should not be identified with a particular organization unless it agrees.

27

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

I.4 Publication of individual dispute-resolution results
In appropriate circumstances (e.g. the case volume is low and the educational benefit is high) and whilst preserving the promised confidentiality, the text of individual dispute-resolution results (recommendations, determinative decisions, settlements or related information) can be published if all parties agree.

28

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex J (informative) Guidance on selecting providers

Factors that should be considered by an organization when selecting a provider include:               whether, in the estimation of the organization, the provider has chosen to use this International Standard or any other relevant dispute-resolution standard; the provider's reputation with the organization's customers, consumer and industry associations, the media and consumer protection agencies of government; where available, results obtained from independent evaluations, management reviews or customer surveys that can show trends (e.g. in performance); recommendations from other organizations which have used a provider's services; the extent to which the provider and its methods are consistent with the organization's values; the provider's experience, the provider's financial condition, and the likelihood that it can meet its obligations to the organization and the organization's complainants; whether the provider's methods can be coordinated with the organization's complaints-handling and other operational processes, including the use of technology for information exchange; the extent to which the provider's procedures meet the organization`s needs, including how the cases can be presented to the dispute resolver (e.g. orally or in writing); the extent to which the dispute-resolution methods offered by the provider facilitate early resolution of disputes; direct and indirect costs to the organization and its complainants; the extent to which the provider has adequate resources to receive, track and resolve the types and volume of disputes that it has agreed to handle; whether the provider employs, or has access to, a sufficient number of adequately trained dispute resolvers and technical experts (including legal experts); whether the provider has the means to handle disputes where the organization and complainant reside at great distance from each other, such as in cross-border situations; whether the provider has processes in place to monitor, evaluate and continually improve its disputeresolution services.

29

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex K (informative) Guidance on dispute-resolution policy

K.1 Making advance commitment
In determining whether to make an advance commitment to dispute resolution, an organization should consider the value of this advance commitment to the organization's overall customer satisfaction efforts, and to other policies and objectives of the organization. The organization should consider factors such as:         the possible enhancement of the organization's overall reputation; any statutory and regulatory requirements or incentives; any requirements or incentives to participate in an association's dispute-resolution programme; the utility to the organization's quality and improvement processes of the provider's statistical reporting data; the possible advantage of an advance commitment in encouraging customer willingness to use the process; the typical monetary value of resolutions sought by complainants; the opportunity to reduce costs that can otherwise be incurred in litigation; the number of complaints that are expected to remain unresolved by the organization's internal complaints-handling process.

K.2 Case-by-case participation
If an organization does not make an advance commitment to dispute resolution, it should disseminate to all employees involved with complaints handling the criteria for determining when it will participate in dispute resolution on a case-by-case basis. Such criteria should consider factors such as:     the amount in dispute and other relief sought; any benefits to avoiding court proceedings, such as reduced costs; statutory or regulatory incentives or requirements; the potential impact of not resolving the dispute on the organization's relationship with that customer, and on the organization's overall reputation.

30

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex L (informative) Guidance on elements of design for dispute resolution

There are many designs for dispute resolution, each offering its own advantages and disadvantages. The guiding principles are used in different ways in different designs. These can be established by providers that offer dispute resolution in the marketplace generally, or by providers that are associations or are selected by associations to provide dispute resolution to members and others. Table L.1 is intended to illustrate different elements of dispute-resolution design and is not intended to be comprehensive. Table L.1 -- Guidance on elements of design for dispute resolution
Design elements Examples

What options are available in terms of the provider's legal Industry association; consumer association; non-profit structure? organization; commercial organization; sole proprietor. What types of disputes will be handled by the provider? Non-fulfilment of the warranty, lack of timeliness of delivery, untruthfulness of advertising, breach of contract, product liability. Facilitative, advisory, and/or determinative (binding or nonbinding). Fees from one or both parties; association membership dues; government or charitable grants.

What methods of dispute resolution will be offered? How will dispute resolution be financed?

What methods of dispute resolution will be used in an Facilitation only; determinative decision only; facilitation individual dispute? followed by determinative decision, if needed. What will be the qualifications of dispute resolvers? How will independence be achieved? Must undergo 40 hours of training; must have 10 years of relevant experience; must be lawyers. Ethical code; balanced multi-stakeholder governing body; dispute resolvers not employed by the provider; dispute resolvers insulated from other provider personnel. Strict application of legal principles; application of code of conduct; and/or equity. Decisions in 60 days; facilitation will be attempted for 40 days before decision. In person; by telephone; by written submissions; online.

What criteria will be used for dispute-resolution decisions? In what time frames will disputes be resolved? In what form will dispute resolution be accessible?

31

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Annex M (informative) Dispute-resolution flowchart

Figure M.1 illustrates the various steps of dispute resolution.

32

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

a

A complainant can exercise his/her rights to go outside the dispute-resolution process at any time and at any stage. This can be subject to restrictions depending on the circumstances (for example, in business-to-business contexts).

Figure M.1 -- Dispute-resolution flowchart

33

IS/ISO 10003 : 2007

Bibliography

[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]

ISO 9001, Quality management systems -- Requirements ISO 9004:2000, Quality management systems -- Guidelines for performance improvements ISO 10001, Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for codes of conduct for organizations ISO 10002:2004, Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations ISO 10015, Quality management -- Guidelines for training ISO/IEC Guide 37, Instructions for use of products of consumer interest

34

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of the these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard alongwith amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 2 (318). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telephones 2323 7617 2323 3841 2337 8499, 2337 8561 2337 8626, 2337 9120 260 3843 260 9285 2254 1216, 2254 1442 2254 2519, 2254 2315 2832 9295, 2832 7858 2832 7891, 2832 7892

Eastern

:

Northern

:

Southern

:

C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western

:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

:

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Published by BIS, New Delhi

