***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 1448-93 (1979) : Methods of test for petroleum and its 
products. Part 93: Needle penetration of petroleum waxes 
[PCD 1: Methods of Measurement and Test for Petroleum, 
Petroleum Products and Lubricants] 



.^^llli^=ac^^fc^ll f fm^>N:>;»gaTCAaiiTgs 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:^>^ifi^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1448 [ P : 93 ] -1979 

Adopted : 16 November 1979 
( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 
PETROLEUM AND ITS PRODUCTS 

[ P : 93 ] 
NEEDLE PENETRATION OF PETROLEUM WAXES 

UDG 665*772: 620* 179- 11 105 
Adapted from ASTM Designation : D 1321-76 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard describes a method for the empirical estimation of the 
consistency of waxes derived from petroleum by measurement of the 
extent of penetration of a standard needle. This method is applicable to 
waxes having a penetration of not greater than 250. 

2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

2.1 The sample is melted, heated to 20^G above its congealing point, 
poured into a container, and then air cooled under controlled conditions. 
The sample then is conditioned at test temperature in a water bath. 
Penetration is measured with a penetrometer, which applies a standard 
needle to the sample for 5 seconds under a load of 100 g. 

3. SIGNIFICANCE 

3.1 Petroleum waxes differ in hardness. Needle penetration is a measure- 
ment of hardness. Hardness may have a significant effect upon other 
physical properties. 

© Copyright 1980 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAE MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1980 




IS : 144a [ P : 93 ] . 1979 

4, DFFINITION 

4.1 Penetration of Petroleum Wax — The depth, in tenths of a milli- 
metre, to which a standard needle penetrates into the wax under defined 
conditions. 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Penetrometer — For applying the standard needle to the surface of 
the sample specimen and for measuring the extent of penetration at the 
conclusion of the test. The penetrometer shall be constructed in such a 
manner that the accurate placement of the tip of the needle at the level 
surface of the specimen may be made while maintaining a * zero * reading 
on the indicator. The apparatus shown in Fig. 1 represents a composite 
drawing illustrating the two available types of instrument, one with an 
adjustable table and the other with an adjustable needle assembly; the use 
of either type instrument is permissible. The loaded neddle shall fall, 
when released without appreciable friction. The instrument shall be 
provided with levelling screws and a spirit level to maintain the plunger 
shaft in a true vertical position. The indicator scale shall be calibrated 
in tenths of a millimetre divisions and shall have a range of at least 250 
tenths of millimetres. 

5.2 Timing Device — An automatic timing release mechanism attached 
to the penetrometer may be used. Alternatively, a stop watch graduated 
in O'l second intervals may be used. 

5.3 Needle and Plunger — The needle shall be approximately 83 mm 
in length and conform to the dimensions shown in Fig. 2. It shall be 
symmetrically tapered at one end to a cone whose angle shall be within 
the range from 8 deg 55 min to 9 deg 25 min over the entire length of 
the cone. The axis of the cone shall be coincident with the shaft axis 
within 0-125 mm maximum runout (total indicator reading). The 
tapered section of the needle shall be made from fully hardened and 
tempered stainless steel, Grade 440-G or equal, Rockwell hardness G 57 
to 60. After tapering, the point shall be ground off to a truncated cone, 
the smaller base of which shall be from 0*14 to 0*16 mm in diameter. The 
truncation shall be square with the needle axis within 2 deg and the edge 
shall be sharp and free from burrs. The conical surface and the trunca- 
tion shall be finished to a smoothness of 180 nm {Ra), The final mass 
of the needle shall be 2*5 + 0*05 g. The total mass of the plunger shall 
be 47'5 rb 005 g; a mass of 50 ± 0'05 g is required for mounting on the 
plunger { see Note ), 

Note — Penetration needles shall be tested for conformity with these permis- 
sible variations by a qualified testing agency. 



IS:1448[P :93].1979 



CENTERING 
OEVICe 




Fig. 1 Penetrometer 
3 



IS : 1448 [ P : 93 ] . 1979 




^ O.U TO 0,16 




Shaft drilled out and length adjusted to give final mass of 2*5 ± 005 g 
All dimensions in mi Hi metres. 

Fig. 2 Needle for Penetration Test 

5.4 Test Specimen Container — consisting of a brass cylinder open at 
both ends, having a 25 mm inside diameter, 32 mm height, and 3 mm 
wall thickness. To prevent slippage of very hard wax, a few screw threads 
or grooves shall be cut into the centre part of the inside wall of the 
cylinder. The cylinder shall be placed on a base plate of brass, wetted 
with an equal volume mixture of glycerine and water, when casting a 
test specimen. 

5.5 Test Room or Cabinet — capable of being maintained at 
25 ± 2"G. 

5.6 Water Bath — > of at least 10 litres capacity capable of being main- 
tained at the test temperature within i 0*1°G ( see Note under 7.2 ). The 
water bath shall be made of glass or have a window to permit a hori- 
zontal view of the specimen. It shall be possible to immerse the test 
specimen in the bath to a depth of not less than 100 mm and to support 
it on a perforated conditioning shelf not less than 50 mm from the bottom 
of the bath. The bath also shall be equipped with a rigid perforated test 
shelf about 50 mm below the water level to support the specimen during 
the penetration by the needle. 

5.7 Thermometer — total immersion type conforming to the following 
specification: 

Range 25 to 55°G 

Graduation 0*1°G 

Longer lines at each Q-5*'C 





IS : 1448 [ P : 93 ] 


Figured at each 


rc 


Scale error not to exceed 


o-rc 


Expansion chamber to allow 


105°G 


heating to 




Overall length 


379 ± 5 mm 


Stem diameter 


7 to 8 mm 


Bulb length 


25 to 35 mm 


Bulb diameter 


6 to 7 mm 


Distance from bottom of bulb 


115 to 135 mm 


to line at 25^G 




Distance from bottom of bulb 


324 to 344 mm 


to line at 55°C 




Ice point range 


- 0-5 to + 0'5^G 


Distance from bottom of bulb 


60 to 70 mm 


to ice point 




Distance to bottom of contraction 


80 mm ( Min ) 


chamber 




Distance to top of contraction 


\00 mm {Max) 



1979 



chamber 

5,8 Brass Plate — 65 x 40 X ^'^ mm for supporting test specimen 
during preparation of the sample. The specimen support is placed on 
corks during the cooling period. 

6. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 

6.1 Heat the wax sample to approximately 20''G above its congealing 
point using care to prevent local overheating. Stir until the sample is 
homogeneous and free from air bubbles. In the test room or cabinet 
maintained at 25 i 2°G, place the brass plate on two corks, and wet the 
upper surface of the plate with a mixture of equal volumes of glycerine and 
water. Place the test specimen container on the plate and then pour the 
melted wax into it in such a way that a convex meniscus is formed. Allow 
the container and contents to cool in the room at 25 ± 2'^G for I hour. 
Then shave any excess wax from the top of the container and remove 
the brass plate. Place the smooth wax surface up. Condition the specimen 
in the bath at the test temperature within ± 0* TC for 1 hour ( see 
Note). 

Note — Very hard waxes occasionally will shrink away from the walls of the 
test specimen container; in such cases, it is permissible to wedge the specimen in 
the container. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Reverse the penetrometer base and place the penetrometer head over 
the edge of the water bath and above the perforated test shelf used for 



IS : 1448 [ P : 93 ] - 1979 

supporting the specimen. It may be necessary to place a mass on the 
base of the penetrometer to counter-balance the head ( see Note ). Level 
the penetrometer and the perforated shelf in the water bath. 

Note — Alternatively, the penetrometer may be placed in the water bath. 
Likewise a small bath may be placed on the penetrometer stand provided the test 
temperature ( within i 1°C ) and the required water circulation above and below 
the test specimen are maintained, and provided further that the temperature of the 
small bath Is measured immediately prior to testing each specimen using the 
thermometer [see 5.7). Emergent stem corrections shall be applied when the 
correction equals or exceeds 0*05°G. One of the above alternatives will be required 
if the penetrometer is the adjustable type. 

7.2 Place the specimen container on the perforated test shelf with the 
smooth wax surface that had contacted the brass plate at the top. Make 
certain that the container or test shelf cannot teeter during testing. Adjust 
the water level so that it is 25 mm above the top surface of the specimen, 
and maintain it at the test temperature ( see Note ). 

Note -^ The usual test temperature is 25^G but any temperature within the 
range of 25 to 55°C may be used, provided that this is stated in the test report. 

7.3 Place a 50 g mass above the penetrometer needle, making a total load 
of 100 ± 0'15 g for the needle and all attachments. Observe that the 
release mechanism does not drag on the shaft and that the indicator on 
the scale is in the ' zero ' position. Adjust either the indicator assembly 
or the table, depending upon the type of instrument, until the tip of the 
needle nearly touches the surface of the specimen. Securely lock the 
movable assembly in this position, 

7.4 Then, by means of the slow-motion adjustment, bring the needle tip 
to just touch the surface of the specimen, watching the reflection of the 
needle tip as an aid to accurate setting. After 5 minutes release the 
needle shaft and hold it free for 5 seconds, timing this interval automati- 
cally or with a stop watch graduated to O'l seconds {see Note). Then 
gently depress the indicator shaft until it is stopped by the needle shaft, 
and read the penetration from the indicator scale. 

Note — If an automatic timing release mechanism is not used, the timing can 
be done conveniently by starting the stop watch before the beginning of the test, 
releasing the needle shaft as the second hand crosses a unit graduation of the watch 
and engaging the shaft of the needle when the watch indicates exactly 5 second 
later. 

7.5 Make four tests at points about equally spaced ( not less than 13 mm 
apart ) on a circumference at least 3 mm from the side of the container. 
Before each test, wipe the needle carefully towards its point with a clean, 
dry cloth to remove all adhering wax, position the needle as described 
in 7.4 and proceed with the test. 



lS:144a[P:93].197d 

a. REPORT 

8,1 Record as a single test value the average scale reading for the four 
penetrations on the prepared specimen and report to the nearest O'l mm. 
Also report the actual test temperature used. 

9. PRECISION 

9.1 Results of the duplicate tests shall not differ by more than the follow- 
ing amounts: 

Hange Repeatability Reproducibility 

to 30 2 units 4 units 

Above 30 8 percent 15 percent 

Note — When comparing two penetration values, the percentage is based on 
the smaller of the two values. 



Printed at New India Priutiug Press. Kburfa, India 



