IS 15974 : 2013 
(Superseding IS 12449 (Part 2) : 1988) 


IRRA HAF 


cel Gh gern aA Suau (Tot RR al 
DSR) — pip ard 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


Indian Standard 


AUXILIARIES FOR LAMPS STARTING DEVICES 
(OTHER THAN GLOW STARTERS) — PERFORMANCE 
REQUIREMENTS 


ICS 91.140.90 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 7 


Electric Lamps and Their Auxiliaries Sectional Committee, ETD, 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electric 
Lamps and Their Auxiliaries Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


This standard covers performance requirements for starting devices (starters and ignitors) for tubular fluorescent 
and other discharge lamps for use on a.c. supplies up to 1 000 V at 50 Hz, which produce starting pulses not 
greater than 5 kV. 


‘Safety requirements are covered in a separate standard IS 15885 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2011 ‘Safety of lamp controlgear: 
Part 2 Particular requirements, Section 1 Starting devices (other than glow starters)’. 


This standard supersedes IS 12449 (Part 2):1988 ‘Starting devices (other than glow starters): Part 2 Performance 
requirements’. After the publication of this standard, IS 12449 (Part 2): 1988 shall be treated as withdrawn 
withdrawn. 


Following changes have been incorporated in this standard with reference to IEC standard: 


a) Cross references have been changed, 
b) BIS certification marking clause has been added, and 
c) Reference temperature changed to 27°C. 


Assistance has been derived from IEC 60927 : 2004 ‘Auxiliaries for lamps—Starting devices (other than glow 
starters) — Performance requirements’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis , shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15974 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


AUXILIARIES FOR LAMPS STARTING DEVICES 
(OTHER THAN GLOW STARTERS) — PERFORMANCE 
REQUIREMENTS 


SECTION 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies performance requirements for 
starting devices (starters and ignitors) for tubular 
fluorescent and other discharge lamps for use on a c 
supplies up to 1 000 V at 50 Hz, which produce starting 
pulses not greater than 5 kV. It should be read in 
conjunction with IS 15885(Part 2/Sec 1) : 2011 ‘Safety 
of lamp controlgear : Part 2 Particular requirements, 
Section | Starting devices (other than glow starters)’. 


NOTES 


1 All glow starters for fluorescent and other discharge 
lamps including thermal relay/cut-outs will be included in 
IS 2215 : 2006 ‘Starters for fluorescent lamps (third revision)’ . 


2 Presently there are no standards regarding the national 
regulation of EMC requirements for end-products like 
luminaires and independent controlgear. In a luminaire, the 
controlgear is dominant in this respect. Compliance to the 
standards and/or regulation as and when available may be 
ensured for controlgear, together with other components. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent additions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


2215 : 2006 Starters for fluorescent lamps (third 
revision) 

Tubular fluorescent lamps for general 
lighting service: Part 2 Standard lamp 
data sheets 


Luminaire: Part 1 General and safety 


2418 (Part 2) : 
1977 


10322 (Part 1): 


1985 requirements 
15687 (Part 2): Single-capped fluorescent lamps: 
2011 Part 2 Performance requirements 
15882 : 2009 Ballasts for discharge lamps 


(excluding tubular fluorescent 
lamps): Performance requirements 
Safety of lamp controlgear: Part 2 
Particular requirements, Section 1 
starting devices collier than glow 
starters 


15885 (Part 2/ 
Sec 1) : 2011 


IS No. Title 


15968 : 2011 Ballast for tubular 
Performance requirements 


lamps: 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


The definitions given in IS 15885 (Part 2/Sec 1) and 
the following shall apply. 


3.1 Starter with Mechanical Switching Element — 
A starter which provides cathode pre-heating current 
and lamp starting pulse(s) by mechanical means (for 
example, thermal or magnetic). 


3.2 Starter with Electronic Switching Element — 
A starter which provides cathode pre-heating current 
and lamp starting voltage(s) or pulse(s) by electronic 
means and contains no moving parts. 


3.3 Deactivated Lamp — A lamp in which one or 
both cathodes are deprived of emitting material but 
neither of which is broken. 


3.4 Non-re-operating Level — A reduced level of 
voltage and/or current at which a starting device must 
not re-operate after the completion of the starting cycle, 
and the lamp is operating normally. 


3.5 Maximum Abnormal Current — The value of 
continuous r.m.s. current through the ballast which shall 
not be exceeded at the end of the starting cycle when 
the circuit is in an abnormal condition (for example, 
deactivated lamp, or lamp that has been removed). 


3.6 Starting Aid — A starting aid can be either a 
conductive strip affixed to the outer surface of a lamp, 
or a conductive plate which is placed within an 
appropriate distance from a lamp. 


A starting aid can only be effective when it has an 
adequate potential difference from one end of the lamp. 


3.7 Maximum Case Temperature (¢, + X) Under 
Abnormal Conditions — Maximum allowable case 
temperature of the ignitor under abnormal conditions 
with metal halide lamps. The value of (t, + X) is 
declared by the manufacturer. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTS 
4.1 General 
Only requirements for type tests are included. 


Unless otherwise specified, the tests shall be made at 


IS 15974 : 2013 


an ambient temperature between 10°C and 30°C. 


The tests shall be carried out in the order of the clauses 
of this standard. 


The following numbers of samples shall be submitted: 


a) Six samples of starters as defined in 3.1 and 
3.2; and 

b) Four samples of ignitors (where appropriate, 
together with those circuit components which 
are necessary to carry out the tests). 


4.2 Supply Voltage 


The total harmonic content of the supply voltage shall 
not exceed 3 percent, the harmonic content being 
defined as the root-mean-square (r.m.s.) summation of 
the individual harmonic components, using the 
fundamental as 100 percent. 


Care shall be taken that this applies under all conditions 

that occur during the measurement. 
NOTE — This implies that the source of supply will have 
sufficient power and that the supply circuit has sufficiently 
low impedance at supply frequency and impulse frequency 
compared with the ballast impedance. The correct impedance 
at impulse frequency can be obtained by connecting a 2 uF 
(approximately) capacitor in parallel with the source. 


4.3 All starting devices specified in this standard shall 
meet the requirements of IS 15885(Part 2/Sec 1). 


4.4 All starting devices specified in this standard shall 
meet the requirements of IS 15885(Part 2/Sec 1). 


NOTE — The requirements for starting devices are under 
consideration in IS 15885 (Part 2/Sec 1). 


5 MARKING 


The marking requirements of IS 15885(Part 2/Sec 1) 
shall apply, together with the following, to be either 
clearly marked on the starting device or made available 
in the manufacturer’s catalogue, or the like: 


a) Manufacturer shall declare the type of 
switching element as defined in 3.land 3.2, 

b) Manufacturer shall declare the maximum load 
capacitance for satisfactory operation of the 
ignitor, and 

c) Manufacturer shall declare the allowable 
maximum case temperature under abnormal 
conditions (t, + X) of the ignitor. 


5.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The ballasts may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


5.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made there under. The 


details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE 
REQUIREMENTS FOR STARTERS 
(OTHER THAN GLOW STARTERS) FOR 
FLUORESCENT LAMPS 


6 GENERAL 


This section specifies performance requirements for 
starters other than glow starters, used with tubular 
fluorescent lamps with pre-heated cathodes, and their 
associated ballasts [see IS 2418 (Part 2) and IS 15687 
(Part 2), where appropriate]. 


7 STARTING TEST 


7.1 Starting Test Quantity 


The starting test quantity consists of six new starters 
which have not been subjected to the tests specified in 
IS 15885 (Part 2/Sec 1). 


7.2 Conditions of Acceptance 


The prototype is considered as satisfying the 
requirements of this sub-clause, if all six starters 
comply with the appropriate tests specified in 7.4 to 7.8. 
If one failure occurs, a further six starters shall be 
selected and tested and all these shall comply. If more 
than one failure occurs the starter is deemed not to 
satisfy the requirements of this clause. 


7.3 Conditions of Test 
7.3.1 Circuit 


The starter is tested in the circuit as declared by the 
manufacturer. 


A starting aid complying with the requirements of 
Table 1 shall be used unless otherwise indicated on the 
starter or in the manufacturer’s literature. 


In case of doubt a choice shall be made by mutual 
agreement between the testing authority and the 
manufacturer. 


7.3.2 Ballast 


The ballast used shall meet the requirements of 
IS 15968, where appropriate. It shall have a rated 
voltage equal to the supply voltage, or equal to the 
lowest value of the supply voltage range for which the 
starter is designed. 


The rated wattage of the ballast shall be chosen to give 
the most onerous starting conditions of the range of 
lamp types for which the starter is designed. In case 


Table 1 Starting Aid Requirements 
(Clause 7.3.1) 


SI Lamp Starting Aid Spacing Length 
No. Diameter Width from Lamp 
mm mm mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 15 25 7 
ii) 25 40 12 Not less 
than lamp 
length 
iii) 38 40 20 
iv) 15/25/38 1.5) 0” 


NOTE — A starting and spaced from the lamp can only be 
effective, if the outer surface of the lamp is treated to be net- 
wetting. 


Strip affixed to lamp surface. 


of doubt the rated wattage of the ballast shall 
correspond to the main lamp type for which the starter 
is designed. 


Details of ballasts to be used for life testing are given 
in Annex A. 


Where a starter is designed to operate with different 
ballast types (for example, capacitive or inductive), the 
tests are made with both types of ballast. 


7.3.3 Lamps 


The lamp shall be of the pre-heated cathode type and, 
where appropriate, meet the requirements of IS 2418 
(Part 2). The rated wattage of the lamp shall be equal 
to the rated wattage of the ballast used. 


For starters of the mechanical type defined in 3.1 the 
lamp shall normally be of the with starter type. For 
starters of the electronic type defined in 3.2 the lamp 
shall normally be of the starterless type. Where a choice 
of lamp of with starter or starterless type is declared 
by the manufacturer, the with starter type shall be used. 


7.4 Starters Having a Mechanical Switching 
Element 


7.4.1 Speed of Operation 


a) Current operated starters — A current equal 
to the minimum pre-heating current 
prescribed on the relevant lamp data sheet in 
IS 2418 (Part 2) shall be passed through the 
circuit. 


For starters which incorporate a cut-out, the 
starter shall operate at least once during the 
test period of 30 s. For continuously operating 
starters, the starter shall operate at least twice 
during the test period of 30 s. 

The test is made with a deactivated lamp or 
with an equivalent resistance of both cathodes 
in series as prescribed on the relevant lamp 


IS 15974 : 2013 


data sheet in IS 2418 (Part 2). 


b) Voltage operated starters — A voltage of 0.92 
times the rated voltage of the ballast shall be 
applied to the circuit. 


For starters which incorporate a cut-out, the 
starter shall operate at least once during the 
test period of 30 s. 


For continuously operating starters, the starter 
shall operate at least twice during the test 
period of 30 s. 


The test is made with a deactivated lamp or 
with an equivalent resistance of both cathodes 
in series as prescribed on the relevant lamp 
data sheet in IS 2418 (Part 2). 


7.4.2 Cathode Pre-heating 


A voltage of 0.92 times the rated voltage of the ballast 
shall be applied to the circuit. 


Starters shall provide sufficient lamp cathode heating. 
The pre-heating current shall be either as specified on 
the relevant lamp data sheet in IS 2418 (Part 2) or shall 
be in line with the lamp manufacturer’s requirements 
relating to current and time. 


7.4.3 Pulse Voltage 


The circuit for measuring pulse voltage shall be as 
shown in Fig. 1. 


A voltage of 0.92 times the rated voltage of the ballast 
shall be applied to the circuit for 30 s. On at least one 
occasion during this period, the highest pulse voltage 
(indicated by either of the two voltmeters) shall be not 
less than the value mentioned in the column 
‘information for starter design’ of the relevant lamp 
data sheet of IS 2418 (Part 2). If the starter is designed 
for a range of lamps, care should be taken that the 
highest voltage value quoted in the sheets for the lamps 
within that range should be used. 


In case of doubt, the measurement with the electrostatic 
voltmeter is the reference method. 


NOTE — As an alternative to the electrostatic voltmeter 
prescribed in Fig. 1, a memory oscilloscope may be used in 
the circuit together with a high-voltage probe having the 
following properties: 


a) Input resistance: : 2100 MQ 
b) Input capacitance : <15 pF 
c) Cut-off frequency : 21 MHz 


7.5 Starters Having an Electronic Switching 
Element 


For explanatory notes and guidance to testing, see 
Annex B. 


It may be expected that starters complying with this 
subclause, when associated with lamps which comply 


IS 15974 : 2013 


a) Circuit diagram 


60 


b) Components used 


1) HV diode: 
Blocking voltage Urm 2 25 kV 
Rated current Tea 2 1.5 mA 
Periodical peak current Irm 20.1 A 
Anode/Cathode capacitance Clk <2 pF 


NOTE — Suitable parts are, for example, HV rectifier tubes type GY 501 for CTV receivers. 


2) HV capacitor: 
Capacitance 
Rated voltage 


Phase-angle difference (at 10 kHz) 


3) HV measuring instrument: 
Static voltmeter 
Capacitance at full deflection 
Breakdown voltage 
Precision 

4) Discharge resistance 


C = 500 pF 
U 2 6.3 kV 
tan 6 = 20 x 10° 


: Oto6kV 

: <15 pF 

: >10kV 

: Class 1 or better 


1MQ 


5) Short-circuiting device for discharging 
6) To high-voltage lead 
7) To neutral conductor 


NOTE — The leakage resistance between A and B and between C and D shall be not less than 10”? Q. 


Fic. 1 PULSE VOLTAGE MEASUREMENT FOR STARTING DEVICES 


with IS 2418 (Part 2) and IS 15687(Part 2) will provide 
satisfactory starting of the lamp at an air temperature 
immediately around the lamp between 10°C and 35°C 
and at voltages within 92 percent and 106 percent of 
the rated voltage. 


For 7.5.1, 7.5.2 and 7.5.3 compliance is checked 
with the following: 


a) Each lamp cathode replaced by a resistance 
corresponding to the substitution resistor 
value prescribed on the relevant lamp data 


sheet in IS 2418 (Part 2) and IS 15687(Part 2). 


b) Supply voltages of 0.92 and 1.06 times the 
rated voltage of the ballast. 


7.5.1 Speed of Operation 


For starters which incorporate a cut-out, the starter shall 
operate at least once during the test period of 30 s. 


For continuously operating starters, the starter shall 
operate at least twice during the test period of 30 s. 


7.5.2 Cathode Pre-heating 


The starter shall operate so that the minimum total 
effective heating current shall comply with the time/ 
current limits specified on the relevant lamp data sheets 
(see Fig. 2). 


The absolute minimum pre-heating time shall be at least 
0.4 s unless otherwise specified on the relevant lamp 
data sheet. 


The maximum effective heating current shall not 
exceed the limits specified on the relevant lamp data 
sheet at any time f. 


7.5.3 Open-Circuit Voltage 


The open-circuit voltage between any pairs of 
substitution resistors representing a lamp shall not 
exceed the maximum values specified on the lamp data 
sheet, during the pre-heating period. 


After the pre-heating period the voltage shall attain a 
value, not less than the minimum value for lamp 
starting, as specified on the lamp data sheet. 


a) Circuit diagram 


IS 15974 : 2013 


If the current through the substitution resistor, as 
specified in 7.5.2, is interrupted before the minimum 
specified voltage for lamp starting has been reached, 
the voltage rise to minimum starting voltage shall take 
place within not more than 0.1 s (see B-5). 


If the voltage rise takes more than 0.1 s, the current 
through the substitution resistor shall not fall below 
the absolute minimum value specified on the relevant 
lamp data sheet (see B-5). 


7.6 Non-re-operating Level 


This sub-clause applies to starters with mechanical and 
electronic switching elements. 


With a circuit and ballast as previously specified in 7.3 
but with a lamp connected as in normal use the 
following test shall be applied. 


7.6.1 For Voltage Operated Starters 


A supply voltage equal to the rated voltage of the ballast 
shall be applied to the circuit, and the lamp shall start 
and operate normally. 


b) Components used 
1) Blocking capacitor: 


Capacitance : 0.1 uF 
Tolerance on capacitance : +5 percent 
Rated voltage : 21 000 V 
Phase-angle difference (at 10 kHz) : tan ô= 20 x 10° 
Pulse loading capacity : 2100 V/us 

2) Current measuring instrument suitable for high frequency: 
Current range 0 to 150 mA 
Indicator error at full deflection < 3 percent 
Internal resistance of measuring instrument R,<10Q 


3) To high voltage lead 
4) To neutral conductor 


Fic. 2 IGNITION ENERGY MEASUREMENT FOR NON-TRIGGERED STARTING DEVICES 


IS 15974 : 2013 


After a period of 30 s lamp operation, the supply 
voltage shall be reduced within 5 s without interruption 
to 85 percent of the rated value and held in this 
condition for 90 s. The lamp shall remain alight without 
disturbance from the starter. 


7.6.2 For Current Operated Starters 


A supply voltage equal to the rated voltage of the ballast 
shall be applied to the circuit, and the lamp shall start 
and operate normally. 


After a period of 30 s lamp operation the lamp current 
shall be reduced within 5 s without interruption to a 
value which shall be 80 percent of the nominal lamp 
running current as prescribed on the relevant lamp data 
sheet given in IS 2418 (Part 2). This condition is held 
for 90 s. The lamp shall remain alight without 
disturbance from the starter. 


7.7 Maximum Pre-heat Current (Lamp Fails 
to Start) 


In order to protect lamp cathodes against excessive pre- 
heating current, if a healthy lamp fails to start, the 
following test shall be applied to starters with 
mechanical and electronic switching elements. 


With the starter connected as for normal operation and 
with a supply voltage equal to 106 percent of the ballast 
rated voltage applied to the circuit, the total effective 
heating current through the cathodes during the 60 s 
period immediately after switch-on shall not exceed 
115 percent of the nominal running current of the 
lamps, as prescribed on the relevant lamp data sheets 
given in IS 2418 (Part 2) and IS 15687(Part 2). 


For this test a deactivated lamp or two separate lamp 
ends with real cathodes shall be used. 


7.8 Interruption of Starter Function 


If a manufacturer or responsible vendor declares that 
the starter has an additional cut-out to disconnect the 
starter from the circuit, the following test shall be 
applied. 


With the supply voltage equal to the rated voltage of 
the ballast and with a deactivated cathode lamp or two 
separate lamp ends with real cathodes, in the place of 
the lamp, the additional cut-out shall operate within 
5 min from the application of the supply voltage to the 
circuit. 


8 ENDURANCE TEST 


8.1 Test Quantity 


The test quantity shall consist of three starters which 
have passed the test in accordance with 7. 


8.2 Test Conditions 


For this test the starters are connected as in normal 
use, operated at the maximum case temperature t, and 
associated with a lamp of the highest wattage rating, 
for which the starter is intended together with an 
appropriate ballast. The ballast shall conform to the 
requirements of Annex A. The test voltage shall be 
equal to the rated voltage of the ballast. 


In the event of the lamp failing during this test, 
arrangements shall be made for its immediate 
replacement. 


8.3 Starters Replaceable Without Tools 


The test duration shall be 6 000 cycles, each of 4 min. 
During each cycle, the voltage shall be applied to the 
circuit for 90 + 30s. 


A rest period of 30 min shall be applied during each 
12-h testing. 
8.4 Starters not Intended for Replacement 


The test duration shall be 25 000 cycles, each of 4 min. 
During each cycle, the voltage shall be applied to the 
circuit for 90 + 30s. 


A rest period of 30 min shall be applied during each 
12-h testing. 
8.5 Conditions of Acceptance 


After this test, the tests described in 7.4 to 7.7 are 
repeated. 


In the event of one starter failing to comply, another 
three shall be tested, all of which shall comply. 


9 DEACTIVATED LAMP TEST 


9.1 Test Quantity 


The test quantity shall consist of three starters which 
have passed the test in accordance with 7 but have not 
been used for the test in accordance with 8. 


9,2 Test Conditions 


In this test the starters are connected as in normal use 
and, except for 9.5, operated at the maximum case 
temperature t, and associated with appropriate lamps 
having deactivated cathodes. A lamp of the highest 
wattage rating for which the starter is intended shall 
be used together with appropriate ballast. 


The ballast shall comply with the requirements of 
Annex A. 


The test voltage shall be equal to the rated voltage of 
the ballast. 


It is permissible to use a substitution resistor in place 


of each lamp cathode. The value of each resistor shall 
be the objective value as prescribed on the relevant 
lamp data sheet given in IS 2418 (Part 2). 


9.3 Starters with a Mechanical Switching Element 
but Without Cut-Out 


After 3 h continuous operation the starter is subjected 
to the appropriate tests described in 7.4 to 7.7. 


After a further 5 h continuous operation, neither shall 
the switching contacts have welded together nor shall 
the capacitor have failed. 


9.4 Starters With an Electronic Switching 
Element but Without Cut-Out 


Starters replaceable without tools shall be subjected 
after 8 h continuous operation to the appropriate tests 
described in 7.4 to 7.7. 


Starters not intended for replacement shall be subjected 
after 40 h continuous operation to the appropriate tests 
described in 7.4 to 7.7. 


9.5 Starters with a Mechanical Switching Element 
and with Thermal Cut-Out 


Starters are tested in a cycle of 5 min ‘ON’ and 10 min 
‘OFF’ at the minimum and maximum temperatures of 
—20 °C and +80 °C, respectively, unless the manufacturer 
has specified a different temperature range. 


Only the starter is subjected to these temperatures. The 
lamp and ballast shall remain at room temperature. 


During 5 min ‘ON’ period the cut-out shall become 
operative. Resetting shall not take place by itself. 


Starters with manually reset cut-outs shall be subjected 
20 times to the test at the minimum temperature 
and 20 times to the test at the maximum temperature 
described above. 


Starters, whose cut-outs are reset automatically, for 
example, by actuating the mains switch, shall be 
subjected 500 times to the test at a minimum 
temperature and 500 times to the test at the maximum 
temperature described above. 


After this test the starters are subjected to the tests 
described in 7.4 to 7.7. 


9.6 Starters with an Electronic Switching Element 
and Electronic Cut-Out 


Starters shall be subjected to a test cycle of 4 min. 
During each cycle the test voltage shall be applied 
for 90 + 30s. 


Alternatively, the test cycle may be mutually agreed to 
between the testing authority and the manufacturer. 


IS 15974 : 2013 


The total test cycling period shall consist of at least 
500 complete cycles, and the cut-out shall operate 
during every ‘ON’ period. 


At the end of the test cycling period the starters shall 
be subjected to the appropriate tests given in 7.4 to 7.7. 


9.7 Condition of Acceptance 


In the event of one starter failing to comply with the 
appropriate tests in 9.3 to 9.6, a further test quantity 
shall be tested, all of which shall comply. A Guide to 
quoting product life and failure rate is given for 
information as in Annex C. 


SECTION 3 PERFORMANCE 
REQUIREMENTS FOR IGNITORS 


10 GENERAL 


This section specifies performance requirements for 
ignitors used with low pressure sodium vapour lamps, 
high pressure sodium vapour lamps and metal halide 
lamps, and should be used in conjunction with the 
corresponding standards, if any, for these lamps and 
their ballasts. 


11 STARTING TEST 


11.1 The test is made on two ignitors that have not 
been submitted to any other test. 


11.2 Test Conditions 
In this test the ignitors are connected as in normal use. 


Ignitors are tested in combination with lamps and 
ballasts for which the ignitor is intended. For ignitors 
intended for more than one lamp type or lamp wattage 
ratings it may be necessary to make the test for each 
lamp type of each wattage rating. 


The ballast used shall meet the requirements of the 
relevant Indian Standard, if any, and be compatible with 
the lamp type or wattage to be started by the ignitor. 


11.3 Conditions of Acceptance 


The type complies with the requirements in this section 
when both ignitors comply with the tests specified 
in 11.4 to 11.7. 


If one ignitor fails any test, another two ignitors shall 
be tested and both shall comply. 


11.4 Switching Speed 


The test is made without a lamp. A voltage of 0.92 
times the rated supply voltage is applied to the circuit. 
During a period of 30 s the starting operation shall 
take place at least once. 


IS 15974 : 2013 


11.5 Pulse Voltage 


To measure the pulse voltage the ignitor is connected 
in accordance with 11.2 but without lamp, using the 
circuit shown in Fig. 1. 


Within the rated temperature range (if any) and with a 
maximum load capacitance of 1 000 pF (unless 
otherwise declared by the manufacturer) and at 0.92 
times the rated supply voltage, the pulse voltage 
available at the lamp (generated by ignitor or ignitor- 
ballast combination) shall be not less than the value 
declared by the manufacturer. 


In case of doubt, the measurement with the electrostatic 
voltmeter is the reference method. 


NOTE — As an alternative to the electrostatic voltmeter 
prescribed in Fig. 1, a memory oscilloscope may be used in 
the circuit together with a high-voltage probe having the 
following properties: 

: 2100 MQ 

b) Input capacitance : <15 pF 

c) Cut-off frequency : 21 MHz 


a) Input resistance 


11.6 Repetition Rate, Pulse Position, Width and 
Height of Starting Pulse for Triggered Ignitors 


Details are under consideration. 


The test is made aided by an oscilloscope and a high- 
voltage probe. Properties required for this combination 
are: 


: 100 MQ 
b) Input capacitance : 5 pF 
c) Cut-off frequency : 50 MHz 


a) Input resistance 


11.7 Ignition Energy for Non-triggered Ignitors 


The ignition energy of non-triggered ignitors shall be 
measured in the circuit of Fig. 2. Required values are 
under consideration. 


For ignitors for low-pressure sodium lamps both the 
circuit and values are under consideration. 


12 NON-RE-OPERATING LEVEL 
Ignitors shall not operate after the lamp has started. 


Two ignitors complying with the test in accordance 
with 11 shall be subjected to the following test. 


A lamp compatible with the ignitor is connected as in 
normal use, started and operated until stabilized. 


For ignitors whose function depends on the lamp 
voltage the supply voltage is reduced continuously 
down to 85 percent of the rated supply voltage without 
breaking the supply circuit. 


The current flowing through the ignitor circuit after 
1 min shall not exceed the rated lamp current (for 


ballast protection) and there shall be no disturbance of 
the lamp function. 


For ignitors whose function depends on the lamp 
current, the lamp current is reduced continuously down 
to 80 percent of the rated lamp current without breaking 
the supply circuit. 


The current flowing through the ignitor circuit after 
1 min shall not exceed the rated lamp current (for 
ballast protection) and there shall be no disturbance of 
the lamp function. 


This test is not made if, according to the manufacturer, 
the ignitor, in addition to the starting function, performs 
other functions necessary for the appropriate operation 
of the lamp. 


However, in case of a defective lamp, the current 
flowing through the ignitor circuit after 1 min shall 
not exceed the rated lamp current. 


13 ENDURANCE TEST 


13.1 Test Quantity 


The test quantity shall consist of two ignitors that have 
passed the tests prescribed in 11 and 12, as appropriate, 
and two additional ignitors for the test as specified in 13.2. 


13.2 Test Conditions 


In this test the two ignitors are connected as in normal 
use, each associated with an appropriate ballast. The 
test voltage shall correspond to 1.06 times the rated 
supply voltage of the ballast. The ignitors are operated 
in conformity with their marking at the maximum case 
temperature t, and without lamp. In doing so, the live 
connections of one of the ignitors are loaded by the 
maximum allowable load capacitance, whilst the 
connections of the other ignitors are left unloaded. 


The ballast used in the life test shall comply with the 
requirements specified in Annex A. Ballasts that fail 
during the endurance test are replaced. 


Ignitors intended to be connected in series with 
discharge lamps which could, according to the lamp 
specification lead to ballast/ignitor overheating, are 
tested additionally under conditions with maximum 
case temperature brought to t, + X °C and with 
rectifying test circuit in accordance with IS 10322 
(Part 1), 13.5 and Annex C. 


13.3 Ignitors Without Replaceable Switching 
Elements 


After 30 days (720 h) continuous operation the ignitor 
shall be subjected to the tests described in 11.4 to 11.7 
and 12. 


13.4 Ignitors with Switching Elements Replaceable 
Without Tools 


After 30 days (720 h) continuous operation the ignitor 
shall be subjected to the tests described in 11.4 to 11.7 
and 12. 


Switching elements that fail during this test are 
replaceable up to six times. The test is regarded as 
negative when seven switching elements have failed. 


After these tests and mounting of any new switching 
element, the ignitor shall be subjected to the tests 
described in 11.4 to 11.7 and 12. 


13.5 Ignitors with Additional Cut-Outs 


The ignitor is operated at rated supply voltage without 
lamp, each time at the minimum and maximum 
temperatures of —20°C and +80°C unless the 
manufacturer has specified a different temperature 
range. 


The cut-outs shall become operative within 20 min. 


Ignitors with manually reset cut-outs shall be subjected 


IS 15974 : 2013 


20 times to the test at the minimum temperature 
and 20 times to the test at the maximum temperature 
described above. 


Starters, whose cut-outs are reset automatically, for 
example, by actuating the mains switch, shall be 
subjected 500 times to the test at the minimum 
temperature and 500 times to the tests at the maximum 
temperature described above. 


After these tests the ignitor shall be subjected to the 
tests described in 11.4 to 11.7 and 12. 


13.6 Conditions of Compliance 


The type complies with the requirements of this section 
if all ignitors comply with the tests described in 11.4 
to 11.7 and 12 after surviving the endurance test 
according to 13. 


In the event of one ignitor failing to comply, two other 
ignitors shall be tested, both of which shall comply. 


The pulse voltage is measured as in accordance with 11.5 
before and after the endurance test. The changes in the 
value found shall not exceed +10 percent. 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 7.3.1, 8.2 and 9.2) 


BALLASTS TO BE USED FOR LIFE TESTING 


A-0 Ballast used for the life testing of starting devices 
shall comply with the following requirements. 


A-1 It shall be of a type that will comply with the 
requirements of the relevant ballast standard, if any, 
and correspond with the starting conditions of the lamp. 


A-2 When, at its rated voltage, it is associated with a 
lamp whose voltage at lamp terminals does not deviate 
by more than +2 percent from the objective value 
specified in the relevant lamp standard, the lamp shall 
dissipate a power which does not differ from its rated 


value by more than + 4 percent. 


A-3 For lamps with pre-heated cathodes, the pre- 
heating current (short-circuit current) at rated voltage, 
shall not differ by more than +10 percent from the 
nominal value specified on the relevant lamp data sheet 
of IS 2418 (Part 2). 


A-4 For lamps without pre-heated cathodes, the short- 
circuit current at rated voltage shall not deviate by more 
than X percent from the value specified in the relative 
section of IS 15882. 


IS 15974 : 2013 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.5) 


EXPLANATION OF STARTING CONDITIONS FOR ELECTRONIC STARTERS 
WITH AN ELECTRONIC SWITCHING ELEMENT 


B-1 INTRODUCTION 


The requirements for starting conditions given in 7.5 
and the associated data given in lamp data sheets in 
relevant Indian Standard have been specified to 
encompass the different lamp starting methods which 
can be employed by electronic starters. 


As these starting methods can be more complex than 
those of conventional glow starter circuits, this annex 
is provided to assist in the interpretation of the 
requirements of this standard and of the data specified 
on lamp data sheets. 


B-2 CHARACTERISTICS WHICH AFFECT 
LAMP STARTING 


There are five main physical characteristics which 
influence the starting mechanism of a fluorescent lamp. 


B-2.1 Cathode Heating 


Pre-heating current and time of application. 


B-2.2 Open-Circuit Voltage 


Voltage across the lamp and to the starting aid both 
during pre-heating and at the moment of lamp ignition. 


B-2.3 Environmental Condition 


Ambient temperature, relative humidity. 


B-2.4 Lamp Physical Conditions 


Type of filling gas and its pressure, lamp dimensions, 
the inclusion of an internal conducting film. 


B-2.5 Supply and Luminaire Conditions 


Operating frequency, starting aid dimensions and 
spacing. 


All of these characteristics interact with each other in 
a complex manner and if the correct combination is 
not obtained for a chosen method of starting, poor lamp 
performance can result (for example, reduced lamp life, 
reduced number of starting cycles for a given lamp 
life, excessive end blackening of the lamp). 


B-3 METHODS OF LAMP STARTING (WITH 
STARTER) 


Glow starters, as specified in IS 2215, rely on the 
closing of bi-metallic contacts caused by the thermal 
effect of their own gas discharge. 


10 


The lamp cathodes pass short-circuit current (that is, 
the quotient of the open-circuit voltage and the circuit 
impedance) whenever the glow starter contacts close. 
This current is approximately saturated due to any 
significant dc component of the current. 


The open-circuit voltage across the lamp, whilst the 
glow starter contacts are closing, never exceeds the 
open-circuit voltage of the ballast (often equal to the 
supply voltage) and this voltage is normally below the 
level at which glow current, which will damage 
unheated cathodes, will be induced in the lamp. 


The lamp starting voltage is produced in the form of a 
pulse due to the collapse of magnetic flux in the ballast 
when the glow starter contacts open; therefore this high 
voltage across the lamp does not occur until pre-heating 
current has flowed through the lamp cathodes. 


Electronic starters can be designed to provide cathode 
heating currents and lamp starting voltages in a number 
of ways, for example, unidirectional current and/or 
voltage, high-frequency current or voltage, etc. 


Because electronic starters can make use of higher 
technological features, revised methods of specifying, 
measuring and assessing the starting characteristics 
often have to be adopted. 


The parameters that have to be controlled are the 
following: 


a) Cathode total heating energy; and 
b) Voltage across the lamp both before and after 
the cathode pre-heating period. 
The fundamental points which must be observed are 
as follows: 


a) Prior to cathodes reaching emission, open- 
circuit voltages across the lamp and/or from 
lamp to starting aid must be kept below the 
level which causes cathode damaging lamp 
glow current. 


b) After cathodes have reached emission, open- 
circuit voltages must be adequate to start the 
lamp quickly and without repeated starting 
attempts. 

c) If open-circuit voltages have to be elevated 


to achieve lamp starting, once cathodes have 
reached emission, the transition from low to 
high open-circuit voltage must occur whilst 
the cathodes are still at emission temperature. 


d) During the cathode pre-heating period the 
heating current must be adequate to ensure 
thermal emission; but it must not be so 
excessive that the emissive material on the 
cathodes is damaged by overheating. 


This latter requirement also applies, if cathode heating 
currents continue to flow during the lamp starting 
sequence and for any period after lamp starting has 
occurred. 


B-4 INTERPRETATION OF THE 
REQUIREMENTS AND INFORMATION GIVEN 
ON LAMP DATA SHEETS 


B-4.1 Minimum Values of Effective Heating 
Current 


The amount of heat necessary to bring a given cathode 
type to the minimum emission temperature can be 
stated in terms of time, current and a constant which is 
determined by the physical properties of that given 
cathode type. 


This relationship can be expressed by the following 
equation: 


_ a 
2 TH 2 
lk 7 lmn 
where 
t, = time to emission ( see Note) in s; 
a = constant for specific cathode type; 
i = minimum effective heating current 


necessary to time ¢, in A; and 


absolute minimum of effective heating 
current to achieve emission if application 
time is of a sufficiently long duration (for 
example, 230 s from cold), in A. 


The values of constant ‘a’and the absolute minimum 
current (i,,) are given on each relevant lamp data sheet, 
together with the values of the cathode substitution 
resistor. 


The minimum value of effective heating current (i,) 

can be calculated by substituting the measured value 

of t, into the equation given in each lamp data sheet. 
NOTE — Emission times less than 0.4 s are normally not 


acceptable because experience has shown that satisfactory 
cathode pre-heating is not always achievable in practice. 


B-4.2 Maximum Values of Effective Heating 


Empirical evidence has shown that a relatively high 
effective heating current can be applied for a short 
time (< 0.4 s) without cathode damage occurring, 
but that this high level of current must be 
progressively reduced for times greater than 0.4 s 
until, at 2.0 s and longer, the level should not exceed 


11 


IS 15974 : 2013 


a value which is significantly different from those 
values already established for 50/60 Hz glow starter 
circuit practice. 


Maximum levels of effective heating current are given 
on relevant lamp data sheets together with the value of 
substitution resistor required for the test. 


A schematic representation of these requirements is 
given in Fig. 3. 


B-5 OPEN-CIRCUIT VOLTAGES 
TRANSITION TIMES (T,) 


AND 


The data in the relevant lamp data sheets is given for 
systems that require a starting aid and for systems that 
do not require a starting aid. 


It is essential that the correct system is identified before 
testing commences. 


Open-circuit voltages can be generated in many ways, 
for example, unidirectional pulses, high frequency 
oscillation, etc. Therefore, care must be taken in 
evaluating these characteristics with respect to the 
limiting values specified on lamp data sheets in relevant 
Indian Standards, if any. 


When open-circuit voltages are elevated at time f,, the 
time t, must not exceed 100 ms, if cathode heating is 
terminated at time t.. 


Transition times of greater than 100 ms are acceptable 
provided cathodes are kept at emission during the 
transition time. 


As the lamp cathodes will have been brought to 
emission during time t,, it is only necessary to ensure 
that the effective heating current does not fall below 
the absolute minimum value i,, during the transition/ 
lamp starting phase. 


The maximum value of open-circuit voltage prior to 
time t, being reached and the minimum value of open- 
circuit voltage after t, is reached are specified on the 
relevant lamp data sheets. 


For some lamp types the relevant lamp data sheets may 
specify values of maximum open-circuit voltage prior 
to time t, being reached which are higher than, or the 
same as, the minimum values of open-circuit voltage 
specified after time t, has been reached. 


Starters designed for these lamp types do not 
necessarily have to elevate the open-circuit voltage to 
start these lamps correctly. 


A schematic representation of these requirements is 
given in Fig. 4 and 5 


B-6 MEASUREMENT REQUIREMENTS 


As the pre-start and starting characteristics of electronic 


IS 15974 : 2013 


starters do not necessarily provide steady state 
sinusoidal voltages and currents, it is necessary to 
provide measuring devices and techniques which will 
cope with these conditions. 


The term effective heating current has been used to 
describe the heating effect to time t 
(that is, the total energy to time f) and a varying r.m.s. 
current envelope can be equated to a steady r.m.s. 


max ~~ 


Effective heating 
current 


current over the same period by integration of the 
square of the current. 


In many cases it may be possible to deduce from the 
varying r.m.s. current envelope whether the 
requirement is met, simply by comparison to the 
minimum steady state r.m.s. value which will give the 
same total heating effect. Examples of this technique 
are given in Fig. 6. 


Maximum effective heating current to any time t 


ik when to =04s — 


P a 2 
hr E + im) 0.5 


er 


Minimum effective heating current limit to time t, 


Absolute minimum an = 


0.4s 


t(s) —— 


Fic. 3 CATHODE HEATING CURRENT REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRONIC STARTERS WITH 
ELECTRONIC SWITCHING ELEMENT 


MV) 
> 
= U after te — 
® 
D> 
2 
© 
> 
= 
e U before te 
ẹ 
c 
© 
a. 
ie) 
@ 
ge i, to ty 
in 
ER 
OL 


lo 


Cathode heating removed at to 


(te + ty) t(s) 


Fic. 4 STARTERS WHICH REMOVE PRE-HEATING CURRENT WHEN OPEN-CIRCUIT VOLTAGES ARE ELEVATED 


IS 15974 : 2013 


U(V) 


U after tə 


U before te 


Open-circuit voltage (U) 


v & (to + ta) t(s) 
> 
gE i to t 
£3 k e 
v $ ry 
Or \ 
Zim te tamp start mee an on mn en an a 
s 
to (t, + ta) t(s) 


Fic. 5 STARTERS WHICH HAVE OPEN-CIRCUIT VOLTAGE TRANSITION TIMES HIGHER THAN 100 ms 


i(A) 


Example 1 


Starter complies with 7.5.2. Varying r.m.s. current i, never falls below steady state r.m.s. current i, (at £), therefore, 
the r.m.s. envelope of current i, can be used to show: 


tes: te 
Í idt > Í i, dt 
o o 


KA) 


04s t t(s) 


Example 2 


Starter does not comply with 7.5.2. Varying r.m.s. current i, only reaches the level of steady state r.m.s. current i, 
(at t,), just before time f,, therefore, the r.m.s. envelope of current į, can be used to show: 


to Bes 
Í ièdt < Í i, dt 
o o 


Fic. 6 INTERPRETATION OF EFFECTIVE HEATING CURRENT— Continued 


13 


IS 15974 : 2013 


(A) 


04s 


Example 3 


Starter may or may not comply with 7.5.2. The varying r.m.s. current i, only exceeds the steady state r.m.s. 
current i, (at t.) for part of the time period to t.. Energy measurements or calculations are necessary to determine 


whether. 


fe 2 te 2 
lk i,dt < ip i, dt 


The total heating effect of the varying heating current to time f, shall not be less than the equivalent of the steady 


state r.m.s. current i, (at t.) for the same heating effect. 


Possible instances are shown in these three examples. 


Fic. 6 INTERPRETATION OF EFFECTIVE HEATING CURRENT 


B-7 PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IF HIGH- 
FREQUENCY VOLTAGES ARE PRODUCED BY 
THE ELECTRONIC STARTER 


B-7.1 Starting Aid Spacing 


High-frequency components in the open-circuit voltage 
can induce quite high currents to the starting aid during 
the starting sequence depending on the frequency used. 


In these cases it is necessary to observe a minimum 
distance between the lamp and the starting aid to avoid 
high starting aid currents. 


The total heating effect of the varying heating current to 
time tf, shall not be less than the equivalent of the steady 
state rms current i, (at t,) for the same heating effect. 


Possible instances are shown in the three examples in 
Fig. 6. 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 9.7 and 13.2) 


A GUIDE TO QUOTING PRODUCT LIFE AND FAILURE RATE 


C-1 To allow the lifetime and failure rate of different 
electronic products to be meaningfully compared by a 
user it is recommended that the data given in C-2 
and C-3 are provided by the manufacturer in a product 
catalogue. 


C-2 The maximum surface temperature, symbol ¢, (t — 
lifetime) of the electronic product or the maximum part 
temperature which affects product life, measured under 
normal operating conditions and at the nominal voltage 
or at the maximum of the rated voltage range, that 


14 


allows a life of 50 000 h to be achieved. 


C-3 The failure rate, if the electronic product is 
operated continuously at the maximum temperature t 
(see in C-2). Failure rate should be quoted in units of 
failure in time (fit). 


C-4 For the method used to obtain the information 
given in C-2 and C-3 (mathematical analysis, reliability 
tests, etc) the manufacturer should, on request, provide 
a comprehensive data file containing the details of the 
method. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 23 (5965). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


