ЯТ Wan IS 13258 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


этеч ата KAU hay 95 fera 5 ferex 
a afin ча aa ата ач 
еч Hida gum H fufeist— 
зчат fea та ueniet fufeisu 
Ж чтаїяч эй тда 
al ser 
( чест FRAT ) 


Welded Low Carbon Steel 
Cylinders Exceeding 5 Litre Water 
Capacity for Low Pressure 
Liquefiable Gas — Requirements 
for Inspection and Reconditioning 
of Used LPG Cylinders 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.30; 75.160.30 


© BIS 2014 


ada AM ERI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e "rS чая, 9 четте sper ant, ae 110002 
Loans MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in | www.standardsbis.in 


January 2014 Price Group 5 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This Standard was first published in 1991 and revision is taken to align it with the latest technological advancement 
and the practice being followed in the country for the re-conditioning of LPG cylinders. 


This standard covers examination, reconditioning and the criteria for declaring an used LPG cylinder unserviceable. 
Manufacture, possession and use of any gas, when contained in cylinders of more than 500 ml water capacity in 
a compressed or liquefied state, are regulated under the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004, of the Government of India. 
This standard has been formulated in consultation and agreement with the statutory authorities under those rules. 


For the convenience, it is divided into following two sections: 


Section 1 Inspection 
Section 2 Detailed examination and reconditioning 


In the revision of this standard following major changes has been done: 


a) Title modified earlier it was ‘code of practice’ now ‘requirement standard’. 


b) Clause 6for external examination has been modified and more details are provided regarding the rejection 
criteria in the tabulated form. 


c) New Clause 4 ‘General’ has been added. 
d) Clause for dedenting is removed, that is dedenting not permitted. 
e) Clause 12 Heat treatment modified. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding 
off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the 
same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13258 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


WELDED LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS 
EXCEEDING 5 LITRE WATER CAPACITY FOR LOW 
PRESSURE LIQUEFIABLE GAS — REQUIREMENTS 

FOR INSPECTION AND RECONDITIONING OF USED 
LPG CYLINDERS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard lays down the requirements for the 
inspection, materials, procedure, testing and marking 
for reconditioning of used LPG cylinders manufactured 
as per IS 3196 (Part 1) : 2006 ‘Welded low carbon 
steel cylinders exceeding 5 litre water capacity for low 
pressure liquefiable gases : Part 1 Cylinders for 
liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) — Specification (fifth 
revision)’ of capacity exceeding 5 litre and up to and 
including 250 litre. 


This standard is not applicable for periodic inspection 
and testing of LPG cylinders. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions to this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7241 : 1981 ‘Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology’ and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Competent Person — A person appointed by the 
testing agency and who by a combination of training, 
experience and supervision is able to make objective 
judgments on a subject. 


3.2 Gross Weight — The sum of the tare weight of 
cylinder and the maximum weight of the LPG 
permitted in it. 


3.3 Manufacturer — Means approved LPG cylinder 
manufacturer under gas cylinder rules. 


3.4 Owner — The owner means the oil company who 
owns LPG cylinder. 


3.5 Pit — A local corrosion not in excess of 6 mm 
diameter and occurring not more frequently than one 
in any 500 mm? of the surface. 


3.6 Rejection — Putting cylinder out of service until 
finally deshaped. 


3.7 Repairer — Any agency having facilities and 
capabilities to carry out the reconditioning of used LPG 
cylinder as per the standard. 


SECTION 1 INSPECTION 


4 GENERAL 


The details of Inspection and reconditioning, shall be 
submitted by the repairer to the inspecting authority 
for final approval by statutory authority. 


5 INSPECTION EQUIPMENT AND METHOD 
OF MEASUREMENT 


Exterior corrosion, denting, bulging, gouges or digs 
are normally measured by simple direct measurement 
with scales or depth gauges. The defect can also be 
measured using a rigid straight edge of sufficient length 
placed over the defect and a scale is used to measure 
the distance from the bottom of the straight edge to 
the bottom of the defect. Suitable depth gauges may 
also be used for measuring the depth of small cuts or 
pits. When measuring cuts, the upset metal shall be 
removed or compensated for so that only actual depth 
of metal removed from the cylinder wall is measured. 


6 EXTERNAL EXAMINATION 


6.1 External Inspection 


The entire surface shall be inspected by a competent 
person for, 


a) dents,cuts, gouges, bulges cracks, laminations 
or punctures, bottom shell thickness, foot ring 
bottom clearance applying the criteria for 
rejection given in Table 1. 


IS 13258 : 2014 


Table 1 Physical Defects in the Cylinder Wall 


[Clause 6.1(a)] 


SI No. Defects Description Rejection Criteria 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
i) Bulge Visible swelling of the cylinder Rejection in all cases 
ii) Dent Depression in the cylinder that has neither penetrated nor a) Depth of dent is greater than 1/10th of the 
removed the metal mean diameter of the dent, or 
b) Mean diameter of the dent is greater than one- 
quarter of the diameter of cylinder, or 

c) Dent on or adjacent to weld 

iii) Cut or gouge Sharp impression where metal has been removed or 75 mm or more in length or when the depth of cut 


iv) 
v) 


vi) 


vii) 
viii) 
ix) 


x) 


Intersecting cut 
or gouge 


Dent containing 
cut or gouge 


Crack 


Lamination 
Dig 
Bottom shell 


thickness 


Footring 
bottom 
clearance 


redistributed 


Point of intersection of two or more cuts or gouge 


Depression in the cylinder within which there is cut or 
gouge 


A split or rift in the cylinder shell 


Layering of the material within the cylinder wall appearing 
as a discontinuity, crack. Lap or bulge at the surface 


A sharp depression where the surface material has been 
penetrated 


Thickness of the bottom of the cylinder surface 


Clearance of the body bottom from the ground. 


is such that the undamaged (remaining) wall 
thickness is less than the minimum calculated wall 
thickness 


Rejection in all cases 


When the size of dent or cut or gouge exceeds the 
dimension for rejection as an individual defect 


Rejection in all cases 


Rejection in all cases 


75 mm or more in length and 4 mm or more in 
width 


Less than minimum calculated wall thickness” 


a) Less than 8 mm for cylinders of water capacity 
up to 34 litre 

Less that 15 mm for cylinders of water 
capacity exceeding 34 litre and up to 50 litre 
Less than 25 mm for cylinders of water 
capacity exceeding 50 litre 


b) 


c) 


D Cylinders shall be rejected in case the observed thickness of the undamaged remaining wall in the affected portion is less than the 
minimum calculated wall thickness. 


Table 2 Corrosion Defects in the Cylinder Wall 


[Clause 6.1(b)] 


SI No. Defects Description Rejection Criteria 
d) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Isolated corrosion pits Pitting of metal occurring in isolated areas at a Depth of penetration of any pit exceeds 0.4 mm” 
concentration not greater than 1 pit / 500 mm’ of 
surface area 
ii) Area corrosion Reduction in wall thickness over an area not Depth of penetration of any pit exceeds 0.4 mm” 
exceeding 20 percent of the cylinder surface 
including the ends (top and bottom) 
ii) ^ General corrosion Reduction in wall thickness over an area Rejection in all the cases 
exceeding 20 percent of the cylinder surface 
iv) Line corrosion Series of pits or corroded cavities of limited width a) Total length of corrosion in any direction 
along the length or around corrosion exceeds 50 percent of the circumference of the 
circumference cylinder 
b) Depth of penetration exceeds 0.4 mm" 
c) Depth of corrosion cannot be measured 
v)  Cervice corrosion Cervice corrosion occurs in the area of the When the depth of penetration exceeds 0.4 mm or 


intersection of the footring or stay plate with the 
cylinder 


when the depth of corrosion cannot be measured" 


D Cylinders shall be rejected in case the observed thickness of the undamaged remaining wall in the affected portion is less than the 
minimum calculated wall thickness. 


IS 13258 : 2014 


Table 3 Other Defects 
[Clause 6.1(c)] 


Defects 
(1) (2) 


Description 


Rejection Criteria 


(3) (4) 


i) Depressed bung 


ii) Arc or torch burns Burning of the cylinder base metal, a hardened heat affected zone, the addition of 


Damage to the bung which alters the profile of the cylinder 


Rejection in all cases 


Rejection in all cases 


extraneous weld metal, or removal of metal by scarping or cratering 


iii) Fire damage 
a) Charring or burning of paint” 
b) Fire damage of the metal 
c) Distortion of the cylinder 
d) Melting of metallic valve parts 
e) Melting of safety cap 


Excessive general or localised heating of the cylinder usually indicated by: 


Rejection in all cases 


D In case of superficial charring of paint cylinder may be accepted. 


b) corrosion, giving special attention to areas 
where water can be trapped, at the base of the 
cylinder, the junction between the body and 
the footring, the junction between the body 
and valve guard or shroud, applying the 
criteria for rejection given in Table 2. 

c) other defects (for example, depressed bung 
or fire damage), applying the criteria for 
rejection given in Table 3. 


Any cylinder rejected by the competent person shall 
be segregated in accordance with 11.1. 


SECTION 2 DETAILED EXAMINATION 
AND RECONDITIONING 


7 DE-GASSING OF CYLINDERS 


7.1 Cylinder shall be degassed by suitable method and 
each cylinder shall be checked to ensure complete 
degassing. The de-gassing station and procedures shall 
have the approval of the statutory authority. 


7.2 Valves of cylinders taken for processing shall be 
removed by employing a proper fixture and a suitable 
wrench using a close fitting hexagonal adopter. It shall 
be ensured that only depressurised cylinders are taken 
for the removal of the valve. 


8 MATERIAL 


The material used for manufacturing the replacements 
of detachables like shroud, valve protection ring and 
footring shall be as specified in IS 3196 (Part 1). The 
tube used for making valve protection ring shall 
conform to the owner’s requirement as detailed in their 
drawing. 


9 REPLACEMENT DETACHABLES 


9.1 The design of all detachables shall meet the 
requirements laid down in IS 3196 (Part 1) for 
individual parts respectively and shall be in line with 
the approved drawing of owner. 


9.1.1 The design shall conform to the owner’s 
requirement as detailed in their drawing. 


9.1.2 The straightness and verticality of finished 
cylinders shall be as per IS 3196 (Part 1). 


9.1.3 The eccentricity of the welded VP ring shall be 
as per IS 3196 (Part 1). 


9.1.4 The foot ring shall be fitted as per IS 3196 (Part 1). 
10 DETAILED EXAMINATION 


10.1 Cylinders received for reconditioning shall be 
examined in accordance with Section 1. 


10.2 External Cleaning 


Each cylinder shall be cleaned externally by wire 
brushing, water jet abrasive cleaning, approved 
chemical cleaning or any other suitable method. 


10.3 Internal Cleaning 


Each cylinder shall be internally cleaned by any of the 
following methods. 


10.3.1 Where the interior of the cylinder is 
contaminated by oil or other similar fluid it shall be 
cleaned by one of the following methods: 


a) Steam cleaning; 
b) Washing out with an approved solvent; and 
c) Use of magnet to remove metallic parts. 


10.3.2 Where the interior of a cylinder is affected by 
rust or other foreign matter it shall be cleaned by one 
of the following methods: 


a) Approved blasting, rotary wire brushing or 
rumbling procedure; or 

b) Burntouttreatment in a furnace not exceeding 
temperature of the cylinder to more than 
300°C for a period not exceeding 1 h since 
overheating could change the mechanical 
properties of the cylinder. After this all free 
rust and scale shall be removed by methods 
as given in 10.3.1. 


IS 13258 : 2014 


10.4 Tare Weight Verification 


After degassing and through cleaning (internally and 
externally), cylinders shall be checked for correct 
determination of the tare weight (weight of the empty 
cylinder with valve and its safety cap, footring and V.P. 
ring). Any cylinder having lost its tare weight by over 
5 percent of its original tare weight shall be declared 
unserviceable. 


10.5 External Inspection 


10.5.1 Affected portions of the body of the cylinders 
segregated during inspection under Section 1 shall be 
ground to achieve a defect free surface. 


10.5.1.1 Cylinder wall thickness so achieved shall not 
be less than minimum calculated wall thickness as per 
IS 3196 (Part 1). 


10.6 Internal Inspection 


The entire internal surface of the cylinder shall be 
examined by means of an extra low voltage inspection 
lamp and the cylinder shall be declared unserviceable, 
if the bottom of an internal defect cannot be seen and 
its extent cannot be measured. 


11 SEGREGATION OF CYLINDERS 


Cylinders on the basis of inspection shall be segregated 
in accordance with 11.1 and 11.2. 


11.1 Unserviceable 


Cylinders with any one or more of the following 
conditions shall be declared unserviceable: 


a) Cylinders declared unserviceable when 
inspected according to Section 1; 


b) Cylinders having lost their identity 
(Manufacturer's name, serial number of the 
cylinder, test date and original tare weight); 

c) Cylinders coming for repairs for the second 
time; and 

d) The cylinders having wall thickness less than 
the minimum thickness as permitted 
in 10.5.1.1. 


Cause(s) of rejection of all the unserviceable cylinders 
shall be recorded in the performa as shown in Annex B 
and cause may be coded in the following manner: 


Bulge : E-l 
Burn ; E2 
Dent : Е-3 
Dig : E-4 
Cut : E-5 
Pit : E-6 
Line corrosion : Е-7 


General corrosion : E-8 
Bung thread damage : E-9 
Loss in tare weight E-10 
Identity lost E-11 
Cylinder identified as once repaired : E-12 


The bottom of internal defect cannot: I-1 
be seen and it's extent cannot 
be measured 


The wall thickness has been reduced : I-2 
by more than the specified value 


11.2 Repairable 


Cylinders which are found serviceable according 
to 10.1 and 11.1 shall be considered repairable. These 
cylinders shall be taken for further processing and 
reconditioning. When repaired, both the footring as 
well as the V P ring shall be replaced. 


12 RE-CONDITIONING 


12.1 Removal of Footring and Valve Protecting Ring 


12.1.1 Foot ring and valve protecting ring shall be 
removed without damaging the body of the cylinder. 
The welded spots shall be ground and cleaned 
thoroughly for checking the surface for line corrosion, 
pits, etc, and wall thickness before fitting new footring 
and valve protecting ring. 


12.2 Fixing New Footring and Valve Protecting 
Ring/Shroud 


New footring and valve protecting ring/shroud shall 
be welded in accordance with IS 3196 (Part 1) and all 
welds shall be inspected for weld defects. 


13 HEAT TREATMENT 


13.1 Cylinders shall be efficiently and uniformly stress 
relieved as approved by the statutory authority after 
completion of welding of attachments and before 
hydrostatic test is applied. A complete record of the 
heat treatment cycle shall be maintained. 


13.2 Localized heat treatment shall not be permitted. 


NOTE — The stress relieving cycle shall be qualified as in 
manufacturing of the cylinder variety being subjected to the 
process. 


14 HYDROSTATIC TEST 


14.1 Each heat treated cylinder shall be subjected to 
hydrostatic test. During the hydrostatic test, the 
pressure shall be increased gradually till the required 
test pressure is reached. After the test pressure is 
reached and the external surfaces of the cylinder are 
dried, it shall be retained for a period of not less than 
30 s. Any reduction in pressure noticed during this 
retention period or any leakage or visible bulge or 


deformation shall be treated as a case of failure in the 
test and the cylinder shall be declared unserviceable. 


14.1.1 The value of hydrostatic test pressure for LPG 
shall be taken as 25 kgf/cm? as specified in IS 3196 
(Part 1). 


14.1.2 Hydrostatic test shall be carried out as per 
IS 3196 (Part 3). 


15 FIXING OF VALVE 


15.1 Valve Connection 


Prior to fitting the valve, the bung threads shall be 
cleaned using a machine tap of the same thread profile 
as the bung threads. The cleaning shall ensure freedom 
from grit, zinc and other foreign matter, if any. Also it 
shall ensure, breaking of scale formed on the thread 
and re-correction of any distortion, experienced during 
heat treatment. 


Valve suitable for intended use and conforming to IS 
8737 shall be fitted to the cylinder using approved 
jointing compound at the torque of 200 + 20 Nm, after 
ensuring that internal cleaning of the cylinder has been 
done for removal of any water, grit, welding slag, flux, 
metal or any other foreign particles. 


16 PNEUMATIC TEST 


16.1 Each cylinder after it has been dried and fitted 
with valve shall be tested for leakage by subjecting to 
air pressure of not less than 12 kgf/cm? a period of 
1 min while immersed in water and shall show no 
leakage from the body of the cylinder and the joint 
between valve and bung. This test shall be carried out 
after fixing the safety cap on the valve. 


16.2 Pneumatic leakage test shall be carried out as per 
IS 3196 (Part 3). 


NOTE — Suitable air drying methods may be adopted as long 
as they ensure no condensate is present in the cylinders. 


17 DE-SHAPING 


Cylinders declared unserviceable during inspection/ 
tests shall be de-shaped as per Gas Cylinder Rules, 
2004. 


18 PREPARATION FOR DESPATCH 


18.1 All cylinders shall be thoroughly cleaned and 
dried internally before being fitted with valves. 


18.2 The outside surface shall be grit (see IS 4683) 
blasted with minimum SA 2.5 grade of blast (see IS 9954) 
and shall be given following protective coatings: 


a) Spraying zinc to give a coating of minimum 
thickness of 37 unless otherwise agreed to 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


IS 13258 : 2014 


The zinc wire used for spraying shall be as 
per IS 12447 and the zinc spraying shall be 
as per IS 6586. 

b) One coat of zinc chromate primer as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

c) One coat of synthetic enamel paint 
conforming to IS 2932 of signal red colour 
(Shade No. 537 of IS 5) or any other colour 
with the approval of statutory authority. 


d) Asan alternate to (a), (b) and (c) cylinders shall 
be powder coated (see IS 13871) or stoving 
primer coated (see IS 2074) and enamel coated 
(see IS 2932) as per the agreement between 
the repairer and the owner. 


The total minimum combined coating thickness shall 
be 67 LL. 


NOTE — Procedure for measurement of coating of thickness: 


a 


— 


Five gauge readings for each spot shall be taken moving 
the probe a short distance for each new gauge reading within 
an approximate area of 2 cm x 2 cm, Discard any unusually 
high or low gauge reading that cannot be repeated 
consistently. Take the average of the five gauge readings 
as a spot measurement. 


b 


— 


Make five such spot measurements approximately evenly 
spaced over the surface of the cylinder. 


с 


— 


Each spot measurement shall not be below 80 percent of the 
specified minimum thickness and average of the five spot 
measurements shall not be below the specified thickness. 


19 RECORDS 


A record shall be maintained for all tests, 
reconditioning and inspections at the cylinder repairer's 
works and copies shall be made available to the 
inspecting authority and owner of the cylinder, if 
desired. A test certificate duly approved and signed by 
the inspecting authority shall be forwarded to the 
statutory authority and the owner (see Annex C). 


20 MARKINGS 


20.1 The cylinders fitted with new footring and V. P. 
ring shall be immediately marked with the following 
original markings on the footring and vertical stays of 
V. Р. ring as applicable: 


a) Original serial number and batch number of 
the cylinder; 


b) Original BIS certification mark and 
manufacturer's name or its initials; 

c) Repairer's identification/ initials/monogram; 

d) New tare weight and gross weight of cylinder, 
in kg; 

e) Month and year of manufacture, retest and 
reconditioning; 

f The maximum working pressure, test 
pressure, in MPa; 

g) Water capacity, in litres; 


IS 13258 : 2014 


h) Loss in tare weight, if observed under 10.4 
shall be punched at the footring (Example, If 
the loss in tare weight is 200 g, it shall be 
punched as LTW 200); and 

j) BIS certification Mark and СМЛ, number of 
repairer on the foot ring. 


The letter ‘R’ shall be conspicuously stamped on the 
vertical stay of the valve protecting ring as close to 
certification mark as practicable for identification that 
the cylinder is reconditioned. The letter ‘R’ shall be 
stamped on the footring also. 


20.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The details available with the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


20.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the licence for 
the use of Standard Mark may be granted for the 
process to the repairer may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
5 : 2007 Colours for ready mixed paints and 4683 : 1968 Pictorial surface preparation 


enamels (sixth revision) 


2074 : 1992 Ready mixed paints, air drying, red 
oxide zinc crome, priming — 
Specification (second revision) 

2932 : 2003 Enamel, synthetic, exterior, 


undercoating, (b) finishing — 
Specification (third revision) 
Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity 
for low pressure liquefiable gases — 
Cylinders for liquefied petroleum 
gases (LPG) — Specification (fifth 
revision) 

Methods of test (fifth revision) 


3196 (Part 1) : 
2006 


(Part 3) : 2011 


standards for painting steel surfaces 
Recommendation practice for metal 
spraying for protection of iron steel 
(first revision) 

Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology (first revision) 
Valves fittings for use with liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders of 
more than 5 litre water capacity (first 
revision) 

Pictorial surface preparation 
standards for painting of steel 
surfaces 

Zinc wire for sprayed zinc coatings 
Power coatings — Specification 


6586 : 1989 


7241 : 1981 


8737 : 1995 


9954 : 1981 


12447 : 1988 
13871 : 1993 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 11.1) 


LIST OF CYLINDERS UNSERVICEABLE 


Repairer’s name : 


IS 13258 : 2014 


Order No. 
Batch No. 
Certificate No. 
Date 
Cylinder Original Manufacturer's Date of Date of Cause 
SI No. Name Manufacture Rejection of Rejection 
Repairing company’s Inspecting officer 
representative 
ANNEX C 
(Clause 19) 
LIST OF CYLINDERS ACCEPTED 
Repairer’s name : 
Order No. 
Batch No. 
Certificate No. 
Date 
Cylinder Original Manufacturer 's Date of Date of Details 
Sl No. Name Manufacture Repair/Test of Repairs 
Carried Out 


Repairing company's 
representative 


Inspecting officer 


IS 13258 : 2014 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


BOC India Ltd, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Ltd, Bangalore 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Representative(s) 


Suri T. К. Tuomas (Chairman) 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI VisuNU D. SONAWANE 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri Р. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI К. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. К. KuaMkaR (Alternate) 


Suri М. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RAmBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN К. PANDEY 
Suri Олуг. BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA К. GARG 
Suni NIKHILEsSh К. Gan (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. GoraLAIN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. BomaL (Alternate) 


Suri U. V. MANNUR 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI ARUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. Р. Trwari, JASG 
SHRI К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. Кони 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri К. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri К. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI M. PRABAKARAN 
Suri №. К. VuavavanaiA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 

Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 

In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1, Mile, Mathura Road, 


Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane 
Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 13258 : 2014 


Representative(s) 


Suri Y. К. BEHANI 
Suri К. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RAmikaR (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. Jain 
Suri Амо) JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri S.R. SARVATE 
Suri S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


Suri L. D. THAKKAR 


Suri Т. V. Sinch, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Gas Cylinder Valves & Fittings Subcommittee, ME 16:1 


Organization 
In personal capacity [303, Shantikunj, Athwalines, Surat] 
ACE LPG Car Kits Ltd, Thane 


All India Gases Manufacturers Association, Vadodara 


Batra Associates Limited, Faridabad 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


LPG Equip. Research Centre, Bangalore 


Neema Forge Press Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Southern Metals and Alloys Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Representative(s) 
Suri L. D. THAKKAR (Convener) 


Suri Amit SHAH 
Suni MANOJ VITHALANI (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri N. K. SAWHNEY 


SHRI J. VEDAGIRI 
Suri SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. G. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


Suri P. P. NADKARNI 


SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI RABINDRA N. GHOSH 
Suri S. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. GoraLarat (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Bolmal (Alternate) 


Suri G. P. Gupta 
SHRIMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Suri G. L. NEEMA 
Suri AJAY Mirani (Alternate) 


Suri P. B. YEDLA 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI Vinop NORONHA 
Suri Vivek Noronua (Alternate) 


Suri Y. К. BEHANI 
Suri К. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. Jain 
Suri Амо) JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri S. К. KHANDEKAR 
Suri S. К. Sanvars (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1208). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


