**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9097 (1979) : Guide for laying lining of canals with hot 
bitumen or bituminous felts [WRD 13: Canals and Cross 
Drainage Works] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS; 90W-19T9 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



GUIDE FOR LAYING LINING OF 

CANALS WITH HOT BITUMEN 

UR BITUMINOUS FELTS 



UDC 626823 915 




« Copyright 1979 

I IN D r A M STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, fl BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR HAKIx 

NEW DELHI 110Q02 

rice J¥j 5*M November 1979 



IS : 9097 - 1979 



Indian Standard 



GUIDE FOR LAYING LINING OF 

CANALS WITH HOT BITUMEN 

OR BITUMINOUS FELTS 

Canals and Canal Linings Sectional Committee, BDC 57 



Chairman 
Shri S. B. Khare 



Representing 
Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, New Delhi 



Members 

Shri Chickarmane 

Shri S. K. Karamchandani 
( Aiternate ) 
Chief Engineer 



Union Carbide India Ltd, Bombay 



Irrigation & Power Department, Government of 
Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 
Dr J. Purushotham ( Alternate ) 



Chief Engineer ( C ) 

Director Central Designs 
( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Irrigation ) 

Chief Engineer ( Irrigation ) 



Irrigation Works, 
Chandigarh 



Government of Punjab, 



Senior Deputy Chief Engi- 
neer ( Irrigation ) ( Alternate ) 



Public Works Department, Government of 

Karnataka, Bangalore 
Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

Nadu, Madras 



Shri Q. P. Datta 
Shri R. L. Dewan 
Director 

Director ( B & CD-I ) 

Deputy Director 
( B & CD-I ) ( Alternate ) 
Director ( B & CD-II ) 

Deputy Director 
(H. W-II) [Alternate) 
Dr R. J. Garde 

Dr A. S. Chawla ( Alternate ) 



Beas Designs Organization, Nangal Township 
Irrigation and Research Institute, Khagaul ( Patna ) 
Irrigation Department, Government of Rajasthan, 

Jaipur 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 



Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Water Resources Development Training Centre, 
University of Roorkee, Roorkee 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1979 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9097 - 1979 

( Continued from page I ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. D. Kulkarni Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

Bombay 
Shri A. A. Pai ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Maheshwari Planning Commission, Government of India, 

New Delhi 
Shri N. K. Dikshit ( Alternate ) 
Shri Gauri Kanta Misra Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Shri R. K. Agoarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. H. Rodricks Fibreglass Pilkington, Bombay 

Shri S. G. Pitre ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. C. Saxena Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 

Shri V. P. Bhatt ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 

Shri M. K. Singhal Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 

Shri K. T. Subudhi Irrigation and Power Department, Government of 

Orissa, Bhubaneshwar 
Superintending Engineer Irrigation and Power Department, Government of 

Haryana, Chandigarh 
Shri B. T. Unwalla Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri E. T. Anita ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Ajitha Simha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri V. Kalyanasundaram 

Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



IS : 9097 - 1979 



Indian Standard 



GUIDE FOR LAYING LINING OF 

CANALS WITH HOT BITUMEN 

OR BITUMINOUS FELTS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 February 1979, after the draft finalized by the Canals and Canal 
Linings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 

0.2 For conserving water, preventing water logging and many other 
purposes, canal systems are being provided with various types of linings. 
Use of hot bitumen or bituminous felts for canal lining is one of the 
alternatives. 

0.3 Bitumen, a bye-product of petroleum industry and well known for its 
binding and water-proofing qualities is being increasingly used in lining 
work all over the world. Its main advantage over the -conventional 
materials is that no water is required during construction and no curing is 
necessary. The structure can be put to use immediately after the construc- 
tion is over. 

0.4 Bitumen lining consists of spraying a layer of bitumen at high tempera- 
ture on the prepared subgrade. It is protected from damages due to 
animal traffic and weathering by giving suitable covering of soil ( see Fig. 1 ). 

0.5 At places where spraying in-situ is costlier and time consuming, bitumen 
felts of adequate thickness and durability are used as the lining material. 
These felts are also given a suitable covering of soil to avoid damages 
{see Fig. 2). 




layer of bitumen^ 

Fig. 1 Bitumen Lining 

3 



IS : 9097 - 1979 




BITUMEN FELT BOTH / \150 TO 200mm THICK LAYER OF SOIL 

AT THE BED AND SIDES/ COVER BOTH AT BED AND SIOES 

Fig. 2 Bitumen Felt Lining 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides guidelines for laying lining of canals with: 
(a) hot bitumen, and (b) bitumen felts. 

1.2 These guidelines apply to minor distributaries and minors. 

■2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply: 

2.1 Lip Cutting — It is the extra width provided at the inner face of the 
bank under compaction to allow for any lapses in compaction due to the 
inability of compacting rollers to cover the edge of the bank. 

2.2 Made Up Ground — Excavated soil or rock deposited for the purpose 
of filling a depression or raising a site above natural level of the ground. 

2.3 Subgrade — The surface specially prepared against which lining shall 
be laid. 

2.4 Bitumen — It is a non-crystalline solid or viscous material having 
adhesive properties, derived from petroleum, either by natural or refinery 
processes and substantially soluble in carbon disulphide. 

2.5 Membrane — Any functionally continuous flexible structure of bitumen 
or prefabricated impregnated bituminous felts suitably reinforced, 

2.6 Primer — Usually a medium curing cut back bitumen or road tar of 
sufficiently low viscosity when used as an initial application to improve 
adhesion. 



IS : 9097 - 1979 

3. INFORMATION REQUIRED 

3.1 The information on the following points shall be required before 
taking up the work of lining: 

a) Nature of Soil — The nature of the soil influences infiltration, 
cohesion, permeability and water holding capacity, etc. It should 
be known whether the soil is sandy, loam, silt, silty clay. 

b) Position of Subsoil Water Level — The position of subsoil water 
level be observed before taking up the work of lining. The lining 
technique to be adopted depends upon the position of water table. 

c) Cross-Section of the Canal — The bed width, depth, bed slope are 
required to be known from the L-section of the canal to be lined. 

4. BITUMEN AS LINING MATERIAL 

4.1 The bitumen used shall conform to S 35 of IS: 73-1961* or 85/25 
specified in IS :702-1961f. 

4.2 Bitumen Felts — The bitumen felts used< shall be as per Type 2 Grade II 
of IS : 7 19 3-1 974: . 

5. PREPARATION OF SUBGRADE 

5.1 Cutting Reaches — The subgrade should be suitably shaped to the 
required cross-section before applying the lining. 

5.2 Filling Reaches — In the case of filling reaches the compaction and lip 
cutting should be suitably planned to consider the position of bitumen lining 
so that the channel attains the designed cross-section after the protective 
cover is laid over the asphaltic lining. 

5.3 Compaction of the Soil — The compaction of the subgrade is to be 
done at optimum moisture content in accordance with IS : 2720 ( Part II )« 
1973§. The subgrade should be allowed to dry before the lining is applied. 

5.4 Side Slope — The side slope should be flatter than the angle of repose. 
For normal soils, the slope could be 1|:1. For sandy soils the section 
should have a slope of 2 : 1 or flatter. 

5.5 Weed Growth — For preventing weed growth, it will be advisable to 
sterilize the soil by use of sodium chlorate or sodium carbonate which may 
be sprayed as a 5 percent solution in water at the rate of 2 1/m 2 of the 
subgrade. The tree roots and any other sharp projections are also removed 
before laying the lining. 

♦Specification for paving bitumen ( revised ). 

tSpecification for industrial bitumen ( revised ). 

^Specification for glass fibre base coal tar pitch and bitumen felts. 

§Methods of test for soils: Part II Determination of water content ( second revision ). 



IS : 9097 - 1979 

6. LINING TECHNIQUE 

6.1 Bitumen Lining — Crude oil or emulsified bitumen is sprayed over the 
subgrade at the rate of 05 1/m 2 . A water resistant film is formed due to 
surface tension which results in a good bond between the bitumen and the 
subgrade. Bitumen of grade mentioned in 4.2 is heated in heating 
pans up to a temperature of 175°C. The hot bitumen is spread on the sides 
first and then on the bed with a spraying equipment. Lining thickness 
varying from 3 to 6 mm ( 3*25 to 6*5 kg/m 2 ) is laid. The membrane 
so formed is covered with suitable protective cover of soil to protect it 
from damage. 

6.2 The following procedure is adopted for using bitumen felts: 

a) The prefabricated asphaltic membranes are laid with an over- 
lapping of 100 mm at the sides and ends. The overlap should be 
provided in the direction of the flow of water; 

b) The overlapping joint is sealed with hot bitumen ( grade 90/15 or 
115/15 ) at the rate of 0*5 kg/m 2 or suitable cold adhesive; and 

c) Suitable protective covering is then laid over the membrane. 

7. PROTECTIVE COVER 

7.1 Soil Cover — The bitumen lining is given a covering of soil varying 
from 150 to 200 mm in thickness which is quite sufficient. 

&. PRECAUTIONS 

8.1 While heating the bitumen it should be ensured that the material is not 
overheated. It should be properly stirred for uniform heating. Nobody 
should be allowed to walk on the sprayed bitumen to avoid damage to the 
lining. In the case of felts no sharp tools should damage the lining. 



