INATA Ah IS 18266 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


aaa — fatera ara aa — fate 


Textiles — Medical Respirator — 
Specification 


ICS 11.140; 59.080.01 


© BIS 2023 


dit HAR ST 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 get Me TH AM, 28 Keelt. 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


VEER 


June 2023 Price Group 7 


Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee, TXD 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Technical 
Textiles for Medtech Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division Council. 


Workers, primarily those in the health care profession, involved in treating and caring for individuals injured or 
sick, can be exposed to biological liquids capable of transmitting disease. These diseases, which may be caused 
by a variety of microorganisms, can pose significant risks to life and health. 


A medical respirator is a respiratory protective device designed to achieve a very close facial fit and covers at 
least the nose, mouth and may cover the chin. A respirator is worn by healthcare personnel (HCP) to reduce the 
wearer’s risk of inhaling hazardous airborne particles such as dusts, fumes, vapors, infectious agents and 
aerosol/fluids (for example splashes, sprays) for use in healthcare settings. 


This standard does not cover the requirement of surgical face mask which has been covered in ‘IS 16289 : 2014 
Medical textiles — Surgical face mask — Specification’ and for respiratory filtering half masks which has been 
covered in IS 9473 : 2002 Respiratory protective devices — Filtering half masks to protect against particles — 
Specification (first revision). 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18266 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
TEXTILES — MEDICAL RESPIRATOR — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the performance 
requirements and test methods of medical respirator 
intended to be worn by operating room 
personnel/staff during surgical procedures and other 
healthcare services such as patient care, with similar 
requirements. Medical respirators are used to protect 
both the surgical patient and the operating room 
personnel/staff from transfer of microorganisms, 
body fluids and particulate material. 


1.2 Medical respirator shall not have any exhalation 
valve. Respirators with exhalation valves are not 
meant to be used for medical use. Medical respirator 
is not recommended for washing or reuse due to 
performance drop (due to washing) and cross 
contamination (reuse). 


1.3 This standard does not address the design, 
construction, interfaces or other factors which may 
affect the overall protection offered by the medical 
respirator. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 8347 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Aerosol — It is the suspension of solid, liquid, or 
solid and liquid, particles in gaseous medium, the 
particles having a negligible falling velocity, 
generally considered to be less than 0.25 m/s. 


3.2 Biocompatibility — The ability to be in contact 
with a living system without producing an adverse 
effect. 


3.3 Breathing Resistance — It is the pressure 
differential between the upstream and downstream 
location caused by a medical respirator to the flow 
of breathable gas during inhalation (inhalation 
resistance) or exhalation (exhalation resistance). 


3.4 Colony Forming Unit (CFU) — A particle 
containing one or more bacterial cells which gives 
rise to a single bacterial colony on a culture plate. 


3.5 Fluid/Splash Resistance — It is defined as the 
ability of a respirator’s material construction to 
minimize fluids from travelling through the material 
and potentially coming into contact with the user 
of the respirator. Fluid resistance helps reduce 
potential exposure to blood and body fluids caused 
from splashes, spray or splatter. Resistance to 
penetration by synthetic blood is indicated as 
pass/fail at one of two distinct velocities of 120 mm 
and 160 mm of Hg. Penetration (visual evidence of 
synthetic blood on the side opposite impact results in 
failatthat pressure. Non-penetration results in a pass. 


3.6 Healthcare Personnel (HCP) — Refers to all 
paid and unpaid persons serving in healthcare 
settings who have the potential for direct or indirect 
exposure to patients or infectious materials, 
including body substances (for example blood, 
tissue, and specific body fluids); contaminated 
medical supplies, devices, and equipment; 
contaminated environmental surfaces; or 
contaminated air. These HCP may include, but are 
not limited to, emergency medical service personnel, 
nurses, nursing assistants, physicians, technicians, 
therapists, phlebotomists, pharmacists, students and 
trainees, contractual staff not employed by the health 
care facility, and persons (for example clerical, 
dietary, environmental services, laundry, security, 
maintenance, engineering and facilities 
management, administrative, billing, and volunteer 
personnel) not directly involved in patient care but 
potentially exposed to infectious agents that can be 
transmitted among from HCP and patients. 


3.7 Infective Agent — The microorganism that has 
been shown to cause surgical medical wound 
infection or that might cause infection in the patient 
or in members of the surgical medical team. 


3.8 Manufacturer — Natural or legal person with 
responsibility for the processing of raw material or 
inputs in any manner that results in the emergence 
of a new product having a distinct name, character 
and use. 


3.9 Medical Respirator — A medical respirator is 
a respiratory protective device designed to achieve a 
very close facial fit and covers at least the nose, 
mouth and may cover the chin. A respirator is worn 


IS 18266 : 2023 


by healthcare personnel (HCP) to reduce the 
wearer’s risk of inhaling hazardous airborne 
particles such as dusts, fumes, vapors, infectious 
agents and aerosol/fluids (for example splashes, 
sprays) for use in healthcare settings. 


NOTE —The edges of the respirator are designed to form 
a seal around the nose and mouth and may cover the chin. 


3.10 Penetration of Filter — Penetration is defined 
as ratio of sodium chloride (NaCl) concentration 
(after filter) by sodium chloride concentration 
(before filter) expressed in percent. 


3.11 Surgical Procedure — A surgical intervention 
penetration skin or mucosa, performed by a surgical 
team under controlled environmental conditions. 


4 MANUFACTURE AND WORKMANSHIP 


4.1 The medical respirator shall be made from 
suitable textiles material that is not prohibited for 
use for the purpose under any applicable 
law/regulation in force so that the product made out 
of this meets the requirements specified in this 
standard. The fabric used for the manufacturing of 
medical respirator shall be a single or multi-layered 


textile structure made of woven or non-woven 
(spunlace or spunbond or combination of spunbond 
and meltblown) or knitted structure. 


4.2 The medical respirator shall not disintegrate, 
split or tear during intended use. The medical 
respirator shall have a means by which it can be 
fitted closely over the nose, mouth and chin of the 
wearer and which ensures that the respirator fits 
closely at the sides (see IS 9623). The manufacturer 
shall provide the information and instruction for safe 
use of the product to the user. 


4.3 The head harness shall be so designed that the 
medical respirator can be donned and removed 
easily. The head harness shall be adjustable/self- 
adjustable and shall hold the medical respirator 
firmly and in comfortable position so that it can meet 
the requirement specified in the standard. 


5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 The medical respirators shall conform to the 
requirements as specified in Table 1. Medical 
respirators have been categorized into two classes 
based on performance IN95 and IN99. 


IS 18266 : 2023 


Table 1 Performance Requirements for Medical Respirator 


(Clause 5.1) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirements Method of Test, Ref to 
f \ 
IN95 IN99 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Breathing resistance Pa, 
nee IS 17274 (Part 2) 
(Method 1: Static breathing 
resistance) 
a) Inhalation (@30 Ipm) 70 100 
b) Inhalation (@95 Ipm) 240 300 
c) Exhalation (@ 160 Ipm) 300 300 
ii) Splash resistance, mmHg, Pass at 120 Pass at 160 Annex B 
Min 
iii) Penetration of filter, percent, 5 1 IS 17274 (Part 3) 
Max 
Sodium chloride test method 
(Full exposure particle 
penetration test) 
iv) Inward leakage, percent, 11 5 IS 17274 (Part 1) 
Max (see Note 1) 
v) CO, content, percent, Max 1 1 IS 17274 (Part 9) 
vi) Cleanliness-microbial <30 <30 ISO 11737 (Part 1) 
(CFU/g) 
vi) Flammability (resistance to Pass Pass IS 17274 (Part 10) 
flame, single burner, 
dynamic test) as received, 
(optional) (see Note 2), 
vii) Biocompatibility Evaluation 
(optional) (see Note 2) 
a) Cytotoxicity None None IS/ISO 10993-5 
b) Irritation and skin Non-irritant and Non-irritant and ISASO 10993-10 and 
sensitization non-sensitizer non-sensitizer ISO 10993-23 
NOTES 


1 When tested as per IS 17274 Part 1, the medical respirators fitted in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions, at least 46 out of 50 
individual exercise results (that is, 10 subjects x 5 exercises) for total inward leakage: 


a) Shall not be greater than 11 percent for IN95 and 5 percent for IN99. 


b) At least 8 out of 10 individual wearer arithmetic mean for total inward leakage shall not be greater than 8 percent for IN95 and 


2 percent for IN99. 


2 The requirement of biocompatibility evaluation and flammability of raw material shall be confirmed at designed stage. The 
biocompatibility evaluation and flammability test shall be carried out once for existing raw material and whenever there is a change in 
the raw material or source of supply for manufacturing the product. 


5.2 The informative annex for user of medical respirator has been given in Annex C. 


IS 18266 : 2023 


6 MARKING 


6.1 Each piece of medical respirator shall be legibly 
marked with the following information: 


a) Name of the product; 


b) Manufacturer’s name, initials or trade- 
mark, if any; 


c) Month and year of manufacture or 
Batch/Lot No; 


d) Class of medical respirator; 
e) Instruction for use; 


f) Disposability instructions — The 
manufacturer shall provide the instruction 
to users for safe disposal of the product as 
per Biomedical Waste Rules 2016 or 
applicable rules published from time to 
time; 

g) Additional features of flammability (if 
applicable); 


h) The information whether the material of the 
product is biocompatible that is meets the 
requirement of the ` standard for 
biocompatibility evaluation —- 
cytotoxicity, irritation and skin 
sensitization (if applicable); 


j) Country of origin; and 


k) Any other requirement as per Medical 
Device Rules, 2017 or as required by the 
law in force or as agreed between buyer and 
seller. 


6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


7 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


7.1 Lot 


All the medical respirators of the same class and 
material, produced under similar conditions of 
manufacture shall constitute a lot. 


7.1.1 Each lot shall be tested separately for 
ascertaining the conformity of the lot. 


7.1.2 Unless otherwise sampling plan is specified in 
the contract or order, the number of respirators to be 
selected from the lot shall depend on the size of the 
lot and shall be in accordance with col (2), col (3) 
and col (5) of Table 2. 


7.1.3 These respirators shall be selected at random 
from the lot. For this purpose, reference may be 
made to IS 4905. 


7.2 NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


7.2.1 All the medical respirators selected as percol 
(3) of Table 2 shall be examined for manufacture 
and workmanship (see 4). 


7.2.1.1 Any respirator failing in one or more of the 
above requirements shall be termed as defective. 
The lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
above requirements, if the total number of defectives 
found in the sample is less than or equal to the 
acceptance number given in col (4) of Table 3. 
Otherwise, the lot shall be rejected. 


7.2.1.2 Out of the sample already found satisfactory 
according to 7.2.1.1, a sub-sample as per col (5) of 
Table 2 shall be taken. This sub-sample shall be 
further tested for the remaining requirements. 


7.2.2 The lot shall be considered as conforming to 
the requirements of the specification, if the total 
number is less than or equal to the acceptance 
number as given in col (6) of Table 2. 


IS 18266 : 2023 


Table 2 Number of Medical Respirators to be Selected 
(Clauses 7.1.2, 7.2.1, 7.2.1.1 and 7.2.2) 


SI No. Lot size Sample size for manufacture and Sample size for the remaining 
workmanship requirements 
) | \ 
No. of Respirator Acceptance No. of Respirator Acceptance 
to be Selected Number to be Selected Number 
(1) (2) (3) ER (5) (6) 
i) Up to 280 13 1 8 0 
ii) 281 — 500 20 2 8 0 
iii) 501 — 1 200 32 3 13 0 
iv) 1 201 —3 200 50 5 13 0 
v) 3201 — 10 000 80 7 20 1 
vi) 100 001 and above 125 10 20 1 
8 PACKING packing shall be as agreed to between the buyer and 


the seller. Packaging of the product shall be such as 
to maintain the integrity of the product throughout 
its shelf life. 


The medical respirator shall be packed securely so 
as to allow normal handling and transport without 
tearing and exposing the contents. Details of the 


IS 18266 : 2023 


IS No. 
IS 4905 : 2015 


IS 8347 : 2008 


IS 9623 : 2008 


IS/ISO 10993-5 : 
2009 


IS/ISO 10993-10 : 


2021 


ISO 10993-23 : 2021 


IS 16546 : 2016/ISO 
16603 : 2004 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 
Random sampling and 
randomization procedures 
(first revision) 
Respiratory protective 
devices — Definition, 
classification and 


nomenclature of components 
(first revision) 


Selection, use and 
maintenance of respiratory 
protective devices — Code of 
practice (first revision) 


Biological evaluation of 
medical devices: Part 5 Tests 
for in vitro cytotoxicity 


Biological evaluation of 
medical devices: Part 10 
Tests for irritation and skin 
sensitization 


Biological evaluation of 
medical devices — Part 23: 
Tests for irritation 


Clothing for protection 
against contact with blood 
and body fluids — 
Determination of the 


IS No. 


IS 17274 


(Part 1) : 2019/ISO 
16900-1 : 2014 


(Part 3) : 2019/ISO 
16900-3 : 2012 


(Part 9) : 2019/ISO 
16900-9 : 2015 


(Part 10) : 2019/ISO 
16900-10 : 2015 


ISO 11737-1 : 2018 


Title 
resistance of protective 
clothing materials to 


penetration by blood and 
body fluids — Test method 
using synthetic blood 


Respiratory protective 
devices — Methods of test 
and test equipment 


Determination of inward 
leakage 
Determination of particle 


filter penetration 


Determination of carbon 
dioxide content of inhaled gas 


Resistance to ignition, flame, 
radiant heat and heat 


Sterilization of health care 
products — Microbiological 
methods — Part 1: 
Determination of a population 
of microorganisms on 
products 


IS 18266 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (ii)] 


METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF SPLASH RESISTANCE 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


A volume of synthetic blood is disbursed at a 
specimen respirator by a pneumatically controlled 
valve from a set distance at specified pressure to 
simulate the impact of blood or other body fluid onto 
the specimen. The velocity and volume of fluid are 
set to simulate a given health care scenario. 


B-2 APPARATUS AND REAGENTS 


B-2.1 A suitable test apparatus to dispense a 
specified volume of synthetic blood through a small 
diameter canula (1 .27 cm long with an internal 
diameter of 0.084 cm) over a controlled amount of 
time at a specimen respirator aset distance away. The 
testapparatus consists of a specimen holding fixture, 
a targeting plate, a pressurized fluid reservoir, a 
pneumatically actuated valve with interchangeable 
canula and a valve controller. The test apparatus 
includes a base for more convenient mounting of the 
components and a hood or other components to 
contain or control the splash. 


B-2.2 Synthetic Blood (see IS 16546) 


B-2.3 Isopropanol, laboratory grade, for cleaning 
the apparatus. 


B-3 TEST SPECIMEN 


B-3.1 Use complete medical respirators as the test 
specimen. If in the design of a medical respirator, 
different materials or thickness of material are 
specified at different locations, test each area of the 
specimen separately. If in the design of a medical 
respirator, seams are claimed to offer the same 
protection as the base material, test these areas of the 
respirator separately. 


B-3.2 Prior to test, the specimens shall be 
conditioned to moisture equilibrium in the standard 
atmosphere of temperature 27 + 2) °C and relative 
humidity of 65+2) percent. When the test specimens 
have been exposed to standard atmosphere for at least 
6h in such a way to expose as far as possible, all 
portions of the specimens to the atmosphere, they 
shall be deemed to have reached moisture 
equilibrium. 


B-4 PROCEDURE 


B-4.1 Place a small droplet (approximately 0.1 ml) 
of the synthetic blood on the normal inside surface of 
an extra medical respirator. The droplet must 
remain easily visible to ensure that a droplet 
penetrating the material shall be seen. If not, use 
talcum powder on the normal inside surface of the 
medical respirator to enhance droplet visibility. 


B-4.2 Mount a specimen on the specimen holding 
fixture and position the specimen so that the impact of 
the synthetic blood occurs in the desired area of the 
respirator. If the respirator contains pleats, spread 
the pleats out when mounting the respirator onto the 
test fixture to present a single layer of material as the 
target area. Use the centre of the specimen as the 
target area. The inside of the respirator shall contact 
the entire perimeter of the viewing hole. The 
specimen respirator shall be supported by the 
specimen holding form. Re-mount the specimen 
respirator, if necessary. 


B-4.3 Locate the exit of the canula 30.5 cm from the 


target area of the specimen respirator- Dispense the 
synthetic blood (approximately 2 ml) at a pressure 
of 120 mm or 160 mm of Hg (as applicable) onto the 
specimen medical respirator. Ensure that the 
synthetic blood hits the target area of the medical 
respirator. 


B-4.4 Inspect the viewing side of the specimen for 
synthetic blood within 10 s of dispensing the 
synthetic blood against the target area. Using 
suitable lighting note whether any synthetic blood, 
or other evidence of wetness, or both appears on the 
viewing side of the specimen. Use a cotton 
absorbent swab or similar item to lightly daub the 
target area, if doubt exists for visible penetration of 
the synthetic blood. 


B-5 TEST REPORT 


Any evidence of synthetic blood penetration on the 
inner facing of the medical respirator constitutes a 
failure at the specified pressure. 


IS 18266 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.2) 


INFORMATION FOR USERS 


C-1 A medical respirator used in a healthcare setting 
that is worn by healthcare professionals (HCPs) 
during procedures to protect both the patient and 
HCPs from the transfer of microorganisms, body 
fluids, and particulate material at different 
penetration levels of IN95 and IN 99. 


C-2 The degree of protection offered by a respirator 

depends on a number of factors such as the 
penetration of filter media and the fit of the 
respirator on the wearer’s face. Different designs are 
suited for different applications and the careful 
choice of respirator is therefore important in order to 
achieve the desired result. 


C-3 The penetration capacity of respirator materials 
can vary depending on the filter media. The fit of 
respirators varies considerably from those which are 
held in place by ear loops fastened behind the 
wearer’s ears to those with tie bands around the head 
and a nose clamp that can be shaped to the wearer’s 
nose. 


C-4 The considerable variations in results when 
respirators are tested in vivo results in the need for 
large groups of test subjects and observations. It is 
thus usual to characterize respirator performance 
using in vitro tests of the material from which the 
respirator is made. It is, however, important to 
consider the fit of the respirator carefully when a 
respirator for a certain application is chosen. Users 
should request such information from their 
suppliers. 


C-5 A further factor to be considered is the capacity 
of the respirator to absorb moisture from the exhaled 
air and thereby to maintain its performance over a 
longer period of time. The more advanced designs 
easily maintain their performance throughout even 
very long operations whereas the less advanced ones 
are intended only for short procedures. There is no 


scientific evidence that demonstrates a limitation in 
wearing time for the advanced medical respirators. 


C-6 The contamination risk resulting from hand 
contact with a used respirator means that it is 
essential that the respirator is taken off and disposed 
of when no longer worn over nose and mouth. When 
there is a further need for protection then a new 
respirator should be put on. Touching a used 
respirator or putting on a new one should always be 
followed by a full hand disinfection procedure. 


C-7 It is important to wear your respirator properly, 
so it forms a seal to your face. Gaps can let air with 
respiratory droplets leak in and out around the edges 
of the respirator. Gaps can be caused by choosing 
the wrong size or type of respirator or when a 
respirator is worn with facial hair. 


C-8 Do not wear medical respirators, 


a) If they have exhalation valves, vents, or 
other openings; 

b) If it is hard to breathe while wearing them; 

c) If they are wet or dirty; and 


d) With other masks or respirators. 


C-9 Medical respirators are typically designed to be 
used for the use of adults and therefore they have not 
been tested for broad use in children. So, the usage 
of medical respirator for children are not 
recommended by this standard. 


C-10 In case of wearer has a hard time breathing, 
gets dizzy, or has other serious symptoms while you 
are trying to get the respirator to fit better, choose a 
surgical face mask or regular cloth mask. They 
should seek immediate healthcare provider advice 
and to continue the suitable local government 
norms to protect themselves and others. 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


IS 18266 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Technical Textiles for Medtech Applications, TXD 36 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore 


3 M India Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Indian Medical Devices (AiMeD), New Delhi 


All Indian Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Cologenesis Healthcare Pvt Ltd, Salem 


Defence Research & Development Establishment (DRDE), 


Gwalior 


DGAFMS, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi. 


DGQA (Ministry of Defence), New Delhi 


Dima Products, Mumbai 


Director General of Health Services, New Delhi 


Dispoline India Private Limited, Bangalore 


Dr. Sabharwals Manufacturing Labs Pvt Ltd, Panchkula 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry, 
New Delhi 


Ginni Filaments Limited, Noida 


Govt Medical College & ESI Hospital, Coimbatore 


Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Indian Technical Textile Association,Mumbai 


Johnson & Johnson Ltd., Mumbai 
KOB Medical Textiles Pvt Ltd, Palladam 


Livinguard Technologies Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai 


Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


DR PRAKASH VASUDEVAN (Chairperson) 


SHRI KULVEEN SINGH BALI 
SHRIMATI PRABHA HEGDE (Alternate) 


DR G. D. AGARWAL 
SHRI JITENDRA SACHCHADE (Alternate) 


DR VIJAYDEEP SIDDHARTH 
DR ANOOP DAGA (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RITIKA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRIR. KRISHNA KUMAR 
SHRI K. RAMPRASAD (Alternate) 


DR VIKAS B. THAKRE 
SHRI SURAJ BHARATI (Alternate) 


COL RAMESH CHANDRA 
SURG LT CDR KOTIAN V. GOPAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SENTHIL KUMAR 
SHRI ARNAB DAS (Alternate) 


SHRI NIRAV MEHTA 


DR NARESH PANCHAL 
DR B. S. CHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT MARWAH 


SHRI MANISH SABHARWAL 
SHRI DHRUV SABHARWAL (Alternate) 


DR SANJIIV REHLAN 
Ms TULSI (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMOD SHARMA 


DR N. TAMILSELVEN 
DR K. KULENDAIVELU (Alternate) 


DR SADHANA SRIBVASTAV 


PROF ASHWINI AGARWAL 
PROF BIPIN KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ANUP RAKSHIT 
SHRI MAHESH KUDAV (Alternate) 


MS ROOCHA KHEDKAR 


SHRI ARUN BUCHADE 
SHRI T. BALAJI (Alternate) 


MS SHIVANI SWAMY 
SHRI VIRENDER MADIYAR (Alternate) 


DR PAWANINDRA LAL 
D. BHARTI WADHWA (Alternate) 


IS 18266 : 2023 
Organization 


Medline Healthcare Industries Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Ministry of Textiles (NTTM), New Delhi 
National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Nobel Hygiene, Mumbai 


Office of the Drug Controller (CDSCO), Delhi 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


PGIMER, Chandigarh 


Procter and Gamble Co., Mumbai 


Surgicotfab Textile Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 
The Pad Project (NGO) India, New Delhi 


The South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ANTHONY DCOSTA 
SHRI DHAVAL GHUGE (Alternate) 
DR MUKESH KUMAR SINHA 


DR SANJAY YADAV 
DR SHANKAR G. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMAL JOHARI 
SHRI JOY DEVASSY (Alternate) 


DR RAVIKANT SHARMA 
SHRI ARVIND HIWALE (Alternate) 


SHRI SIVAKUMAR S. 
SHRI NARROTAM KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ ARORA 


SHRI PRASHANT JADHAV 
SHRI GIRISH PARHATE (Alternate) 


SHRI PARESH PATEL 


SHRI KARTIKEYAN DHANDA 
DR P. RAVICHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ARUNA APTE 
SHRIMATI TANYA MAHAJAN 


SHRIS. SIVAKUMAR 
DR E. SANTHINI (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATIS. S. DONGRE (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. GUPTA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (TEXTILES) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DHARMBEER 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(TEXTILES), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 36 (19627). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


