Gr 11 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 to 5 )- 1988 
( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 


Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2015) 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY (Feaffirmed 2021) 


PART 65 TRANSMISSION 


UDC 001-4-621°391-3/-6 


© Copyright 1988 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 1988 


IS ; 1885 ( Part 65/Sec I to 5 ) - 1988 


Indian Standard 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 


PART 65 TRANSMISSION 


0 FOREWORD 


0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 65/Sec 1 to 5) 
was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 23 February 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommuni- 
cation in consultation with the Radio Communi- 
cations Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Electronics and Telecommunication 
Division Council. 
0.2 A series of standards has been brought out 
with a view to bringing together the terms 
relating to radio communications covering differ- 
ent aspects, such as circuits, sound and television 
broadcasting, transmitting and receiving i 
ment, radio telegraphy and mobile radio, etc. 
0.2.1 This standard deals with terms relating 
to information transmission as applied to radio 
communications. 


0.3 The terminology on transmission has been 
covered in the following five sections: 


Sec I 
Sec2 Analogue transmission 

Sec 3 Time division multiplexing 
Sec 4 Digital transmission 

Sec5 Pulse code modulation 


General aspects of transmission 


0.4 This standard is based on IEC Doc: 1 ( IEV 
704 ) ( Central Office ) 1241 ‘International 
electrotechnical vocabulary Chapter 704 of IEV: 
Transmission’, issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission ( IEC ). 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 ) - 1988 


Indian Standard 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 


PART 65 TRANSMISSION 
Section 1 General Aspects of Transmission 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard ( Part 65/Sec 1 ) covers defini- 
tions of terms relating to general aspects of in- 
formation transmission. 


2. TERMINOLOGY 
2.1 Basic Terms in Transmission 


2.1.1 Information — Intelligence or knowledge 
capable of being represented in forms suitable for 
communication, storage or processing. 

Nors — Information may be represented for 
example by signs, symbols, pictures or 
2.1.2 Signal — A physical phenomenon one or 

more of whose characteristics may vary to repre- 
sent information. 

Nota — The physical phenomenon may be, for 
instance, an electromagnetic wave or an acoustic wave, 
and the characteristic may be an electric field, a 
voltage, or a sound pressure. 


2.1.3 Analogue Signal — A signal in which the 
characteristic quantity representing information 
may assume, at any instant, any value in a con- 
tinuous interval. 

Nors — For example, an analogue signal may 
continuously follow the values of another physical 
quantity representing information, 

2.1.4 Discretely-Timed Signal — A signal com- 

ed of successive elements in time, each ele- 
ment having one or more characteristic quantities 
which can convey information, for example, its 
duration, its position in time, its waveform, its 
amplitude. 

2.1.5 Digital Signal A discretely-timed 
signal in which information is represented by a 
number of well defined discrete values that one of 
its characteristic quantities may take in time. 

2.1.6 Transmission — The transfer of informa- 
tion from one point to another point or to multi- 
point by means of signals. 

Nore | — Transmission can be effected directly, 
or indirectly with or without intermediate storage. 

Norr 2 — The use of the word ‘transmission’ in the 
sense of ‘emission’ in the radio communication is 
deprecated. 


Associated term : To transmit 


2.1.7 Analogue Transmission — The transmission 
of an analogue signal. 


2.1.8 Digital Transmission — The tranamission 
of a digital signal. 

2.1.9 Unidirectional — Pertaining to a link 
where the transfer of users’ information is possible 
in one pre-assigned direction only. 

Norm — This term should not be used to describe 
the direction of call set-ups. 

2.1.10 Bidirectional — Pertaining to a link 
where the transfer of users’ information is possible 
in both directions between two points. 

Norm I — The transmission channel capacities or 
digit rates are not necessarily the same in both direc- 
tions. 

Nora 2 — This term shall not be used to describe 
the direction of call set-ups. 


2.1.11 One-Way — Pertaining to an operational 
mode in which the call set-ups always occur in 
one direction. 


Norm — This term shall not be used to describe the 
direction of transfer of users’ information. 


2.1.12 Both-Way ; Two-Way — Pertaining to 
an operational mode in which the call set-ups 
occur in both directions. 


Nora I — The amount of traffic flowing is not 
necessarily the same in both directions. 


Nore 2 — These terms shall not be used ‘to describe 
the direction of transfer of users’ information. 


2.1.13 Simplex Operation — Operating method 
in which transmission is made possible alternately 
in each direction of a telecommunication channel, 
for example, by means of manual control. 


2.1.14 Duplex Operation — Operating method in 
which transmission is possible simultaneously in 
both directions of a telecommunication channel. 


2.1.15 Data — Information represented in a 
manner suitable for automatic processing. 


2.1.16 Data Communication; Data Transmission 
( deprecated in this sense ) — Å form of telecom- 
munication intended for transfer of information 
between data processing equipments. 


2.1.17 Data Transmission — The conveying of 
data from one place to another by telecommuni- 
cation. 

Nors — The term ‘data transmision’ is deprecat 
in the sense of ‘data communication’. ; 


2.2 Transmission Media 


2.2.1 Transmission Medium — A natural medi- 
um or manufactured structure through or over 
which a signal is conveyed. 

2.2.2 Transmission Line — A manufactured 
transmission medium used to convey electro- 
magnetic energy between two points with a mini- 
mum of radiation. 


2.2.3 Earth Return — An electrically conducting 
path provided through the earth or the sea be- 
tween two points. 


2.2.4 Symmetric Pair — A transmission line 
consisting of two metallic conductors of the same 
type, symmetrically arranged in relation to each 
other, to earth, and to other circuits. 


2.2.5 Coaxial Pair — A transmission line consist- 
ing of two coaxial cylindrical conductors. 


2.2.6 Waveguide — A transmission line consisting 
of a system of material boundaries or structure for 
guiding electromagnetic waves. 

Nors — The most common form of waveguide is 

a metallic tube, other forms are a dielectric rod, for a 

mixed structure of conducting and dielectric materials. 

2.2.7 Optical Fibre — A filament-shaped optical 
waveguide made of dielectric materials, capable 
of guiding optical power. 

2.2.8 Space — A transmission medium in which 
manufactured structures are not used for guiding 
electromagnetic energy. 


2.3 Physical Transmission Circuits 


2.3.1 Metallic Circuit — A circuit composed of 
a pair of metallic conductors between two points. 


2.3.2 Balanced Metallic Circuit; Balanced Trans- 
mission Line ( deprecated ) — A circuit, between 
two points, composed of a pair of metallic con- 
ductors and associated terminations, with the 
whole ideally having equal impedances from each 
conductor to earth and to other circuits, 


2.3.3 Unbalanced Metallic Circuit; Unbalanced 
Transmission Line ( deprecated ) — A circuit, be- 
tween two points, composed of a pair of metallic 
conductors and associated terminations, with the 
whole having different impedances from each 
conductor to earth and to other circuits. 


2.3.4 Earth-Return Circuit — A circuit, between 
two points, obtained by using a single metallic 
conductor, or a number of metallic conductors in 


parallel, with return through the earth or the sea 
between these points. 


2.3.5 Superposed Circuit — An additional circuit 
obtained from one or more conductors provided 
for other circuits, and arranged so that all the cir- 
cuits may be used simultaneously. 


Notz— An exampl: å 
phantom circuit. Re å neal oe 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 ) - 1988 


2.3.6 Side Circuit — One of the metallic circuits 
from which a superposed circuit is derived, 


2.3.7 Earth Phantom Cirucit — A superposed 
circuit derived from the conductors of a metallic 
circuit, with these two conductors effectively 
being used in parallel, and with return through 
the earth or the sea between the end points, 


2.3.8 Phantom Circuit — A superposed circuit 
derived from the conductors of two metallic cir- 
‘cuits, with the two conductors of each metallic 
circuit effectively being used in parallel. 


2.3.9 Double Phantom Circuit — A superposed 
circuit derived from the conductors of two 
phantom circuits, with the four conductors of 
each phantom circuit effectively being used in 
parallel. 


2.4 Transmission Networks 


9.4.1 Transmission Path — The course taken 
by a signal during its transmission between two 
points. 


2.4.2 ( Transmission ) Channel — A means of 
transmission of si in one direction between 
two points. 


Norm i — Several channels may share a common 
path, for example, where each channel is allocated a 
particular frequency band or a particular time-slot. 

Nors 2 — The usage of the term ‘communication 
channel’ or its abbreviation ‘channel’ to mean *tele- 
communication circuit’, for example, to encompass the 
two directions of transmission, is deprecated. 

Nore 3 — A transmission channel may be qualified 
by the nature of transmitted signals, or its bandwidth, 
or its digit rate, for example, telephone channel, 
telegraph channel, data channel, 10 MHz channel, 34 
Mbit/s channel. i 


2.4.3 ( Telecommunication ) Circuit — A com- 
bination of two transmission channels permitting 
transmission in both directions between two 
points. 

Nore 1 — If the telecommunication is by nature 
unidirectional, for example, long distance television 
transmission, the term ‘circuit’ is sometimes used to 
designate the single transmission channel providing the 
facility but this usage is deprecated. 

Nore 2 — A telecommunication circuit may be 
qualified by the nature or characteristics of the trans- 
mitted signals, for example, telephone circuit, telegraph 
circuit, data circuit, digital circuit. 

Nors 3 — Characteristics of the transmission 
channels, such as bandwidth or digit rate may be 
different in the two directions of transmission. 

Nors 4 — In telephony, usage of the term ‘tele- 
phone circuit’ is generally limited to a telecommuni- 
cation circuit directly connecting two switching centres. 


2.4.4 Go Channel ( Return Channel ) — One of a 
pair of channels used to provide a telecommuni- 
cation circuit, normally handing signals which 
leave ( arrive at ) a given point. 

Norm — The qualifications ‘go’ and ‘return’ 
usually highly localised; A canal tofectedh tte å gå 


I at one point in a network may be referred to s5 
a return channel at another point, and vice-vers8. 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 ) - 1988 


2.4.5 Distribution Frame — A structure provid- 
ing flexibility of semi-permanent interconnection 
of channels and circuits, by terminating them and 
providing means for connecting them together in 
any required order. 

Norz I — Å distribution frame permits any semi- 
permanent inter-connection of subscribers’ lines and 
line terminal multiplex, switching, signalling and 
other equipment. The semi-permanent interconnec- 
tions may be changed as required from time to time. 


Nors 2 — Examples of the technology used for 
semi-permanent interconn: are wires, U-links, 
and plugs and sockets, all of which are set up and re- 

ed manually, and electrom ic or electronic 
switches which can be operated locally or remotely. 
2.4.6 ( Transmission ) Link — A means of 
telecommunication with specified characteristics 
between two points. 

Nore — The type of transmission path or the capa- 
citv is normally indicated, for example, “line link, 
radio link, broadband link. 

2.4.7 Line Link — A transmission link provided 
by a manufactured transmission medium. 

Nors — Examples of a line link are a symmetric 
pair line link, a coaxial line link, a waveguide lme 
link, and optical fibre line link, 


2.4.8 Radio Link — A transmission link provi- 
ded by means of radio waves, 
Norm — Examples of a radio link are a radio-relay 


link, a satellite link, direct wireless link, troposcatter 
link, etc, j 


2.4.9 Transmission System 


2.4.9.1 The organized set of principles 
defining a particular method of transmission. 


2.4.9.2 The whole of the means of trans- 
mission between two points, comprising of: 
a) Transmission medium, 
b) Terminal equipments, 
c) Any necessary intermediate equipments, 
an 


d) Any equipment provided for such ancillary 
purposes as power feeding, supervision, 
testing. 

2.4.10 Transmitted Source Signal — A signal 

applied to an input port of the transmitting ter- 
minal equipment of a transmission system. 


Norg — A transmitted source signal of one trans- 
mission system may be a received source signal of 
another transmission system. 


2.4.11 Received Source Signal — A signal emitted 
from an output port of the receiving terminal 
equipment of a transmission system, 


Nore 1 — Ideally, a received source signal shall be 
an undistorted version of the corresponding transmitted 
source signal. 

Norg 2— A received source signal of one trans- 
mission system may be a transmitted source signal of 
another transmission system, 


2.4.12 Line Signal — The signal actually trans- 
mitted over a transmission channel. 


. Nors — Where the line signal needs to have a 
different form from that of the sigual applied to the 
input port of the terminal equipment, this terminal 
equipment carries out the required reversible process- 
ing, such as modulation, multiplexing, and coding. 
2.4.13 Two-Wire Transmission; 2-Wire Trans- 

mission — A method of transmission in which the 
go and return channels use the same path and 
the same frequency band at the same time. 


2.4.14 Four-Wire Transmission; 4-Wire Transmis- 
sion — A method of transmission in which the go 
and return channels use separate paths, or 
separate frequently bands, or separate time inter- 
vals, or other means of separation throughout. 


2.4.15 Two-Wire Circuit; 2-Wire Circuit — A 
telecommunication circuit that provides two-wire 
transmission. 

Nor» I — An example of a two-wire circuit is one 
formed from a pair of metallic conductors. 

Nors 2 — Certain types of two-wire circuit were 
formerly known as two-wire type circuite, The term 
‘two-wire type circuit’ is deprecat 
2.4.16 Four-Wire Circuit; 4-Wire Circuit — A 

telecommunication circuit that provides four-wire 
transmission. 

Nors I — An example of a four-wire circuit is one 


formed from two pairsof metallic conductors arranged 
as two channels, one im each direction. 


Nore 2 — Certain types of four-wire circuit were 
formerly known as four-wire type circuits, The term 
‘four-wire type circuit’ is deprecated. 

2.4.17 ( Four-Wire | Terminating Set; 4-Wire 
Terminating Set; 4 W/2W Terminating Set — An 
assembly of apparatus used to terminate the go 
and return channels of a four-wire circuit, and to 
provide connections between these channels and 
a two-wire circuit. 

2.5 Repeaters 


2.5.1 Repeater — An equipment, essentially 
including one or several amplifiers and/or regene- 
rators and associated devices, inserted at a point 
in a transmission medium. 


Nors — A repeater may operate in one or both 
directions of transmission. 


2.5.2 Analogue Repeater — Å repeater for 
amplifying analogue signals or digital signals, but 
not capable of regenerating digital signals. 

2.5.3 Regenerative Repeater — A repeater for 
regenerating digital signals. 

Norm — A regenerative repeater is sometimes 
referred to as a ‘regenerator’, 


2.5.4 Two-Wire Reapater; 2-Wire Repeater — A 
repeater for use at a point in a two-wire circuit 
and which provides gain for both directions of 
transmission. 


2.5.5 Four-Wire Repeater; ¢-Wire Repeater — A 
repeater for use at a point in a four-wire circuit 
and which provides gain for both directions of 
transmission. 


2.5.6 Section Termination — A conventional in- 
terface selected to be the boundary between the 
physical transmission medium and_ its assoicated 
equipment, such as repeaters. 

Nors — The location of the section termination in 
relation to the accessories, such as splicea, connectors 
and flexible connecting cables, may differ for different 
transmission systems, different manufacturers and diffe- 
rent administrations. 


2.5.7 Elementary Cable Section — The whole of 
the physical transmission medium and accessories, 
such as splices, connectors, flexible connecting 
cables, included between two consecutive section 
terminations. 


Nors — The main transmission medium usually 
consists of several factory lengths of cable connected 
together. 


2.5.8 Elementary Repeater Section; Elementary 
Repeatered Section — In a given direction of 
transmission, and elementary cable section to- 
gether with the immediately following regenerative 
repeater, all included between two section 
terminations. 

2.5.9 Elementary Regenerator Section; Elementary 
Regenerated Section — In a given direction of 
transmission, and elementary cable section to- 
gether with the immediately following analogue 
repeater, all included between two section termi- 
nations. 


2.6 Repeater Stations | 


2.6.1 Repeater Station — An aggregate of transmi- 
ssion equipment at one location, usually including 
repeaters and other equipment for such functions 
as signalling, modulating, multiplexing, monitor- 
ing, and power feeding. 


2.6.2 Locally-Controlled ( Repeater ) Station — A 
repeater station with means for adjusting the 
characteristics of repeaters under manual contro} 
or automatically under the control of locally 
derived signals. ; 


2.6.3 Controlling ( Repeater) Station — A repe- 
ater station which originates signals for remotely 
controlling the characteristics of repeaters in other 
repeater stations, 


2.6.4 Remotely-Controlled ( Repeater) Station — 
A repeater station with means for adjusting the 
characteristics of repeaters under the control of 
signals received from a controlling repeater 
station. 


2.6.5 Directly-Powered ( Repeater) Station — A 
repeater station which receives its electric energy 
directly from the local mains or from a local 
generator. 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 ) - 1988 


2.6.6 Power-Feeding (Repeater) Station — A 
directly-powered repeater station which supplies 
electric energy to other repeater stations. 


2.6.7 Dependent ( Repeater ) Station — A repeater 
station which receives its electric energy from a 


_ power-feeding repeater station. 


Nors — Electric energy may be conveyed to a 
dependent repeater station by the physical transmission 
medium itself, or by conductors in the same cable 
sheath, or by another exterior cable. 


2.7 Echo Control 


2.7.1 Echo — An electric, acoustic or electro- 
magnetic wave which arrives at a given point, 
after reflection, or indirect propagation, with 
sufficient magnitude and delay for it to be dis- 
tinguishable from the direct wave. 


2.7.2 Echo Control — The intentional reduction 
of unwanted echoes arising in a telecommuni- 
cation circuit. ; 

Nor» — The reduction may be effected, for exam- 


ple, by techniques of impedance balancing, inserting 
loss, or cancelling. 


2.7.3 Echo Suppression — A method of echo 
control in which the reduction of echoes is effec- 
ted by the insertion of loss in the transmission 
path(s) under the control of the voice signals 

cing transmitted, 


2.7.4 Echo Suppressor — A device placed in the 
4-wire part of a telecommunication circuit for 
effecting echo suppression. 


Norm — An echo suppressor may operate on a 
multiplex signal. å 


- 2.7.5 Full Echo Suppressor — An echo suppressor 
in which voice signals in one transmission path 
control the insertion of a large loss in the other 
transmission path, and vice-versa. : 


2.7.6 Half Echo Suppressor; Split Echo Suppres- 
sor — An echo suppressor in which the voice 
signals in one transmission path control the in- 
sertion of a large loss in the other transmission 
path, but not vice-versa. 


Norm — These echo suppressors are normally used 
in pairs in telecommunication circuits. 
2.7.7 Unoperated State ( of an Echo Suppressor ) — 
The state of an echo suppressor in which it does 
not insert loss in either direction of transmission, 


Nors — This state may result from th lication 
ofa disabling signal. y oe 


2.1.8 Suppression State ( of an Echo Suppressor ) — 
The state of an echo suppressor in which one 
transmission path is carrying voice signals and the 
echo suppressor has inserted a large loss in tbe 
other transmission path, i 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 ) - 1988 


2.7.9 Break-in State ( of an Echo Suppressor ) — 
The state of an echo suppressor which results 
from the simultaneous presence of voice signals in 
both transmission paths and the large loss requi- 
red for the suppression state is not inserted. 

Norm — Å small loss is normally inserted in at 
least one of the transmission paths. 

2.7.10 Echo Cancellation — A method of echo 
control in which the reduction of echoes is effec- 
ted by subtracting an estimated echo from each 
circuit echo, 


2.7.11 Echo Cancellor — A device placed in the 
4-wire part of a telecommunication circuit for 
effecting echo cancellation. 


Nor» — An echo cancellor may operate on a 
multiplex signal. 
2.7.12 Disabling ( in Echo Control ) — The 
action of preventing an echo control device from 
carrying out its echo control functions. 


Associated term : To disable 


2.7.13 Enabling (in Echo Control) — The 
action of permitting an echo control device to 
resume its echo control functions after being 
disabled. 


Associated term : 
2.8 Multiplexing 


2.8.1 Multiplexing — A reversible process for 
assembling signals from several separate sources 
into a single composite signal for transmission 
over a common transmission channel; this process 
is equivalent to dividing the common channel 
into distinct channels for transmitting indepen- 
dent signals in the same direction. 

To multiplex, multiplex, 
multiplexed 

2.8.2 Multiplex Signal; Multiplexed Signal — The 
composite signal produced by multiplexing several 
signals, 

2.8.3 Demultiplexing — A process applied to a 
composite signal, formed by multiplexing, for 
recovering the original independent signals, or 
groups of these signals. 

Nors — Demultiplexing may be partial, for 
example, for extracting a primary group from a second- 
ary group. 


Associated terms : 


To enable 


Associated terms: 


To demultiplex, 
demultiplexed 


2.8.4 Derived Channel — Any of the separate 
channels provided by multiplexing. 

2.8.5 Frequency Division Multiplexing, (FDM) — 
Multiplexing in which several independent 
signals are allocated separate frequency bands for 
transmission over a common channel. 


2.8.6 Wavelength Division Multiplexing 
( WDM ) — Multiplexing in which several in- 
dependent signals are allotted separate waveleng- 
ths for transmission over a common optical 
transmission mediur. 
Nor» — Wavelength division multiplexing is a 
form of frequency division multiplexing. The use of a 
special term avoids confusion with the possible use of 
frequency division multiplexing in assembling the base- 
band signal which has to be carried over the optical 
link by one wavelenth. 
Associated term : Wavelength-derived 
channel 
2.8.7 Time Division Multiplexing ( TDM ) — 
Multiplexing in which several independent signals 
are allotted separate periodic time intervals for 
transmission over a common channel. 


Associated term : Time-derived channel 


2.8.8 Code Division Multiplexing ( CDM ) — 
Multiplexing in which several independent signals 
are allotted orthogonal signals for transmission 
over a common channel. 

Nors — In code division multiplexing, the signal 
elements allotted to distinguish the channels are so 
shaped that they cam be easily distinguished and 
separated by using am appropriate operation although 
they may overlap in time and frequency when transmi- 
tted over a common channel. 


Associated term : Code-derived channel 


2.8.9 Multiplex Transmission; Multiplexed Trans- 
mission — A method of transmission employing 
multiplexing at the input terminal of a transmi- 
ssion path and complementary demultiplexing at 
the output terminal, 


Associated term : 


2.8.10 Carrier Transmission — A form of trans- 
mission in which the transmitted signal is the 
result of the modulation of one or more carriers 
by one or more signals. 

Nors — This term is usually qualified by the 
method of modulation, for example, single sideband 

( carrier ) transmission. 

Associated term : 


2.8.11 Multichannel Carrier Transmission; Multi- 
channel FDM Transmission; Analogue Carrier 
Transmission — A form of carrier transmission on 
a common path provided for several independent 
signals by a combination of single or double side- 
band transmission and frequency division multi- 
plexing. 

Norg I — In multichannel carrier transmission, the 
carriers may be transmitted or suppressed. 
Norg 2 —CCITT normally uses the 
‘analogue carrier transmission’. 
Associated terms : 
Multichannel carrier system, multichannel 


Multiplex system 


Carrier system 


term 


Associated term : Frequency-derived channel FDM system, analogue carrier system 


2.8.12 Multichannel PCM Transmission — A 
form of transmission on a common path provided 
for several independent signals by a combination 
of pulse code modulation and time division 
multiplexing, 


Associated term: Multichannel PCM system 


2.8.13 Multiplexer — An equipment for effect- 
ing multiplexing. 


18 : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 ) - 1988 
2.8.14 Demultiplexer — An equipment for 
effecting demultiplexing. 

2.8.15 Muldex : Muldem — An assembly of a 
multiplexer and a demultiplexer operating in 
opposite directions of transmission in the same 
equipment. 

Nors — When used to describean equipment, the 


function of that equipment shall qualify the title, for 
example, PCM muldex, data muldex, digital muldex. 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 2 ) « 1988 


Indian Standard 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 


PART 65 TRANSMISSION 
Section 2 Analogue Transmission 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard ( Part 65/Sec 2 ) covers defini- 
tions and terms relating to analogue transmission. 


2. TERMINOLOGY 
2.1 Basic Terms in Analogue Transmission 


2.1.1 Frequency Spectrum — The continuum of 
frequencies that can be used for transmission of 
signals in telecommunications. 


2.1.2 Frequency Band — A portion of the fre- 
quency spectrum lying between two specified 
limiting frequencies. 


. Nor — See Note 2 under 2.1.3.1. 


2.1.3 Bandwidth — The numerical difference 
between the frequencies at the extremities of a 
portion of the frequency spectrum. 


2.1.3.1 X dB bandwidth — The width of a 
frequency band such that beyond its lower and 
upper limits, any discrete component or 
continuous spectral power density is at least X dB 
lower than a predetermined 0 dB reference level. 


Nore I — This term is usually associated with a 
qualification, for example bandwidth, nece- 
ssary bandwidth, bandwidtb of an amplifier or a device. 


Norm 2 — A clear distinction must be drawn 
between: 


a) The frequency band which occupies a clearly 
defined position in the frequency spectrum, 
and which is characterized by two values, 
namely, its lower and upper limits, or by any 
equivalent means; and 

b) The bandwidth which is expremed by only a 
single value. This value is the difference be- 
tween the limits of a frequency band but these 
limits may have any position in the spectrum 
with & constant difference. 


2.1.4 Baseband—By convention, that frequency 
band occupied by one signal or by a number of 
multiplexed signals, at specified input and output 
points of a transmission system. 


Nore 1 — In the case of a radiocommunication, the 
baseband is that frequency band which is occupied by 
the signal modulating the transmitter. 


Nore 2 — Where the transmission involves multi- 
ple modulation, it is generally considered that the 
baseband is that frequency band occupied by the signal 
which is applied to the first modulation stage, not 


by an intermediate modulated signal. 


2.1.5 Baseband Transmission —The transmission 
of signals in their original frequency band. 


2.1.6 Voice-Frequency Channel; VF Channel — A 
channel that provides the frequency band required 
for transmission of telephone quality speech, and 
that operates at the original audio frequencies, 

Nore | — A voice-frequency channel normally has 
a standardized frequency band of 300-3 400 Hz. 

Nors 2 — Signals, other than speech signals, hav- 
ing appropriate specified characteristics may occupy the 
whole or a part of a voice-frequency channel. 

Nors 3 — The use of this term to denote a wider 
band channel, such as the one suitable for high quality 
sound signals, is deprecated. 

2.1.7 Sound Programme Channel—-A channel that 
provides the frequency band required for the 
transmission of high quality sound ugnals. 


2.1.8 Repeater Distribution Frame; RDF — A dis- 
tribution frame in a repeater station for intercon- 
necting voice-frequency and signalling channels 
and circuits, with or without repeaters. 


2.2 Frequency Division Multiplexing 


2.2.1 Frequency Translation — The transfer en 
block of the spectral components of a signal from 
one position in the frequency spectrum to another 
in such a way that the absolute value of the fre- 
quency difference between any pair of components 
is preserved, as well as the relative amplitude and 
phase of each component. 

Nors I — Frequency translation may be accompa- 
nied by frequency inversion, in which case the sign of 
the frequency difference between any pair of component 
is reversed. 

Nors 2—A composite signal produced by frequency 
division multiplexing may itself be subjected to further 
frequency translation. 


2.2.2 Carrier — An oscillation or wave, usually 
periodic, some characteristic of which is intended 
to be constrained by modulation to follow the 
values of a signal or another oscillation. 


2.2.3 Carrier Frequency ( in Multichannel Carrier 
Transmission ) — The specified frequencies of the 
carriers used for effecting modulation and demo- 
dulation in frequency translating equipments. 


2.2.4 Channel ( Group) (...) Carrier Frequencies — 
A specified set of carrier frequencies used by 
channel ( group ) (...) translating equipment for 
the frequency translation of channels ( groups ) 


Associated terms: 

a) Group carrier frequencies; 

b) Supergroup carrier frequencies; 

c) Mastergroup carrier frequencies; 

d) Supermaster group carrier frequencies; and 

e) 15 supergroup assembly carrier frequencies; 
hypergroup carrier frequencies. 


2.2.5 Guard Band:— A frequency band left be- 
tween the limits specified for two adjacent 
channels in multichannel carrier transmission, 
with a width chosen to reduce mutual inter- 
ference. 


2.2.6 ( FDM Telephone ) Channel — A channel 
that has a standardized bandwidth suitable for 
the transmission of telephone quality speech in 
multichannel carrier transmission, and that occu- 
pies one of a number of specified positions in the 
frequency spectrum. 

Norm I —An FDM telephone channel normally has 

a standardized bandwidth of 4 kHz, this being sufficient 

for a signal occupying a frequency band of 300-3 400 Hz, 

for outband signalling, and for the required guard bands. 


Nore 2 —Signals, other than speech signals, having 
appropriate specified characteristics may occupy the 
whole ora part of an FDM telephone channel. 


2.2.7 Channel Translating Equipment; Channel 
Bank — Equipment used for frequency translation 
of a specified number of voice-frequency channels 
and their assembly into a specified frequency band 
normally 12 voice-frequency channels into a basic 
group, and for performing the complementary 
process. 

2.2.8 Group 

a) The assembly, obtained by frequency divi- 

sion multiplexing of a specified number of 
FDM telephone channels, normally 12, in 
adjacent positions ina frequency band of 
specified width constituting the first level 
in the standardized frequency division 
multiplex hierarchy. 
A frequency band of standardized width, 
48 kHz, in a multichannel carrier system 
and occupying one ofa number of specified 
positions in the spectrum. . 

Nors 1 — A is 
12 FDM A pe re de red) 
width. But in some systems, for example, those 
systems used over submarine cables, a group is an 


assembly of 16 FDM teleph channels. 
S kHz bandwidth, 7 my Gach: of 


Nor» 2 — Signals other than those deri 
from FDM telephone channels, may Ré 
whole or a part of the frequency band normally 
assigned to a group. 

2.2.9 Group A ( obsolete term ), 
( deprecated ) — A group 
ency band 12-60 kHz. 


2.2.10 Basic Group; Basic Group B ( deprecated ); 


Group B ( obsolete term ) — A ocen 
the frequeney bond 60-108 kHz. ep pying 


b 


x 


» Basic Group A 
occupying the frequ- 


IS 1 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 2 ) - 1998 


2.2.11 Sub-Group — An assembly, obtained by 
frequency division multiplexing, of a specified 
number of FDM telephone channels in adjacent 

itions in a frequency band of specified width, 
and normally used as an intermediate stage in the 
formation of a group. The number of channels in 
a sub-group is a sub-multiple of the number of 
channels in a group. 

Nors — A subgroup may sometimes be transmitted 
without subsequent formation into a complete group. 
2.2.12 Group Modulating Equipment — Equipment 

used for frequency translation of one basic group 
into a specified frequency band, for example, into 
the band 12-60 kHz, and for performing the com- 

plementary process. 


2.2.13 Group Translating Equipment; Group Bank — 
Equipment used for frequency translation of a 
specified number of basic groups and their assem- 
bly into a specified frequency band, normally 5 
basic groups into a basic supergroup, and for 
performing the complementary process. 


2.2.14 Supergroup 


a) An assembly, obtained by frequency divi- 
sion multiplexing of a specified number of 
groups, normally 5, in adjacent positions in 
a frequency band of specified width. 

b) A frequency band of standardized width, 
240 kHz, in a multichannel carrier system 
and occupying one of a number of specified 
positions in the spectrum. 

Nors I — A subgroup is normally an assembly 
of 60 FDM telephone channels. 

Norm 2 — Signals, other than those derived 
from an assembly of groups but having specified 
_ characteristics, may occupy the whole or a part of 

frequency band assigned to a supergroup. 
2.2.15 Basic Supergroup —A supergroup occupy- 
ing the standardized frequency band 312-552 kHz. 


2.2.16 Supergroup Modulating Equipment — Equip- 
ment used for frequency translation of one basic 
supergroup into a specified frequency band, for 
example, into the band 12-252 kHz, and for per- 
forming the complementary process. 


2.2.17 Supergroup Translating Equipment; Supergroup 
Bank — Equipment used for frequency translation 
of a specified number of basic supergroups and 
their assembly into a specified frequency band, 
normally 5 or 10 basic supergroups into a basic 
supermaster group or 15 basic supergroups into 2 
basic 15-super group assembly, and for performing 
the complementary process. 


2.2.18 Mastergroup 


a) An assembly, obtained by frequency divi- 
sion multiplexing of a specified number 0 
supergroups, normally 5, in adjacent posi- 
tions in a frequency band of specified width 
with guardbands between adjacent supe- 
groups. 


18 : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 2 ) - 1988 


b) A frequency band of standardized width, 
1 232 kHz, in a multichannel carrier system 
and occupying one of a number of specified 
positions in the spectrum, 

Nors | — A mastergroup is normally an 
assembly of 300 FDM telephone channels, 

Nor» 2 — Signals, other than those derived 
from an assembiy of supergroups but having speci- 
fied characteristics, may occupy the whole ora 
part of a frequency band normally assigned to a 
mastergroup. 

2.2.19 Basic Mastergroup; Mastergroup A (obsolete 
term ) — A mast p Occupying the standardi- 
zed frequency band 812-2 044 kHz. 


2.2.20 Mastergroup B (obsolete term) —A 
mastergroup occupying the frequency band 2 796- 
4 028 kHz. 


2.2.21 Mastergroup Modulating Equipment—Equip- 
ment used for frequency translation of one basic 
mastergroup into a specified frequency band, for 
example, into the band 2 796-4 028 kHz, and for 


performing the complementary process. 


2.2.22 Mastergroup Translating Equipment — 
Equipment used for frequency translation of a 
specified number of basic mastergroups and their 
assembly into a specified frequency band, nor- 
mally 3 basic mastergroups into a basic super- 
mastergroup, and for performing the complemen- 
tary process. 

2.2.23 Supermastergroup 

a) An assembly, obtained by frequency divi- 
sion multiplexing, of a specified number of 
mastergroups, normally 3, in adjacent 
positions in a frequency band of specified 
width with guardbands between adjacent 
mastergroups. 

b) A frequency band of standardized width, 

3 872 kHz, in a multichannel carrier system 
and occupying one of a number of specified 
positions in the spectrum. 

Nor» I — A supermastergroup is normally an 
assembly of 900 FDM telephone channels 


Nors 2 — Signals, other than those derived 
from an assembly of mastergroups but having 
specified characteristics, may occupy the whole or 
a part of a frequency band normally assigned to a 
supermastergroup. 


2.2.24 Basic Supermastergroup — A su aster- 


group occupying the standardized frequency band 
8 516-12 388 kHz. 


2.2.25 Supermastergroup Translating Equipment — 
Equipment used for the frequency translation of a 
specified number of basic supermastergroups and 
their assembly into a specified frequency band, 
and for performing the complementary process. 


2.2.26 15-Supergroup Assembly, ( 15-Supergroup ) 

Hypergroup 
a) An assembly, obtained by frequency divi- 
sion multiplexing, of 15 supergroups in 


adjacent positions in a frequency band of 
specified width, with guardbands between 
adjacent supergroups. 


A frequency band of standardized width, 
3716 kHz, in a multichannel carrier system 
and occupying one of a number of specified 


positions in the spectrum. 


Norm I — "15-1u) up assembly" is the only 
term in use by the CCIE T. 

Norz 2 — The English word ‘hypergroup’ is 
sometimes used for a supergroup assembly different 
from that standardized by CCITT. Accordingly, 
this term should be qualified by the number of 
supergroups used in each application, 

Norz 3— A 15-supergroup assembly is nor- 
mally an assembly of 900 FDM telephone 
channels. 

Nors 4 — Signals, other than those derived 
from an assembly of supergroups but baving speci- 
fied characteristics, may occupy the whole ora 
part of a frequency assigned to a 15-super- 
group assembly. 


2.2.27 Basic 15-Supergroup Assembly; Basic 
( 15-Supergroup ) Hjypergroup — A 15-supergroup 
assembly occupying the standardized frequency 
band 312-4 028 kHz. 


2.2.28 15-Supergroup Assembly Modulating Equip- 
ment; Hypergroup Modulating Equipment—Equipment 
used for frequency translation of one basic 
15-supergroup assembly into a specified frequency 
band, for example, into the band 8 620-12 336 
kHz which is inside the basic supermastergroup, 
and for performing the complementary process. 


b 


= 


2.2.29 15-Supergroup Assembly Translating Equip- 
ment; Hypergroup Translating Equipment—Equipment 
used for frequency translation of a specified num- 
ber of basic 15-supergroup assemblies and their 
assembly into a specified fraquency band, and for 
performing the complementary process. 


2.3 Analogue Carrier Transmission 


2.3.1 High-Frequency Repeater Distribution Frame; 
HFRDF — A distribution frame in a repeater 
station for channels and circuits carrying basic 
groups, basic supergroups, etc. 

Norz — Wherever possible, the use of the appro- 
priate special term is recommended. 

2.3.2 Group (Supergroup) (...) Distribution Frame — 
A distribution frame for channels and circuits 
carrying basic groups ( basic supergroups ) (...). 

Associated terms: 

a) Supergroup distribution frame; 

b) Mastergroup distribution frame; 

c) Supermastergroup distribution frame; and 

d) 15-Supergroup assembly distribution 
frame; hypergroup distribution frame. 


10 


2.3.3 Separation Point (in FDM Transmission )= 
A defined point at the end of a transmission 5y3- 
tem where standard defined conditions exist such 
that interconnection with another transmission 
system may be achieved. 


Nora — $ ioa points permit interconnection 
with other equipment such as direct through-connection 
filters, translating equipment, etc. 


2.3.4 FDM Link; Line Link ( deprecated in this 
sense ) — The basic entity of frequency division 
multiplex transmission, for transmitted source 
i occupying a ified frequency band, 
comprising the whole of the means of transmission 
over a given transmission medium, between two 
consecutive separation points at this frequency 
band. 


Nors 1 — An FDM link provides transmission in 
both directions unless otherwise specified. 


Nors2— An FDM link never includes a direct 
through-connection filter. 


Nora 3 — In such cases as optical fibre transmi- 
sion, radio-relay transmission, etc, the appropriate 
terminal equipment is included within the ‘FDM link”. 


2.3.5 Group (Supergroup) (,..) Section—The whole 
of the means of transmission including one or 
more FDM links, for signals occupying a standar- 
dized frequency band of a group ( supergroup ) 
p=) between two consecutive group (supergroup) 

...) distribution frames, or equivalent points. 
Nors —A group (supergroup) ( ..) section provides 


trananimion in both directions unless otherwise speci- 
ed. 


Associated terms: 


a) Supergroup section; 
b) Mastergroup section; 
c) Supermastergroup section; and 


d) 15-Supergroup assembly section; hyper- 
group section. 


2.3.6 Group ( Supergroup ) (...) Link — A group 
(supergroup) (...) section or a number of em 
connected group (supergroup) (...) sections be- 
tween two group (supergroup) (...) distribution 
frames, or equivalent points, where the group 
(supergroup) (...) originates or terminates. 


Norm | — A group (supergroup) (...) link provid 
ee in both directions he = ae ta Per 


Nora 2 — Fzamples of where a group ( ) 


(...) may mate or terminate are multiplex equip- 


ments or wideband modems. 
Associated terms: 

a) Supergroup link; 

b) Mastergroup link; 
c) Supermastergroup link; and 

d) 1 -Sapergroup assembly link; hypergroup 


18 : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 2 ) - 1988 


2.3.7 Direct Through-Connection Filter; Direct Line 
Filter; Direct Transfer Filter — À bandpass filter for 
the interconnection of two FDM links providing 
transmission for transmitted source signals occupy- 
ing the same frequency band. 


Noru— A direct one filter may be 
used to interconnect two FDM links inside the same 
group section, the same supergroup section, etc. 


2.3.8 Direct Through-Connection Point — A point 
at which a direct through-connection filter is used 
for the interconnection of two FDM links. 


2.3.9 Through-Group ( Through-Supergroup ) (...) 
Filter — A bandpass filter whose pass band is the 
standardized frequency band of a basic group 
(basic supergroup) (...). 
Nor» — A through-group ( through-supergroup ) 
(...) filter may be used to interconnect two consecutive 
group (supergroup) (...) sections, where appropriate. 
Associated terms: 
a) Through-supergroup filter; 
b) Through-mastergroup filter; 
c) Through-supermastergroup filter; and 
d) Through 15-supergroup assembly filter; 
through-hypergroup filter. 


2.3.10 Through-Group ( Through-Supergroup) (...) 
Connection Point — Å point in a group (supergroup) 
(...) link at which two consecutive: group ( super- 
group ) (...) sections are connected in tandem, 
via a through-group ( through-supergroup ) (...) 
filter, where appropriate. 


Associated terms: 


a) Through-supergroup connection point; 

b) Through-mastergroup connection point; 

c) Through-supermastergroup connection 
point; and 


d) Through 15-supergroup assembly connec- 
tion point; through hypergroup connection 
point. 


2.4 Pilot Signals 


2.4.1 Pilot Signal — A signal, usually a single 

uency, transmitted in telecommunication net- 

work for measurement, supervision, or control 
purposes. 


2.4.2 Reference Pilot — A pilot si d to 
2. pilot signal use 

facilitate the maintenance and på otmett of å 
multichannel carrier system. 


2.4.3 Group (Supergroup) (...) Reference Pilot — Å 
reference Pilot applied where a group ( super- 
gr oup ) (...) is assembled and which, accompanies 

€ group (supergroup) (...) over the system up to 


rd vs — it is broken down into its consti- 


TS : 1885 ( Part 63/Sec 2 ) - 1968 


Nore I — Various frequencies have been standard- 
ised by the CCITT for up ( supergroup ) (...) 
reference pilots within the frequency band of a basic 
group (besic supergroup) ( ..). 

Nora 2 — In certain cases, two reference pilots may 
be applied where a basic group ( basic supergroup ) ( ..) 
is assembled. 


Associated terms: 

a) Supergroup reference pilot; 

b) Mastergroup referenceipilot; 

c) Supermastergroup reference pilot; and 

d) 15-Supergroup assembly reference pilot; 

hypergroup reference pilot. 

2.4.4 Regulating Pilot — A reference pilot used 
to maintain tbe level of the line signal of the 
multichannel carrier system at the prescribed 
value, and to ensure that the attenuation-equali- 
zation is continuously satisfactory. 

2.4.5 Frequency Comparison Pilot; Synchronizing 
Pilot ( obsolete term ) — A reference pilot used 
either for comparing the frequencies, and possibly 


the phases, of the carriers generated at the send- 
ing and receiving terminals in one direction of 
transmission of a multichannel carrier system, or 
for maintaining the synchronism of these carriers. 


2.4.6 Switching Control Pilot; Switching Pilot — A 
reference Ve used to control a maintenance 
switching function at a distant point. 

Nor» — Examples of such switching functions are, 
to busy the channels of a multichannel carrier system, 
repeater 


or to replace a normal repeater by a standby 
in the case of a fault. 


2.4.7 Regulated Line Section — A succession of 
tandem-connected elementary repeater sections 
over which the line signal and one or more regu- 
lating pilots are transmitted from end to end, with 
this signal and the pilots passing through the 
same amplitude regulating devices at intermediate 
points. 

Nors — At the end of a regulated line section, the 
initis! pilot signals are removed. or reconstituted, or 
replaced by new pilot signals sent at the reference 
evel. 


12 


18 : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 3 ) - 1988 


Indian Standard 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 


PART 65 TRANSMISSION 
Section 3 Time Division Muitiplexing 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard ( Part 65/Sec 3 ) covers defini- 
tion of terms relating to time division multiplex- 
ing. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Timing | 
2.1.1 Tims-Scals — A succession of continguous 
pre-determined time intervals. 


Norm — The time intervals in a time-scale need 
not all have the same duration. 


2.1.2 Cyclic Time-Scale — A time-scale consist- 
ing of periodic repetition of a succession of time 
in 

Nors — The individual time intervals comprising 

a single cycle need not ali have the same duration, but, 

ideally, all the cycles are identical, any variations 

being constrained within the specified limits. 


2.1.3 Significant Instant ( in Transmission ) — An 
instant at which a time interval commences in a 
time-scale or a signal element commences in a 
discretely-timed signal. 


2.1.4 Phase Relationship (in or between Cyclic 
Time-Scales ) — The difference in time between 
two significant instants in a cyclic time-scale or 
between corresponding significant instants in two 
cyclic time-scales at the same place. 

Norm — The phase relationship may be expressed 


in units of time, or as å pro aliens Å 
cycle duration. port percentage of the 


2.1.5 Timing Signal — A signal used to deter- 
mine the instants at which the operations are 
2.1.6 Cyclic Timing Signal — A cyclic signal 


used to determine the instants at which operati 
are initiated. å Fe 
2.1.7 Cyclic Control Signal — A cyclic signal 


used to control the frequency at which i 
pelea quency operations 


2.1.8 Time-Slot ( TS ) — Any cyclic ti 
interval that can be ized ‘ed 
uk à recognized and defined 


2.1.9 Clock — ipment that 3 * 
dungeon + at provides a cyclic 


Nora — Where replicated sources are used for 
reliability reasons, the assembly of these is regarded as 
a single clock. 


2.1.10 Reference Clock — A clock of very high 
stability, accuracy and reliability which is used as 
the single reference standard for the clocks ina 
synchronized network. 


2.1.11 Master Clock — A clock used to control 
the frequency of other clocks. 


2.1.12 Isochronous — Qualifying a time-varying 
phenomenon, a time-scale, or a signal characteri- 
zed by consecutive significant instants which are 
separated by time intervals which all have the 
same nominal duration or have nominal dura- 
tions equal to integral multiples of a unit dura- : 
tion. 

Norg — In practice, any variations of the time in- | 
tervals are constrained between the specified limits. 


2.1.13 Burst Isochronous — Qualifying a time- 
varying phenomenon, a time-scale, or a signal in 
which there are bursts of isochronous activity. 


2.1.14 Anisochronous — Qualifying a time 
varying phenomenon, a time-scale, or a signal 
characterized by consecutive significant instant 
which are separated by time intervals which are 
not constrained to have the same nominal dura- 
tion or to have nominal durations equal to integ- 
ral multiples of a unit duration. 


2.1.15 Synchronous — Qualifying two time 
varying phenomena, time-scales, or signals char- 
acterized by corresponding significant instants 
which are separated by time intervals of a nomi- 
nally constant duration at two designated places, - 
one for each phenomenon, time-scale or signal. 

.  Norz 1 — In practice, any variations of the time 

intervals are constrained within the specified limits. 

Nore 2 — Two anisochronous phenomena, time 
scales, or signals may be synchrouous, 

Associated term: 


Synchronism 


. 21.16 Synchronization — The process of adjust 
ing clocks to achieve synchronism of two time 
varying phenomena, time-scales, or si: 

Associated term: 

To synchronize 


13 


18 1 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 3 ) - 1968 


2.117 Plesichronous — Qualifying two time-vary- 
ing phenomena, time-scales, or signals in which 
corresponding significant instants occur at nomi- 
ally the same rate, any variations in rate being 
constrained within the specified limits. 

Norm — Corresponding significant instants are 
separated by time intervals having durations which 
may vary without limit at two designated places, one 
for each phenomenon, time-scale or signal. 


2.1.18 Non-Synchronous: Asynchrono s( deprecated 
in this sense) —Qualifying two time-varying pheno- 
mena, time-scales, or signals characterized by 
corresponding significant instants which are 
separated by time intervals that do not have a 
nominally constant duration at two designated 
pas, one for each phenomenon, time-scale or 


2.2 Frames and Channels 


2.2.1 Frame — A repetitive set of consecutive 
ume-slots constituting a complete cycle of a signal, 
a process, etc, in which the relative position of 
each time-slot in the cycle can be identified. 


2.2.2 Frame Start — An instant, always occupy- 
ing the same relative position in every frame, 
used as the datum for timing other events in the 
frame. 


2.2.3 Frame Alignment — The state in which the 
frame generated by the receiving equipment has 
a desired constant phase relationship with the 
frame of the received signal so that the individual 
time-slots in each frame can be uniquely identi- 
fied. 


2.2.4 Frame Alignment Signal — A distinctive 
signal inserted in every frame or once in every 
frame, always occupying the same relative position 
within the frame, and used to establish and main- 
tain frame alignment. 


2.2.5 Bunched Frame Alignment Signal — A frame 
alignment signal whose signal elements occupy 
consecutive digit time-slots. 


2.2.6 Distributed Frame Alignment Signal — A 
frame alignment signal whose signal elements 
occupy non-consecutive digit time-slots. 


2.2.7 Frame Alignment Time-Slot — A time-slot 
occuyping the same relative position in every 
frame, used to transmit the frame alignment 


signal. 


«Nor I — The frame alignment time-slot may be 
used permanently or periodically for transmitting the 
frame alignment signal; when it is not occupied by this 
signal, it may be used for the transmission of other in- 
formation, j 

Nors 2 — In digital TDM systems, the frame 
alignment time-slot consists of one or more digit time- 
slots. 


2.2.8 Frame Alignment Recovery Time — The time 
that elapses between a valid frame alignment 
signal available at the receive terminal equipment 
and frame alignment being established. 


Nors — The frame alignment recovery time in- 
cludes tbe time required for replicated verification of 
the validity of frame aligament signal. 

2.2.9 Out-of-Frams-Alignment Time — The time 
during which frame alignment is effectively lost. 

Nors — The out-of-frame-alignment time includes 


both the time taken to detect loss of frame alignment 
and the frame aligoment recovery time. 


_ 2.2.10 Channel Tims-Slot — A time-slot occupy- 
ing a specific position in a frame and permanently 
allocated to a particular time-derived channel. 
Nors I — A channel time-slot may be qualified by 
its usage, for example, telephone channel time-slot. 
Nors 2 — In digital TDM systems, a channel time- 
slot, 11 addition to its main functions, may aiso be used 
for in-slot signalling or for transmitting other inform- 
ation. 
2.2.11 Signalling Time-Slot — A time-slot occu- 
pying a specific porion in a frame and 
nently allocated for the transmission of signalling. 


2.2.12 Highway : Bus — A common path within 
an apparatus or station over which signals from 
a number of channels pass with separation achie- 
ved by time division multiplexing, 


2.2.13 Channel Gate — A device for connecting 
a time-derived channel to a highway, or a high- 
way to a time-derived channel, at specified times. 


2.2.14 Sub-Frame — A fixed number of non- 
contiguous channel time-slots within a frame that 
together provide a digital channel having a speci- 
fied digit rate higher than that of a single channel 
time-slot. 

2.2.15 Muliiframe — A repetitive set of consecu- 


tive frames in which the relative position of each 
frame in the set can be identified. 


2.2.16 Multiframe Alignment — The state in 
which the multiframe generated by the receiving 
equipment has a desired constant phase relation- 
ship with the multiframe of the received signal so 
that the individual frames in each multiframe can 
be uniquely identified. 


2.2.17 Multiframe Alignment Signal — A distinc- 
tive signal inserted in every multiframe or once 
in every n multiframes, always occupying the 
same relative position within the multiframe, and 
used to establish and maintain multiframe align- 
ment. 


2.3 Synchronized Networks 


2.3.1 Synchronized Network; Synchronous Network 
— A network in which clocks at designated nodes 
are adjusted to establish and maintain signals in 
synchronism. 


2.3.2 Non-Synchronized Network; Non-Synchronous 
Network; Asynchronous Network ( deprecated in this 
sense) —A network not designed to maintain syn- 
chronism between signals. 


14 


2.3.3 Plesichronous Network — A non-synchroni- 
zed network in which clocks are designed to have 
high accuracy and stability such that the signals 
are plesichronous. ; 


Nore — The network effectively operates for long 
periods as if it were å synchronized network. 


2.3.4 Mutually Synchronized Network 


a) In theory, a synchronized network in which 
each clock exerts direct control on all the 
other clocks, 

b) In practice, a synchronized network in 
which each clock exerts direct control on a 
few other clocks, and indirectly influences 
the remaining clocks. 


2.3.5 Democratic Mutually Synchronized Network 


a) Intheory, a mutually synchronized network 
in which all the clocks are of equal status 
and directly exert equal amounts of control 
on all the other clocks. 

b) In practice, a mutually synchronized net- 
work in which all the clocks are of equal 
status and in which each clock directly 
exerts equal amount of control on a few 
other clocks. 


Norm — In the theoretical case, the network 
operating frequency or digit rate is the mean of the 
natural frequencies of all the clocks. 


2.3.6 Hisrarchic Synchronized Network — A 
synchronized network in which each clock is 
assigned a status in a hierarchy which permits it 
to exert control only over clocks of equal or lower 
status, 


2.3.7 Hierarchic Mutually Synchronized Network — 
A hierarchic synchronized network in which some 
of the status levels are themselves democratic 
mutually synchronized networks, 

2.3.8 Synchronization Signal — A signal which 
indicates the phase relationship between two 
cyclic time-scales or a significant variation of this 
relationship. 

2.3.9 Timing Information ( in a Synchronized Net- 
work ) — Information pertaining to the timing 
relationship of several series of events and which 
is conven by and/or derived from synchroniza- 
tion si , timing signals, or time-scales embodi- 
ed in digital signals. i 

2.3.10 Synchronization Nods — A point in a 
synchronized network at which timing informa- 
tion is derived, sent, or received and processed for 
the purpose of ization, 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 3 ) - 1983 


2.3.11 Synchronization Link — A link, between 
two synchronization nodes, over which timing 
information is transmitted in one or both direc- 
tions. 

2.3.12 Synchronization Network — An arrange 
ment of synchronization nodes and synchronize 
tion links provided in a synchronized network to 
synchronize the clocks in or connected to these 
nodes. 


Norge — Å synchronization network is usually eg 
important constituent of a synchronized network, 


2.3.13 Locally-Derived Synchronization Signal — A 
synchronization signal derived at a synchroniza 
tion node from the phase relationship between the 
cyclic time-scale generated by the local clock and 
the cyclic time-scale of a digital signal received 
over a synchronization link from a particular 
distant synchronization node. 


2.3.14 Remotely-Derived Synchronization Signal ~ 
A synchronization signal received at a synchroni- 
zation node over a synchronization link froma 
particular distant node, this signal having been 
derived at the distant node, as a locally-derived 
synchronization signal, from the phase relation 
ship between the cyclic time-scale generated by 
its own clock and the cyclic time-scale of a digital. 
signal received from the node to which the sym 
chronization signal is sent. 


2.3.15 Single-Ended Synchronization — A method. 
of synchronizing clocks at a synchronization node 
with respect to a distant synchronization node 
solely by means of locally-derived synchronize 
tion signals relating to that particular distam 


node. 


2.3.16 Double-Ended Synchronization — A method 
of synchronizing clocks at a synchronization node 
with respect to a distant synchronization node by 
means of both locally derived synchronizatio 
signals and remotely derived synchronization 
signals relating to that particular distant node. 


2.3.17 Unilateral Control — Control betwee 
two synchronization nodes such that the frequen 
of the clock of only one of these nodes is infue 
need by timing information derived from th 
clock of the other node. 


2.3.18 Bilateral Control — Control between tv? 
synchronization nodes such that the frequency d 
the clock of each of these nodes is influenced 
timing information derived from the clock of t 
other node. 


15 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 4 ) - 1988 


Indian Standard 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 


PART 65 TRANSMISSION 
Section 4 Digital Transmission 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard ( Part 65/Sec 4 ) covers defini- 
tions of terms relating to digital transmission. 


2. TERMINOLOGY 
2.1 Basic Terms in Digital Transmission 
2.1.1 Signal Element ( in Digital Transmission ) — 
A part of a digital signal, characterized by its 
discrete timing and its discrete value, and used to 
represent a digit. 
2.1.2 Digit Time-Slot — A time-slot allocated 
to signal element of a digital signal. 


2.1.3 Binary ( Ternary) (N-ary) (Digital) 
Signal — A digital signal in which each signal 
element has one of two ( three ) ( N ) permitted 
discrete values. 


2.1.4 Digit Rate — The number of digits trans- 
ferred per second. 

Nora 1 — The term digit rate may be qualified, 
for example, ternary digit rate. 

Nors 2 — The term digit rate should not be used 
to express the transmission rate of a line signal for 
which the appropriate term is ‘line digit rate’. 

2.1.5 Binary ( Ternary) ( N-ary) Digit Rate: 
Bit Rate — The number of binary ( Ternary ) 
( N-ary ) digits transferred per second. 

Nore — The term ‘binary digit rate’ may be 
abbreviated to ‘bit rate’. 

2.1.6 Effective Digit Rate (of a Time-Slot) — 
The number of digits per second provided by a 
time-slot and numerically equal to the product of 
the number of digits per time-slot and the num- 
ber of repetitions of that time-slot per second. 


Nore — The term may be qualified, for example, 
‘effective bit rate”. 


2.1.7 Dectsion Instant ( for a Digital Signal ) — 
The instant at which a decision is taken as to the 
probable value of a signal element of a received 
digital signal. 


2.1.8 Decision Circuit (fora Digital Signal ) — 
A circuit that decides the probable value of a 
signal element of a received digital signal. 


2.1.9 Fitter ( in Digital Transmission ) — Short- 
term variations in the significant instants of a 
digital signal from their ideal positions in time. 


2.1.10 Wander (in Digital Transmission ) — 
Long-term variations in the significant instants of 
a digital signal from their ideal positions in time. 


2.1.11 Time Interval Error — The cumulative 
drift of the significant instants of a digital signal 
from their ideal positions in time, measured over 
a specified period. 

2.1.12 Timing Recovery — The derivation of a 
cyclic timing signal from a received digital signal, 
based on the periodicity of the digit time-slots. 

2.1.13 Retiming — Adjustment of the intervals 
between the significant instants of a digital signal 
by reference to a cyclic timing signal. 


2.1.14 Regeneration ( of a Digital Signal ) — The 
process of receiving a digital signal and recons- 
tructing it in a form in which the timing, wave- 
forms, and amplitudes of the signal elements are 
constrained within the specified limits. 

2.1.15 Regenerator — A device which performs 
regeneration of a digital signal. 


2.1.16 Byte (in Digital Transmission ) — A 
specified number of binary digits, or signal ele- 
ments representing binary digits, operated on as 
an entity. 

Nor» — The term ‘byte’ is often used as a 
synonym for ‘octet’ but this usage is not recommended, 
2.1.17 Octet (in Digital Transmission) — A 

group of eight binary digits, or eight signal 
elements representing binary digits, operated on 
as an entity, 

2.1.18 Digit Position — The position in time or 
space into which a representation of a digit may 
be placed. 

2.1.19 Digital Filling — The addition of a 
constant number of signal elements at regular 
intervals to a digital signal to increase the digit 
rate from its original value to a predetermined 
multiple. 

Norm| — The added signal elements are not 
normally used to transmit information. 

Nors 2 — The multiple need not be an integer but 
must bea rational number, for example, 64/62. 

2.1.20 Re-iteration — The repetition of the 
signal elements of a given digital signal to change 
the digit rate from its original value to a value 
which is an integral multiple of the original digit 
rate. 


16 


Associated term: 
To re-iterate 


2.1.21 De-iteration — The process applied to a 
re-iterated signal for restoring the original signal. 

2.1.22 Service Digits; Housekeeping Digits; 
Overhead Digits ( USA ) — Ancillary signal ele- 
ments, normally added at regular intervals to a 
digital signa] at the sending end and removed at 
the receiving end of a transmission path, mainly 
used to ensure that when the sending equipment 
carries out a process on the digital signal, 
particularly an aperiodic process, the receiving 
equipment carries out the corresponding comple- 
mentary process. 

2.1.23 Serial ( Digital) Transmission — The 
successive transmission of signal elements over a 
single path between two points. 


2.1.24 Parallel ( Digital) Transmission — The 
simultaneous transmission of a group of signal 
elements over the appropriate number of parallel 
paths between two points. 


2.1.25 Serial-to-Parallel Converter: Deserializer: 
Staticizer (deprecated) — A device for converting 
a sequence of consecutive signal elements into a 
corresponding group of signal elements which are 
all presented simultaneously. 


2.1.26 Parallel-to-Serial Converter; Serializer; 
Dynamicizer ( deprecated ) — A device for convert- 
ing a group of signal elements, which are all 
presented simultaneouely, into a corresponding 
sequence of consecutive signal elements. 


2.2 Line Codes 


2.2.1 Line Code — A code, chosen to suit the 
characteristics of a transmission channel, defining 
the equivalence between a set of digits, represen- 
ted by the signal elements of the transmitted 
source signal, and the sequence of signal elements 
in the corresponding line signal. 


2.2.2 Line Encoding — The process of applyi 
the rules of a particular line code to a pes ie 
digits to derive the sequence of signal elements of 
the line signal. 

2.2.3 Line Digit Rate; Modulation Rate ( depre- 
cated in this context ); Symbol Rate (deprecated ) — 
In digital transmission, the number of signal 
elements of the line signal transmitted per second, 
expressed in bauds. 

Nors — The t ‘modulation "å i 
telegraphy and data cumreaicntion, it ær rene 


of the duration of unit interval å 
element. Se “ the shortest signal 


2.2.4 Equivalent Binary Content — The minimum 
number of binary digits strictly necessary to 
convey the same information as a defined number 
of consecutive signal elements in a given digital 
signal. 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 4 ) - 1988 


2.2.5 Equivalent Bit Rate — The minimum value 
of the bit rate: strictly necessary to convey the 
same information in the same time as a given 
digital signal at a given digit rate. 

2.2.6 ( Uniform) Multivalus Digital Signal — A 
digital signal whose nominal permitted discrete 
values form a set in which adjacent values differ 
by the same constant amount. 

Nors — A multivalue digital signal is usually used 
as a line signal. 

2.2.7 Notional Value (of a Uniform Multivalu 
Digital Signal ) — The value of signal element of 
a uniform multivalue digital signal, with the unit 
of value being so chosen that adjacent values differ 
by one unit according to the following rules: 


a) For unbalanced signals, the lowest notional 
value is zero; 

b) For balanced signals having an even 
number of permitted discrete values, the 
notional values are symmetrical about, but 
omit zero; and 

c) For balanced signals having an odd number 
of permitted discrete values, the notional 
values are symmetrical about and include 
zero. 


Nors — Examples of notional values of uniform 
multivalue digital signals are as follows” 


Unbalanced signals 

Binary 0 1 

Ternary 0 1 2 
Quaternary 0 1 2 3 
Quinary 0 l 2 3 4 
Balanced signals 

Binary —it+i 

Ternary —1 0 +1 
Quaternary ~$ —t+i+: 
Quinary —2 —1 0+1+2 


2.2.8 Digital Sum— The algebraic sum of 
the notional values of a sequence of consecutiv 
signal elements. 


2.2.9 Disparity — The digital sum of one of 
more consecutive signal elements forming a defined 
group. l 


2.2.10 Digital Sum Variation ( of a Line Code ) — 
The difference between the theoretical maximum 
possible digital sum and the theoretical minimum 
possible digital sum of consecutive signal ce 
ments of a uniform multivalue digital signal 
produced by encoding, in accordance with ê 
given line code, all permitted sequences of si 
elements in the original signal. 


2.2.11 Balanced Code — A line code producing 
an encoded signal which has a finite digital su” 
variation and which has no discrete zer" 
frequency component in its power spectrum. 


17 


18 : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 4 ) - 1988 


2.2.12 Paired-Disparity Code — A line code in 
which the sequence of digits in the original signal 
is divided into successive groups of digits, some 
of which, when encoded, may be represented by 
one of two combinations of signal elements of 
equal and ite disparity, the specific com- 
binations used being chosen such that the digital 
sum tends to zero whenever possible, and in 
which the other groups of digits, if any, in the 
original signal are r: nted by combinations 
of signal elements of zero disparity. 


2.2.13 Alternate Mark Inversion Code; AMI; 
Bimolar Code — A paired-disparity employing a 
ternary signal to convey binary digits in which 
the binary 1 states are represented by signal 
elements that are normally of alternate positive 
and negative polarity but equal in amplitude, 
and in which binary 0 states are represented by 
signal elements having zero amplitude. 

Nors — In telegrapby and data communication, 


the binary | state is known asthe Z state ( or ‘mark’ ) 
and the binary 0 state is known as the A state ( or 


‘space’ ). 

2.2.14 Alternate Mark Inversion Signal; AMI 
Signal; Bipolar Signal — The encoded signal 
produced by alternate mark inversion code. 


2.2.15 Alternate Mark Inversion Violation: AMI 
Violation; Bipolar Violation — A non-zero signal 
element, in an alternate mark inversion signal, 
having the same polarity as the previous non-zero 
signal element. 


2.2.16 Modified Alternate Mark Inversion Code; 
Modifed AMI — A line code, based on alternate 
mark inversion code, in which alternate mark 
inversion violations occur in accordance with a 
defined set of rules. 


Nore — Examples of such codes are HDB3, B6ZS. 


2.2.17 Redundant Line Code — A line code using 
more encoded signal elements than strictly 
necessary to represent groups of digits of the 
original signal. 


2.2.18 Redundant Digital Signal — The encoded 
signal produced by encoding a given original 
signal in accordance with a given redundant line 
code. 

Nore — For a redundant N-ary digital signal, the 
average binary equivalent content per encoded signal 
element is less than log, n bits. 

2.2.19 Pseudo-Ternary Signal — A redundant 
ternary digital signal which is derived from 
a binary digital signal without change of line 
digit rate. 

Norte — An alternative mark inversion signal isan 
example of a pseudo-ternary signal, 

2.2.20 Pseudo N-ary Signal — A redundant N- 
ary digital which is derived from a M-ary digital 
signal without change of the line digit rate and 
for which N is greater than M. 


2.2.21 Digit Sequence Integrity — The property 
of a digital transmission channel, circuit, or 
connection, that permits a digital signal to be 
conveyed over it without change in the sequence 
of the signal elements. 


2.2.22 Octet Sequence Integrity — The property 
of a digital transmission channel, circuit, or 
connection which permits a digital signal to be 
conveyed over it without change in the sequence 
of the octets. 


2.2.23 Bit Sequence Independence — The property 
of a binary transmission channel, circuit or 
connection which permits all sequences of binary 
signal elements to be conveyed over it as its 
specified bit rate. 


2.2.24 Quasi Bit Sequence Independence — The 
property of a binary transmission channel, circuit, 
or connection which permits almost all sequences 
of binary signal elements to be conveyed over it 
as its specified bit rate, the exceptional sequences 
being completely specified together with their 
prohibition and allowance conditions. 


2.2.25 Scrambler ( in Digital Transmission ) — A 
device used to combine a digital signal with a 
pseudo random sequence and intended to produce 
a randomized digital signal which conveys the 
same information and facilitates its transmission. 


Associated term: 
To scramble 


2.2.26 Descrambler ( in Digital Transmission ) — 
Adevice for processing a scrambled signal in 
order to restore the original signal. 


2.3 Digital Errors 

2.3.1 Digital ( Bit ) Error — A difference be- 
tween a digit ( bit ) in a transmitted digital signal 
and the corresponding digit ( bit ) in the received 
digital signal. 

2.3.2 Error Ratio; Error Rate ( Deprecated ) — 
The ratio of the number of digital errors received 
in a specified period to the total number of digits 
received in the same period. 

Norm — Numerical values of this ratio are usually 
expressed in the form: 
a x 1079 
where p is a positive integer. 

2.3.3 Bit Error Ratio; BER; Bit Error Rate 
( deprecated ) — The error ratio for a binary 
signal. 

2.3.4 Error Multiplication; Error Extension — 
A property of a device which causes more than 
one error to occur in its output signal when a 
single digital error is present in its input signal. 


Nora — Line decoders and descramblers are exam- 
ples of devices which may cause error multiplication. 


18 


2.3.5 Error Multiplication Factor — The ratio of 
number of errors in the output signal to the 
number of digital errors in the input signal. 

Norz — The error multiplication factor may be 
expressed as an average value under defined operat 
conditions, or else as the maximum value that coul 
result from a single digital error in the input signal. 

2.3.6 Error Spread — The number of a conse- 
cutive digits of the output signal over which 
digital errors are distributed when a single digital 
error inthe input signal causes error multiplica- 
tion. 

2.3.7 Errored Second ( Errored Decisecond ) — 
That period of time, of duration one second 
(one decisecond ) during which one or more 
digital errors occur in a given digital signal. 

2.3.8 Error-Free Second ( Error-Fres Deci- 
second ) — That period of time, of duration one 
second ( one decisecond ) during which no digital 
errors occur in a given digital signal. 


2.3.9 Slip — The loss or gain of a digit time- 
slot or a set of consecutive digit time-slots in a 
digital signal, and in which this loss or gain of 
digit time-slots cannot be corrected. 


2.3.10 Octet Slip — The loss or gain of eight 
consecutive digit time-slots conveying an octet in 
a digital signal, and in which this loss or gain of 
the octet cannot be corrected. 


2.3.11 Frame Slip — The loss or gain of a 
complete frame of consecutive digit time-slots in a 
digital signal, and in which this loss or gain of 
the frame cannot be 


2.3.12 Controlled Slip — The controlled loss or 
gain of a set of consecutive digit time-slots in a 
digital signal to enable it to accord with a digit 
rate different from its own digit rate, and in 
which this loss or gain of digit time-slots cannot 
be corrected. 

Norm — The term may be qualified, for example, 
controlled octet slip, controlled frame slip. 

2.3.13 Uncontrolled Slip — The uncontrolled 
loss o gain of =r time-slot or a set of consecu- 
tive digit time-slots in a digital signal, ibly as 
the result of an storage the ej Me 
associated with transmission or switching of that 
signal, and in which this loss or gain of digit time- 
slots cannot be corrected. 


2.4 Digital Transmission Networks 


2.4.1 Digital Distribution Frame — A distri- 
bution frame for channels and circuits carrying 
digital signals. 

None = Jade , 

Bed eo indicate the dight e frame may be quali- 


2.4.2 Digital Section — The whole of the means 
of transmission, in both directions unless other- 
wise specified, for digital signals of specified digit 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 4 ) - 1988 


rate between two consecutive digital distribution 
frames, or equivalent points. 
Nors — A digital section may be qualified to indi- 
cate its digit rate or multiplex order. 

2.4.3 Digital Link; Digital Path ( deprecated in 
this sense ) — A digital section or a number of 
tandem-connected digital section operating at the 
same digit rate between two digital distribution 
frames, or equivalent points, at which switches or 
terminal equipments are connected. 

Nore 1 — Terminal equipments are those at which 
signals at the specified digit rate criginate or terminate. 

Noreg 2 — A digital link may be qualified to indi- 
cate its digit rate or multiplex order. 


2.4.4 Digital Transmission System 


2.4.4.1 An organized set of principles defin- 
ing a particular method of digital transmission. 


2.4.4.2 A particular implementation of a 
digital section comprising of: f 
a) Transmission medium, 
b) Terminal equipment, 
c) Any necessary intermediate equipment, and 
d) Any equipment provided for such ancillary 
purposes as power feeding, supervision, 
testing, etc: 

2.4.5 Digital Line Section — A digital section 
implemented on a manufactured transmission 
medium, such as a symmetric pair, a coaxial pair, 
or an optical fibre. 

2.4.6 Digital Line Link; Digital Line Path 
( deprecated) —A digital link comprising a digital 
line section or a number of tandem-connected 
digital line sections, 

2.4.7 Digital Line System — A digital trans 
mission system providing a digital line section. 

_ 2.4.8 Digital Radio Section — A digital section 
implemented by means of radio waves. 

2.4.9 Digital Radio Link; Digital Radio Path 
( deprecated ) — A digital link comprising of a 
digital radio section or a number of tandem- 
connected digital radio sections, 

_2.4.10 Digital Radio System — A digital trans- 
mission system providing a digital radio section. 


2.5 Digital Multiplexing 


. 25.1 Digital Multiplexing — A form of time 
division multiplexing applied to digital channels 
which convey digital signals, 

2.5.2 Digital Multiplexer — Equipment for 
combining, by time division multiplexing, two or 
more tributary digital signals into a single com- 
Posite digital signal. 

Nors — A digital multiplexer may be qualified by 


the digi mier the multiplex order of the composite 


IS: 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 4 ) - 1988 


2.5.3 Digital Demultiplexer — Equipment for 
separating, by time division demultiplexing, a 
comsposite digital signal into its component 
tributary digital signals. 

Nors — A digital demultiplexer may be qualified 
by the digit rate or the multiplex order of the composite 
digital signal. 

2.5.4 Digital Multiplex Equipment — The com- 
bination of a digital multiplexer and a digital 
demultiplexer at the same location but working 
in opposite directions. 

Nors | — The multiplexer and demultiplexer 
may or may not be combined into a single equipment. 

Nota 2 — A digital multiplex equipment may be 
qualified by the digit rate or the multiplex order of the 
composite digital signal it handles. 


2.5.5 Digital Muldex — The combination of a 
digital multiplexer and a digital demultiplexer in 
the same equipment but working in opposite 
directions. 

Nore — A digital muldex may be qualified by the 


digit rate or the multiplex order of the composite 
digital signal it handles. 


2.5.6 Digital Block — The combination of an 
appropriate digital link and digital multiplex 
equipment at its end. 


Nota — A digital block is qualified by the digit 
rate or the multiplex order of the digital link. 


2.5.7 Digital Multiplex Hierarchy — A series of 
levels of digital multiplexing in which each level 
is characterized by a defined digit rate, and in 
which each level handles a digital signal assem- 
bled by multiplexing digital signals of a lower 
level. 

' Norm — CCITT has defined a standardized digital 
multiplex hierarchy. 


2.5.8 Primary Digital Group; Digroup; Primary 
Block ( deprecated ) — The assembly, by digital 
multiplexing, of a specified number of digital 
signals constituting the first level of the standar- 
dized digital multiplex hierarchy, operating at a 
standardized digit rate of 1 544 or 2 048 kbit/s. 


Nors I — Normally, each time-slot has 8-digit 
time-slots and an effective digit rate of 64 kbit/s. 

Norm 2 — In normal usage, the term ‘digroup’ 
is used to designate a primary digital group operating 
at a digit rate of ] 544 kbit/s. 

2.5.9 Secondary Digital Group — The assembly 
by digital multiplexing, of a specified number of 
primary digital groups constituting the second 
level of the standardized digital multiplex hierar- 
chy, operating at a standardized digit rate of 
6 312 or 8 448 kbit/s. 


2.5.10 Tertiary Digital Group — The assembly, 
by digital multiplexing, of a specified number of 
secondary digital groups constituting the third 
level of the standardized digital multiplex hierar- 
chy, operating at a standardized digit rate of 
32 064, 34 468, or 44 736 kbit/s. 


2.5.11 Quaternary Digital Group — The assem- 
bly, by digital multiplexing, of a specified number 
of tertiary digital groups constituting the fourth 
level of the standardized digital multiplex hierar- 
chy, operating at a standardized digit rate of 
97 728 or 13 9264 kbit/s. 


_ 2.5.12 Standardized Digital Signal — A digital 
Signal having a digit rate standardized by 
CCITT, primarily for use in the standardized 
digital multiplex hierarchy. 


Nors | — A standardized digital signal may or 
may not be a multiplexed assembly of standardized 
digital signals from a lower hierarchical level. 


Nore 2 — Examples of such signals are 'standardi- 

zed 2 048 kbit/s digital signal’ and ‘standardized 44 736 

kbit/s digital signal’ which may be abbreviated to ‘2’ 048 

kbit/s digital signal’ and "44 736 kbit/s digital signal’ ‘or, 

by convention, to ‘2 Mbit/s signal’ and ‘45 Mbit/s 
signal’. 

2.5.13 Standardized 64 kbit/s Digital Signal; 64 
kbit/s Signal — A standardized digital signal 
having a standardized digit rate of 64 kbit/s and 
which constitutes the normal basis of a primary 
digital group. 


2.6 Justification 


2.6.1 Justification; Pulse Stuffing — The process of 
changing the digit rate of a digital signal ina 
controlled manner without loss or mutilation of 
information. 


Norm — Justification is usually employed as an 
adjunct to digital multiplexing to enable t multiplex- 
ing to be applied to tributary channels that are not 


to the multiplex equipment, Where this 
F done, the original signal of each channel is independ- 


ently justified, 
Associated terms: 

To justify, to stuff 

2.6.2 Fustification Instant, Stuffing Instant — An 
instant at which zero, one, or two digits of the 
original digital signal are transmitted according 
to the timing relationship between the time-slots 
of the original signal and the time-slots provided 
for conveying that signal. 


2.6.3 Fustifable Digit Time-Slot; Stuffable Digit 
Time-Slot — A timeslot provided ay regular time 
intervals for justification of a digital signal. 


4 ying Digit; Stuffing Digit — An 
ee ge amet in a jusubable digit time- 
slot when the prevailing timing relationship docs 
not require the transmission of a digit of the 
original signal at that instant. 

2.6.5 Justification Service Digit; Stuffing Service 
Digit — A digit that transmits information con- 
cerning the action taken at å justification instant. 


20 


2.6.6 Positive Justification, Positive Pulse Stuffing — 
A method of justification in which the digit time- 
slota used to convey a digital signal have a digit 
rate thatis always higher than the digit rate of 
the original signal, and in which at each justifi- 
cation instant, depending on the prevailing 
conditions, either 


a) no digit of the original is transmitted but, 
instead, a justifying digit is transmitted in 
the justifiable digit time-slot, or 

b) one digit of the original signal is trans 
mitted in the justifiable digit time-slot, 


with these two alternative justification states 

being indicated by unique signals formed from 

justification service digits. 

2.6.7 Negative Justification; Negative Pulse 
Stuffing — A method of justification in which the 
digit time-slots used to convey a digital signal 
have a digit rate that is always lower than the 
digit rate of the original signal, and in which at 
each justification instant, depending on the pre- 
vailing conditions, either 

a) one digit of the original signal is trans- 

mitted in the justifiable digit time-slot, or 

b) two digits of the original signal are trans- 

tea one in the justifiable digit time- 
slot with the other digit being removed 
and then transmitted by other means, 


with these alternative justification states being 
indicated by unique signals formed from justifica- 
tion service digits. 


2.6.8 Positive] Zero] Negative Justification; Positive] 
Krol Negative Pulse Stuffing — A method of justifi- 
cation in which the digit time-slots used to convey 
a digital signal have a digit rate that, at various 
times, may be higher than, the same as, or lower 
than the digit rate of the original signal, and in 
which at each justification instant, depending on 
the prevailing conditions, either 

a) no digit of the original is transmitted but, 

instead, a justifying digit is transmitted in 
the justifiable digit ti or 

b) one digit of the original is transmitted in 

the justifiable digit time-slot, or 
c) two digits of the original signal are trans- 
mitted; one in the justifiable digit time-slot 


IS : 1883 ( Part 65/Sec 4 ) - 1988 


with the other digit being removed and 
then transmitted by other means, 


with these three alternative justification states 
being indicated by unique signals formed from 
justification service digits. 


2.6.9 Justification Rate; Stuffing Rats — The 
number of instants per second at which a digital 
signal is justified either by the insertion of a 
justifying digit or by the transmission of one of 
the digits of that signal by other means. 


2.6.10 Nominal Justification Rate; Nominal 
Stuffing Rate — The justification rate which theore- 
tically would occur if the original signal and the 
channel provided for conveying it by justification 
were both to have their nominal digit rates. 


2.6.11 Justification Capacity; Stuffing Capacity; 
Maximum Justification Rate; Maximum Stuffing 
Rate — The maximum possible justification rate 
that can be accommodated by the justification 
process, 

Nors 1 — In practice, the tolerance limits on the 
digit rates of the original signal and the channel pro- 
vided for conveying it by justification shall be such that 
the justification rate is always less than the justifi- 
cation capacity. 

Norm 2 — Because of the confusion which arises 
from the similarity of the terms ‘maximum justification 
rate’ and ‘maximum justification ratio’, it is strongly 
recommended that ‘justification capacity’ shall be used 
instead of the first of these terms, 


2.6.12 Justification Ratio; Stuffing Ratio — The 
ratio of the justification rate to the justification 
capacity. 

2.6.13 Nominal Justification Ratio; Nominal 
Stufing Ratio — The justification ratio that occurs 
when the original digital signal and the channel 
provided for conveying it by justification both 
have their nominal digit rates. 


2.6.14 Maximum ( Minimum ) Justification Ratio; 
Maximum ( Minimnm ) Stuffing Ratio — The justi- 
fication ratio that occurs when the digit rate of 
the original digital signal is at its lower ( upper ) 
tolerance limit and the digit rate of the channel 
provided for conveying it by justification is at its 
upper ( lower ) tolerance limit. 

i Nors mA The maximum and Fig ag justification 
ratios e lim occur 

under practical operating conditions. 7 


21 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 5 ) - 1988 


Indian Standard 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 


PART 65 TRANSMISSION 
Section 5 Pulse Code Modulation 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard ( Part 65/Sec 5 ) covers defini- 
tions of terms relating to pulse code modulation. 


2. TERMINOLOGY 
2.1 Basic Terms in Pulse Code Modulation 


2.1.1 Analogue-to- Digital Conversion; AJD Conver- 
sion — A process designed to convert an analogue 
signal into a digital signal with essentially the 
same information. 

Nors — There is always some minor loss of infor- 
mation in analogue-to-digital conversion. 

2.1.2 Digital-to- Analogue Conversion, Dj A Conver- 
sion — A process designed to convert a digital 
signal into an analogue signal with essentially th 
same information. 

Nor» — Normally, there is no significant loss of 
information in digital-to-analogue conversion. 

2.1.3 ( Generic ) Pulse Code Modulation; Generic 
PCM — Any form of analogue-to-digital conver- 
sion that employs sampling, quantizing, and 
encoding to convert an analogue signal into an 
equivalent digital signal. 

Nore — The shortened term ‘Pulse code modula- 
tion’ is widely used in the generic sense defined above, 
2.1.4 ( Basic ) Pulse Cods Modulation; ( Basic ) 

PCM — A process in which 

a) a signal is sampled, 

b) each sample is quantized independently of 
other samples, and 

c) the succession on quantized values is con- 
verted by encoding into a digital signal. 

2.1.5 Differential Pulse Code Modulation; DPCM 
— A process in which 

a) a signal is sampled; 

b) the difference between each sample and its 
predicted value derived from the previous 
sample(s), is quantized; and 

c) the succession of quantized values is con- 
verted by encoding into a digital signal. 

2.1.6 Prediction ( in Differential Pulse Code 
Modulation) — The process of estimation the 
value of a sample from the succession of previous 
samples or quantized values. 

Associated terms: 

Prediction law, predictor 


2.1.7 Delta Modulation; (M) — A form of diffe- 
rential pulse code modulation in which only the 
sign of the difference between each sample and 
its predicted value is encoded by a single bit. 

2.1.8 Adaptive Differential Pulse Code Modulation, 
ADPCM — Å form of differential pulse code 
modulation in which the prediction law and/or 
the quantizing law are automatically adjusted 
according to some characteristic of the signal or 
channel concerned. 

2.1.9 Adaptive Prediction ( in ADPCM ) — Pre- 
diction in which one or more parameters of this 
process are automatically adjusted according to 
some characteristic of the signal or channel con- 
cerned. 


Associated term: 
Adaptive predictor 
2.2 Sampling in Pulse Code Modulation 
2.2,1 Sample ( of a Signal ) — Å representative 
value of a si at a chosen instant, derived from 


the relevant portion of that signal. 

Nor» — Ideally, the value of a sample is equal to 
the value of a given signal at a chosen instant; in prac- 
tice, it is equal or proportional to a weighted average 
of the varying value of the signal near this instant, 
2.2.2 Sampling ( of a Signal ) — The process of 

taking samples of a signal, usually at equal time 
intervals, 


Associated term: 

To sample ( a signal ) 

2.2.3 Sampling Rate; Sampling Frequency — The 
number of samples of a signal taken per unit 
time. 

2.2.4 Aliasing; Foldover Distortion — The distor- 
tion caused by sampling a signal at an inappro- 
priate rate and which results in overlapping of 
the sidebands. 


2.3 Quantizing in Pulse Code Modulation 


2.3.1 Quentizing — A process in which a conti- 
nuous range of values that a quantity may assume 
is divided into a number of predetermined adja- 
cent intervals, and in which any value within a 
given interval is represented by a single pre- 
determined value within the interval. 


Associated terms: 
To quantize, quantizer 


22 


2.3.2 Quantizing Interval — One of the adjacent 
intervals used in quantizing. 

2.3.3 Quantized Value — The single discrete 
value used to represent any value in a particular 
quantizing interval. 

2.3,4 Decision Value — A value defining the 
boundary between two adjacent quantizing 
intervals. 


2.3.5 Virtual Decision Value — Each of the two 
values obtained by extrapolation from the actual 
decision values. 

Nors — These values are taken to represent hypo- 
thetical outer bounds for the two extreme quantizing 
intervals of the quantizing law. 


2.3.6 Quantizing Law; Coding Law ( deprecated ) 
— A law in quantizing that defines: 

a) The number of quantizing intervals, 

b) The virtual decision values, 

c) The decision values, 

d) The quantized values, and 

e) Where appropriate, the rules governing 

adaptive working. 


Nors — Examples are quantizing laws A and mu 
standardized by CCITT for voice-frequency signals. 


2.3.7 Uniform Quontizing — Quantizing in 
which al] the quantizing intervals lying between 
the two virtual decision values are equal. 


2.3.8 Non-Uniform Quantizing — Quantizing in 
which not all the quantizing intervals lying be- 
tween the two virtual decision values are equal. 


2.3.9 Adaptive Quantizing — Quantizing in 
which one or more parameters of this process are 
automatically adjusted according to some charac- 
teristic of the signal or the channel concerned. 


2.3.10 Working Range ( of a Quantizer )— The 
range of input values to a quantizer lying between 
the two virtual decision values. 

Nors» — The distortion in quantizing is 

tionally attributed to overload: distortion far values fall. 

ing outside tbe working range. 


2.3.11 Load Capacity ( of a Quantizer ); Overload 
Point ( deprecated ) — ER level of ÅR) rer 
signal whose positive and negative peaks coincide 
with the virtual decision values in basic pulse code 
modulation. 


2.3.12 Peak Limiting ( in Quantizing ) — The 
effect whereby any = be enr LÀ lying 
outside the working range is replaced by the 
nearest quantized value, 

2.3.13 Quantizing Distortion; Quantizing Noise — 
The distortion of a signal resulting from the pro- 
cess of quantizing samples of the corresponding 
original signal within the working range. 


IS: 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 5 ) - 1988 


2.3.14 Overload Distortion (in Basic Pulse Code 
Modulation ) — The distortion of a signal result- 
ing from peak limiting in quantizing. 

2.3.15 Slope Overload Distortion ( in DPCM ) — 
The distortion due to peak limiting in a DPCM 
quantizer. 

Nor» — Slope overload distortion arises from the 
inability of the quantizer to respond adequately to large 
differences among a succession of samples applied to 
the input of the DPCM system. 


2.4 Coding in Pulse Code Modulation 


2.4.1 Encoding (in Pulse Code Modulation ) — 
The proeess of representing a given quantized 
value by a set of digits in accordance with a 
defined set of rules. 


2.4.2 Pulse Code — A set of rules defining the 
equivalence between each quantized value and 
the particular set of digits used to represent it. 


2.4.3 PCM Binary Code — A pulse code in 
which the quantized values, from the most nega- 
tive to the most positive, are identified by binary 
numbers taken in natura) order. 


2.4.4 Symmetrical Binary Code — A pulse code 
in which the positive or negative sign of a quan- 
tized value is represented by one binary digit, 
and in which the magnitude is represented by the 
remaining digits. 

Nors — The order of the digits and the use made 


of the binary symbols 0 and | in the various digit posi- 
tions must be specified, 


2.4.5 Code Word (in Pulse Code Modulation ); 
PCM Word — A set of digits representing a quan- 
tized value in basic pulse code modulation or 
differential pulse code modulation. 


Nors — A set of signal elements representing a 
code word is sometimes called a ‘character signal’ by 
analogy with telegraphy and data communication. This 
usage ia deprecated, 


2.4.6 Decoding qa Pulse Code Modulation ) — 
The process applied to a succession of code words 
for restoring the original signal. 


_ 2.47 PCM Encoder — A device for implement- 
ing encoding in pulse code modulation. 


_ 248 PCM Decoder — A device for implement- 
ing decoding in pulse code modulation. 


2.4.9 PCM Codec; PCM Encoder-Decoder — An 
assembly of a PCM encoder and a PCM decoder 
operating in opposite directions, in the same 
equipment. : 

Nors — The meaning of the term is often widened 

to embrace an assembly of equipment for quantizing a 

signal samp} e, encoding tbe quantized value as a code 

word generating the required digital signal, and for 
pe ike complementary processes in the oppo- 


23 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 5 ) - 1988 


2.4.10 Transcoding ( in Pulse Code Modulation ) — 
The conversion of a succession of PCM words, in 
a given pulse code, into the corresponding succes- 
sion of PCM words representing the equivalent 


succession of quantized values in another pulse 
code. 


Note — The term may be qualified to indicate the 
particular pulse codes concerned. 


Associated term: 
Transcoder 


2.4.11 Digital Test Sequence; DTS — A defined 
sequence of digits used for testing digital transmi- 
ssion systems. 


~- Norz — An example of a digital test sequence is 
a specified pseudo-random sequence, - 


2.4.12 PCM Digital Reference Sequence; DRS — 
A defined sequence of PCM code words which, 
when applied to an ideal PCM decoder, produces 
a OdBmO sinusoidal reference signal at a parti- 
cular test reference frequency. 


Norm — Examples of test reference frequencies are 
804 Hz and 1 020 Hz, 


2.5 Multiplexing in Pulse Code Modulation 


2.5.1 (PCM ) ( Telephone ) Channel — A 
channel that has a standardized effective digit 
rate suitable for transmission of telephone quality 
speech in multichannel PCM: transmission, and 
that occupies one of a number of channel time- 
slots in the frame. 


Norz I — In most multichannel PCM systems 
using basic pulse code modulation the standardized 
effective digit rate is 64 kbit/s. 

Nors 2 — Signals, other than speech signals, hav- 
ing appropriate specified characteristics may occupy 
the whole or part of a PCM telephone channel. 


2.5.2 PCM Multiplex Equipment — Equipment 
for deriving a single digital signal at a defined 
digit rate trom several voice-frequency chaunels 
by a combination of pulse code modulation and 
time-division multiplexing, and also for carrying 
out complementary functions in the opposite 
direction of transmission. 


Nors — The single digital signal is normally that 
of a primary digital group. 

2.5.3 Primary PCM Group A — A primary digi- 
tal group of PCM channels, usually 30, assembl 
by PCM multiplex equipment which uses the 
CCITT quantizing law A; the composite digital 
signal has a frame consisting of 32 octet time- 
slots and operates at a digit rate of 2 048 kbit/s. 


Note — This term should be used only when al} 
the available channels are used as PCM channels. 


2.5.4 Primary PCM Group mu — A primary digi- 
tal group of 24 PCM channels assembled by PCM 
multiplex equipment which uses the CCITT 
quantizing law mu; the composite digital signal 
has a frame consisting of 24 octet time-slots and 
asingle digit time-slot, and operates at a digit 
rate of 1 544 kbit/s. 

Nore — This term should be used only when all 
the available channels are used as PCM channels. 
2.5.5 Transmultiplexing — The conversion of a 

frequency division multiplexed signal, such as a 
group or a su p, into a corresponding 
digital multiplexed signal which has the same 
structure and channels as if it were derived from 
PCM multiplex equipment, and the complemen- 
tary process in the opposite direction of transmi- 
ssion. 

Associated term: 

Transmultiplexer 


Norm — This index has been prepared in accordance with IS: 1275- 


A 
Adaptive 
differential pulse code modulation 2.1.8, Sec 5 
prediction 2.1.9, Sec 5 
predictor 2.1.9, Sec 5 
uamizing 2.3.9, Sec 5 
A/D conversion 2.1.1, Sec 5 
ADPCM 2.1.8, Sec 5 
Aliasing 2.2.4, Sec 5 
Alternate mark inversion 
code 2.2.13, Sec 4 
code modified, 2.2.16, Sec 4 
signal 2.2.14, Sec 4 
violation 2.2.15, Sec 4 
AMI 2.2.13, Sec 4 
modified 2.2.16, Sec 4 
signal 2.2.14, Sec 4 
violation 2.2.15, Sec 4 
Analogue 
carrier transmission 2.3, Sec 2 
carrier transmission 2.8.11, Sec 1 
repeater 2.5.2, Sec 1 
signal 2.1.3. Sec 1 
to-digital conversion 2.1.1, Sec 5 
transmission 2.1.7, Sec I 
pannes ve ce 2.1.14, Sec 3 
Asynchronous 
I deprecated ) 2.1.18, Sec3 
network ( deprecated ) 2.3.2, Sec 3 


Balanced 

code 2.2.11 Sec 4 

metallic circuit 2.3.2, Sec 1 

transmission line ( deprecated ) 2.3.2, Sec I 
Bandwidth 2.1.3, Sec 2 
Baseband 2.1.4, Sec 2 


transmission 2.1.5, Sec 2 


PCM 2.1.4, Sec 5 
pulse code modulation 2.1, 2.1.4, Sec 5 
supergroup 2.2.20, Sec 2 

Basic supergroup 2.2.29, Sec 2 

BER 2.3.3, Sec 4 

Bidirectional 2.1.10, Sec I 

Bilateral control 2.3.18, Sec 3 


Binary 
code, PCM 2.4.3, Sec 5 
code, symmetrical 2.4.4, Sec 5 
content, equivalent 2.2.4, Sec 4 
digit rate 2.1.5, Sec 4 
digital signal 2.1.3, Sec 4 
signal 2.1.3, Sec 4 

Bipolar 
code 2.2.18, Sec 4 
signal 2.2.14, Sec 4 

violation 2.2.15, Sec 4 

Bit 
error 2.3.1, Sec 4 
error rate ( deprecated ) 2.3.2, Sec 4 
ratio 2.3.3, Sec 4 
rate 2.1.7, Sec 4 
rate, equivalent, 2.2.5, Sec 4 
sequence independence 2.2.23, Sec 4 
sequence indepedence quasi, 2.2.24, Sec 4 


*Rules for making alphabetical indices. 


18 : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 to 5 ) - 1988 


INDEX 


1976*. Index numbers are the clause 


Both-way 2.1.12, Sec I 

Break-in state ( of an echo suppressor ) 2.7.9, Sec 1 
Bunched frame alignment signal, 2.2.5, Sec 3 
Burst isochronous 2.1.13, Sec 3 

Bus 2.2.12, Sec 3 

Byte 2.1.16, Sec 4 


Le] 


Cable section 2.5.7, Sec 1 
Carrier 2.2.2, Sec 2 
frequencies 2.2.3, Sec 2 
frequencies, channel 2.2.4, Sec 2 
system, analogue 2.8.11, Sec 1 
system, multichannel 2.8.1}, Sec 1 
transmission 2.8.10, Sec I 
transmission, analogue 2.8.11, Sec 1 
transmission, multichannel 2.8.11, Sec 1 
CDM 2.8.8, Sec I 
Channel 2.4.2, Sec I 
bank 2.2.12, Sec 2 
carrier frequencies 2.2.4, Sec 2 
code-division 2.8.8, Sec 1 
derived 2.8.4. Sec 1 
frequency-division 2.8.5, Sec I 
gate, 2.2.13, Sec 3 
go 2.4.4, Sec I 
{ PCM ) ( telephone ) 2.5.1, Sec 5 
sound programme 2.1.7, Sec 2 
Channel} 


time-division 2.8.7, Sec I 
time-slot 2.2.10, Sec 3 
translating equipment 2.2.7 Sec 2 
transmission 2.4.2, 1 
VF 2.1.6, Sec 2 
voice-frequency 2.1.6, Sec 2 
wave-i h division 2.8.6, Sec I 
Circuit 2.4.3, Sec 1 
urt maae 2.3.2, Sec 1 
ecision ( for a digital signal ) 2.1.8, Sec 
double phantom $3.9, Sec ] ) g $ 
earth phantom 2.3.7, Sec 1 
earth return 2.3.4, Sec I 
four-wire 2.4.16, Sec 1 
metallic 2.3,1, Sec I 
phantom 2.3.8, Sec 1 
side 2.3.6, Sec I 
superposed 2.3.5, Sec I 
telecommunication 2.4.3, Sec I 
two-wire 2.4.15, Sec I 
unbalanced metallic, 2.3.3, Sec I 
Clock 2.1.9, Sec3 
master 2.1.11, Sec 3 
reference 2.1.10, Sec 3 
Coaxial pair 2.2.5, Sec 1 
Code, alternate mark 
inversion 2.2.13, Sec 4 
modified 2.2.16, Sec 4 


e 
balanced 2.2.11, Sec4 
bipolar 2.2.19, kar 4 
ivision multiplexing 2.8.8, Sec 
line 2.2.1, Sec seer 
paired-disparity 2.2.12, Sec 4 
PCM binary 2.4.3, Sec 5 
Pulse 2.4.2, Sec 5 
redundant line 2.4.17, Sec4 
aar ies binary 2.4.4, Sec 5 
word ( in pulse code modulation ) 2.4, 2.4. 
Coding law ( deprecated ) 2.3.6; TE gade 
Controlling repeater station 2.6.3, Sec I 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/See 1 to 5 ) - 1988 


Controlled slip 2.3.12, Sec 4 
Converter 
parallel-to-serial 2.1.26, Sec 4 
serial-to-parallel 2.1.25, Sec 4 
Cyclic 
control signal 2.1.7, Sec 3 
time-scale 2.1.2, Sec 3 
timing signal 2.1.6, Sec 3 


D/A conversion 2.1.2, Sec 5 
Decision 
circuit 2.1.8, Sec 4 
instant 2.1.7, Sec 4 
value 2.3.4 Sec5 
Decoding ( in pulse code modulation ) 2.4.6, Sec 
De-iteration 2.1.21, Sec 4 
Delta modulation 2.1.7, Sec 5 
Democratic mutually synchronized network 2,3.5, Sec 3 
Demultiplex, to 2.8.3, Sec 1 
Demultiplexed 2.8.3, Sec 1 
Demultiplexer 2.8.14, Sec 1 
digital 2.5.3, Sec4 
Demultiplexing 2.8.3, Sec I 
Dependent repeater station 2.6.7, Sec 1 
Derived channel 2.8.4, Sec I 
Descrambler 2.2.26, Sec 4 
Deserializer 2.1.26. Sec 4 
Differential pulse code 
modulation 2.1.5. Sec 5 
adaptive 2.1.8, Sec 5 
igit 
housekeeping 2.1.22, Sec 4 
justification service 2.6.5, Sec 4 
Justifying 2.6.4, Sec 4 
overhead 2.1.22, Sec 4 
position 2.1.18, Sec 4 
rate 2.1.4, Sec 4 
binary, 2.1.5, Sec 4 
effective, 2.1.16, Sec 4 
line, 2.2.3, Sec 4 


ternary 2.1.5, Sec 4 
sequence integrity 2.2.21, Sec 4 
service 2.1.22, Sec 4 
stuffing 2.6.4, Sec 4 

service 2.6.5, Sec 4 
time slot 2.1.2. Sec 4 
time-slot, justifiable 2.6.3, Sec4 
timeslot, stuffable 2.6.3, Sec 4 

Digital 
block 2.5.6, Sec 4 
demultiplexer 2.5.3, Sec 4 
distribution frame 2.4.1, Sec 4 
errors 2.3, Sec4 


Digital line 
link 2.4.6, Sec 4 
path ( deprecated ) 2.4.6, Sec 4 
section 2.4.5, Sec 4 
system 2.4.7, Sec 4 

Digital link 2.4.3, Sec 4 

Digital 
muldex 2.5.5, Sec 4 4 
multiplex equipment 2.5.4, cae 
multiplex hierarchy 2.5.7, Sec 
nt er 253, Sec Py 
multiplexing 2.5, 
path i deprecated ) 2.4.3, Sec 4 
radio link 2.4.9, Sec 4 


26 


Digital radio 

path ( deprecated ) 2.4.9, Sec 4 

section 2.4.8, 4 

system 2.4.10, Sec 4 

reference sequence 2.4.12, Sec 5 

section 2.4.2, Sec 4 
Digital signa) 2.1.5, Sec | 

binary 2.1.3, Sec 4 

multivalue 2.2.6, Sec 4 

N-ary 2.1.5, Sec 4 

redundant 2.2.18, Sec 4 

standardized 2.5.12, Sec 4 

uniform muitivalue 2.2.6, Sec ¢ 

64 kbit/s 2.5.13, Sec 4 
Digital sum 2.2.8, Sec 4 

variation 2.2.10, Sec 4 

test sequence 2.4.11, Sec 5 
Digital-to-analogue conversion 2.1.2, Sec 5 
Digital transmission 2.4, Sec 4, 2.1.8, Sec I 

lel 

serial 2.1.27, Sec 4 

system 2.4.4, Sec 4 
Digroup 2.5.8, Sec 4 
Direct 

line fileer 2.3.7, Sec 2 

through-connection filter 2.3.7, Sec 2 

point 2.3.8, Sec 2 

transfer filter 2.3.7, Sec 2 
Directly-powered repeater station 2.6.5, Sec I 
Disable ( an echo control ) 2.7.12, Sec 1 
Disabling ( in echo control ) 2.7.12, Sec 1 
Discretely-timed signa] 2.1.4, Sec I 
Disparity 2.2.9, Sec 4 
Distortion 

foldover 2.2.4, Sec 5 

overload 2.3.14, Sec 5 

quantizing 2.3.13, Sec 5 

slope overload 2.3.15, Sec 5 
Distributed frame alignment signal 2.2.6, Sec 3 
Distribution frame 

digital 2.4.1, Sec 4 

group ( etc ) 2.3.2, Sec 2 

repeater 2.1.8, Sec 2 
Double-ended ization 2.3.16, Sec $ 
Double phantom circuit 2.3.9, Sec I 
DPCM 2.1.5, Sec 5 
DRS 2.4.12, ad 
DTS 2.4.11, 
Dynamicizer ( deprecated ) 2.1.26, Sec 4 


Earth 
phantom circuit 2.3.7, Sec I 
return 2.2.3, Sec I 
circuit 2.3.4, Sec 1 
Echo 2.7.1, Sec 1 
cancellation 2.7.10, Sec I 
cancellor 2.7,11, Sec 1 
control 2.7.2, Sec 1 
re A A a 
su 7.4, 
full 2.7.5, Sec 1 
half 2.7.6. Sec 1 
split 2.7.6, Sec 1 
Effective digit rate 2.1.6, Sec 4 
Elementary 
cable section 2.5.7, Sec I 
ed section 2.5.9, Sec 1 
regenerator section 2.5.9, Sec I 
r ter section 2.5.8, Sec I 
Enabling ( in echo control ) 2.7.13, Sec I 


bit rate, 2.2,5 Sec 4 


Error 
digital 2.9.1, Sec 4 
multiplication 2.3.4, Sec 4 
factor 2.3.5, Sec 4 
me pos Kva er 4 
bit ( deprecat 23.4, Sec 
ratio 2.3.2; sed 


Estor-free 
decisecond 2.3.8, Sec 4 
second 2.3.8, Sec 4 


ro. l 
FDM 2.8.5, Sec 1 
DM 


F. 
link 2.3.4, Sec 2 
system, multichannel 2.8.11, Sec 1 
telephone channel 2.2.6, Sec 2 
transmission, multichannel 2.8.11, Sec 1 
Fifteen-supergroup assembly 2.2.28, Sec 2 
basic 2.2.27, Sec 2 
connection point 2.3.8, Sec 2 
distribution frame 2.3.6, Sec 2 ' 
reference pilot rime: = 2 
hypergroup 2.2.31, Sec 
Filter direct 
Foldover distortion, 2.2.4, Sec 5 
Four-wire 
circuit 2.4.16, Sec 1 
transmission, 2.4.15, Sec I 


2 
comparison pilot 2.4.5, Sec 2 
derived channel 2.8.4, Sec 1 
division multiplexing 2.2, Sec 2 
spectrum 2.1.1 Sec 2 i 
translation 2.2.1, Sec 2 
Full echo suppressor 2.7.5, Sec 1 


G 


Generic 
PCM 2.1.3, Sec 5 
pulse code modulation 2.1.3, Sec 5 
go channel 2.4,4, Seo I 
Group 2.2.8 Sec 2 
A (obsolete terms), 2.2.9, Sec2 
B ( obgolete ) 2.2.1, Sec 2 
distribution frame 2.3.2, Sec 2 
link 2.9.6, Sec 2 
modulating equipment 2.2.12, Sec 2 
reference pilot 2.4.3, Sec 2 
section 2.3.5, Sec 2 
translating equipment, 2.2.13, Sec 2 
Guard band 2.2.5, Sec 2 


Haif echo suppressor 2.7.6, Sec 1 
HFRDF 2.3.1, Sec 2 


Hierarchic 
synchronized network 2.3.6, Sec 3 
mutually synchronized network 2.3,7, Sec 3 


18 : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 to 5 ) - 1988 


High frequency ae distribution frame 2.3.1, Sec 2 
Highway 2.2.12, 3 
Housekeeping digits 2.1.22, Sec 4 


Hypergroup 
connection point 2.3.30, Sec 2 


Information 2.1.1, Sec 1 
Isochronous 2.1.12, Sec 3 
burst 2.1.13, Sec 3 


J 
Jitter 2.1.9, Sec 4 
Juntifiable digit time-slot 2.6.3, Sec 4 


Justification 2.6, Sec 4 
capacity 2.6.11, Sec 4 
instant 2:0:2. Bec4 å 
negative 2.6.7, 
positive 2.6.6, Sec 4 
positive/zero/negative, 2.6.8 Sec 4 
rate 2.6.9, Sec 
maximum 2.6.11, Sec 4 
nominal 2.6.10, Sec 4 
ratio 2.6.12, Sec 4 
maximum 2.6.14, Sec4 
minimum 2.6.14, Sec 4 
Justification 
ratio nominal 2.6.13, Sec 4 
service digit 2.6.5, Sec 4 
Justify, to 2.6.1, Sect 
Justifying service digit 2.6.5, Sec 4 


L 


` Line code 2.2, Sec 
redundant 2.2.17, Sec 4 


Link 
digital 2.4.3, Sec 4 
line 2.4.6, Sec 4 
radio 2.4.9, Sec 4 
line 2.4.7, Sec 1 
radio 2.4.8, Sec I 
synchronization 2.3.11, Sec 3 
transmission 2.4.6, Sec 1 
Load capacity ( of a quantizer ) 2.3.11, Sec 5 


Locally-controlled er station 2.6.2, Sec 1 
Locally-derived sy ization signal 2.3.13, Sec 3 
M 


Master clock 2.1.11, Sec3 
Mastergroup 2.2.18, Sec 2 
A ( obsolete term ) 2.2.19, Sec 2 
B ( obsolete term ), 2.2.20, Sec 2 
tade DEIR, Sec 2 i 
modulating equipment 2.2.21, Sec 
reference pilot 245, Sec? 3 
seg equipment 2.2.22, Sec 2 


27 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 to 5 ) - 1988 


Minimum 
justification ratio 2,6,14, S 
stuffing ratio 2.6.14, Sex 4 * 
Modified 
alternate mark inversion cod: 22. 
AMI 2.2.16, Sec 4 aa 


Modulating equipment, ropi etc ) 2.2.17, Sec 2 


Modulation rate ( deprecat 
Muldem 2.8.15, Sec 1 
Muldex 2.8.15, Sec 1 
digital 2.5.5, Sec 4 
Multichannel 
FDM system 2.8.11, Sec I 
FDM transmision 2.8.11, Sec 1 
PCM system 2.8.12, Sec 1 
PCM transmission 2.8.12, Sec 1 
Multichannel carrier 
system 2.8.11, Sec I 
transmission 2.8.11, Sec 1 
Multiframe 2.2.15, Sec 3 
alignment 2.2.16, Sec 3 
signal 2.2.17, Sec I 
Multiplex 2.8.1, Sec 1 
equipment 
digital 2.5.4, Sec 4 
PCM 2.5.2, Sec 5 
hierarchy, digital 2.5.7, Sec 4 
signal 2.8.2, Sec | 
system 2.8.9, Sec I 
to 2.8.1, Sec 1 
transmission 2.8.9, Sec I 
Multiplexed 2.8.1, Sec I 
signal 2.8.2, Ser: | 
transmission 2.8.9, Sec | 
Multiplexer 2.8.13, Sec I 
digital 2.5.2, Sec 4 
Multiplexing 
code division 2.8.8, Sec I 
digital 2.5.1, Sec 4 
frequency division 2.8.5, Sec 1 
in pulse code modulation 2.5, Sec 5 
time division 2.8.7, Sec 1 
wavelength division 2.8.6, Sec 1 
Multivalue digital signal, uniform 2.2.6, Sec 4 
Mutually synchronized network 2.3.4, Sec 3 


» 2.2.3, Sec 4 


N 


Neary 
digit rate 2.1.5, Sec4 
digital signal 2.1,3, Sec 4 
Negative 
justification 2.6.7, Sec 4 
pulse stuffing 2.6.7, Sec 4 
Network 
asynchronous 2.3.2, Sec 3 
democratic mutually synchronized 2.3.5, Sec 3 
gee ized 2.3.6, Sec 3 
sync niz 30 
ar otsally synchronized 2,3,7, Sec 9 
mutually syncbronized 2.3,4, Sec 3 
. mon-symchronized 2.3.2, Sec 3 
plesichronous 2.3.3, Sec 3 
synchronization 2.9.12, Sec 3 
synchronised 25) sn 3 
chronous 2.3.1, Sec 
Nove, synchronization 2.3.10, Sec 3 
Nominal justification 
rate, 2010 TA A 
ratio 2.6.13, 
Nominal stuffing rate 2.6.10, Sec 4 
Nominal stuffing ratio 2.6.13, Sec 4 
Non-synchronized network 2.3.2, Sec 3 
Non-synchronous 2.1.18, Sec 3 
network 2.3 2, Sec 4 
Non-uniform quantizing 2.3.8, Sec 5 
Notional value 2.2.7, Sec 4 


28 


o 


Octet 2.1.17, Sec 4 
sequence integrity 2.2.22, Sec 4 
slip 2.3.10, Sec 4 
One-way 2.1.11, Sec I 
Out-of-frame alignment time 2.2.9, Sec3 
Overhead digits 2.1.26, Sec 4 
Overload 
distortion 2.3.14, Sec 5 
point ( deprecated ) 2.3.11, Sec 5 


P 


Pair 
coaxial 2.2.5, Sec 1 
symmetrical 2.2.4, Sec 1 
Paired-disparity code 2.2.12, Sec 4 
Parallel ( digital transmission ) 2.1.24, Sec 4 
drag to-serial converter 2.1.26, Sec 4 


basic 2.1.4, Sec 5 

binary code 2.4.3, Sec 5 
PCM 

channel 2.5.1, Sec 5 

codec 2.4.9, Sec 5 

decoder, 2.4.8, Sec 5 

digital reference sequence 2.4. 12, Sec 5 

encoder 2.4.7, Sec 5 

decoder 2.4.9, Sec 5 
generic 2.1.3, Sec 5 
group À 2.5.3, Sec 5 
mu 2.5.4, Sec 5 

multiplex equipment 2.5.2, Sec 5 

system, multichannel 2.8.12, Sec 1 

telephone channel 2.5.1, Sec 5 

transmission, multichannel 2.8.12, Sec 1 

word-2.4.5, Sec 5 
Peak limiting 2.3.12, Sec 5 
Phantom 

circuit 2.3.8, Sec 1 

double 2.3.9, Sec 1 

earth 2.3.7, Sec 1 
ae relationship 2.1.4, Sec3 

ilot 

group ( etc ) reference 2.4.3, Sec 2 

reference ver “a 2 

signal 2.4.1, Sec 
Plesichronous 2.1.17, Sec 3 
Plesichronous network 2.3.3, Sec 3 
Positive justification 2.6.6, Sec 4 
Positive pulse stuffing 2.6.6, Sec 4 
Positive/zero/negative 

justification 2.6.8, Sec 4 

stuffing 2.6.8, Sec 4 
Power-feeding repeater station 2.6.6. Sec I 
Prediction 

adaptive 2.1.9, Sec 5 

law 2.1.6, Sec 5 
Predictor 2.1.6, Sec 5 
or tg 2.1.9, Sec 5 


mary 
block ( deprecated ) 2.5.8, Sec 4 
digital group 2.5.8, Sec 4 
STORES 
mu 2.5.4, 
Pseudo É 


N-ary signal 2.2.20, Sec 4 
rt he signal 2.2.19, Sec 4 
Pulse code 2.4.2, Sec 5 
modulation 2.1.4, Sec 5 
adaptive differential 2.1.8, Sec5 
basic 2.1.4, Sec 5 
differential 2.1.5, Sec 5 
generic 2.1.9, Sec 5 
Pulse stuffing 2.6.1, Sec 4 
negative 2.6.7, Sec 4 
positive 2.6.4, Sec 8 
positive/zero/negative 2.6.8, Sec 4 


Q 


Quantize 
to 2.3.1, Sec5 
Quantized value 2.3.3, Sec 5 
Quantizer 2.3.1, Sec 5 
Quantizing 2.3.1, Sec 5 
adaptive 2.3.9, Sec 5 
distortion 2.3.13, Sec 5 
interval 2.3.2, Sec 5 
law 2.3.6, Sec 5 
noise 2.3.13, Sec 5 
non-uniform 2,3.8, Sec 5 
uniform 2.3.7, Sec 5 
Quasi bit sequence independence 2.2.24, Sec 4 
Quaternary, digital group 2.5.11, Sec 4 


Radio 
section, digital 2.4.8, Sec 4 
system digital 2.4.10, Sec 4 
Radio link 2.4.8, Sec 1 
digital 2.4.9, Sec 4 
Dr path, digital ( deprecated ) 2.4.9, Sec 4 


received source signal 2.4.11, Sec 1 
Redundant 

digital signal 2.2.18, Sec 4 

line code 2.2.17, Sec 4 
Reference 

pilot 2.4.2, Sec 2 

clock 2.1.10, Sec 3 

clock 2.4.2, Sec 2 

group ( etc) 2.4.3, Sec 2 

Regenerated section 2.5.9, Sec I 
Regneration 2.1.14, Sec4 
Regenerative repeater 2.5.9, Sec 1 
Regenerator 2.1.15, Sec 4 

section 2.5.9, Sec I 
Regulated line section 2.4.7, Sec 2 
Regulating pilot 2.4.4, Sec 2 
Re-iterate to 2.1.20, Sec 4 
Re-iteration 2.1.20, Sec 4 
Remotely 

controlled repeater station 2.6.4, Sec 1 

derived synchronization signal 2.3. 14, Sec 3 
Repeater 2.5.1, Sec I 

analogue 2.5.2, Sec I ` 

distribution frame 2.1.8, Sec 2 

four-wire 2,5.5, Sec 1 

regenerative 2.5.3, Sec I 

section 2.5.8, Sec I 

two-wire 2.5.4, Sec 1 

station 2.6.1, Sec | 
Repeatered section 2.5.8, Sec 1 
Retiming 2.1.18, Sec 4 
Rerurn channel 2.4.4, Sec I 


Sample, to 2.2.2 Sec 5 
Sample ( of a signal ) 2.2.1, Sec 5 
Sampling 
(of a signal ) 2.2.2, Sec 5 
frequency 2.2.3, Sec 5 
impulse code modulation 2.2, Sec 5 
Tate E2 Hp > 
Scramble to ( in digital transmission 2.2.25, § 
Scrambler ( in digital transmission ) 2.25, Sec à $ 
Secondary digital group 2.5.9, Sec 4 
Section j 
cable 2.5.7 Sec 1 
digital 2.4.2, Sec 4 
line 2.4.5, Sec 4 
radio 2.4.8, Sec 4 
regenerated 2.5.9, Sec 1 
regenerator 2.5.9, Sec I 
regulated line 2.4.7, Sec 2 
repeater 2.5.8, Sec 1 


1 
re 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec 1 to 5 ) - 1988 


ad 2.5.8, Sec 1 


termination 2.5.6, Sec 1 
Separation point 2.3.3, Sec 2 


Sequence independence ( in digital transmission ) 2.2.23 
Sec 


4 
Sequence integrity (in digital transmission) 2.2.21, Sec 4 
ial 


ia 
_ (digital ) transmission 2.1.23, Sec 4 
to-parallel converter 2.1.25, Sec 4 
Serializer 2.1.26 Sec 4 
Service digits 2.1.22, Sec 4 
Side circuit 2.3.6, Sec I 
Signal 
alternate mark inversion 2.2.14, Sec 4 
AMI, 2.2.14 Sec4 
analogue 2.1.3, Sec I 
binary 2.1.3 Sec 4 
bipolar 2.2.14, Sec 4 
bunched frame alignment 2.2.5, Sec 3 
cyclic, control 2.1.7, Sec 3 
timing 2.1.6, Sec 3 
digital 2.1.5, Sec 1 
discretely-timed 2.1.4, Sec 1 
element 2.1.1, Sec 4 
frame alignment 2.2.4, Sec 3 
line 2.4.12, Sec 1 
multiframe alignment 2.2.17, Sec 3 
multivalue digital 2.2.6, Sec 4 
multiplex 2.8.2, Sec 1 
multiplexed 2.8.2, Sec 1 
N-ary 2.1.3, Sec 4 
pilot 2.4.1, Sec 2 
preudo N-ary 2.2.20, Sec 4 
pseudo ternary 2.2.19, Sec 4 
received source 2.4.11, Sec I 
redundant digital 2.2.18, Sec 4 
standardized digital 2.5.12, Sec 4 
sychronization 2.3.8, Sec 3 
locally-derived 2.3.13, Sec 3 
remotely-derived 2.3.14, Sec 3 


2.1.3, Sec 4 


timing 2.1.5, Sec3 

transmitted source 2.4.10, Sec 1 
uniform multivalue digital 2.2.6, Sec 4 
64 kbit/s 2.5.13, Sec 4 


Signalling time-slot 2.2.11, Sec 3 

Significant instant ( in transmission ) 2.1.3, Sec 3 
Single-ended synchronization 2.3.15, Sec 3 

Slip 2.3.9, Sec 4 


controlled 2,3.12, Sec 4 
frame 2.3.11, Sec 4 

Octet 2.9.10, Sec 4 
uncontrolled 2,3.13, Sec 4 


Slope overload distortion 2.3.15, Sec 5 
Sound 


me channel 2.1.7, Sec 2 


Space 2.2.8, Sec I 
Split echo su 
Standardize 


essor 2.7.6, Sec 1 


digital signal 2.5.12, Sec 4 
64 kbit/s digital signal 2.5.13, Sec 4 


Staticizer ( deprecated ) 2.1.25 Sec 4 
Stuff, to 2.6.1, Sec 4 
å Sn digit time-slot 2.6.3, Sec 4 


preg 2.6.11, Sec 4 


t 2.6.4, Sec 4 


instant 2.6.2, Sec 4 
rate 2.6.9, Sec 4 


Stuffing 


rate 


Maximum 2,6.11, Sec 4 


å nominal 2.6,10, Sec 4 


ratio 2.6.12, Sec 4 


Maximum 2.6.14, Sec 4 
minimum 2.6.14, Sec 4 
nominal 2.6.13, Sec 4 


Sub 


service digit 2.6.5, Sec 4 


frame 2.2.14, Sec 3 
group 2.2.11, Sec 2 


IS : 1885 ( Part 65/Sec I to 5 ) - 1988 


Supergroup 2.2.14, Sec 2 

modulating equipment 2.2.16, Sec 2 

reference pilot 2.4.2, Sec 2 

section 2.3.10, Sec 2 

translating equipment 2.2.17, Sec 2 
Supermastergroup 2.2.23, Sec 2 

basic 2.2.24, Sec 2 

reference pilot 2.4.6, Sec 2 

translating equipment 2.2.25, Sec 2 
Superposed circuit 2.3.5, Sec 1 
Suppression state ( of an echo suppressor ) 2.7.8, Sec 1 
Switching control point 2.4.6, Sec 2 
Symmetrical binary code 2.4.4, Sec 5 
Synchronism 2.1.15, Sec 3 
Synchronization 2.1.16, Sec $ 

signal 2.3.8, Sec 3 

node 2.3.10, Sec 3 

link 2.3.11, Sec3 

network 2.3.12, Sec 3 
Synchronized networks 2.3, 2.3.1, Sec 3 
Synchronous 2.1.15, Sec 3 


T 


Tertiary digital group 2.5.10, Sec 4 
Through-group 
filter 2.3.9, Sec 2 
connection-point 2.3.10, Sec 2 
Timing 2.1, Sec 3 
information 2.3,9, Sec 3 
recovery 2.1.12, Sec 4 
Time scale 2.1.1, Sec 3 
Time 
interval earror 2.1.11, Sec 4 
slot ( TS ) 2.1.8, Sec 3 
Timing signal 2.1.5, Sec 3 
cyclic 2.1.6, Sec3 
Transcoder 2.4.10, Sec 5 
Transcoding 2.4.10, Sec 5 
Translating equipment 
channel 2.2.12, Sec 2 
group ( etc) 2.2.18, Sec 2 
Transmission 2.1.6, Sec I 
analogue 2.1.7, Sec I 
carrier 2.8.11, Sec 1 
baseband 2.1.5, Sec 2 
carrier 2.8.10, Sec 1 
channel 2.4.2, Sec 1 
digital 2.1.7, Sec I 
four-wire 2.4.14, Sec I 


Transmission 
line 2.2.2, Sec I 
balanced ( deprecated ) 2.3.2, Sec 1 
unbalanced ( deprecated ) 2.3.3, Sec 1 
link 2.4.6, Sec 1 
medium 2.2.1. Sec I 
multichannel carrier 2.8.11, Sec 1 
multichannel FDM 2.8.11, Sec I 
multichannel] PCM 2.8.12, Sec 1 
multiplex 2.8.9, Sec I 
parallel 2.1.28, Sec 4 
path 2.4.1, Sec 1 
serial 2.1.27, Sec 4 
system 2.4.9, Sec I 
digital 2.4,4, Sec 4 
two-wire 2.4.18, Sec 1 
Transmit, to 2.6.1, Sec 1 
Transmultiplexer 2.5.5, Sec 5 
Transmultiplexing 2.5.5, Sec 5 
TS 2.1.8, Sec 3 
Two-way 2.1.12, Sec 1 
wire, circuit 2.4.15, Sec 1 
repeater 2.5.4, Sec 1 
transmission 2.4.13, Sec 1 


U 


Unbalanced metallic circuit 2.3.3, Sec 1 
Unbalanced transmission line ( deprecated ) 2.3.3, Sec 1 
Uncontrolled slip 2.3.13, Sec 4 
Unidirectional 2.1.9, Sec I 
Uniform 
multivalue digital signal 2.2.6, Sec 4 
quantizing, 2.3.7, Sec 5 
Unilateral control 2.3.17, Sec 5 
Unoperated state ( of an echo suppressor ) 2.7.7, Sec I 


v 


VF channel 2.1.6, Sec 2 . 
Virtual decision value 2.3.5, Sec 5 
Voice-frequency channel 2.1.6, Sec 2 


w 


Wander 2.1.10, Sec 4 
Waveguide 2.2.6, Sec 1 x 
Wavel: 

derived channel 2.8.6, Sec I 

— multiplexing 2.8.6, Sec I 


wD 
Working range ( of a quantizer ) 2.3.10, Sec 5 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 


Telephones : 3310131, 3311375 


Regional Offices: 
Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW DELHI 10002 


*Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, 
CALCUTTA 700054 


Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C,CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 
tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East), 
BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 
'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 


Peenya industrial Area, Ist Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 
BANGALORE 560058 


Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 
BHOPAL 462003 


Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI! 781003 


5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg (Nampally Station Road), 
HYDERABAD 500001 


R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302008 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Patiiputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O,, Palayam, TRIVANDRUM 695035 


inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): 
‘Pushpanjali’, First Floor, 205A West High Court Road, ShankarNagar 
Square, NAGPUR 440010 


institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 
Pune 411005 


*Salss Office in Caicutta la at 5 Chowringhes Approach, P.O, Princep Street, 
Cateutta 700072 


Sales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400007 


Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all offices ) 


Telephone 


3310131, 3311375 
362499 


21843, 31641 
412442, 412519, 412916 
6329295 


26348, 26349 
384955, 384956 


66716 


53627 


231083 


63471, 69832 
216876, 218292 
62308 

62104, 62117 


25171 


52435 


276800 


eS rm 
Printed at New india Printing Preas, Khurja, indie 


