IS 8800

: 1997

(Reaffirmed 2002)

TECHNICAL DELIVERY CONDITIONS FOR STEEL CASTINGS (EXCLUDING INVESTMENT CASTINGS)
( Third Revision )

ICS 77.140.80

0 BIS 1997

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

September 1997

Price Group

6

Steel Casting Sectional Committee, MTD 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Steel Castings Sectional Committee had been aproved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. This standard was first published in 1978 and was revised in 1985 and 1986. While reviewing the standard in the light of the experience gained during these years the committee has decided that the standard may be further revised. In this revision various clauses have been aligned with the recent standards on steel castings. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IS0 4990 : 1986 Steel Castings, General Technical requirements issued by International Organization for Standardization ISO. For the purpose of deciding wheather a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, ovserved of calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for Rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 8800 : 1997

Indian Standard TECHNICAL DELIVERY CONDITIONS FOR STEEL CASTINGS (EXCLUDING INVESTMENT CASTINGS) ( Third Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard outlines technical conditions for supply of steel castings and conditions for selection and preparation of samples and test pieces.
NOTE - Where a pattern is supplied by the purchaser, the manufacturer would not ordinarily be held rcsponsibte for the dimensional accuracy or the castings unless otherwise agreed.

1.2 Where a material of product specification lays down different conditions, those conditions shall apply. In special cases, variations on these conditions may be agreed upon at the time of enquiry and order. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards Listed in Annex A are ncccssary adjuncts to this standard. 3 `IXRMINOI,OGY 3.1 Cast (Melt) The product of any of the following: a) One furnace heat, b) One crucible heat, or c) A number of furnace or crucible heats of similar composition mixed in a ladle or tapped in separate ladles and poured simultaneously for making a casting. 3.2 Batch A group of castings of one grade of material cast from the same melt and heat treated together under identical conditions. 4 WORKING OF ENQUIRIES AND ORDERS 4.1 Each enquiry and order shall provide information given in 4.1.1 to 4.1.17. 4.1.1 Designation and, where identification number of the casting. the

4.1.5 The Reference Numbers of AI1 Standards or Specifications Concemed
4.1.6 The method of inspection,

case of non-destructive with 7.2.1.4.

tests

cspccially in the in accordance in

4.1.7 Indication of the special requirements, accordance with 7.2.

4.1.8 Grade and quality of the steel and, if method of melting and appropriate, the additional properties. 4.1.9 Important dimensions with indication of their detum points for marking out of machining. 4.1.10 Class of deviations on dimensions and mass chosen in accordance with IS 4897 (see 7.2.1.1). 4.1.11 Submission, where appropriate, of sample castings for approval before bulk manufacture. 4.1.12 Place of purchaser's inspection when the tests can not be carried out in the manufacturer's works. 4.1.13 Method of Batching. 4.1.14 Methods of statistical (if used). 4.1.15 Restrictive (if any). control to be used

clauses on repairs by welding

necessary,

4.1.2 The quantity, rate of delivery and plus or minus tolcrancc on the quantity of castings. 4. I .3 The numbers of the drawings provided. 4.1.4 If the pattern is supplied by the purchaser, its design, its condition, its number and the inspection to bc carried out.
1

4.1.!6 Procedures for marking, in accordance with 8, machining, loading, dcsparching and the destination. 4.1.17 Type of Inspection 4.1.17.1 With no certificate of' compliance, no statcmcnt of routine control test results and no works certificate.

IS 8800 : 1997 4.1.17.2

Non specific inspection

Non specific inspection is carried out by the manufacturer on a cast resulting from the same production process but not necessarily on the products supplied. a) Documents 1) Statements of compliance with the order - A document by which the founder states that the castings supplied comply with the requirements of the order without giving any test results. Statement of routine control test 2) results - A document by which the founder states that the casting supplied comply with the requirements of the order and in which he supplies the results of routine control tests of the foundry carried out on products obtained by the same method of manufacturer as those supplied, but not necessarily on the castings delivered.
4.1.17.3

certificate. If there is no specific stipulation from the purchaser or an agreement to the contrary, the supplier can presume that the acceptance procedures may be carried out by the compctcnt department (see Note 2) at the works see Table 1.
Table 1 Type of Document Required for Various Types of Inspection and Testing
Type of Inspection Tesling Non specific md Type of Document Symbol

inspection

No document

and testing

or Statement of compliance or Test rcpor-1 Inspections certificate signed by the reprcsentativeof thequalified dcpartmcnt of the works Inspection certificate signed by the purchaser or the representalive of the body named by him or Inspection report signed by the manufacturer and the purchaser or his repr~entativc Inspection certificate signed by the independent body

SC `IX

Specific inspection and testing carried out by the qualified department (see Note 2) of the manufactureer's factory Specific inspection and testing carried out in the presence of the purchaser or of a body named by him

I<:

ICI'

Specific inspection

IK

Specific inspection means the acceptance procedure carried out on the products to be delivered in order to check whether these products comply with the requirements of the order. a) Documents 1) Certificate of acceptance-The certificate of acceptance contains the result of all prescribed tests carried out on samples taken from products (see Note 1) which are themselves delivered in the conditions specified for the forming of batches. The acceptance procedures may be carried out by one of the following methods as agreed at the time of enquiry and order. i) by the competent department (see Note 2) at the works. ii) in the presence of the purchaser or of an organization appointed by him. In case (l), the acceptance certificate is signed by the rcprcsentative of the competent department, and in case (2) by the purchaser or the representative of the organizations appointed. In some special cases the acceptance procedure may also be carried out by an organization which is independent of the purchaser and the manufacturer, the test bcingcarried out outside the manufacturing works. In this case, representative of this organization has to sign the acceptance

Specific inspection and testing carried out by an independent body, the test being carried out outside the production works Continuous inspection

ICI'

13y agreement the interesrcd

between Parties

2) Acceptance report - When it has been agreed that the certificate of acccptancc specified in 4.1.17.3 (a) (1) (2)shall also be signed by the purchaser or his representative, it is called the acccptancc report.
NOTES 1 Both the castings and the test blocks used for inspection are know as the product. 2 Thecompetentdepartment at theworksmcans the inspcc tion department, which is different from the productIon department. In certain cases, this department may bc 111~ subject of approval by the purchaser.

5 MANUFACTURI1:
5.1 Steel Making
Except where stipulated to the contrary, the s~c.cI making process is Icft to the discretion of the foundry, it shall, however, bc indicated to the purchaser if the latter so specifics in the enquiry and order.

IS 8800 : 1997

5.2 Unless otherwise specified in the enquiry and order or mutually agreed upon, the choice of the methods of moulding, running, heat treatment, etc, is left to the discretion of the foundry. 5.3 Cleaning and Dressing All the castings shall be cleaned, have the sand removed, and be dressed sufficiently to allow them to respond to heat treatment and to be adequately examined. 5.4 Repair and Fabrication Welding The repair and fabrication welds required by the nature of the steel casting shall be carried out accordance to IS 5530. Unless any restrictive clauses specify to the contrary at the time of the enquiry and order, the castings may be finished by means of welding without the previous approval of the purchaser. 6 SELECTION OF SAMPLES AND PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 6.1 Test Rlocks Except for routine control tests or where otherwise agreed upon, the test blocks whether cast separately or attached to the castings, are produced from the same cast and are heat treated along with the castings they represent. In case of classification by batch, same test blocks shall be put with each batch for heat treatment. 6.1.1 Unless otherwise specified, the test blocks may be cast separately from the castings. 6.1.2 The test pieces used for the mechanical tests are selected from the test blocks with their axes at least 12 mm from the surface. 6.1.3 In the absence of a specific agreement when ordering,the thickness of the test block shall be 30 23 mm. 6.1.4 Test bars with different thicknesses and corresponding mechanical properties as well as the

conditions under which they are to be used (location in the case of attached blocks, method of removel, etc) may form the subject of agreement when ordering. In such a case the thickness of the test bar may be maintained nearly equal to the ruling section thickness of the casting concerned. However, when the ruling section thickness is 50 mm or more the height and length of the test bar shall be each kept at least 3 times its thickness. The ruling section thickness shall be indicated by the purchaser in-the enquiry and the order. The test pieces should be taken as shown in the Fig. 1.
the ruling section thickness is more than the thickness of the test block to be provided it may be advisable to heat treat such test blocks separately, giving a similar heat treatment cycle as recommended for the parent castings, subject to agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. By similar heat treatment cycle it is generally meant that the temperature range, rate of heating and cooling, etc, will be the same as those of the parent castings but the soaking time and method of cooling may be different depending on the ruling srction thickness.

NOTE- In the case of large castingwhere

6.2 Mechanical Tests 6.2.1 Unless otherwise specified the mechanical properties specified are those which are to be obtained when tested at 3O+lO"C from test bars cast either separately from or attached to the casting to which they refer. The test values so exhibited represent, therefore, the quality of steel from which the castings have been poured; they do not necessarily represent the properties of the castings themselves. 62.2 Tensile Test at Ambient Temperature
The shape and the dimensions, as well as the test

method, shall comply with IS 1608. Unless otherwise specified, the dimeter of mechincd test bars shall be 14 mm. 6.2.3 Tensile Test at Elevated Temperature A test piece of the same dimeter as for the test at ambient temperature shall be used.

-Ii

),3d P

c

Xl
FIG. 1 POSITIONOF'IIIETESTPIECEAND 3

SECTION d is the thickness of the ruling section

XX

SIZEOFTIIESAMPLE

IS 8800 : 1997 6.2.3.1 The proof stress at elevated temperature shall be determined in conformitywith IS 1608. The temperature specified in the product standard is used.

6.2.4 Creep Testing and Stress Rupture Testing at Elevated Temperature of the test pieces and the test methods shall comply with the requirement in IS 3407 (Parts 1 and 2). The chaise of method and the testing conditions shall be the subject of agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 6.2.5 Impact Test This test shall be carried out on V-notch charpy test pieces in accordance with IS 1757. 6.2.6 Hardness Test This test shall be carried out after removal of surface layer in order to eliminate de-carburized zones.
6.2.7 Bend Test The test shall be carried out in accordance with the The dimension

analysis in the test certificate for residual elements shall be done only when so specified by the purchaser in the enquiry and order. However, the manufacturer shall ensure that the residual elements are within the limits, when such limits are specified by the purchaser in the enquiry and order. 6.3.3 Inter-granular corrosion Test This test is normally reserved for stainless steels. The test shall be carried out in conformity with IS 10641 (Part 1)or IS 10461 (Part 2) or otherwise by agreement between the parties.
6.4 Magnetic Tests

6.4.1 The specified characteristic is normally magnetic induction. The choice of other properties shall be subject to agreement between the partics. 6.4.2 In order to determine the megnetic induction, unless there are special indications, the measuring procedure to be used, and the shape of the test peice shall comply with IS 10181.
7 INSPECTION

procedure given in IS 1599.
6.3 Chemical Tests

7.1 General Requirements
The general requirements

Samples for chemical analysis are obtained either from the test block or more generally from the ladle. The sample shall be sufficient to allow three determinations. analysis of the elements is determined by spectrography or any other method specified in the standards in force, on samples, the shape and dimensions of which are suitable for the method used. When the analysis is carried out by spectrography, mesurement is effected on a point of the sample which represents its means chemical composition. In the case of dis-agreement about the results, only those obtained by chemical analysis in accordance with the appropriate part of IS 228 shall be taken as being reliable. When the determination is made chemically, the analysis shall be made on chips taken at least 6 mm beneath the surface. 6.3.1.1 The permissible variation in product analysis from the limits specified for the ladle analysis shall be as given in IS 6601. 6.3.2 Residual Elements Elements not specified in the required chemical composition of the respective standard shall not ordinarily be added to the steel and all reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent contamination from the scarp, etc, to keep them as low as practicable. Analysis and reporting of the
6.3.1 The quantitative

give the normal general for steel castings. The SUPPlY conditions conditions of inspection are specified on the order inaccordancewith4.1.17.1,4.1.17.2or4.1.17.3.

7.1.1 Visual Examination of the Castings
7.1.1.1 Shape and Dimensions

of the castings shall complywith the requirements of the order whcthcr in the form of drawing pattern of tcmplatc. All modifications to bc made to the drawings, or patterns for the technical requirements of the manufacturer, shall form the subject of an agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer. The founder shall then verify by suitable means that the shape and dimensions correspond to those specified on the order, if hc is responsible for producing the pattern or, unless otherwise specified, to those of the pattern, al'tcr adjusting for contraction allowance, if it is supplied by the purchaser. 7.1.1.2 Surface condition Thcsurface of the castings shall be free from dcfccts that will adversely affect the utility and machinic of the castings. Surface affects which arc not prejudicial to the proper USC of the castings cannot bc a reason for rejection. Unless spccificd otherwise at the time of enquiry and or&x, the castings arc dclivercd in the unmachincd condilion but duly dressed and clcancd of all mouldini: material and heat trcatmcnt scale.

The shape and dimensions

IS 8800: 1997
7.1.1.3 The castings shall not be painted unless so 7.2 Special Requirements

indicated at the time of enquiry and order. 7.1.2 Examination of the Material
The material

is characterized by its mechanical properties and/or when required by the product standards, by its chemical composition. For special steels the properties below may be supplimented by their own particular basic properties. 7.1.2.1 Mechanicalproperties a)
Tensile test at ambient temperature

The purchaser shall specify the special microstruture, if any, like requirements, intergranular corrosion test, etc, to supplement the general requirements on the enquiry and order. The condition of inspection are specified on the order in accordance with 4.1.17.1, 4.1.17.2 or 4.1.17.3. 7.2.1 Inspection of the Castings
The purchaser shall in all cases specify on the enquiry and order the inspection which he has decided to carry out in relation to the service conditions of the castings and specifically the non-destructive tests together with their severity levels as defined in 7.2.1.4. In addition, if he propose to make the founder responsible for these inspection procedures, he shall clearly state this on the order. Ins the absence of such a statement, or otherwise, in the absence of the contractual agreement subsequent to the founder's quotation for the inspection methods, the founder need only check for dimentions, shape and surface appearance, in accordance with 7.1.1.1 and 7.1.12.

i) ii) iii)

Tensile strength, Yield stress, and Elongation.

NOTE - In the event of non-availability of a test bar for any reason, the purchaser may at his discretion agree to have the tensile test conducted on the test piece taken from a casting. In that case, it may be stated for information that the properties so obtained may go down to as low as 80 per cent of those obtainable from test bars.

b) Hardness

test

(specific

to

certain

products)-Following agreement between the parties, the tensile test may be replaced by a hardness test, however, this test may also be used concurrently with the tensile test to check the homogeneity of a supply.
NOTE! - Due to variation of sectional thickness in actual castings, the hardness is measured on the castings, may deviate from that specified for the test bars by &20 per cent.

7.2.1.1 Machining allowances and tolerances on dimensions and mass

a) Machining allowances and tolerances on

Cl

Reduction of area or impect test (Charpy V) at ambient temperature - One of the

d)

properties shall be applicable. However, the purchaser, if he so desires, may ask for both the properties at the time of enquiry and order. Bend test - The test piece shall be capable of being bent to the stipulated angle. In order to meet the requirements of this test, the guided bend specimens shall have no cracks or other open defects each exceeding 3 mm measured in any direction on the convex surface or at the corner of the specimen after bending.
analysis (specific to certain

b)

7.1.2.2 Chemical products)

The chemical purity and composition limits are given in the product standards. The specified ranges of chemical composition are based on the results of the cast analysis and if so specified at the time of enquiry and order the manufacturer shall provide a certificate indicating the content for each element specified in the standard for the product. Any deviation from the specification in 6.3 shall be notified in writing.

dimensions and mass shall be as specified on the drawing supplied; otherwise they shall conform to IS 4897. Verification of the dimensions is carried out on castings in the state of delivery, at the reference temperature of 30+ 10�C. The dimensions of unmachined and machined parts are measured by mean of instruments which allow a precision compatible with the required tolerances. The purchaser shall indicate the detum points for machining and marking out. It is desirable for him to supply the drawings of the finished component. Proof Machining - Proof machining is an operationsometimes carried out on castings in order to ensure, before supply, that a castings is free of surface and near-surface defects that may otherwise appear in the course of final machining, causing downtime and delays during such a final machining operation, which of ten involves expensive machine tools. When proof machining is done, it is carried out as preliminary coarse machining operation on that will, a few important surfaces final finish thereafter, undergo the machining. The permissible deviations on untoleranced proof machined dimensions, unless otherwise agreed shall bc as per the

1s8800:

1997 class `Extra Coarse' specified in IS 2102 (Part 1)
NOTES 1 Where such proof machining is done not merely on a few important smfaces but on all the surfaces that are ultimately finish machine, then such an operation is called `Raugh Machining'. 2 Proof machining and rough machining is sometimes also carried out to improve the `as cast' dimensional accuracy of castings so as to make them fit to be loaded, with appropriate fixtures, on to the machine tools I+ for finish machining.

4

The mass of the castings shall be taken to mean the mass after all normal fettling operations are carried out but prior to doing any machining or drilling; that is the mass shall include any stock kept for any machining operation, unless otherwise agreed to.
MUSS -

Any weld repair exceeding the above shall be term as a major repair. Also any single repair having an area exceeding 250mm2 for every millimetre of wall thickness shall also be deemed to be a major repair, regardless of the cqnsiderations mentioned in (1) above. d) Carbon Equivalent - unless otherwise specified in the enquiry and order, or otherwise agreed to, the Carbon Equivalent (C.E.) for the purpose of guidance in determination of the pre- and post weld treatment applicable to carbon and low alloy steels shall be computed as follows:
ii) = C + + C. E. + Cr + `;`" + V + Ni t5Cu

7.2.1.2 Su@ace inspection
The examination of the surface is ordinarily carried

In case of high alloy steels, the definition of C. E. shall be subject to agreement between the parties. 7.2.1.4 Non-destmctive test

out visually in adequate lighting in the state of delivery, without optical aids. The surface conditions and the method of examination thereof may be the subject of a special agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer. Method of sampling, if sampling technique is agreed to, shall be as per IS 6907. 7.2.1.3 Repair of castings on the enquiry and order, castings may be rectified by welding. AI1 repairs by welding shall be carried out in accordance with the procedure laid down in IS 5530. If castings have been subjected to non-destructive testing by agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer, the castings shall be re-examined in the area of repair following any rectifying operation performed on the castings. b) Major repair welds shall be documented on drawing or photographs showing location and extent of weld and welding procedure followed. Documentation shall be submitted to the purchaser at the time of despatch of particular casting if so specified and the time of enquiry and order. c) To form the basis of an agreement between the purchaser and the supplier iu this respect, the following classification shall apply concerning to the extent of repair: i) Weld repair involving a depth not exceeding 20 percent of the wall thickness or 25 mm, whichever is lower, shall be termed as a minor repair.
6

a) Under this heading are grouped the test

a) Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser

which aim at revealing defects which cannot be revealed by a simple visual examination, such a penetrant, magnetic particle, ultrasonic, X-radiographic, or gamma -radiographic inspection also included under this heading are tests on the surface condition by visual or visual - tactile examination. In application of the principle started in 7.2.1, the purchaser shall specify in the enquiry and order. 0 The type of non-destructive testing which he intends to carry out or to have carried out; ii) The area or areas of the castings to which these tests apply and types of discontinuity; where relevent; iii) Whether all, or what proportion, of the castings are to be tested; iv) The severity levels defining the acceptability or non-acceptability of defects which may be revealed; v) Whether the manufacturer is or not contractually responsible for carrying
out the tests.

b)

Unless otherwise agreed upon, whcrl non-destructive testing is to be done the castings shall be examined as follows: i) Ultrasonic examination as per IS 7666; ii) Magnetic particle examination as per IS 3707; iii) Liquid penetrant examination as per IS 3658; and

IS 8800 : 1997 Radiographic examination as per IS 2595. Unless otherwise agreed upon the following shall be the acceptance standards: i) IS 9565 for ultrasonic inspection; ii) IS 10724 for magnetic particle inspection; iii) IS 11732 for liquid penctrant inspection; and iv) IS 12938 for radiographic inspection; iv)

C> Other
NOTE used.

c)

identification marks in accordance with any agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer.
It is recommended that a minimum of marking bc

8.2 Protection If the order so specifies, the unmachincd or machined castings may besubmitted to a proteclivc treatment otherwise the unmachined castings shall ordinarilly be supplied unpainted and the machined castings be greased in the areas machined. 8.3 By agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer, castings complying with the requirements of this standard may, after inspection, be legibly marked with an acceptance mark. 8.4 The castings may also be marked with the standard mark. 8.4.1 The use of standard mark is governed by the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details of conditions under which the liccncc for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indians Standards. 9 PURCIIASER'S 9.1 General If the supply is subject to purchaser's inspection, this shall be stated on the enquiry and order, and the correspondingly increased cost 01 manufacturer, tests, etc, if any, may bc implicity included in the quotation. The purchaser's inspection may be carried out by the reprcsentativc of the foundry, or by the represcntativc of the purchaser; the inspection by the rcprcscntativc 01 the purchaser shall, however, be specified in the enquiry and order. In the case of inspection by a representative of the foundry, the later supplies a certificateofacceptanceinconformitywith 4.1.17.3 (a) (1) (1). In the case of inspection by a rcprescntative of the purchaser in the prcscncc 01 a rcprcsentativc of the foundry, an acccptanc~ report is drawn up, in conformity with 4.1.17.3 (a) (1) (2). The final acceptance is carried out in the foundry by the handing over of the ccrlificatc ol't hc acceptance, or the acccptancc report, cxccpt I'or inspections which can only take place later at rhc purchaser's works within limits spccificd by agreement between the parties. sclcctions ol samples, preparation of test piece and the tests defined in the order shall normally bc carried OUI at the foundry. INSPECTION

NO'I`f~ - In case of austenitic grades, ultrasonic inspection and maguctic particle inspection may not ordinarilly be fcasiblc.

7.2.1.5 Pressure tightness Prcssurc tightness tests are carried out on unmachincd or machine castings. The pressure tightness test conditions (test prcssurc, fluid, temperature and time), as well as the interpretation of the results, are as defined in existing standards, otherwise by agreement or as stipulated in the enquiry and ordcr.The castings which are required to bc leak proof to a fluid (air, water, oil petroleum, vapour, etc), under pressure indicated on the enquiry or order are tested with that fluid at the specified pressure for the test time indicated. b) If these castings arc only intended to contain a liquid at atmospheric pressure, they are filled with the liquid stated on the order for the time necessary to verify freedom from leakage. The. castings submitted to the test shall not be oxidized and shall not rcccivc any protcctivc casting or covering before the test. In the castings for pressure vcsscls, refercncc shall be made to the test standard relating to these vessels. C> The castings shall not be pcencd, plugged or impregnated, to stop leakages. Howcvcr, unless otherwise specified at the time of enquiry and order, rectification and upgradation of a castings by welding may be carried out in accordance with the approved proccdurcs as laid down in the relevant clause of the standard.

a>

8 MARKING AND 1'ROTECTION 8.1 Each castings shall be legibly marked with the following as may be relevant. However. where linkage and traceability are required, the relevant marking shall be indelible. a) The number or identification mark by which it is possible to trace the melt and the hcattreatment batch from which it was made; h) The manufacturer's initials or trade-mark; and

IS 8800 : 1997 9.2 Procedure for Purchaser's Inspection

9.2.1 Formation of Lots

The method of forming lots shall be stated in the order. For example, it may be done as follows: a) s), cast - The products arc of the same type. They come from the same cast and where necessary have undergone the same heat treatment procedure. b) 4 lot - The products may come from cast of the same grade and/or heat treatment having the same cycles, which may or may not be identified; in this case, the lot is limited to a number of castings or a tonnage which is fixed by the parties and which constitutes the unit of acceptance; the homogeneity of the lot is vcrificd by hardness tests carried out on 5 percent of the castings (or at least 5 castings) per lot or by agreement between the parties; the hardness is measured at the same place on each castings. Each hardness value obtained shall not deviate by more than 10 percent from the average of the hardness value of all the castings representing the lot, measured at comparable section thicknesses. If this is not the case, the manufacturer may either: 1) Subject all the castings in the lot of testing, to eliminate those which do not correspond to the condition of homogcncity, in order to subject them to a new heat trcatmcnt; 2) Or subject the whole lot to a new heat treatment, before presenting it again for purchaser's inspection; and c) In certain cases, when agreed to between the parties, other methods for the making up 01 lots by means of statistical control may bc used. 9.2.2 Submission for Purchaser's Inspection The manufacturer shall inform the purchaser, at an appropriate time the date for submission for inspection. The means of communication to bc used for giving of such an intimation by the manufacturer to the purchaser, and the notice period that shall be allowed to the purchaser for this purpose shall be as may be agreed to between the parties. Heshall indicate the number of castings to be submitted against each melt and the reference of the order of which they are the subject; this constitutes a certificate stating that the manufacturing conditions specified have been compliedwith and that any individual examinations which may have been specified, have been carried out. The purchaser's representative who is permitted access to the places where the castings

arc stored, will prcscnt himself on the day spccificd by the written notice, or within the next five days; otherwise, in order to avoid disturbance in the manufacturing cycle, the manufacturer may carry out the inspection operation himselfand dclivcr to the purchaser the cerlificatc of acceptance. 9.2.2.1 Rights and duties of the accepting agent The accepting agent shall have free access at any suitable time to the places in which the products to be inspected by the purchaser are manufactured and stored: He may indicate the parts of the acceptance unit or the products from which rhc samples shall be selected in accordance with the specification. Hc shall have the option of attending the selection of samples, the preparation (machining and treatment) of test picccs and the carrying out of the tests. An accepting agent who visits the workshops shall respect all the safety regulation in force in the works, if possible. The acceptance procedures shall bc carried out in accordance with normal production rcquircmcnts. 9.2.3 Validity of Tests No account is taken of tests whcrc unsatisfactory results are not attributable to the quality of steel, but arc the results oC a) either incorrect mounting of the test piccc, or the abnormal operation of the test machine; b) or dcfcctive preparation of the test piccc; c) or fracture of the tensile tcsl piccc, outside the gauge length; and d) casting defects observed in the test piccc. In the above casts, a new test piccc may IX sclcctcd from the test block, or from another test block belonging to the same lot and the results obtained may bc substituted for those corresponding to the defcctivc test piece. 9.2.4 Retest In casts other than those mentioned in 9.2.3, whcrc the results of the mechanical tests carried out on the test pieces do not comply with the rcquircmcnt of the products standard, the manufacturer may, unless otherwise agreed upon, one of the following procedures: test a) Hc may repeat the mechanical (including the inter-granular corrosion lest where applicable) which failed, on IWO additional test pieces. Ifthe rcsultsobtaincd from both these test picccs arc satisl'actory, then the material reprcscntcd shall bc considered to be satisfying the rcquircmcnts of the products standard. Should any of` the two new test pieces fail to give satisfactoq

IS - 1997 . X800 .

results, the manufacturer may follow the procedure indicated in c). In case of the impact tests, if the average value obtained from three tests dots not reach the specified value, or one of the individual values dots not reach two-thirds of the specified minimum, three additional test picccs selected from a test bar coming from the same batch shall be tested and the average shall be recalculated. If the new average satisfies the specified avcragc value, the materials shall be considered to be satisfying the requirements of the products standard. Should the new mean value not satisfy the specified requirements or if one of the individual values does not reach two-thirds of specified minimum, the manufacturer may follow the procedure indicated in c). He may submit the castings and test bars to a new heat treatment, and then carry out all the mechanical tests required in the product standard on the test bars, including the inter-granular corrosion test, if rcquircd. 9.2.4.1 Should they fail again, the castings and test bars may be submitted once more to a final heat treatment and undergo all the mechanical tests required by the product standard once more. In no case shall the castings and test bars be submitted to more than two additional heat treatments (excluding tempering). 9.2.5 Grading or Reprocessing Unless otherwise specified, the manufacturer may rcservc the right to grade of subject the products to heat trcatmcnt, either before or after the retest, and present these products as a new acceptance unit in accordance with the procedures in 9.2.1 and 9.2.2, without prejudice to the purchaser. The manufacturer shall indicate to the accepting agent the method of grading used or the type of heat treatment applied. 9.2.6 Condition of Acccptunce If all the conditions required in the order are fulfilled in accordance with this standard the lot is

considcrcd to conform and is acccptcd by the purchaser without prejudice to the inspection which can only take place later at the purchaser's works within the time spccificd by agrccmcnt between the parties. 9.3 Rounding Off Test Results
9.3.1

Mechanicnl and Chemical Propertics

The mechanical and chemical tests shall be rounded off, using the rules spccificd in IS 2. 9.3.2 Dimensiom Rounding off the results of measured dimensions and shape is not required. 10 AGREEI) MANUE'ACTURING PROCEDURE

Under normal circumstances, the manufacturing procedure is to bc at the discretion of the manufacturer. Howcvcr, certain supplies, where castings are produced in large numbers, the purchaser or the manufacturer may request at the time of enquiry and order the benefit of a manufacturing approval. In this cast, a programme of manufacture and inspection is drawn up by common agreement. The partics shall agree to a certain number of satisfactory preliminary test and the manufacturer of pilot scrics of castings. All these conditions taken togethsr constitute approved tests of the manufacturer by the purchaser. Where the results are satisfactory, the purchaser may place subscqucnt orders with the manufacturer in accordance with these programmes of manufacturer and inspection. 11 RECORDS AND COhll'LAINTS Unless otherwise spccificd in tlic enquiry and the order, the manufacturer shall maintain the record of results of all the chemical , mechanical and other specified tests pcrformcd by him for a minimum period of two years from the date 01 supply.
11.2 If a complaint is made by the purchaser concerning a supply, the manufacturer shall be given reasonable time to examine merits of the complaint and castings in question shall remain available for his examination. 11.1

1s 8800 : 1997

ANNEX A (Clause 2)
LIST OF REFERED INDUN STANDARDS
IS No. Title IS No.
Title

228 1599 : 1985 1608 : 1995 1757 : 1988

Methods for chemical analysis of steel Methods Wision) for bend test (second

7666 : 1988

Recommended procedure for ultrasonic examination of fcrrilic castings of carbon and low alloy steel (lirst rerfshl) Acceptance standard for ultrasonicinspection ofstccl c;istings (lir.vt rcvi.sion) Method for determination 01 magncticpcrmeabilityof iron anti steel Method for dctcrmination 01 rcsistancc to inter granular corrosionofausteniticst:kitilc\x srccl: Corrosion tests in nitric acid medium by mcasurcmcnt of loss in mass (Huly test) y7~srrcl*,Siou) Copper sulphateisulphuric acid test (Monypcnny Straus Test) Acceptance standard for magnetic particles inspection of steel castings fJ7r.G revisiorz) Permissible deviations on dimcnsions, surface roughness and mass of steel castings made with invcstment castings process (/7~sr
revision)

Mechanicals testings of mctalsTensile testing (second rclGion j Methods for charpy impact test (V-notch) for metallic material (second revision) Code of practice for radiographic testing (lirst ~vision) Method for creep testing of steel at elevated temperature Tensile creep testing (`Jim
wvision)

9565 : 1995

10181 : 1982

259.5 : 1978 3407 (Part 1) : 1983 (Part 2) : 1993 3658 : 1981

10461

(Part 1) : 1991

Tensile creep stress rupture testing (first revision) Code of practice of liquid penetrant flaw detection (first revision) Code of practice for magnetic particle flaw detection (first revision) Recommendations for production, and rectification repair of steel castings by metal arc welding process yirsr rc\*ision) Permissible deviations in chcmical composition for product analysis of steel castings @rst
revision)

(Part 2) : 1985 10724 : 1990

3703 : 1980 5530 : 1987

11166: 1993

11732 : 1995

6601 : 1987

Acceptance standard penetrant inspections castings Acceptance radiographic castings.

for dye of steel

12938 : 1990

standards for inspection of steel

6907 : 1992

Methods of sampling steel castings (fil.sf revision)

STANDARDS RELATED TO STEEL CASTINGS ISNo. 276 : 1992
1030 : 1989
Title IS No. Title

Austcnitic mangancsc steel castings (fourth revision) Carbon steel castings for general engineering purposes (Fourfh
revision)

2708 : 1993

20.56 : 1987

2611: 1994 2737 : 1989

High tensile steel castings f$iur?h
revision)

manganese steel 1.5 Percent castings for general cnginccring purposes (third revision) Carbon slccl castings for presaurc conlaining parts suitable foi IIISII tcmperaturc scrvicc (fusion wclclins quility) (rlwl rc\Y.sio,t j Steel castings for ships stt-uc'l~~i-~
(third revision)

Carbon steel castings for surface hardening (third revision)

2985 : I990

IS 8800 : 1997

IS No.

Title

IS No.

Title

2986 : 1990 3038 : 1992

Steel castings for marine engines and boilers (second revision) Martensitic stainless steels and alloy steel castings for pressure containing parts suitable for high temperatures service (third
revision)

4899 : 1991

6079 : 1989 7806 : 1993

3444 : 1987

Corrosion resistant alloy steel and nickel base castings for general applications (second
revision)

Ferriticand martensiticsteel casting for use at low temperature (second revision) Low alloy cast steel grinding media (second revkion) Martensitic and austenitic high alloy steel castings for high temperature service (second
revision) Alloy steel castings suitable for pressure services (second revision)

7899 : 1992 SO92 : 1992

4491: 1994 4522 : 1986

Steel castings for high magnetic permeability (third revision) Heat resistant alloy steel and nickel base castings (second
revision)

4896 : 1992

One percent chromium steel castings for resistance to abrasion
(second revision)

9541: 1987 11758 : 1994 12968 : 1991 13505 : 1992

4897 : 1994

4098 : 1989

Deviation on untoleranced dimensions and mass of steel castings (third revision) Steel castings for case carburizing (second revision)

Code for inspection of surface quality of steel castings for valves, other piping fittings and components (visual method) (first revision) Cast CTC segments (first revision) Precipitation hardening stainless steel castings (first revision) Steel castings for crankshafts for marine engines Centrifugally cast high alloy steel and nickel base tubing for pressure application at high temperature

11

Bureau of Indinn Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofZndian Stundnrds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not prec!ude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. MTD 17 ( 4186 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone { 323 38 76 41 17

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

1 337 84 86 26,337 99,337 85 9120 61

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 1 60 38 20 43 25 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 1 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 Western
: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printograpb, New Delhi, Pb

: 5726947

