621'887'218

: 622'647'2

8S:4776(Part
( Secand Reprint APRI L 1593)

Ill-

1977

(Reaffirmed 1999) ( Reaffirmed 1991)

Indian

Standard

SPECI-FICATION
PART

FOR TROUGHED

BELT

CONVEYORS
FOR

II TROUGHED UNDERGROUND

BELT CONVEYORS INSTALLATION

1. Scope -Covers the requirement for sectional type electrically driven traughed bett conveyors commonly usedunderground in coal mines, metal mines and non-metallic mines for handling loose bulkmaterials using fire resistance conveyor belting, conforming to IS : 3181-l 966 `Specification for fire resistant conveyor belting for underground use in coal mines', within the belt width from 500 to 1 600 mm. ;;I,;;; . 1.2 Guidance on the information to be supplied by the purchaser when facturer to the purchaser, is given in Appendices A and B respectively. 2.. Terminology - For the purpose of this standard, of conveyor terms and definitions' shall apply. 3. Dimensions 3.1 Sizes -The sizes of belt conveyor shall be the width It shall be one of the following: designed to carry. 500, 650, 750, 800, 1 000, 1 050, `b' of the belt 1400 which or the conveyor 1600 mm is the definitions ordering, and by the manu`Glossary standard (Part II) is not applica'ble to conveyors handling materials which do not behave

given in IS : 4240-1967

1 200,

3.2 Length -The length of the conveyo,r is the total length from the axis of the delivery pulley to the axis of the tail pulley, with all the adjustable or telescopic sections adjusted to their shortest length measured along the path of the conveyor. Unless otherwise agreed, the actual length of the conveyor shall not be less than the specified len'gth nor exceed it. by more than the length of one`intermediata section. 4. Material -The material used in the construction ments specified in the appropriate Indian Standards. of belt conveyors laid down shall comply with 977 the require8Specifica-

5. pulleys

- The pulleys shall conform tion for pulleys for belt conveyors'.
6. [tilers conveyors'. 7. General The idlers shall Requirements conform

to the requirements 977

in IS : 8531-l

to IS : 8598-l

' Specification

for idlers and idler sets, for bell

7.1 Pifch of idler SetsThe pitch IS: 4776 (Part I)-1977 `Specification for surface installation (first revision)

and the related requirements for troughed belt conveyors: `. idlers and rollers

of idler sets shall conform to , Part I Troughed belt conveyors

7.2 Location-The placement of the cated without disturbing their position. 7.3 The other requirements shall conform

shall be such that they can easily be_lubrl_

to IS : 4776

(Part I)-1977. shall conform to IS : 7155-l 974
i

-The requirement ~pertaining to safety 8. Safety Requirements `Code of practice for conveyor safety `.

9. Cleaning - Means for cleaning up of the belts appropriate to the material conveyed shall be provr ded. The device shall be operative in line and shall be automatic in design so that the cleaning operation + continuous and effective without special attendant requirements. Provision for cleaning of pulleys and return ~belts shall be provided if specified by the purchaser. : . i
)

_'

10. Design iO.1 The design of the conveyor units shall b9 such that they are very compact using small space in the underground galleries and reads and can easily be erected and dismantled, easily inspected, The removal and dismantling of each unit should not call for t,he dismanmaintained and regulated. tling of the adjacent units. The units of the conveyor having the same dimensions shall be easily
I

Adopted

29 September

1977

Q May 1978, I BUREAU
MANAK

BIS I

Gr 4

OF
NEW

INDIAN
9 -BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

BHAVAN,

IS:4776 (Part II)- 1977
interchangeable. No part

moving direction

devices, etc. in both the right is the conveyor direction ).

hand and left hand side of conveyor

(carrying

belt parts,

10,s The stationary parts of the conveyor ( idler support brackets, intermediate section, structural etc ), situated close to belt edge shall have streamlined forms to protect the belt from wear.

10.4 intermediate Sectiohs - Intermediate sections shall be of the detachable or welded type. Welded Where the intermediate sections are of easily detachable type, these shall types shall not be bulky. The joining allow for the shortening and lengthening of the conveyor for semi-permanent installations. of'two intermediate sections shall be such that there is a play in the vertical plane between the two sections of the order 3" to 4". The design shall provide for fixing the intermediate sections to longitudinal If required by the purchaser, intermediate sections for the stationary conveyors side guards. 10.5 Receiving Sfafion --`Hopper or a similar arrangement guide the material along the central line of the belt. 11. Electrical Requirements 11 .l Motors - The motors shall be direct current or three-phase 50 cycle squirrel cage motors complying with 1s : 325-l 970 ' Specification for three-phase induction motors (third revision) `, unless otherDirect current voltage shall be either 250 or 550 V. The alternating current voltage wise specified. shall be either 400/440 or 500/550 V. 11.1.1Rating-The (1.1.2 Enclosures motors shall have a continuous for the molar rating. according to: shall be provided or transverse sleepers. shall be provided with station to

with the receiving

The motor shall be enclosed

to the requirements a) flame-proof motor of the totally ~enclosed fan cooled type conforming apparatus of 1 S : 2148-1968 ' Specification for flame proof enclosures of electrical (first revision) `, or b) any inining type enclosure approved by the Statutory Authority. 11.1.3Torque-The fluid .or similar other minimum torque. minimum couplings However, in case starting torque shall be twice the full load torque. are employed, a suitable compensation may be made in the above percent belt

power required for acceleration shall not exceed 100 11.1.4Power requirements -The required to overcome friction in the idlers of the loaded conveyor in the case of level conveyor. controller used in 11.2 Central Gear -The conveyor may be reversing or non-reversing. starting and controlling the electric

motor of mining

11.2.1Rating a) Voltage rating -The voltage rating of the controller shall be the same as that of the motor with which it is used. b) Power rating ( kilowatt rating ) -The kilowatt rating of an electric controller shall not be less than that of the motor which it controls. c) Continuous rating - Electric controllers shall have a continuous rating. used with underground troughed belt conveyors the shall

11.3 Protection for fhe Motor Circuit - Controllers shall be provided motor which it controls against short circuits, overload, under-voltage 11.3.1Protection for the control circuit - All semi-magnetic be provided with fuses for protection of control circuits.

with a means for protecting and earth-leakage. electric controls

and full magnetic

lr.3.2 Controller mounting-The controller enclosure shall be so supported by a skid, platform or panel that it will not be in direct contact with the mine floor. The controller may also be of the adaptable type for wall mounting. 11.3.3Remote control circuit -The remote control circuits, incorporating remote start-stop, etc. shall be intrinsically safe as per the Indian Electricity underground gassy mines. 11.3.4Emergency stop switch emergency at any point throughout Suitable means its length. shall be provided 2 belt protection device, Rules, I-956 for u6e in the conveyor in an

for stopping

IS : 4776 ( Part II ) - I977
11.3.5 If required by the purchaser, interlocking switch gears sequence control, such-other equipment of flame-proof devices shall be provided. power and control cables between 11.3.6Power and control cables -All veyor or its auxiliary equipment shall be of flame resistant material. remote control of the and con-

compartments

or the equivalent should be used for main belt 11.4 load Control Switches - ~Load control switches conveyors to prevent overloading of the main belt by the feeder belt. The switch automatically shuts The switch then automatically starts the down the feeder belt when the main belt becomes overloaded, feeder belt when the load on the main belt becomes normal.

11.5Belt-Slip Protection -A belt-slip protection device is an assembly which causes the power to be Mining belt conveyors shall be provided disconnected if the belt slips excessively on the drive pulley. with a belt-slip protection device.
note --This is commonly a speed-responsive swifch which IS driven by the belt and electrically connected to the conveyor starter. During starting, this switch is held inoperative until the bett has reached a predetermined speed. Thereafter, if the conveyor belt speed drops below a predetermined set speed, power to the motor drive is cut off.

12 Marking- The belt conveyor, including the interchangeable intermediate s&tion, shall be marked with the following information on the name-plate provided on the conveyor at suitable prominent place(s):
a) Manufacturer's b) Purchaser's name and identification code number, mark,

equipment

c) Type and width, d) Capacity and speed, and e) Any other information specifically required by the purchaser. 12.1 Certification Marking Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards.

APPENDIX
( Clause 1.2 )

A

INFORMATION
Purchaser Address Mine or plant name Location Inquiry No.

TO

BE SUPPLIED

BY THE PURCHASER

Date
GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS

Belt width (mm) Maximum distance material is raised or lowered (m) Average output tonnes per hour Material Maximum lump size ; ; ;

;

Length

(ml

(axis

to

axis)

(provide profile if seam`ls undulating) Belt speed (m/s) : Forward Mass per cubic metre Seam height (m) ; Reverse

Other requirements

3

IS : 4776 (Part

II ) - 1977 HEAD END Head section

Maximum Other

a?~`,s\ lbie height ,rlent~_

(m9

requk

Located:

Right side dc volts for: _ ._ Motor ; 86: volts ; Cycles ; Controller ; Phase_

Electric power: Electrical

enclosures

Non-reversing Other requirements___.

Belt Take-Up Type and location -_.-

TAIL Maximum allowable height for tail section (m)

END ; at IVlethod of loading ; End

Type of hopper

required

.; Loaded

Other requirements

INTERMEDIATE Rigid framed: idler centres (mm) _ (mm) _ ~. ;~ ~.~_ ; ;

SECTION

Carrying Wire

Return

idler centres (mm)

rope framed: idler centres

Carrying

;

of splice

TO BE SUPPLIED

; Maximum Average distance output material is raised or lowered

Length (m) ;

(m)

tonnes per hour

IS :-4776 ( Part HEAL) ENP Head Section 1) Type of drive
2) Pulleys

II ) - 1977

TYPO
Driving Idler snub_ Idler head

Number

Diameter,

mm

Thickness and

type

of lqgging(if

any)

3) Dimensions
Overall Height Overall

of head section: (m) pulley (m) ; Minimum _-* * Length ; Overall width (mm) moving of boom height overhang

height

under discharge length (m)

4) Other Features

.Power Unit 5) Location 6) Electric of power unit motors

Manufacturer Horse power VOhS~ Enclosure IS : No. 7) Speed reducer Manufacturer Thermal horsepower . ; Mechanical horsepower (continuous ; Phase ); RPM ; Cycles

Class of service Type and size 8) Controller: Manufacturer Volts Type and size Enclosure Mounting Other features 3) Other components
l

; Ratio (to l)_

-;

Phase

; Cycles

; Reversing:

Manual

Magnetic

of power unit

5

+

IS:4776 (Part II)-

1977
Head End Belt Take-Up

10) Type of head end belt take-up 11) Pulleys Fixed: Number Number * Diameter , ; Diameter Without resetting (mm) (mm) tensioning unit unit

Movable: 12) Length -Pulley. 13) 14) Overall

of travel for movable (mm): length of take-up unit (m)

~ By resetting

tensioning

Other features

TAIL 1) Dimensions
Overall of tail section:

END

length (m)

; Overall width

(mm)

; Loading

height

(m)_

2) Tail pulley: Type 3) Plows for cleaning return belt: ; Type ; Diameter (mm)

Number provided 4) TarI end take-up: Description`Number of tensioning 6) Tail end -loading Integral For conveyor Height Overall loading length loading over (m) plates: __-____-tail section side

jacks provided

hopper: ; Separate * For shuttle , (m) ___ car loading _I_-

; Height loading over end (m) * Overall width , (mm)

6) Tail end loading Length (m)

; Rigid type

; Hanged type -

7) Telescopic provided 8) Other

Length

of telescopic

tail end: Max

; Min

features

INTERMEDIATE 1) Rigid framed:
Increment length (m)

SECTION

; No, of increments

- Overall height , ; Deck covers

(m)

Side members Carrying 2) idler centres (mm)

; Return ~idler centres (mm)

Wire rope framed: Carrying idler centres (mm) ; Return idler centres (mm)

Wire rope support: (a) Number height (m) maximum ; (b) Centres (mm) ; minimum ; minimum ; fixed ; fixed _

(c) Overall support (d) Rope height Wire rope diameter Anchors: (a) Number

(m) maximum (mm) and type * , 6

(b) Centres

(mm)

IS : 4776( Part 11,) - 1977
3) idlers Item Type Roll Carrying Return

L

4)

Other equipment

BELTING 1) Belt specifications: Length (m) Number of plies Cover thickness: Top (mm) Bottom (mm) Tensile rating ( whole belt strength -warp Fire resistant: Additional Yes ; No and wefr ) ; Type of carcass ; Breaker , Width (mm) , Ply rating/Belt type

description

2)

Splices: Number Type

3)

Tension

rating * Belt tension rating, including splices ,

Calculated total tension

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

Mining conveyors as are used underground for coal mines, metal mines and non-metallic mines differ from the belt conveyors which are commonly used on surface w.ith fixed length at reasonably permanent installation in that the length of the mining conveyor IS lengthened or shortened as mining operation advances or retreats. The surface conveyors need not have these features of varrable length. This standard is being issued in the following two parts:

Part I Troughed belt conveyors for surface installations Part I I Troughed belt conveyors for underground `Mining installations

While ,preparing this standard assistance has been derived from .NBMA Pub No. MBl-1965 belt conyevors' issued by National Electrical Manufacturers Assocratrons, New York. 7 Reprography Unit, BIS, N&v Delhi, India

