IS 2953 : 1985
(Reaffirmed (Reaffirmed 2000) 1995)

Indian Standard GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED FOR INTERPRETATION OF WELDS AND CASTINGS RADIOGRAPHS (First Revision)
First Reprint MARCH 1997

UDC

621.791.053

+ 669 -

14 : 620.179.52

: 001.4

0

BIS 1986

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI NEW

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002 Price Group 7

BHAVAN,

November

1986

IS x 2953 - 1985

Indian Standard

GLOSSARYOFTERMS USEDFORINTERPRETATIONOFWELDS ANDCASTINGSRADIOGRAPHS (First Revision )
Non-destructive
Chairman
SHRI N. V. PANDIT M. M. Suri & Associates

Testing

Sectional

Committee,

SMDC

25

(P) Ltd, Bombay

Members

alchandnagar Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar SERI E. B. ARDHANARI ~HRI D. R. KOLRATKAR ( Alfernate ) Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI LM. K. BANERJEE SHHI A. R. HORE ( Allcrnate j Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel Plant ), Durgapur SERI S. K. BANERJEE SHRI S. K. DUTTA ( Altarnote ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapaili SHRI S. BRASKARAN SHRI D. K. AGARWAL ( Altwnafc I ) SHRI P. V. SASTRY ( Alternate II ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. C. BHAWAL SHRI K. L. BARUI ( Altcrnatc) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR V. N. BINDAL DR Amor; KUMAR ( Alfernatc ) Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, Durgapur SHRI T. K. BOSE SHRI S. KUMAR ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steel Plant ), Bhilai SHRI K. P. CHOPRA SHRI R. S. DUBEY ( Altcrnofc ) ACC Vickers Babcock Ltd, Durgapur SHRI R. N. DAS DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( MET-~ ), RDSO, LUC~NOW Ministry of Railways CHEXIST & METALLURGIST ( WR, AJMER ) ( Alfcrnatc ) Central Boilers Board, New Delhi SHRI S. C. DEY Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SERI D. DUTTA SHRI V. S. CHANDRASEKRAR ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Lrd ( Rourkela Steel Plant ), Rourkela SHRI V. EASWARN SHRI M. C. JOSHI ( Alternnte ) Air India, Bombay SHRI K. N. K~NI SHRI A. V. KCLKARNI ( Alternate ) Ministry of Shipping and Transport SHRI N. KOSHI Burn Standard 8r Co Ltd, Howrah SHRI S. S. MUKHERJEE SHRI P. DASGUPTA ( Alfemata ) The K. C. P. Ltd. Madras SHRI K. V. NARASIMHA RAO The Insitute of Indian Foundrymen, Bombay SHRI PRAKASH D. NIRQUDKAR SHRI 5. K. AHUJA ( Alfernnte ) Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SERI A. S. PRASAD SHRI S. A. HAQCE ( Altrrnatc ) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SERI J. PRASAD SHRI T. RANGACHARY ( Alternafe ) Steel Authority of India Ltd ( R & D Centre for Iron and Steel DR V. RAMAS~_~MY New Delhi
SHRI SUDHAKAR JEA ( Alfmntc ) SHRI S. RAMASWAMY SHRI D. S. P. RAO SHRI S. ADIMOORTY ( ALternate ) SHRI B. N. RAY . SHRI S. R. MAZUMDAR ( Alternafej

tv

),

Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay Bharat Heavy Plates SC Vessels Ltd, Visakhapatnam Ministry of Defence

( DGI )
( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyright

1986 of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in shall be deemed to be an infringement of

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV part by any means except with written permission of the publisher copyright under the said Act.

IS : 2953 - 1985

Msmbns SH~I

SHRI S. R. SAEU SHRI G. C. PRASAD ( AIfcrnatr ) SHRI N. L. SAO DR B. K. SARKAR Sa~r C. R. SATYA ( Alternate ) SEIRI R. B. SINGE SHRI N. M. WALECHA SHRI R. R. WAPORKAR SHRI P. C. KULKARNI ( Altcrnutc ) SHRI K. RABHAVENDRAN, Director ( Strut 8r Met )

SANJOYROY SHRIS.R. BASAK ( Alternnfe )

Central Mechanical Steel Authority

Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur

of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Ltd ), Bokaro

Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad X'ikram Sarabhai Space Centre, Trivandrum Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member )

SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY Assistant Director ( Metals ), ISI

2

IS : 2953 - 1985

Indian Standard

GLOSSARYOFTERMS USEDFORINTERPRETATIONOF WELDS ANDCASTINGSRADIOGRAPHS
( First Revision /
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD
graphs have been incorporated and the title the standard ha9 been modjCL,:d. of

Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 7 October 1985, after the draft finalized by the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structllral and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1964 covering the definition of the terms used in radioIn this revision, graphic inspection of castings. definitions of some of the terms have been modified in the light of the latest knowledge in this field, definitions of terms relating to weld radio-

0.3 The terms included in the standard arc generalF.used to identify various types of discontinultles in castings and welds as revealed by the radiography inspection. These terms are gcnerully correlated with their metallurgical or foundry origin. 0.4 The terms are defined with their possible causes of occurrence and their revealment by radiographic appearance.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines the industrial terms of the discontinuities of welds and castings as revealed by radiography.
2. WELDS

2.1 Gas Voids 2.1.1 Gas Voids and Blow Holes Gas voids occur in the weld as a result of trapping of gas rele;rsedfrom the molten metal or other impurities in the electrode. A gas void oT size more than 1.6 mm diameter is called as `blow hole'.
Radiographic appearance of gas voids ma! be sharply defined dark shadows varying from circular to extremely elongated or tubular. 2.1.2 Gas Porosity or Gas Pores - Gas void under 1.6 mm diameter formed by entrapped gas is termed as gas porosity or gas pore. Radiographic appearance is sharply defined dark shadows of circular contours. 2.1.3 Elonlongatpd Gas I'oid - Elongated gas voids appear in the radiograph as dark shadow substantially parallel to the axis of the weld, varying in size and shape. 2.1.4 Linear Porosify - A string of gas pores situated parallel to the axis of the weld is termed as linear porosity. Such porosity is frequently accompanied by lack of fusion which may or may not be apparent in the radiograph. 3

2.1.5 Worm Hole, Pipe - An elongated or tubular gas void in the weld metal caused by entrapped gases is termed as worm hole or pipe. It appears in the radiograph as dark shadows, shape of which depends upon the orientation of the discontinuity. If the worm hole is end-on to the radiation beam a dark rounded shadow is produced. Porosity may give a similar appearance but can be distinguished by the defused edges.
2.2 Inclusions

2.2.1 Slag Inclusions - Non-metallic solid materials such as slag entrapped during the welding is termed as slag inclusions. This type of discontinuity is more irregular in shape than gas voids. The radiographic appearance of the slag inclusion shows irregular contours with sharp edges and may show variation in density within the image itself.
2.2.2 Copper Inclusions - Copper inclusions in the weld may be due to the accidental melting of the contact tube or nozzle in self-adjusting and controlled-arc welding or to pick up by contact betiveen copper nozzle and the weld pool in TIG welding. It appears in the radiograph as a light image of any shape often having indistinct edges due to partial alloying and may thereby be differentiated from a tungsten inclusion. 2.2.3 Tunpten Inclusion - Tungsten inclusion in the weld may be due to the inclusion ot tungsten from the electrode in TIG welding. It

IS : 2953 - 1985 appears in the radiograph image of any shape. 2.3 Planar as sharp edged light running along its length, clue to insufficient weld metal. On a radiograph, it appears as a dark bend or dark patches xvithin the \veld itnnae. 2.5.2 Root Concavity or Suck Back - A shal10~ groove which may occur in the root of the \\-eld. It cvould appear on the radiograph as areas along the centre of the weld varving in density according to depth of the imperfections. 2.5.3 Shrinkage Grooves A shallow groove caused by contraction of the metal alotq each side of the penetration bead. On the radiograph, it appears as a dark band varyin: in density according to its depth. It should not IJC confused with undercut. 2.5.4 Undercut - An irregular groove at a toe of a run in the parent metal due to welding. It appears on the radiograph as irregular bend in position adjacent to the toe of a I\-eld run. 2.5.4.1 Root undercut Root undercut, caused by melting of base metal at tile root, appears on the radiograph as relarivcly straight and narrow dark lines. 2.5.5 Excess Penetration Bead - Exccssi\-e lveld metal protruding through the root of a fusion weld made from one side only, appears on the radiograph as continuous or intermittent irregular band having lower density within the image of the weld. 2.5.5.1 ICIC/,E - Melting of metal a\va) from the root of the weld appcarin~ on the radiograph as circular light indications. 2.5.6 Burn-Through -- A localized collapse of weld pool due to excessive penetration resulting in a hole in the weld run is termed as `burnthrough'. It appears on theradiograph as globular dark area. If the hole is incompletely filled, it is revealed as a central dark area. Sonmetallic inclusions are often associated \vith this type of discontinuity. 2.5.7 Crater Pipe A depression due to shrinkage at the end of a run where the source of heat was removed is called as `crater pipe'. It appears on the radiograph as a dark circular or elliptical shadow of graduated density. 2.5.8 Spatters - Globules of metal expelled during arc welding on the surface of the parent metal results in spatters. These appear on the radiograph as small light spots within the image of parent metal. It may appear on the weld also. 2.5.9 Surface Pittin,e - Imperfection on the surface such as small depressions close to the weld can be mistaken for weld discontinuity. It appears on the radiograph in the image of parent metal but also encroaches on weld image area in asymmetric welds.

Discontinuities

( Internal

)

2.3.1 Lack of Fusion or Incomplete Fusion This type of discontinuity in the weld may be dur to the failure of union between the kveld metal and the parent metal, or parent metal and parent metal, or weld metal and weld metal. It appears in the radiograph as dark linear shadow with defined edges. However, depending upou the orientation of the discontinuiFy with respect to the primary radiation beam, It mav tend to be wavy and diffused. 2.3.1.1 Lack of side wall fusion - A discontinuity due to the lack of union between weld metal and the parent metal at a side of the xveld. The radiographic image appears as dark straight line or bend depending upon the radiation beam direction and may be broken or continuous. 2.3.1.2 Lack of inter-run fusion - A discontinuity caused by lack of union between a,ljacent runs of weld metal in a multirun weld. On a radiograph, it may be revealed as faint line \vith sharply defined edges. 2.3.1.3 Lack of root fusion - A discontinuity caused due to the failure of weld metal to fuse at the root of the weld. It appears in the radiograph as dark line along or near the centre of the weld image. 2.3.2 Lack of Root Penetrallon - It is due to the failure of the root pass to extend into the root of the joint. It appears in the radiograph as a dark defined continuous or intermittent line which may be straight or irregular. 2.3.3 Crack - Cracks are linear discontinuities caused due to fracture of the metal in the transverse, \veld. They may be longitudina!, edge, centre line, fusion zone, or in parent metal. They are revealed on the radiograph as fine dark lines. Detection of a crack is dependent on its orientation relative to the source of radiation. the optimum orientation Divergence from results in a broadening of the shadow which n,ay become difficult to recognize or is entirely lost. 2.4 Diffraction Mottling It is an effect produced on a radio:;raph due to the diffraction of the radiation by large sizes of grains in the Indication on the radiograph is by metal. appearance of diffused light and dark spots or streaks extending over the area. Mottling is often confused with microporosity and segregation. 2.5 Surface Discontinuities

2.5.1 Incompletely Filled Grooves - A continuous or intermittent channel on the weld surface

4

Is:2953-1985 2.5.10 Weld Rclnforccment Excessive reinforcement of metal on the face of the weld is considered undesirable in specialised applications. This is indicated on the radiograph as appearance of white shadow covering the weld image. 2.6 Some of the important weld discontinuities are illustrated in photographs of typical radiographs. These illustrations are intended solely to be complimentary to the definitions of the defects and should not be considered as criterion of their severity. These are given as F!g. I to 9 in Appendix A. 3. CASTING 3.1 Gas Voids 3.1.1 Gas Holes - Gas holes are the voids produced in the coating due to entrapment of the gas released from the melt itself, or from core, sand moulds or from other causes, namely, turbulance during pouring of metal. A discrete cavity greater than about 1.6 mm diameter is termed as `blow hole'. A particular form of `worm-hole occurs as a tube-like cavity usually normal to and almost reaching to the surface of the casting. Radiographic appearance of `gas hole' shows as dark area of smooth outline which may be circular or elongated. Worm-hole appearance may vary from a circular to an extremely elongated image depending on the angle of view. 3.1.2 Gas Porosity - The gas porosities in a casting are the small voids of size less than 1 .t) mm diameter, formed due to entrapment of gas as stated in 3.1.1. Usually the porosities are due to the evolution of dissolved gas fromthe molten metal and occurring either throughout the casting or localised within a particular area. When localized near the surface, for example, due to gas evolved at the mould face, it is called subcutaneous pinhole porosity. Radiographic appearance shows an assemblage of small, rounded, widely distributed dark images. 3.1.3 Airlock ( Entrapped Air ) A void formed by air which has been trapped in the mould by the metal during pouring. The discontinuity appears in the radiograph as a dark area with an outline which is generally smooth. An airlock cannot always be distinguished radiographically from a gas hole but a helpful guide to identification is the shape, size and position in the casting. In pressure die casting air may be injected with the metal; in this instance the defect is usually more severe in the runners and may assume an angular form. In both pressure and gravity die casting the defects may occur as cluster or strings of small voids. DISCONTINUITIES 3.2 Shrinkage

3.2.1 Shrinkage Cauity A discrete cavity caused by contraction of metal during solidification. A particular type of shrinkage associated with blockage of feeding head is commonly referred to as `piping' although it is not necessarily tubular. Radiographic appearance is similar to that of gas hole but usually shows a less regular outline and may tend to taper. Occasionally, it may be difficult to distinguish between the two. Piping is usually identified when the position of the feeding head is known. 3.2.2 Shrinkage Porosity or Sponginess - A system of interdendritic cavities of a coarse and usually localized form. The discontinuity usually appears in a radiograph as a group of dark interconnected images which may be irregular in outline and of varying size and blackness. 3.2.3 Micro-shrinkage ( Magnesium Base Alloy ) - A fine form of discontinuity due to shrinkage, gas or both in which a number of cavities occur either around the grain boundaries ( intercrystalline ) or between the dendrite arms ( interdendritic ). These cavities tend to link up in a three-dimensional network throughout the metal. In the radiograph, the dark images of these cavities are superimposed and usually produce a general mottled or cloudy effect. In non-ferrous alloys, particularly those with a magnesium base, the fine cavities may occur in layers ( la)er porosity ) and produce dark streaks in the radiograph.
NOTE The radiographic appearance of the defect can often be confused with that of diffraction mottlmg and action should be taken to verify the interpretation.

3.2.4 Filamentary Shrinkage - A coarse form of shrinkage discontinuity in which the voids are branching, interronnected and extensive, occasionally the discontinuity may be of dendritic form. In the radiograph images appear as continuous, irregular dark lines usually branched or occasionally in the form of a network; the line may become very fine. This type of discontinuity, in some cases, have a similar radiographic appearance to layer porosity. 3.3 Heterogenetics

3.3.1 Inclusions - Foreign materials entrapped in casting may be sand, clay, flux, dross, oxide, or metal of different density. It appears as isolated, irregular, or elongated variation of film density neither corresponding to variations in thickness of material nor to voids.

1s : 2953 .198!J
An inclusion may be of greater or lesser opacity than the surrounding metal. It may appear radiographically either as light or dark area, for example, a sand inclusion in steel will appear dark in the radiograph whereas in magnesium alloy, it will appear light. Slag usually gives a rounded image, whereas material included in the casting as a solid, for example, dross and sand, will give an image of irregular shap,e; thus dross trapped as an oxide film, often produces a characteristic folded appearance. The discontinuity may be at times difficult to distinguish from a void or segregation, but there are usually more variations in density across the image of an inclusion. A condition resulting 3.3.2 Segregation from non-uniform distribution, usually a concentration OS certain constituents or impurities or both, arising during freezing and generally persisting through subsequent operations. It may be classihed as general, localized or banded. Its radiographic detection depends upon the segregating constituents producing a local variation in Lhe absorption of radiation. NOTVGeneral or banded
of certain as defects. a normal feature not be considered segregation may be castings and these should

Radiographically, and light bands. 3.4 Sharp

it appears

as alternate

dark

Discontinuities

3.4.1 Crack - A discontinuity due to the fracture of the metal during or after solidifica. tion. The discontinuity- appears in the radiosTaph as one or more dark lines whose width and form depends upon the type of crack and particularly upon the radiographic technique used. 3.4.1.1 Hot tears ( cracks ) - A discontinuity generally of a decidedly rugged form resulting from stresses developed near the solidification temperatures when the metal is weak; these stresses usually arise when the contraction of the casting is restrained by the mould or the cores. The discontinuities occur mainly at or near the change of sections. The discontinuities are not definitely continuous, may exist in groups and often terminate at the surface. In iron and steel industry, it is referred to as
`I.`Llll'.

3.3.2.1 General segregation - Segregation cstending a considerable part of casting and taking a variety of forms, for example, intersegregation. Radiographically it crystalline appears as an assemblage of small-light or dark areas. An extreme form of inter-crystalline segregation in which the segregating constituent entirely surrounds the grains of the parent metal is known as boundary film. The presence of numerous small segregates may produce a flocculant appearance in the radiograph which may be confused with microporosity or diffraction mottling. The defect may ;tlso appear as randomly oriented streaks, each consisting of an adjacent dark and light hand. 3.3.2.2 I.ocal .scqregation Segregation occurring when shrinkage voids or hot tears are wholly or partially filled with a constituent of low melting point; the terms `shrinkage segregation' and `hot tear segregation' can be applied respectively to these two conditions. The segregates appear in the radiograph as light or dark areas coinciding with the original discontinuity. In some examples, however, where the discontinuity is only partially filled there may be ad.jacent light and dark areas within the original outline. 3.3.2.3 Banded segregation - Segregation associated mainly with centrifugal castings but occasionally occurring in static castings. It' takes the form of alternate layer of the alloy enriched in or depleted by the separating constituents.

Radiographically a hot crack is revealed as rugged dark lines of variable widths and numerous benches. They have no definite line of continuity and may exist in groups. They may originate internally or at the surface. Generally the ends taper and become fine. The radiographic appearance may resemble that of filamentary shrinkages or crrtain types of cold cracks. 3.4.1.2 Stress crack - A well defined and approximately straight crack formed when the metal has become completely solid, quite large stresses being required to cause fracture. Distinctions are sometimes drawn between types of this discontinuity, depending upon the time at which the fracture occurred for example, stress crack due to contraction, residual stress. shock or service. In the radiograph a crack is often revealed as a clearly defined smooth dark line, thus differing from the rugged appearance of a hot tear. By reasons of their origin, different types of stress cracks are often similar in appearance and indistinguishable radiographically. In certain instance, however, a characteristic form may be shown. Examples of these are grinding cracks in steel giving a crazed pattern, heat treatment cracks, often star shaped and transcrystalline fractures, showing typical loops.

I

3.4.2 Cold Shut - A discontinuity caused by the failure of a stream of molten metal to unite with either a confluent stream or a solid metal such as chaplet, internal chill or pouring splash.

6

In radiograph, cold shut appears as distinct dark line or a band of variable length and definite smooth line. It may be difficult to distinguish from a hot tear except of the discontinuity. The shape of the image of an unfused chaplet or unfused chill ( including nailhead ) is dependent upon the orientation of the beam of radiation A cold shut arising from a splash in the mould may appear as a dark crescent or circle. 3.5 Miscellaneous
3.5.1 Surface Irregularities -

on the radiograph corresponding rity' visible on the surface.

to `irregula-

3.5.2 Misrun - These occur in castings when molten metal fails to fill the mould completely and appear as prominent darkened area of variable dimensions with a definite smooth outline.

It is any image

wall thickness.

3.5.3

Coreshgt -

Appears

as a variation in

7

IS : 295'3 - 1985

APPENDIX ( Clause 2.6)
ILLUSTRATIONS SHOWING TYPICAL

A
WELD DISCONTINUITIES

8

.__

_.
FIG. 2

_ __ _..7

-<a..

`L,

A TYPICAL RA&&,RAPH

OF WKLDED JOINT OF STEAM PIPE LINE SHOWMG LACK OF FUSION ( FULL LENGTH )

ii ..

FIG.

j

,P, TYP~CAI_ RADIOGRAPH

OF WELDED Jowr

OF RAIL TONG

STRUCTURE SHO~VING HKAVY PUROSITIES

1% BCIN(`I-IESTJ~ROIJGHO~II`I-HELENGTH

FIG. 4 WELD DI:FECTS - CICAC.~~S AN> BLOW HOI.ES

$861 - iTS6Z : Sl

FIG. 6 A TYPICAL RADIOGRAPH OF WBLDBD JOINT OF STEEL PLAT.ESMEANT FOR BLAST FURNACE UPTAKES, SHOWING INCONPLBTE PENETRATION ( FULL LENGTII )

5 .. g `A

P

..i

__

I,-

~

_

FIG. 7 A TYPICAL RADIOGRAPH OF WBLDED JOINT OF CRANE GIRDBR SHOWING CHAIN TYPE POROSITIES( 70 mm LENGTH )

FIG. 8 A TYPICAL R&IOGR*PH OF WELDID JOINTOF ECONOMISER OF BOILERSHOWING BIG VOID

72 ..

,.
_'

,'

ii&_&_,

,_.,A__~.__~&~

'

_,_

,__"2.

c,_

-i*u.

.c,i

rl

. . . *..

__.&_

-

.._,a_.*l.

.._

. ..A

.L_...

`_,

,

.

.

_A

FIG. 9 A TYPICAL RADIOGRAPH OF WELDED JOINT OF SUEPR-HEATER TUBE OF BOILER SHOWING SLAG INCLUSION

Bureau of Indian Standards

8

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian StandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and at connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright ofall its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of i standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enq copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review oi Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'.

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bbavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAr 400093

Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone I 323 76 17 323 3841 337 84 99, 337 85 61 337 86 26, 337 86 62 1 60 38 43 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15 8329295,8327858 I 8327891,8327892

BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. ' BHOPAL. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New India Printing Press,

Khur~a,

India

