IS 13881 1993 IEC 973 : 1989 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

:

_`i L\

0&

I&

TESTPROCEDURESFORGERMANIUM GAMMA-RAYDETECTORS

UDC

539-166.2-074 : 669.783

g, BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW November 1993

110002
Price Group 13

Nuclear Instrumentation

Sectional Committee,

LTD 26

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC 973 : 1989 `Test procedures for Germanium Gamma-ray detectors', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee ( LTD 26 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those Attention is particularly drawn to the following: used in Indian Standards. a) Wherever the words `International should be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, Standards, to. they

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. In this Indian Standard, the following respective place the following:
International Standard

the current in their

International

Standards

are referred

Read

Indian Standard

Degree of Equivalence

IEC 333 : 1983 Test procedure for semiconductor chargedparticle detectors IEC 759 : 1983 Standard test procedures for semiconductor energy X-ray spectrometers

IS 11425 : 1985 IEC 333 : 1983 Test procedures for semiconductor charged particle detectors IS 12737 : 1988 IEC 759 : 1983 Standard test procedures for semiconductor X-ray energy spectrometers standard has been retained

Identical

Identical

Only the English language text in the international in this Indian Standard.

while adopting it

Is 13881 : 1993 IJX 973 : 1989

Indian Standard

TESTPROCEDURESFORGERMANIUM GAMMA-RAYDETECTORS
1. scope This standard applies to germanium radiation detectors which are primarily used for detection and high-resolution spectroscopy of gamma radiation. These devices are also used for X-ray spectroscopy and occasionally for charged particle spectroscopy. This standard describes the measurement of detector system performance characterist; :s which are important to the detector user. The measurement techniques described have been selected to be readily available to manufacturers and users of germanium detectors.

2.

Object

The object of this standard is to establish standard test procedures for germanium gamma-ray detectors so that measurements have the same meaning to all manufacturers and users. Not all tests described in this standard are mandatory, but tests which are used to specify performance shall be performed in accordance with the procedures described herein.

3. 3.1

Symbols Symbols A

and definitions

All A,
a, b
B C

G

= = = = = = =

peak area peak background area total peak area constants characterizing noise bandwidth electrical capacitance calibrated capacitor used to couple pulse generator

to circuit under test

c, c,

cerr

= effective input capacitance of a preamplifier = feedback capacitance in the charge-sensitive loop of a preamplifier = = = = = total capacitance at preamplifier input full width at half maximum (FWHM) of a spectral peak FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to amplifier noise FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to detector noise FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to electronic noise without the detector noise contribution = FWHM, expressed in units of energy, due to all factors other than electronic noise

A A& A& A4 A&

1

Is 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989 A4 A& ANA AN, ANE AN, AN, ANT
AQA AQD AQE

= FWHM, expressed measurement = FWHM, expressed and amplifier noise A FWHM, expressed = FWHM, expressed = FWHM, expressed noise contribution = FWHM, expressed

in units of energy,

derived

in spectral

energy

resolution

in units of energy, due to the combined

effects of detector

in channels, due to amplifier noise in channels, due to detector noise in channels, due to electronic noise without

the detector noise

in channels, due to all factors other than electronic

MT

At AK 6 4 & e
%i

= FWHM, expressed in channels, of a spectral peak used for energy resolution determination = FWHM, expressed in channels, due to the combined effect of detector and amplifier noise = FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to amplifier noise = FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to detector noise = FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to the electronic noise without the detector noise contribution = FWHM, expressed in units of charge, due to the combined effects of detector and amplifier noise = duration of a pulse, the time interval between the half amplitude points of a pulse = voltage difference signal related to the nonlinearity of an amplifier = energy of a particle or radiation (or energy of a specific value, El, where i is an integer, 1, 2, ...) = average energy required to form one hole-electron pair in a semiconductor detector = charge of the electron = equivalent root-mean-square noise voltage referred to the preamplifier input = root-mean-square = root-mean-square
= electric current

e"0
eqi

noise voltage noise in units of charge at the amplifier

input

1 Id N

NX

Q

R T to

rd v

= detector leakage current = number of counts in channel c of a multichannel pulse-height analyzer spectrum where channel c lies within a specified energy range within the Compton continuum = number of counts in channel X of a multichannel pulse-height analyzer spectrum = electric charge = electrical resistance = absolute temperature = observed detector rise time due to the combined effects of the charge collection time and electronic rise time (10% to 90%) = pulse width at half maximum = charge collection time in a detector (10% to 90%) = pulse decay time (90% to 10% of peak height) = pulse rise time (10% to 90% of its peak value) = time constant = time constant for the decay of a pulse = electric voltage

IS 13881 : 1993
EC 973 : -1989

= amplitude of pulse amplifier output voltage = detector bias voltage V,, V,i = output voltage of precision pulse generator, and that voltage corresponding to energy E, VP, V,i = amplitude of the voltage step impressed on a calibrated capacitor C, by the pulse generator, and that voltage amplitude corresponding to energy Ei = channel number, and that channel number corresponding to energy Ei X x, X channel the maximum of a = interpolated number corresponding to monoenergetic spectral peak 2 = characteristic impedance vb
3.2 Definitions Avalanche (in alphabetical breakdown order) device) -

K4

(of a semiconductor

(Claquage multiplication

par avalanche) of charge carriers through

A breakdown that is caused by the cumulative field-induced impact ionization.
Ballistic deficit -

(Deficit balistique) time in a detector

The loss in signal amplitude that occurs when the charge collection is a significant fraction of the amplifier's differentiating time constant.
Band gap (in a semiconductor) -

(Largeur

de bande interdite) of the conduction

The difference in energy between the energy level of the bottom band and the energy level of the top of the valence band.
Baseline (at pulse peak) -

(Ligne de base)

The instantaneous value that the voltage would have had at the time of the pulse peak in the absence of that pulse.
Bias (of a semiconductor radiation detector) -

(Tension de polarisation) the electric field to sweep out the signal

The voltage applied charge.
Biased amplifier -

to a detector

to produce

(Amplificateur

a seuil)

An amplifier giving essentially zero output for all inputs below a threshold and having constant incremental gain for all inputs above the threshold up to a specified maximum amplitude.
Bias resistor (of a semiconductor radiation detector) -

(Resistance

de polarisation)

The resistor through which bias voltage is applied to a detector.
Breakdown (of a semiconductor diode) -

(Claquage).

A phenomenon occurring `in a reverse-biased semiconductor diode, the initiation of which. is observed as a transition from a region of high dynamic resistance to a region of substantially lower dynamic resistance for increasing magnitude of reverse current.
Breakdown region (of a semiconductor diode characteristic) -

(Zone de claquage) the initiation of breakdown

That entire region of the voltage-current characteristic for increasing magnitude of reverse current.

beyond

3

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989
Breakdown voltage (qf a semiconductor diode) -

(Tension

de claquage) region.

The voltage
Capacitance

measured

at a specified

current

in the breakdown
-

(of a semiconductor

raciiation

detector)

(Capacitk) terminals of the detector under

The small-signal specified conditions
Channel, surface

capacitance of bias and

measured frequency.
radiation

between

(of a semiconductor

detector)

-

(Canal,

surface) by the layers.

A thin region at a semiconductor surface, of p- or n-type conductivity created action of an electric field, for example, that due to charges trapped in surface
Channeling, lattice (in a semiconductor radiation detector) -

(Canalisation, dependence

rCseau) of the rate of

A phenomenon that energy loss of ionizing
Charge carrier

results in a crystallographic particles.
-

directional

(of a semiconductor)

(Porteur hole.

de charge)

A mobile
Charge

conduction

electron

or mobile

collection

time (of a semiconductor

radiation

detector)

-

(Temps

de collection

des

charges) The time interval, flowing between the value.
Charge-sensitive

after the terminals

passage of an of the detector

ionizing particle, for the integrated current to increase from 10% to 90% , of its final

preamplifier

-

(Prkamplificateur

de tension) in which the output signal amplitude See voltage-sensitive preamplifier. is

An amplifier, preceding proportional to the charge
Coaxial detector -

the main amplifier, injected at the input. coaxial)

(Dttecteur

A semiconductor radiation detector in which all or part of the two electrical contacts are substantially coaxial. Typically one end of each contact configuration is closed (closed-end coaxial detector), but both ends may be open (open-end coaxial detector).
Cooled-input FET preampl$er -

(Prtamplificateur input FET (Field

Li TEC Effect

d'entrCe Transistor)

refroidi) is cooled to reduce

A preamplifier noise.
Constantyfraction

in which

the

discriminator

-

(Discriminateur

ri fraction

constante)

A pulse discriminator which gives an output when the amplitude of the input signal, delayed, matches a selected fraction of the undelayed signal. The instant of matching is invariant with input-signal amplitude, and if the delay is less than the fastest charge collection time, the timing spread in the instant of matching will be less than that in the. charge collection time. The timing jitter is minimized by appropriate choices of fraction and delay (see Figure 9.1.2).
Conrerltion(lI-ri~~c~trocir c~oa.Gl detector !jargon) -

(DCtecteur is an n-type

coaxial layer.

conventionnel

Ljargon])

A coaxial

detector

in Lvhich the outer

contact

4

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989 Crest factor (of an r.m.s. voltmeter) The ratio measurement overloading. of the peak voltage value that an average reading (Facteur de Crete) being used for accept without

to the full-scale value of the range or root-mean-square voltmeter will

Crossover time The level instant (usually at

(Instant which

de passage) the waveform of a bipolar pulse passes through a designated

zero). (Imprecision time as sur l'instant a function de passage) of some variable, such as pulse

Crossover walk (of a pulse) The deviation of the

crossover

amplitude. CR-RC shaping (Mise en forme CR-RC)

The pulse shaping present in an amplifier that has a simple high-pass filter consisting of a capacitor and a resistor together with a simple low-pass filter, separated by impedance isolation. (Pulse shaping in such an amplifier cuts off at 6 dB per octave at both ends of the band.) Dead layer (of a semiconductor radiation detector) in which signal.
an entrance

(Zone

morte) part of the energy lost by

A layer of a semiconductor detector particles can contribute to the resulting Nore. The semiconductor detector may have

no significant

and an exit dead

layer.

Decay time constant The time for a true original step height.

(Constante

de temps

de decroissance) waveform to decay to a value of l/e of the

single-exponential

Depletion region (in a semiconductor) -

(Region

de depletion) density is insufficient to neutralize

A region in which the mobile charge-carrier charge the net fixed charge density of donors and acceptors. In a diode-type semiconductor region of the device. radiation detector

the

depletion

region

is the

sensitive

Depletion voltage (of a semiconductor The voltage at which a junction

radiation detector) becomes differentiel fully

(Tension depleted.

de depletion)

detector

Differential dE/dX

detector -

(Detecteur

dE/dX)

A transmission detector whose thickness is small compared to the range of the incident particle and whose entrance and exit dead layers are small compared to the thickness of the detector. Dlfierentiated A pulse CR filter. (pulse) (pulse amplifier jargon) when it is passed (Differencie(e) through [impulsion]) a high-pass network, such as a

is "differentiated"

5

Is 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

Diffused-junction detector -

(Detecteur

a jonction

diffuste) is produced by diffusion

A semiconductor detector in which the p-n or n-p junction of, acceptor or donor impurities. D&fusion depth (of a semiconductor radiation detector) (See junction depth.)

(Profondeur

de diffusion)

Encapsulation (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The packaging of a detector for protective and/or

(Encapsulation) mounting purposes. (R&solution en energie

Energy resolution (FWHM) of a semiconductor radiation detector (LTMH) d'un detecteur semiconducteur)

The detector's contribution (including detector leakage current noise), expressed in units of energy, to the FWHM of a pulse-height distribution corresponding to an energy spectrum. Energy resolution (FWHM) of a semiconductor radiation detector/preampltf?er combination (Resolution en dnergie [LTMH] d'un ensemble dttecteur semiconducteur-prtamplilicateur) The FWHM, measured at a specific energy and expressed in energy units, of a spectral peak within a pulse-height distribution corresponding to an energy spectrum. Equivalent noise referred to input (of a linear amplifier) The value of noise at the input that would produce output as does the actual noise source. Equivalent noise resistance referred to input (of a Cquivalente de bruit rament a l'entree d'un amplificateur (Bruit equivalent a l'entrte)

the same value of noise at the

linear ampliJier) lineaire)

(Resistance

That value of resistor which when applied to the input of a hypothetical noiseless amplifier with the same gain and bandwidth would produce the same output noise. Full width at harf maximum (Largeur totale a mi-hauteur) For a normal

The full width of a distribution measured at half the maximum ordinate. distribution, it is equal to 2(2 In 2)" times the standard deviation o. FWHM (See full width at. half maximum) FW 0,l M (LT 0,l M) is made at one-tenth (LTMH)

Same as FWHM except that measurement rather than at one-half. FW 0.02 M (LT 0,02 M)

the maximum

ordinate

Same as FWHM except that the width maximum ordinate rather than at one-half. Gated integrator (Integrateur a Porte)

measurement

is made

at

one-fiftieth

the

A circuit for obtaining a pulse with an amplitude signal pulse over a definite time interval.

proportional

to the integral

of a

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989 High-purity germanium (HPGe) -

(Germanium

de haute purett

[GeHP])

Germanium whose net concentration of electrically active impurities which are stable at room temperature is such that conventional-sized radiation detectors made from it achieve of electrically active full depletion at reasonable bias voltages. (The net concentration impurities is typically less than 3 x IO'Ocm-`.)
Ion-implanted contact -

(Contact

implante) produced by ion implantation.

A detector

contact consisting of a junction
-

Ion implantation

(Implantation

ionique) ions incident upon a solid results in the

A process in which a beam of energetic imbedding of those ions into the material.
Inactive region (of a semiconductor radiation

detector)

-

(Region inactive) by ionizing radiation does not

A region of a detector in which charge contribute significantly to the signal charge.
Integrated (pulse) (pulse amplifier jargon) -

created

(IntCgrC[e] [impulsion] fiargon]) a low-pass network, such as a single

A pulse is "integrated" when it is passed through RC network or a cascaded RC network.
Integrating preamplifier -

(Preamplificateur in which individual

integrateur) pulses are intentionally integrated by passive

A pulse preamplifier or active circuits.
Intrinsic semiconductor -

(Semiconducteur

intrinseque)

A semiconductor containing an equal number of free holes and electrons throughout its is often used incorrectly for high-purity volume. (The term "intrinsic germanium" germanium.)
Junction (of a semiconductor radiation detector) -

(Jonction) properties

A region of transition between semiconductor regions of different electrical (e.g. n-n+, p-n, p-p+ semiconductors), or between a metal and a semiconductor.
Junction depth (of a p-n semiconductor radiation detector) -

(Profondeur

de jonction)

The distance below the crystal surface at which the conductivity
Leakage current

type changes. de fuite) of radiation.

(of a semiconductor
current
-

radiation

detector)

-

(Courant

The total detector
Lithium-dr$ed detector

flowing

at the operating compense

bias in the absence

(Detecteur

au lithium) process.

A detector
Lithium

made by the lithium compensation
-

dr$ting

(Compensation

au lithium)

A technique for compensating p-type material by causing lithium ions to move through a crystal under an applied electric field in such a way as to compensate the charge of the bound acceptor impurities.

7

Is 13881 : 1993 l-EC 973 : 1989

Load impedance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The impedance shunting signal is developed. the detector, and across

(Impedance

de charge) output voltage

which the detector

Load resistance (of a semiconductor radiation detector) The resistive component Marinelli beaker See reentrant Noise linewidth The contribution of the load impedance. de Marinelli)

(Resistance

de charge)

(Recipient

beaker. (Resolution Clectrique)

of noise to the width of a spectral peak. (Contact non injectant) voltage-current characteristic

Noninjecting contact (of a semiconductor radiation detector) A purely resistive contact, i.e. one throughout its entire operating range. that has a linear

Peaking time (t,,) (of an amplifier output pulse) de sortie d'amplificateur])

(Instant

de Crete [t,l [dune

impulsion

The time between the 1% amplitude point on the leading edge and the 100% amplitude point of a pulse (provided that the pulse does not have a flat top). For flap-topped pulses the peaking time is defined as the time between the 1% amplitude point and the mid-point of the flat top. p-i-n detector A detector region.

(Dttecteur consisting

p.i.n) of an intrinsic or nearly intrinsic region between a p and n

Pulse decay time (tJ -

(Temps de descente d'une impulsion [t,])

The interval between the instants at which the instantaneous value last reaches specified upper and lower limits, namely, 90% and 10% of the peak value unless otherwise stated. (In the case of a step function applied to an amplifier shaping, the decay time is given by td = 3,36 CR.) Pulse optical feedback preamplifier pulsee) (Preampliticateur that has simple CR-RC

a contre-reaction

opto-Clectronique

A charge-sensitive preamplifier in which the charge which accumulates on the feedback capacitor is periodically reset by a pulse of light incident on a suitable photosensitive element (e.g. the n-p junction of the gate of the input FET). Pulse rise time (t,) (Temps de montte dune impulsion [t,l)

The' interval between the instants at which the instantaneous value first reaches specified lower and upper limits, namely, 10% and 90% of the peak pulse value unless otherwise specified. (In the case of a step function applied to an RC low-pass filter, the rise time is given by t, = 2,2 RC. In the case of a step function applied to an amplifier that has simple

8

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

CR-RC shaping, i.e., one high-pass and one low-pass RC filter of equal time constants, the rise time is given by t, = 037 RC.)
Pulse width at harf max. & (of an ampltj?er output pulse) -

(Duree

Yimpulsion

a

mi-hauteur,

T,,J amplitude
detector).-

The time interval between the 50% of maximum
Punch-through voltage (of a semiconductor radiation

points of a pulse. (Tension de desertion totale)

(See depletion
Quasi-Gaussian

voltage).
shaping -

(Mise en forme quasi gaussienne)

Pulse shaping consisting of one differentiation followed by four or more integrations which result in a pulse shape that is approximated by a Gaussian curve. For n integrations the shaping network is sometimes denoted as CR-(RC)".
RBSS -

(SNRE) for reentrant
beaker -

Acronym
Reentrant

beaker standard

source.

(Recipient

enveloppant) sample and tit over a by the sample. (Also

A reentrant (inverted well) beaker which will hold a radioactive detector endcap such that the detector is essentially surrounded referred to as a Marinelli beaker.)
Resistive feedback preampltjier -

(Prtamplificateur

a contre-reaction

resistive)

A charge-sensitive preamplifier in which charge which accumulates on the feedback capacitor is continually discharged through a resistor in parallel with the capacitor.
Reverse-electrode coaxial detector -

(Detecteur

coaxial inverse)

A coaxial detector
Schottky

in which the outer contact is a p-type layer. (Contact a barriere de Schottky)

barrier contact -

A metal semiconductor contact structure whose rectification properties are heavily influenced by the difference in both material work functions. These contacts may utilize an interfacial metal/semiconductor compound.
Schottky barrier radiation detector -

(Detecteur whose

a barriere de Schottky) blocking contact is a Schottky barrier

A semiconductor contact.
Semiconductor,

radiation

detector

compensated

-

(Semiconducteur

compenst)

A semiconductor in which one type of impurity or imperfection (e.g. donor) partially cancels the electric effects of the other type of impurity or imperfection (e.g. acceptor).
Semiconductor radiation detector -

(Dttecteur

semiconducteur)

A semiconductor device that utilizes the production and motion of excess free charge carriers in the semiconductor for the detection and measurement of particles or photons of incident radiation.

9

IS, 13881 : 1993
IEC 973 : 1989 Space-charge generation (in a semiconductor radiation detector) -

(Generation region.

de charge

d'espace) The thermal generation
Spectral line -

of free charge carriers in the space-charge

(Pit spectral) feature of the

A sharply peaked portion of the spectrum that represents a specific incident radiation, usually the full energy of a monoenergetic radiation.
Spectrum (radiation) -

(Spectre)

A distribution of the intensity of radiation as a function of energy or its equivalent electric analog (such as charge or voltage) at the output of a radiation detector.
Straggling, energy -

(Fluctuation

de perte d'energie)

The random fluctuations in energy loss whereby those particles having the same initial energy lose different amounts of energy when traversing a given thickness of matter. (This process leads to the broadening of spectral lines.)
Surface barrier contact -

(Contact

2i barriere de surface)

A metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) contact structure whose rectification properties are dominated or heavily influenced by charge trapped at the interfaces and in the insulator.
Surface barrier radiation detector -

(Ditecteur

a barrikre de surface) rectifying junction is a surface barrier

A radiation contact.
Time-invariant

detector

for which the principal

filtering

-

(Filtrage invariant

dans le temps) with respect to time.

Pulse shaping in which the filter response does not change (CR-[RC]n shaping is an example of time-invariant filtering.)
Time-variant filtering -

(Piltrage variant dans le temps)

Pulse shaping in which the filter response is not constant with respect to time. This is often achieved by a gated integrator following a time-invariant filter. The integrator is gated on for the duration of each pulse.
Totally depleted detector -

(Detecteur

totalement

desert&) region is essentially equal to the

A detector in which the thickness of the depletion thickness of the semiconductor material.
Transistor reset preampl$er -

(Preamplificateur

a remise a zero par transistor) on the feedback

A charge-sensitive preamplifier in which the charge which accumulates capacitor is periodically discharged through a suitably located transistor.
Voltage-sensitive preamplifier I-

(Preamplificateur

sensible B la charge) amplitude is exists at the

An amplifier preceding the main amplifier, in which the output-signal proportional to the signal voltage appearing across the' capacitance that input of the preamplifier. See charge-sensitive preamplifier.

10

Is 13881 : 1993 lEc 973 : 1989

Well-type couxiul detector -

(Detectem

coaxial puits)

A coaxial detector which is mounted and encapsulated in such a ,way that radioactive samples may be inserted within the inner cylindrical electrode such that the sample is essentially surrounded by active detector material.

4. 4.1

Introduction

The interaction of gamma-rays

with matter

Gamma-rays interact with matter through three principal processes: the photoelectric effect, the Compton effect and pair production. For narrow beam geometry, the attenuation of an incident photon beam can be described by a simple exponential law of the form: NY = N, exp (-~3)' where N, represents the number of incident photons, and N, is the number remaining after traversing absorber thickness y. The total linear attenuation coefficient p is the sum of three terms representing the three previously mentioned processes. The photoelectric effect takes place when an incident photon transfers its entire energy to a bound electron in an atom, resulting in the ejection of the electron. The ejected electron has kinetic energy equal to the photon energy less the electron binding energy. The cross section for the photoelectric effect increases rapidly with the atomic number of the absorber (- Z4- per atom) and decreases rapidly with increasing energy (- E3). The Compton effect may be considered as an .elastic collision of a photon with an atomic electron. The electron is ejected from the atom, and the photon is scattered with reduced energy. The scattered photon may then interact through an additional process. The cross section for, the Compton effect decreases with increasing energy, but much less rapidly than for the photoelectric effect. Pair production takes place when the energy of a photon is converted into an electron and a positron in the presence of a nearby nucleus or electron. For pair production to take place, the photon shall have a minimum energy of 1,02 MeV, the sum of the rest mass energies of the electron and the positron. Above this energy, the cross section for

11

IS 13881 : 1993
IEC 973 : 1989

pair production increases with increasing photon energy. Because of screening rate of increase is gradually reduced as photon energy increases.

effects, its

The linear attenuation coefficients for silicon and germanium are shown in Figure 4.1.1. In all of these absorption processes the energy of incident photons is transferred to one or more electrons. These electrons rapidly lose their energy in the absorber material largely through Coulomb interactions resulting in the removal of electrons from atoms along the energetic electron's path. Part of energy from these processes also results in phonon production. Thus, the principal result of the interaction of gamma rays with matter is ionization. In a semiconductor material this is manifested as the creation of a large number of electron-hole pairs, the quantity being directly proportion& to the absorbed energy of the incident photon. The average energy necessary to create an electron-hole pair is 3,0 eV in germanium at 77 K and 3,6 eV in silicon at room temperature. 4.2 Loiregermunium gamma-ray
detector

The germanium detector element is a single crystal of germanium that has been made into a diode capable of withstanding high reverse bias voltage at cryogenic temperature. With bias voltage applied, the bulk of the detector becomes depleted of free charge carriers. Under these conditions, electrons and holes generated by the absorption of gamma rays are swept to opposite contacts by the electric fields in the depletion region. The resulting induced charge is integrated to produce an output pulse whose magnitude is proportional to the absorbed photon energy. Germanium detectors are usually mounted within a cryostat to permit cooling the detector and maintaining it at cryogenic temperature for the purpose of reducing leakage current and thermal noise. The cryostat also provides protection and an appropriate environment for the detector. A preamplifier and high voltage filter are usually combined in an intergrated unit with the cryostat and detector. Thus it is usually not practical to measure performance ' of the\ detector element as an isolated unit. Most stated measurements apply to the integrate-d tunit. 4.3
Germanium detector types

Germanjum detector types are differentiated by material, geometry, and mode of use. Materials used are typically high-purity p-type germanium, and high-purity n-type germanium. Previously lithium-compensated germanium was widely used. Commonly used geometries are planar and coaxial. Hybrids of these geometries are often used. These terms apply to the configuration of electrical contacts. Planar detectors (Figure 4.3.1) are usually disc shaped with contacts which are parallel planes. Coaxial detectors (Figure 4.3.2) have contacts which are in the form of coaxial cylinders which may be closed on one end. The coaxial geometry makes possible detectors with large volumes that have relatively high efficiency for detecting higher-energy gamma-rays for which absorption cross sections are small; planar geometry .is useful for constructing small-diameter, low capacitance devices which make possible low preamplifier noise, an essential factor for obtaining high resolution especially at low photon energies.

12

rs i3881

: 1993

IEC 973 : 1989 Planar detectors can also have large. front surface areas at the expense of higher capacitance. This can be an efficient structure for detecting low-energy photons. A thin outer contact facilitates the use of this type of detector for low energy X-rays.

Hybrid detector application.

geometries

are frequently

employed

and

can be suited

to the particular

The conventional electrode (p-type) germanium (Figure 4.3.2a) with an n+ inner contact can be a metallization or applied to the outer contact to achieve

coaxial outer

detector is made contact (frequently

with p-type high-purity lithium diffusion). The Positive bias voltage is

a p-type ion implantation. diode depletion.

The reverse-electrode coaxial detector (n-type) is made with a p+ outer contact. This outer contact may be made by metallization or ion implantation/(Figure 4.3.2b). The but it can be any non-injecting contact. inner contact is typically lithium diffusion, Negative bias voltage is applied to the outer contact to achieve diode depletion. Thin outer contacts make it possible to use this detector for X-ray spectroscopy as well as The thin outer contact makes it particularly higher-energy gamma-ray spectroscopy. appropriate for use with anti-Compton shielding. Reverse-electrode coaxial detectors are more resistant to neutron damage than are conventional electrode coaxial detectors.

The lithium compensated germanium, Ge(Li), coaxial detector is made from p-type germanium through which lithium ions have been drifted in an electric field to provide acceptor compensation (Figure 4.3.2~). The resulting material behaves approximately as intrinsic germanium if the compensation is precise.

Because compensation is unstable at room at liquid nitrogen temperature at all times.

temperature,

Ge(Li)

detectors

shall

be kept

The outer contact is an n-type lithium diffusion. The inner contact is normally the Coaxial detectors may have the electrodes in an undrifted core of p-type material. open-ended or a closed-ended configuration. Well-type radioactive surrounded coaxial detectors are mounted and encapsulated samples may be inserted within the inner electrode; by active detector volume (Figure 4.3.2d). in such the sample a way that is essentially

Typically a conventional electrode faces the end window. The endcap electrode.

detector contains

is used. The hole for the a well which protrudes

inner electrode into the inner

General

requirements requirements apply for all tests and measurements described in this

The following standard :

device ambient temperature and environment, and a) Maximum detector bias voltage, other operational limits specified by the detector manufacturer should not be exceeded since permanent changes of the detector characteristics may result.

13

Is 13881 ; 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

b) The detector bias supply, amplifier, multichannel analyzer, and other test equipment shall not significantly influence the detector parameter measurements because of instability, nonlinearity or other performance defects. c) All measurements shall be made and reported in accordance with good scientific practice. Changes in test system components or changes in system parameters (e.g. amplifier gain) shall not be made without complete system recalibration. Results which contain the effects of changing more than one parameter shall explicitly show the effects of each parameter on the measurement. d) The values of the parameters measured should be reproducible within the stated precision of the measurement after the peiformance bf any one or all of the tests performed.

6.

Energy spectroscopy

measurements

detectors involve the Tests for evaluating the characteristics of germanium determination of a number of parameters of a peak in a spectra1 pulse-height distribution. The derivati,on and use of these peak parameters are discussed in this clause. The methods described have been chosen for their simplicity and ease of computation, although it is recognized that under certain circumstances, such as in the presence of seriously distorted spectra1 peaks, computer fitting may yield more precise results. For the analyses described below, a spectral peak shall be at least six channels wide at half-maximum and the total number of counts within the FWHM shall be at least 50 000. Energy resolution, peak shape, and peak-to-Compton ratio are sensitive to the detector-source geometry. The source shall be located on-axis, 25 cm from the center of the front of the detector endcap, unless otherwise specified.

6.1

Useful radionuclide sources The radiation souices listed below are recommended for specifying energy resolution for the detector and spectrometry system or both: measurements of

Radiation 5JFe "IAm `OPCd "Co "`CS ?*Na "TO ZOST,

source

Half-life 2.7 Y (year) 433 y 453 d (days) 270 d 30 Y 2.60 y 5.24 y 1.91 y for coaxial recommended detector 5,9 keV* 59.5 keV*. 22.1 keV* 122.1 keV* 661.6 keV* and ("Th

Energy

26.36

keV.

X-rays 88.0 keV *

(X-ray doublet). and 136.5 keV

I I

274.5 keV* 173.2 keV* keV*

1332,s

keV+*

2614.5

source)

+ This line is preferred
l

specifications. resolution measurements

Gamma-

and

X-rays

for energy

Widely 847 keV to I 769 calibrated

used multi-line sources are 77 d 56Co with gamma-rays ranging in energy from to 3 600 keV. and 13 y 15*Eu with gamma rays ranging in energy from 122 keV it is assumed that the system is keV. In energy resolution measurements, irr terms of eV, or keV per channel.

14

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

This can be achieved by using calibration lines which should be sufficiently close in `energy to the peak under study to reduce problems arising from system nonlinearities. For example, in the case of 6oCo, the1 173,2 keV and 1 332,5 keV lines are suitable for this purpose, but in the case of the monoenergetic gamma-emitter 13'Cs, it is possible to use a supplementary source such as 207Bi (569,7 keV) or 54Mn (835 keV) to provide an additional line. 6.2
Method

Connect the detector to an integrating preamplifier, pulse-height analyzer as shown in Figure 6.2.1.
P/ore. -

main amplifier,

and multichannel

unit; coupling may be a.c or d.c. The detector and preamplifier may be supplied as an integral Amplifier pulse shaping suitable for optimum performance 0,' the detector may be used. The type of amplifier pulse shaping used and the full width at half maximum of the pulse shall be given with each stated resolution measurement or specification. A pulse generator (specified by IEC 333) connected to the system as shown in Figure 6.2.1, can be run simultaneously with the gamma-ray counting, provided it is demonstrated that the pulser does not distort other peaks (e.g. by baseline undershoot) or cause significant errors in dead-time correction in the case of an efficiency measurement.

6.3

Peak area and spectral background

Pulse-height spectral data should be plotted as the log of the number of counts Nx in channel X versus channel number X. On this semilog plot, straight lines representing an approximation to the background distribution under the peak should be fitted to sections of the pulse-height distribution on either side of the peak, for example, the lines a-d and e-h shown in Figure 6.3.1. The mean value of groups of 10 data points may be used to facilitate fitting the background lines above and below the peak. Draw a smooth curve ihrough the peak data points, extending the curve on each side at the base of the peak to intersect the background lines, for example, E-F and G-H in Figure 6.3.1. The background under the peak is considered to be the area below the straight line bounded by the points of intersection with the peak curve lines, for example, A-D and E-H in Figure 6.3.1. The total peak area A, is obtained by summing the counts per channel in the peak distribution over the curve bounded by the points of intersection with the background line :
A, = i
X=E

N, A, is found

(1)

Similarly, the area of the background B, for the background:
H

by summing the counts per channel

4, = CI Bx
X-E

(2)

The area of the peak A is then given by:
A = A, - A,, Peak center

(3)

6.4

Calculate, point by point, the number of counts per channel less background as a function of channel number X. Determine the interpolated fractional

Nx - Bx channel

15

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

number X corresponding to the maximum of the monoenergetic spectral peak (see Figure 6.4.1). A convenient technique is the weighted average method for values of N in the symmetrical portion of the peak, for example, above the half-maximum height:

x = CX(N,6.5
FWHM, FW 0,l M and FW 0,02 M of a peak

4) /

wx - 4)

(4)

On a linear plot of Nx - Rx versus X, determine the Yz, %o and %o height of the peak. Determine the FWHM, FW 0,l M, FW 0,02 M of the peak in channels AN, (interpolated). Ratios of these values (FW 0,I M/FWHM and FW 0,02 M/FWHM) are often given as indicators of peak shape quality. 6.6
Peak-to-Compton ratio

Determine the average height $ of the portion of the Common continuum in the average region defined by the relatively flat interval from 358 keV to 382 keV for the 13'Cs 661,6 keV gamma-ray or 1040 keV to 1096 keV for the 6oCo 1332,5 keV gamma-ray. These selected regions avoid the Compton edge. The peak-to-Compton ratio is defined as the ratio of the maximum number of counts in the peak, Nx at channel number X, to Ec (see Figure 6.6.1). Note that in general X and Nx are interpolated values. The source used shall be stated. The peak-to-Compton ratio is a detector performance index which depends on detector geometry, mount and cryostat construction, detector efficiency and detector resolution. This ratio is inversely proportional to resolution if other factors remain unchanged. It generally increases with increasing detector efficiency, but the extent of this effect is determined by the specific nature of the accomnanying changes in detector geometry.

Other things being equal, the peak-to-Compton ratio is greater for detector geometries which maximize the probability of total absorption of the energy of photons which are initially Compton scattered within the detector. The peak-to-Compton ratio is adversely affected by Compton scattering which occurs in material (including inactive detector germanium) which is near the detector or source. Typically, detectors with larger ratios and better counting statistics peak-to-Compton ratios have larger line-to-background for complex spectra.

6.1

Spectral energy resolution

The peak to be measured and a second :peak should be located in the spectrum and their centres X, and X2 determined for the purpose of energy calibration (see 6.4). If needed, the second peak may be produced by a calibrated precision pulse generator. (See I EC 333, 4.1, for pulser calibration instructions.) On a linear plot of NY- Bk determine the FWHM of the peak in channels AN, (interpolated). From the energy and location of the peak being measured, E, and X,, and of a second peak, Ez and XI, the FWHM in energy units is given as follows:

The value AE, is the total spectral energy resolution

at energy E,.

16

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

The type of amplifier pulse shaping used and the full width at half maximum of the pulse shall be given with each stated resolution measurement or specification. Also, the count rate at which the resolution was measured and the maximum count rate-energy product (CREP) capability of the preamplifier used shall be stated. The maximum CREP corresponds to the maximum rate of energy input at which the preamplifier will still operate within its linear response range. For example, in a resistive feedback preamplifier the maximum CREP is determined by the feedback resistor and the maximum feedback voltage. The count rate-energy product is defined as:

CREP = x E x r; (keV s-`)
E

where r, is the count rate (c/s-`) at the energy E in keV. 6.8. Total noise Iinewidth and detector contributic Separately or as part of the same spectrum, obtain a gamma-ray spectrum and a pulser-generated peak. Measure AE,, FWHM for the gamma-ray peak, and AEr, FWHM for the pulser peak. Refer to IEC 333 if more information is needed about using a pulser to measure noise. The value of AE, is the total noise linewidth for the spectroscopy system. The contribution to the spectral linewidth due to all factors other than electrical noise is designated as AE, and is given by:

AE, = (AE,2 - AE;)"

(6)

If the data have been acquired at a sufficiently low count rate to eliminate count rate effects, AE, is primarily due to the detector charge generation and collection processes and,is an important characteristic of the detector.

6.9

Peak asymmetry Peak asymmetry, due to a number of factors, including carrier trapping and ballistic deficit, appears as tailing on the low-energy side of the gamma-ray peak. Measurements should be made at count rates sufficiently low for peak asymmetry due to count-rate effects from the amplifier to be negligible. For purposes of comparison and evaluation, the following analysis can be used. On a semilog plot of (&-II,) versus X, draw a line from the apex of the peak at channel X perpendicular to the abscissae. Measure, at the l/IO height level, the width from the low energy side of the peak envelope to the midline (interval L, see Figure 6.9.1). Measure the corresponding interval H on the high energy side of the midline (see Figure 6.9.1). Quote peak asymmetry as the ratio H/L and state the gamma-ray energy for which it applies. The asymmetry ratio may also be calculated at other specified fractional peak heights.

6.10

Well-type detector resolution Since some detectors may have poor charge collection near .the inner contact, resolution measurements for well detectors shall be made with an approximate point source located on axis .l,O cm from the bottom centre of the end cap well (see Figure 4.3.2d). Detectors with a low electric field strength at the inner contact will perform methods and radioactive poorly with the source inside the well. The measurement

17

IS 13881

: 1993

IEC 973 : 1989 the same nuclides used are otherwise radioactive sources shall be encapsulated the well. Preferred energies as for in such other germanium detectors. However, a way as to permit easy insertion into

6.11

It is desirable to achieve some standardization in detector resolution measurements. resolution measurements at specific energies chosen Thus it is preferred to make according to the energy range for which the detector is to be evaluated. The preferred energy lines and radionuclides are listed according to energy range as follows:

Energy

range

Preferred

energy

lines and

radionuclides

>l MeV 400 keV-1 MeV 70 keV-400 keV ~70 keV

I 3325 keV (""Co) 6616 keV (13'Cs) 122,l keV ("Co) $9 keV (SSFe), 22 keV (lo9Cd) unresolved

.A11 lines that are See 6.1 for a wider range of radionuclide selections. doublets shall be identified, specified and measured without peak deconvolution.

7.

Counting

efficiency

The gamma-ray counting efficiency for a full energy peak or an escape peak depends upon the active volume of the germanium detector, its shape (geometry), source/detector geometry, and interactions in the material in the immediate vicinity of the detector, such as the detector mount and cryostat parts. The efficiency is defined as that of the complete detector assembly. Three source/detector geometries are specified in this standard: a point source 25,O cm from the center of the front of the detector endcap, a reentrant beaker standard source placed over the detector endcap, and a point source on axis 1,O'cm from the bottom of the well of a well-type detector. While representative, these geometries do not correspond to all of the many possible geometries which may be used. However, measurements made under these specified conditions provide a standard basis for testing, comparing and selecting detectors for most applications. When efficiency be clearly stated. 7.1 7.1.1 is quoted as a specification, the type of efficiency measurement shall

Efficiency for a point source at 25,0 cm Absolute full-energy peak counting efficiency

With the detector connected to the auxiliary electronic equipment as shown in Figure 6oCo source. The source-to-cryostat endcap 6.2.18, obtain a spectrum using a calibrated distance (as measured from the center of the source to the center of the front of the endcap) shall be 25,O cm. The absolute fulll-energy peak counting efficiency E, is stated, for purposes of comparison and specification, as the ratio of the number of counts A in the full-energy peak (see 3.1) to the total number of 1332,5 keV gamma-ray photons N, emitted by the source during the live counting time: E,, = A/N, (7)

18

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989 Alternatively, the counting time may be determined from the area of a pulser peak run - 5% above the gamma-ray peak at a constant known rate with the pulser line appearing in energy. For applications in which a source will be close to the cryostat endcap, an additional efficiency measurement simulating this condition is useful.

7.1.2 Relative full-energy

peak counting efficiency

The efficiency Ere, of a germanium detector relative to that of a 3 x 3 in (76 mm x 76 mm) NaI(T1) scintillation crystal at a source-to-detector distance of 25,0 cm (as defined in 7.1 .I) may be determined from the following: E,,, = A/&,, where A is the peak area as obtained in 7.1 .l. gamma-ray emitted from hoC~ at a (8)

The term ANa, is 1,2 . 10m3 N, for the I332,5 keV source-to-detector endcap center distance of 25,0 cm. 7.2 Well-type coaxial detector gamma-ray efficiency

A well-type coaxial detector has a reentrant cavity well in the endcap which extends into a central hole within the detector element. In a well-type coaxial detector (Figure ,4.3.2d) a radionuclide source inserted in the well is essentially surrounded by active germanium. This typically results in a very high absolute efficiency for gamma-ray detection. For the relatively high absolute efficiency often achieved with a well-type detector, the fraction of coincident gamma rays which are summed is much greater than for geometries in which the source is located outside the endcap. Thus for two lines with coincident gamma rays, a significant sum peak appears in the spectrum. Each count in this peak represents the simultaneous full-energy detection of two gamma rays corresponding to the two lines. For one of two coincident lines, the number of photons detected at full energy is equal to the sum of the number of counts in the full energy peak A and the number of counts in the sum peak A,. For an accurate measurement, the number of gamma rays detected which correspond to one such coincident line shall be represented by the sum (A + A,). The effect of true coincidence summing in a well detector is an especially important consideration for specifying detector efficiency. As the absolute detector efficiency goes up, the ratio As/A increases as a greater fraction of counts falls in the sum peak. Thus if only the number of counts A in the full-energy peak is used to calculate absolute efficiency, the calculated efficiency will becom.e progressively deficient as the actual efficiency increases. To calculate detector efficiency using one of two coincident lines, the sum (A+A,) shall be used to represent the number of gamma rays detected at full energy corresponding to that line.

should be measured with an approximate Counting efficiency of a well-type detector* point source of 6oCo (less than 2,0 mm maximum dimension) located I,0 cm above the * One commonly

used indicator of well detector efficiency has been the active volume of germanium (in cm'). Active volume (in cm') of germanium is not an acceptable detector specification because the user has no way to verify the active detector volume and because it is not a reliable indicator of counting efficiency.

19

IS 13881

: 1993

IEC 973 : 1989

bottom of the end cap well. The method described in 6.2 should be used to accumulate a spectrum. The counting of accidental coincidences shall be made negligible by controlling count rate and amplifier shaping time, and through the use of pulse-pile-up rejection. The 1332,5 keV line of 6oCo is in coincidence with the 1 173,2 keV line resulting in a sum peak at 2505,7 keV. Peak areas of the 1332,5 keV and the 2 505,7 keV peaks should be determined method of 6.3. The in-well efficiency (W) is given by: by the

where: A A, is the area is the area of the 1332,5 keV peak keV sum peak emitted by the source during the live counting time

of the 2505,7 number

N, is the total

of 1332.5

keV photons

7.3

Detector

gamma-ray

efficiency

using a standard

reentrant

beaker')

geometry

7.3.1

General

An efficiency measurement using a standard reentrant beaker geometry because of an increasing trend towards large-volume, low-activity samples.

is desirable

Although many reentrant beaker geometries are in use, this standard measurement specifies a single configuration for the purpose of characterizing detector performance. The use +of a fixed source geometry allows systematic comparison of the effect of window thickness, sensitive volume, detector shape, and other detector characteristics. The reentrant beaker geometry specified herein (Figures 7.3.1 and 7.3.2) has been chosen primarily for its -near-optimum design in placing the sample material as near the active detector material as feasible. Germanium semiconductor detectors are encapsulated in vacuum cryostats such that internal dimensions are not readily measurable by the user. Therefore, in this clause reference is made to the cryostat external dimensions. For the purposes of this clause the detector is considered to be part of a single spectrometer where coincidence or Compton suppression modes are not used. The spectrometer shall be set up and calibrated as specified in Clause 6.

7.3.2

Reentrant

beaker

standard

source (RBSS)

A Reentrant_ Beaker Standard Source (RBSS) consists of a standard reentrant beaker (see 7.3.3) containing a carrier with radioactive material (see 7.3.4). An RBSS may be a certified RBSS, a calibrated RBSS, a certified-solution RBSS or a calibrated-solution RBSS. The calibration uncertainty of the photon emission rate2) for the filled beaker shall be not more than 3% (lo) unless otherwise stated.

I) Also

known

as Marinelli

beaker. from the

*) The photon emission d&y of radionuclides

rate as used in this standard is the number of photons per second resulting in the source and is thus higher than the detected rate at the surface..

20

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989 7.3.2.1 Certljied RBSS

A certified RBSS is an RBSS that has been calibrated as to photon emission rate `) at specified energies by a laboratory recognized as a country's National Standardizing Laboratory for radioactivity measurements and has been so certified by the calibrating laboratory. 7.3.2.2 Calibrated RBSS calibrated by comparing its photon

A calibrated RBSS is. an RBSS that has been emission rate to that of a certified RBSS. 7.3.2.3 Certified-solution RBSS

A certified-solution RBSS is a standard beaker conforming to 7.3.3 that certified solution (see 7.3.2.5) as its radioactive filling material (see 7.3.4).

contains

a

7.3.2.4

Calibrated-solution

RBSS

A calibrated-solution RBSS is a standard beaker conforming to 7.3.3 that contains as its radioactive filling material (see 7.3.4) a solution that has been calibrated by comparing its photon emission rate at specified energies to that of a certified solution (see 7.3.2.5).

7.3.2.5

Certified solution

A certified solution is a liquid radioactive filling material (see 7.3.4) that. has been calibrated by a laboratory recognized as a country's National Standardizing Laboratory for radioactivity measurements and has been so certified by the calibrating laboratory. 1.3.3 The beaker Reentrant beakers are .inverted well beakers. They are available in a variety of sizes for use in large-volume, low-level measurements. The beakers specified herein, Models 450 and 1000, are shown in Figure 7.3.1. Figure 7.3.2 shows a schematic of a typical sample-detector geometry. The Model 450 beaker is considered to be of 450 cm' capacity and the Model 1000 of IO00 cm3 capacity. The actual capacities of the beakers are greater than this but, for the purposes of this standard, the beakers are to be filled to those amounts +_2 cm' (see 7.3.4). The beakers specified were selected because of: 1) high counting efficiency 2) commercial 3) common availability for the sample material used; at low cost;

usage in many laboratories;

4) physical convenience. 1.3.4 Radioactive jlling material

The beaker used for calibration of detectors with diameters of 76,5 mm or less shall be the Modei 450' and for larger diameter detectors shall be the Model 1000. .The 45.0 cm3

I) International Commission on Radiation Sotwces ICRU Report No. 12. September

Units and 15, 1968.

Measurements.

Cerri'ica/ion

of Standardized

Radioactive

21

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

beaker shall be filled with 450 cm3 rt2 cm3 of a solid or liquid carrier containing uniformly dispersed radioactive material whereas the 1000 cm" beaker shall be filled with 1000 cm3+2 cm3. The solid carrier is preferable for general use because it constitutes a safe and chemically inert sealed source. Representative radionuclides for use in the RBSS are listed in Table 7.3.1. The carrier shall have an effective atomic number Z of 4,0+ 0,7 and a mean density of 1,15 + 0,02 g.cm" for solid carriers, or 1,06 +O,Ol g.cme3 for liquid carriers. The density of the carrier used shall be stated (see 7.3.6) so that attenuation corrections may be made. The source activity should be such as not to exceed the count-rate capability of the detector system. In some systems, significant spectral distortion may occur at count-rates as low as a few thousand per second.

7.3.5 The measurement

The absolute full-energy peak efficiency of a RBSS (A4) of a. detector assembly being calibrated shall be determined with the RBSS placed over the end cap as in Figure 7.3.2, counted for a live time count interval t and measured according to 6.3 (see also 7.1.1). M is defined as: M = A/N,
where:

(10)
in the full-energy peak representing energy E

A

is the during

number

of events

from

the I

RBSS registered

as counts

the live time count

interval

TV, is the number

of gamma .rays of energy

E originating

in the RBSS during

the same live time interval

I

When the RBSS efficiencies are specified, the energies used in the determination shall be stated. Convenient and frequently used gamma-ray energies include those listed below. The 1332 keV gamma ray of 6oCo has been the most widely used for specifying efficiency and resolution. The preferred line at low energies is the 88 keV gamma ray of `09Cd. 88,0 122,l 661,6 1332,5 keV keV keV keV (lo9Cd) ("Co) (r3'Cs) (""Co) lines.

Mixed sources are available which include the above energies plus additional

If the user wishes to extend the use of these techniques to establish a detailed calibration curve for specific applications of the detector, additional energy peaks will generally be required (see Table 7.3.1). Figure 7.3.3 shows typical results for a calibrated RBSS used with two Ge(Li) detectors. `The two detectors are described by their relative full-energy efficiencies as in 7.1.2. Figure 7.3.3 shows the variation of the absolute full-energy peak efficiency E, versus gamma-ray energy plotted for the two Ge(Li) detectors of Table 7.3.2 for the RBSS geometry. Figure 7.3.4 shows' a linear plot df the spectrum observed using the RBSS and Figure 7.3.5 shows the log plot of the spectrum of Figure 7.3.4. Most of the peaks are clearly observable and available for direct measurement. A possible source of error arises from the fact that the R"Y single-escape peak is about 7 keV (at 1325 keV) from the I 332 keV

22

Is 13881

: 1993

IEC 973, : 1989

peak of 6oCo. Figure 1.3.6 shows .an expanded portion of the spectrum around 1332 keV for the data of Figure 7.3.4. Care should be exercised to assure that counts from the escape peak are not attributed to the peak due to the 1332 keV gamma ray. It should also be noted that the 1 173 keV and 1332 keV gamma rays of 6oCo are in prompt cascade and can therefore sum, resulting in errors of as much as 5%. Approximate correction factors may be determined from a knowledge of the peak-to-total ratios for the secondary gamma and the gamma-gamma angular correlation. A similar situation exists for. all radionuclides emitting gamma rays in prompt cascade.

1.3.6

RBSS

documentation

A certificate shall be provided with each RBSS stating whether the RBSS is a certified RBSS (see 7.3.2.1) or a calibrated RBSS (7.3.2.2). In the case of the certified-solution RBSS (7.3.2.3) and the calibrated-solution RBSS (7.3.2.4), the certificate shall be for the solution alone. In any case, the certificate shall contain the following information:

1) Radionuclidei

used and calibrated,

together

with:

a) the photon energies and radionuclide half lives; b) dates corresponding to the stated photon emission rates; c) uncertainties in the stated photon emission rates. In the case of a calibrated RBSS, the errors for the certified RBSS against which the calibrated tiBSS has been calibrated and the errors in the comparison shall be given separately. In the case of a calibrated-solution RBSS, the errors for the certified solution against which the radioactive filling material solution has been calibrated and the errors in the comparison shall be given separately; d) density of the carrier to within 2%.

2) Calibration

dates. In the case of a calibrated RBSS, the date of calibration against the certified RBSS and the date of calibration of the certified RBSS shall be given. In the case of a calibrated-solution RBSS, the date of calibration of the radioactive tilling material solution against the certified solution and the date of calibration of the certified solution shall be given.

RBSS 3) Full genealogy in the case of a calibrated RBSS or a calibrated-solution including identification of the certified RBSS or certified solution against which it has been calibrated. 4) Calibrating laboratory or organization.

8.

Window thickness

index

lnformation on the thickness of the "window" (detector dead-layer, cryostat mount and endcap, etc.) can be obtained by measuring and reporting a window thickness index as the ratio of peak areas for the four energies 31 keV, 54 keV, 80 keV and 161 keV emitted by `j'Ba. The ratio of peak areas for the 22 keV and' 88 keV energies of *09Cd may also be used. Care shall be taken to ensure that self-absorption in the source and its housing are negligible.

23

Is 13881 : 1993 lEc 973 : 1989

A window thickness index based on X-ray fluorescence is used for measuring thin windows. Such an index is described in I EC 759. The thickness index is based on the X-ray fluorescence of a standard glass as described in I EC 759. This glass contains oxides of Si, Ba, Ca, Li, Mg, Zn and B. When fluoresced with a 5sFe source, it emits numerous X-ray lines in the region from 1 keV to 5 keV. Ratios of these lines to the coherently backscattered 5,9 keV line from the source are used to define a window thickness index. Refer to I EC 759 for additional details.

9.

Timing

A useful measuring method for evaluating the timing capabilities of a germanium detector is based on a coincidence system detecting the two 511 keV gamma-rays of a **Na annihilation source. A "start" signal from the germanium detector under test and a delayed "stop" signal obtained from a high-speed detector are required. The distribution of the time difference between "start" and "stop", measured with a time-to-amplitude. converter, gives the timing resolution of the system. Therefore, significant information on the timing resolution of the germanium detector is obtained, if the second detector and the electronics of the system are faster than the germanium detector. Such a system is described in 9.1.

9.1

Measuring system Figure 9.1.1 detector. The mounted on a photomultiplier shows a typical system for measuring the time resolution of a germanium "stop" or time reference channel consists of a fast plastic scintillator relatively fast photomultiplier (total rise time Q 5 ns). The signal from the is processed by a constant-fraction discriminator.

The output of the discriminator is delayed before entering the "stop" side of a time-to-amplitude converter. Several calibrated delays are required for this function in order to provide a' calibration of the time axis. The germanium detector signal is split in two at the output of the preamplifier. The signal from the preamplifier is routed to a fast shaping amplifier with a differentiation time constant approximately equal to the fastest rise time observable at the preamplifier output. The differentiated signal is then routed to a constant-fraction timing discriminator. The fraction of the pulse amplitude used in this timing discriminator should be 20% and the shaping delay should be one-half of the rise time of the fastest signal observed at the output of the preamplifier. This combination of parameters helps minimize the timing uncertainties due to rise time and pulse height variations. Tbe unshaped timing measurement signals are shown in Figure 9.1.2. The signal from the preamplifier is also routed to an amplifier and timing single-channel analyzer which is used to gate the multicha el analyzer (Figure 9.1 .I). **Na is used as a source of coincident annihilation quant and the single channel 1 analyzer should be centred on the 51 I keV photon peak with 10% window width. 9.2 Timing resolution Using a system such as shown in Figure 9.1 .I, a gamma-ray coincidence spectrum is obtained. A typical spectrum is shown in Figure 9.2.1. The number of channels between

24

IS 13881

: 1993

IEC 973 : 1989

the half-maximum points shall be at least 6, and the total number of counts contained within the FWHM shall be at least 4000: If computer fitting of the data is used, the 4000 minimum counts need not apply provided the FWHM is calculated by computer to within +5% (90% confidence interval). `After calibrating the time-axis with at least two calibrated delays, the FWHM and the FW 0,l M are measured in units of nanoseconds. The following parameters shall be stated for the timing test in order to assure reproducibility:
a) germanium b) differentiation

detector

bias voltage;

time of the fast shaping amplifier;

c) shaping delay time. Timing measurements are dependent on the entire electronics system and its adjustment. These adjustments are critical and difficult. Therefore the results of timing measurements should not be considered solely as characteristics of the detector.

10. Temperature 1Q.I

cyclability

Cyclable detectors

Cyclable detectors are especially useful for systems which are expected to undergo warm-ups, such as portable systems, and those to be used where a continuous supply of liquid nitrogen is neither assured nor convenient. A cyclable detector remains under `vacuum as an integral part of the cryostat system. To designate a detector as cyclable, a manufacturer shall guarantee that the detector shall meet its performance specifications throughout the warranty period under conditions of unlimited cycling between room temperature and liquid nitrogen temperature and of indefinite room temperature storage.

10.2 Annealable detectors Annealable detectors are cyclable detectors (see 10.1) which can be subjected to a specified temperature for a given time to reduce the effects of radiation damage. The cryostat, detector and mount shall be capable of accommodating the annealing schedule (such as 120 "C for ,24 h). It should be specified that in the absence of radiation damage, the detector will be able to tolerate this annealing schedule without degrading its performance beyond specified limits. During the annealing procedure, it may be necessary extremely clean vacuum pumping system. Proper annealing can restore to their approximate condition less sensitive to small amounts their original condition than are to pump the cryostat with an

many radiation-damaged high-purity germanium detectors Reverse-electrode coaxial detectors are prior to damage. of residual damage and therefore are easier to restore to conventional-electrode coaxial detectors.

25

IS 13881 EC 11.

: 1993

973 : 1989 Low background germanium detectors

The measurement of low-level radioactivity involves assay procedures of high sensitivity in order to differentiate the occurrence of extraneous counts having an origin other than the radioactive atoms of interest. In general, it is not possible to give simple, explicit recommendations on methods of measurement applicable for all circumstances, nor can a numerical definition of a low-background germanium detector be usefully stated for an unspecified context. The major component of the background count of radiation detectors is comprised of responses to extraneous sources of environmental radiation such as cosmic radiation and the radioactive contamination present in the construction materials used in building the counting-room facility, shield and the detector. The other component of the background is due to the alteration of the ambient background flux by proximity to the detector of a blank sample or other extraneous materials; this may result in an increased background by scattering radiation into the detector, or a decreased background by acting as an additional shield material.

The traces of radioactive elements present in the construction material of the detector itself are related to the natural percent abundance of the radionuclides present in each material that comprises the detector assembly. Table I1 .I lists typical detector system materials. Radionuclides commonly present construction LiS contaminants and Forresponding gamma-ray energies are listed in Table 11.2. The contribution of these contaminating radionuclides to the background of the detector is related to the specific activity of each radionuclide, the types of radioactive emissions, their energies and intensities and their proximity to the detector. However, it should be noted that the parent nuclides and their daughter products will not necessarily be in equilibrium since the processing and refinements of the constituents of raw materials are treated differently and may result in separation of the radianuclides.

Low-background germanium detectors are typically constructed from selected materials whose radionuclide concentrations are lower than those used in standard germanium detector assemblies. Materials known to be generally lower in radioactive contamination are acquired and samples are assayed for contaminating radionuclides. Only materials having suitably low levels of contamination are subsequently used to make cryostats, detector mounts and other components for low-background detectors. This presents a large materials control problem, whereby material procurement and inventories are subjected to exterisive quality control on assays, machining, fabrication and subsequent isolation from other inventories.

The specific requirements for any low ,background detector depend upon the application. It is beyond the scope of this standard to define procedural methods or instrumentation for specific low-level assay problems or to recommend a shield and * detector design that would give the lowest background and be generally applicable, taking into account the complex interrelationships among the shield composition, volume and spatiotemporal location, relative to a given detector type, volume and orientation.

26

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

Energy (MeV)

i t c
I

Fig. 4.1.1 -

Linear

attenuation

coefficients

versus

gamma-ray

energy

for Si and

Ge.

Thick contact (n+ contact)

w6/89

-_-_-_
I

a) Conventional-electrode coaxial detector

-se-e-J

Fig. 4.3.1 -

Planar

detector. i
l-_-_-_\

i

L ____-_

+

I

I I

b) Reversed-electrode coaxial detector

F
I////
Thick contact (n + contact) Thin contact (p+ contact) -

cJ Lithium-compensated germanium, Ge(Li), coaxial detector

dl

Well-type coaxial detector

Aluminium

endcap
007189

Fig. 4.3.2 -

Coaxial

germanium

detector

types.

27

IS 13881

: 1993

IEC 973 : 1989

l

1

Germanium detector

Bias supply I

A.C. coupling

Preamplifier

Precision pulse generator b C

I

I

Main amplifier

c

L-W-I

Baseline restorer 11111. -I-

I

1

Digital stabiker ---------l

---

Multichannel

analyser

Fig. `6.2.1 -

Block shown.

diagram modes

of of

typical coupling

germanium the

gamma-ray to the

spectrometer input of

system.

Two are

alternative

detector

the. preamplifier

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

I

To

I

I

I
1173,2 1332,

-

-

I

`c

860

900

940

980

1000

khannel number X

Fig. 6.3.1 -

6oCo gamma-ray

spectrum showing straight line background

approximations.

29

Is 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

I-

I "`CS

I

I

I

2 = 863,9 8.
`*
--_), + Ns = 3,15 k8V FWHN I

.
0
I__

.

--_) .

7

6.1 ke+

FW 0,l M

l .

. . .

.

.

. .

b0

08

0

' #" . . . . . 0" l'

* `.a"*

`a. .`.`%
0

"0
.

""
0

.`.`.
".,'
'
.

0 l

l

l

.

00
"

.

.

.

00

W..

a

I
700 750

I
600 650

I__ _
900 950 Channel number X

Fig. 6.4.1 -

"`Cs

gamma-ray

spectrum.

30

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC` 973 : 1989

5 keV)

1 173.2 keV ,Peak (not shown)

l l

1
520

I

I

I

I
600

I

I

I

I
700 Channel number X

Fig. 6.6.1 -

@`Co gamma-ray

spectrum

showing

determination

of peak-to-Compton

ratio.

31

IS 13881 : 1993
IEC 973 : 1989.

I
"'CS

1

I

I

J? = 2 180.7 410, .
.

. . -t .

. . f . .
FWHM

. .
HIL = 0,904

-b+

,;,6 +b4

.

.

.

..*.a .. l ..
0

. .

. .

I
2 148 2 158 2 168 2 178 2 168

4
0 .

-I

2 196

Channel number X

Fig. 6.9.1 -

Gamma-ray full energy peak showing method of calculating peak asymmetry ratio

H/L

32

Is 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

Section A-A

Model

450 mm inches 4,10*0,05 2,690 f 0,006 e] [3,048-0,008 *0,004 e] (ref.)

Model

IO00
mm inches I,3 e] 5,91+0,05 3,937 f 0,006 [4,724-0,008 fO.004 f0.010 e]

HI

104.1 f 13 6833kO.15 [77,40-0,008 f0.10 *0,25 average max. J1

HI H? I

150,0+

H2
I

100.00+0,15

[ I20,00-0,008
+0,1 f0.25 aterage max.

average 1]

W

[14.83+0,008 +0,10 ItO, 1,9o+o,l 2,00f0,2~ 3,60+0,15

fO,OlOmax. [0,584+0,008 *0,004 *O,OlO 0,075 0,079 0,142

aterage -0. max.

average max.

average max. f 0,004 f 0,010 + 0,006 All other dimensions same as for Model 450

11 f? b

Mutwin/:

plastic

of density

l,l f0.l

Fig. 7.3.1 -

Standard

re-entrant

beakers.

33

Is13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

Re-entrant beaker

Ge gamma-ray detector 7

r

and centering jig J

I

Fig.

7.32

-

Re-rntrunt

beaker with

solid

state detector.

34

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

0 0

A

0

A

A

' A

0 0 A
. 0

A A

0

0 0

A A A

O,l Energy (MeV)

0 - 24,5%* Ge(Li) (detector 2 of Table A2). A - I I,S%* Ge(Li) (detector 1 of Table AZ). * E,, (see 7.1.2.)

Fig. 7.3.3 -

RB.& total. absorption detectors.

detection

efficiency

(IQ

versus

energy

for two

Ge(Li)

35

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

1333 keV ("Co) # .

6 .

. .
1325 keV single escape peak ofsey

Energy

(keV) l

017/89

Fig. 7.3.6 -

Expanded portion of Figure 7.3.4 spectrum showing together with. 1325 keV single escape peak of s*Y.

1333 keV peak

of 6oCo

38

Plastic scintillator

I

Time.pick-off

Control I

r' I
Fast shaping amplifier

+

Calibrated delay

Constant fraction

l, Time-amplitude converter

S~~

]

Amplifier,

1
, I Gate

I
Input

Mujtichannel amplitude analyser

Timing single channel analyser

i

Fig. 9.1.1 -

Tiping

measurement.

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

A) Signal from preamplifier

1;;;

d\/--

6) inverted and delayed signal from preamplifier

F = 0,2 A,

1 I`Cl Attenuated signai from preamplifier
I

_------_

-

A w
t

----

Timing marker

Fig. 9.1.2 -

Timing

measurement

signals

(unshaped).

40

IS 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989
10' z" "Start' channel 46.5cm' Ge (Li) Detector Bias:2 BOO V Constant fraction discriminator with amplitude-risetime Shaping delay: 15 ns Fraction: 0.20 Energy window 10% centered on 511 keV Calibration: 100 ps/ch Differentiating time and integrating time amplifier = 3 ps "Stop" channel - Plastic scintillator type. . . - Photomultiplier type.. . (combined risetime of scintiflator and photomuftiplier less than 6 ns) - Constant fraction discriminator

r 4 v) E a U

2 ii

-

FWHM

=3,75

ns

`10' -

FW 0.1 M = 8.45 ns A

2x1@

-

320

I

340

I

360

I

380

I.

I
400 420 Time channel X 020/69

Fig. 9.2.1 -

Typical gamma-ray time of a detector.

coincidence

spectrum

showing

fluctuations

in the resolution

41

Is 13881 : 1993 IEC 973 : 1989

TABLE 7.3.1

Representative radionuclides for RBSS
Typical RBSS initial emission rate in gamma se' For Model 450

Parent radionuclide

Energy (keV)

Half

life

88,0 122,l 165,9 219,2 391,7 661,6 898,O I 173.2 I 332,5 1 836,O

464 271 137.7 46,6 115.1 30.0 106,6 5,271 5,271 106,6

days days days days days years days years years days

200 250 200 600 1 000 500 3 500 1 500 1 500 3 800

TABLE

7.3.2

RBSS total absorption de'tection efjciencies determined for two ,Ge(Li) detectors
Energy (keV) 88,O 122,l lC5,9 279.2 391,7 661.6 898 173 333 836 E. for detector I * (E,, = 11,4%) ** 0,025 0,032 0.0236 0,0157 0,0112 0,0068 0,005o 0,0039 0,0034 0,0026 E, for detector\ 2 * (E,,, = 24,5%):** 0,0414 0,0484 0,0368 0,026O 0,020 0,013l 0,0097 0,0077 0.0070 0,0054

I I I

* Detector

characteristics: Detector 1 Detector 2 I,88 keV 11,4% 44/l 41.2 mm 47,5 mm 1.0 mm 5,0 mm 56,2 cm' 74,8 cm* 2,04 keV 24.5 % 50/ 1 53,5 mm 53 mm I,5 mm 9,0 mm 103,8 cm3 Ill,6 cm2

Resolution at 1.33 MeV E VI l * at 1.33 MeV Peak/Compton at I,33 MeV Diameter Length Diffusion depth Core diameter Active volume Surface area exposed to beaker

** E,, = total absorption

detection efficiency relative to that of a 3x3 in (76x76 mm) NaI(TI) scintillation crystal at a source to detector distance of 25,0 cm, where the peak area for the Nal(T1) crystal is taken as 1,2xiO~' A',. IV, is the total number of 1332,5 keV gamma-ray photons emitted by the source during the life counting time (see 7.3).

42

It% 13881 : 1993 .IEC 973 : 1989

TABLE

11.1

Materials commonly used in detector system construction
Alumina Aluminium Beryllia Beryllium Charcoal Copper Gold lndium Lead Magnesium Molecular sieve Mylar, aluminized Printed circuit board Stainless steel Tin Tungsten

TABLE

11.2

Typical radionuclide contaminants and representative gamma-ray energies
Radionuclide Gamma energy

(ke'0 *,qJ *lrPb 228AC *VI 21aBi "`CS lUAc llsAc *co *co `OK lllgi ZIdBi `08TI 186 239 338 583 609 662 991 968 I I73 I 332 I461 I 765 2 204 2 614

43

hinted U Dee Kay Printers, New &&i-llw15,.I+

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of India Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

institution established under the Bureau of fndh Siandurda Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
BIS is a statutory Copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), RIS.
BIS has the copyright

Revision of Indian Standards Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. LTD 26 ( 1410 )
Amendment8 IssPed Since Publicatloa

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS 110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstho

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhl Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

to all

Offices j

Regional Offices

1

Telephone 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 110002 37 84 99,
37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, I 235 15 19, 235 04 42 235 23 15

Central : Manak Bhavan,

NEW DELHI

331 01 31 331 13 75
37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maoiktolr CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445.446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093 MADRAS 160036 600113

Marol, Andheri ( East )

632 92 95,
632 78 91,

632 78 58
632 78 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANBSHWAR. COIMBATORB. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD: JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printrd at Rintwrll Printers. Aligarh. India

