IS 12777 : 1989

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

-\ ' d'

METHODFORCLASSIFICATIONOF FLAMESPREADOFPRODUCTS

UDC

614~841.41 : 699.81

@I BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
RHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 - __@ce `ZAFAR MARG

NEW August 1990

-%

Group 5

Fire Safety Sectional Committee,

BDC 36

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 20 February 1989, after the draft finalized by the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. The use of flammable surface finishes on walls and ceilings affects the safety of equipment of buildings and these tend to spread the fire even though structural elements may be fire resistant. Method It is essential? therefore, to know the property of rate of flame spread for the products. for classification of flame spread of products was earlier covered in IS 1642 : 1960 which was based on a very simple test method. Based on the development in the field of fire test, this test has been developed in UK which will ensure better results. This has been adopted in this standard deleting the provision from IS 1642 : 1988 Code of practice for fire safety of buildings ( general ): Materials and details of construction (Jirst revision )`. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 12777:1989

Indian Standard

METHODFORCLASSIFICATIONOF FLAMESPREADOFPRODUCTS
1 SCOPE
1.1 This standard specifies a method of test for measuring the extent of flame spread along the surface of a specimen of a material or a product oriented in the vertical position, under the influence of external radiant heat flux; and a classification system based on the rate and the extent of the flame spread. It provides data suitable for comparing the performances of essentially flat materials, composites or assemblies which are used primarily as the exposed surfaces of walls or ceilings.

2.6 Radiant Heat Flux ( at a Point on a Surface) Quotient of the radiant heat incident on an element of the surface containing the point by the area of that element. 2.7 External Radiant Heat Flux The radiant heat flux incident at a point on the surface from an external radiant heat source. 2.8 Flashing Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of less than 1 s. 2.9 Sustained
Flaming

The test results relate only to the behaviour of specimens of the product under the particular conditions of test; they are not intended to be the sole criterion for assessing the potential fire hazard of the product in use. 2 TERMINOLOGY of this standard, 2.0 For the purpose following terminology shall apply. 2.1 Essentially Flat Surface A surface from which specimens, that have a surface irregularity of less than 53 mm from a flat plane, can be obtained. 2.2 Exposed Surface The surface of the product conditions of the test. 2.3 Flame Front The leading edge of the coherent visible flame on the surface of the specimens in the direction of flame spread; that is, the boundary between the visible flame and the unburnt specimen surface. 2.4 Flame Spread The farthest extent of flame front displacement from the vertical edge of the specimen nearer to the radiating surface, along the horizontal reference line, at any instant during a test. 2.5 Radiant Surface ) Heat Output ( from a Point on a subjected to heating the

Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of over 3 s. 2.10 Transitory Flaming

Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods between 1 and 3 s. 3 TEST SPECIMENS 3.1 Number of Specimens A minimum of nine specimens, of the product, shall be provided 3.2 The Exposed Surface The product shall be tested on that face which will normally be exposed in practice, taking account of the following: a) If it is possible for faces to be exposed faces are different, or faces is asymmetrical, tested. either or both the in use then, if the if the core to those both faces shall be representative for a test.

b) If the face of the product contains a surface irregularity that is specifically directional, such as corrugations which run horizontaily or may, in practice, vertically, the product shall be tested in both orientations. c) If the exposed face contains distinct areas of different surface finish or texture, the appropriate number of specimens shall be provided for each distinct area of such finish or texture to be evaluated.
1

Quotient of the radiant heat leaving an element of the surface containing the point by the area of that element.

IS 12777 :1989 3.3 Size of Specimens 3.3.1 With the following exception, the specimens shall be rectangular of length 900 f 3 mm and width 228 ? i mm. However, if specimens are being prepared with a view to achieving only a class 1 standard of performance, then it is permissible for the length of the specimen to be reduced to a minimum of 250 mm. If transitory flaming is exhibited by any short specimen to the end of the specimen, then full size specimens shall be tested. Where reduced specimen lengths are used, the remaining length shall be a filler piece comprising a panel of non-combustible board, the surface of which shall be level with the surface of the specimen. The use of reduced size specimens shall be reported. 3.3.2 When the product is of insufficient specimen size to be size to allow the achieved in the direction of either length or width or both, it is permissible for smaller pieces of the product to be placed adjacent to each other to obtain the required dimension(s) provided that an essentially flat surface can be achieved and it is considered that such a procedure does not have any influence on the flame spread. The use of such specimens shall be reported. 3.3.3 All the specimens of thickness less than or equal to 50 mm shall be tested at full thickness. If the product is of a thickness greater than 50 mm, and it will not fit into the specimen holder, its thickness shall be reduced by cutting away the unexposed face of the product to reduce the thickness to a minimum of 50 mm. 3.4 Construction of Specimens 3.4.1 When the product is a surface coating, it shall be applied to the selected substrate, using a method and application rate recommended for its use. 3.4.2 When the product is a material or composite which would normally be attached to a substrate, it shall be tested in conjunction with a selected substrate, using the specified fixing technique. 3.4.3 When cutting specimens from products with irregular surfaces, the highest point of the surface shall be arranged to be in contact with the pilot flame when the specimen is in its test position. 3.5 Conditioning 3.5.1 All specimens shall be conditioned to constant mass ( see Note ) at a temperature of 27 f 2�C and a relative humidity of 50 5 10 percent and maintained in this condition until required for testing.
NOTE - Constant mass is considered to be attained when two successive weighing operations, carried out at an interval of 24 h, do not differ by more than 0'1 percent of the mass of the specimen, or 0'1 g, whichever is the greater.

3.5.2 Backing boards shall be conditioned for at least 12 h before use in the conditions specified in 3.5.1. 3.6 Preparation of Specimens 3.6.1 The exposed surface of each specimen shall be ruled at intervals of 75 mm, by putting visible markings parallel to the width of the specimen. These markings shall be referred to as vertical reference lines. A horizontal reference line shall similarly be drawn on the exposed surface of the specimen, parallel to the length of the specimen at a distance of 75 mm from the lower edge. Figure 1 shows the details of the reference on the exposed surface of the specimen. lines

9
2

2
w
900
All dimensions in millimetres. surface 3. Vertical

3

1.

Horizontal

reference

line

2.

Exposed

reference

lines

FIG.

1 DETAILS OF HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL REFERENCE LINES ON
THE EXPOSED SURFACE OF THE SPBCIMBN

2

IS 12777 : 1989

3.6.2 The specimens shall be mounted on suitable specimen supports which shall be designed in such a manner that the exposed surface of the specimens of thickness up to 50 mm shall be in the required plane with respect to the radiating surface, during the test. It is permissible to use backing boards for specimens of thickness less than 50 mm to maintain the desired plane of the exposed surface of the specimen during the test. The backing boards shall be rectangular and of same dimensions as those of the specimens but of thicknesses 25 mm, 12 mm and 6 mm which may be reused after' storing in a conditioned
1320

environment for at least contaminated. 4 APPARATUS
4.1 General

12 h, if they are not

The apparatus shall consist essentially of an external radiant heat source mounted vertically in a refractory surround and firmly supported on a frame work; an arrangement to bring the specimen in the desired position quickly; and a pilot burner. Suitable fuel and air supply controls shall also be provided to ensure proper combustion at the radiating surface. Figures 2 to 4 show the salient features of a typical apparatus.
.

I-,

1020

)_

990

mm

I

-I

All dimensions Gas fired radiant panels, 9 numbers Castable refractory surround Metal framework :4: Supports 5. Specimen holder guides 6. M. S. channel 7. M. S. angle
1.

in millimetres. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. Handle Specimen Backing board Specimen holder Pilot burner Groove in surround

(2)

FIG. 2

DETAILS OF THE EXTERNAL RADIANT HBAT SOURCB AND THE SPBCIMBN HOLDER 3

IS 12777:1999

All dimensions in millimetres. ::

z.

Gas fired radiant panels, 9 numbers Castable refractory surround Metal framework Supports 5: Specimen holder guides 6. Air supply line 7. Fuel supply line

8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. v1 -

Handle Specimens Venturi mixer Specimen holder Pilot burner Groove in surround (2) VTvalves

`FIG.

3 GENERAL

VIEWS OF THB SURFACE SPREAD OF FLAME TEST APPARATUS

4

F '

e-

$ \ standby poaition \\ \,of specimen holder `\ \ \`, \ \\ \

All dimensions External radiant 3 Pivot 3: Specimen holder 3. FIG. 4 Specimen heat source

in millimetres. 5. Backing board 6. Guides 7. Exposed surface

STANDBY ANDTEST POSITIONSOF THE SPECIMEN HOLDBRWITH RESPECTTO THE

RADIATING SURFACEOF THE EXTERNAL RADIANTHEAT SOURCE 4.2 The External Radiant Heat Source 4.2.1 The external radiant heat source shall have a radiating surface of dimensions 1 000 f 50 mm square and shall be designed to provide the required radiant heat output. The flaming occurring on the radiating surface shall not project by more than 50 mm under operational conditions. 4.2.2 The external radiant heat source shall be fitted with a refractory concrete surround, projecting 150 mm beyond the radiating surface. The surround shall intimately contain the source and any small gaps between the surround 5 and the individual gas fired radiant panels comprising the external radiant heat source shall be tightly packed with a flexible noncombustible insulating material. 4.3 Specimen Holder 4.3.1 The specimen holder shall be designed to provide a rigid non-combustible insulation backing on which the specimens can be mounted. 4.3.2 The specimen holder shall be rectangular and shall be capable of sliding smoothly into the guides provided on one vertical edge of the external radiant heat source.

.

IS I2777 :1989

4.3.3 The specimen holder guides shall be hinged to the metal framework around the external radiant heat source and shall be capable of being swung into the test position from the Stan&by position quickly. 4.3.4 The specimen holders, backing boards and the guides shall enable the exposed surface of the specimen to be brought in the test position, such that the face of the guides towards the external radiant heat source, the exposed surface of the specimen and the vertical surface of the refractory surround normal to the radiating surface shall all be in the same plane. 4.4 Pilot Burner The pilot burner shall consist of a steel tube with an orifice of 3-O mm internal diameter. The burner shall be designed in such a way that with the specimen in the test position, the centre of the orifice of the burner shall be: a) 8 f 2 mm in front of the exposed surface of the specimen, b) 6 f 2 mm above the lower edge of the exposed surface of the specimen, and c) 15 f 5 mm from the vertical edge of the specimen surface closer to the external radiant heat source ( see Fig. 4 ). 4.5 Fuel and Air Supplies 4.5.1 The fuel supply to the external radiant heat source shall be from a bank of bottled LPG cylinders of 14.2 kg capacity, to ensure a constant fuel supply for a minimum period of ?l. L II. The air supply shall be taken test environment. from outside the

The dimensions of the enclosure shall provide the following minimum clearances for the panel: a) 5 m in front, b) 1 m behind, c) 6 m floor to ceiling, and d) 2.5 m on either side ( measured panel centre ).

from the

To extract the combustion products from the external radiant heat source and the specimen, a suitable extraction system may be provided, which shall not cause significant change in the environment around the apparatus during the course of the test.
NOTE - In order to minimize the spread of toxic products and protect the operator, as far as possible, the space above the panel may be partitioned off from the test of the environment by a hood. This should be designed in such a way that its lower edge is at least 2'4 m above the floor and all parts of the front of the hood are at least 1'5 m from the vertical plane containing the panel face and at least 1'8 m from the upper edge of the panel. It is also permissible to employ a radiation screen alongside the radiating surface to protect the observer. This may take the form of either a movable screen or a permanent structure and should not be within a distance of 1'3 m from the centre nor extend further than 1'4 m in front of the radiating surface.

5 ANCILLARY EQUIPMENT 5.1 The Heat Flux Transducer The heat flux transducer shall be capable of measuring radiant heat flux within the range 10 kW/ms to 50 kW/ms. The sensing surface receiving radiation and possibly to a small extent convection, shall be flat, circular, not more than 10 mm in diameter and coated with a durable matt black finish. The sensor shall be contained within a water-cooled body, the front face of which shall be of highly polished metal, flat, coinciding with the plane of the sensing surface and circular, with a diameter of about 25 mm. The radiant heat shall not pass through any window before reaching the sensing surface. The transducer shall be robust, simple to set up and use, insensitive to draughts and stable in calibration. The transducer shall have an accuracy of within 3 percent, repeatability within 0.5 percent and shall be calibrated at at an appropriate periodic frequency. 5.2 Millivolt Measuring Device The millivolt measuring device shall be compatible with the output from the radiometer specified in 5.1. It shall have a full-scale deflection, sensitivity and accuracy to enable the radiant heat flux measured by the heat flux transducer to be resolved to 0.05 kW/mz. 6

The fuel and air flowrates shall be sufficient to provide the required external radiant heat flux distribution over the exposed surface of the specimen to be achieved. 4.5.2 The fuel and air supply network to the external radiant heat source shall contain suitable pressure regulators, control valves, manometers or other suitable static pressure indicating instruments, gas flowmeters and safety devices. 4.5.3 The fuel supply to the pilot burner shall be LPG. The pilot flame shall be a luminous diffusion flame. The contact height of the pilot flame on the exposed surface of the specimen shall be between 75 mm and 100 mm. 4.6 Test Environment The apparatus shall be located environment essentially free
.

in an enclosed from draughts.

IS 12777: 1989 5.3 Optical Pyrometer 6 CALIBRATION 6.1 General 6.1.1 The apparatus

The optical pyrometer used for checking the uniformity of the radiating surface shall be capable of measuring the temperature to within &lO"C at 1000"c. 5.4 Timing Device ( Timer ) The timing device shall be capable of recording elapsed time to nearest second, and shall be accurate `to within 1 s in 1 h. 5.5 Calibration
5.5.1 Board

The calibration board shall be rectangular of length 900 mm, width 228 mm and thickness 25 mm. It shall be constructed as shown in Fig. 5 from a non-combustible insulation asbestos millboard. It shall be capable of accommodating, at six positions along its length, a heat flux transducer as specified in 5.1. The sensing surface of the heat flux transducer shall be centred at the height specified for the horizontal reference line on the specimens ( see 3.6.1 ) and at the distances along the calibration board from the vertical edge of the specimen holder closer to the external radiant heat source, as specified in Table 1. The plane of the sensing surface shall coincide with the exposed face of the'calibration board. 5.5.2 If only one heat flux transducer is used during calibration, then the holes cut in the board to accommodate the face of the heat flux transducer, that is, the sensor along with its water jacket, shall be provided with infill discs of the board material. The radiant heat flux at each point shall then be measured consecutively with one heat flux transducer.

shall be calibrated in accordance with the requirements given in Table 1. The specified values of external radiant heat flux in the plane of the exposed surface of the specimen along the horizontal reference line, shall be achieved to within a tolerance of 0.5 kW/m*. Suitable calibration procedures shall be employed for checking periodically. The radiating surface shall also be checked for the uniformity of temperature by visual inspection and by an optical pyrometer. of the External
Radiant Heat

6.2 Calibration
Source 6.2.1

The fuel and air Aowrates to the individual burner elements shall be adjusted so that there is a relatively uniform radiant heat output from the radiating surface of the external radiant heat source. 6.2.2 The calibration board shall be in thermal equilibrium before the external radiant heat flux values are determined. This shall be achieved by mounting the calibration board in place of the specimen in the specimen holder and placing these in the test position during the heating up period. External radiant heat flux at a specific distance ( say, 525 mm ) from the vertical edge of the calibration board closer to the radiating surface shall be recorded, a constant value of which shall be taken to denote thermal equilibrium.

LA.
- -.

A 2

P
1 228

I

I

c

All dimensions in millimetres. 1. Calibration board, 12 mm thick 2. FIG. Holes, 254, 6 numbers

5

CALIBRATION BOARD HAVING HOLES FOR THE TEST FLUX TRANSDUCER 7

IS 12777:1989 6.2.3 If one heat flux transducer is to be used during initial calibration according to 5.2.2, then the external radiant heat flux at each point specified in Table 1 shall be measured consecutively over a period not exceeding 10 min.
Table 1 External Radiant Heat Flux Along the Horizontal Reference Line on the Calibration Board (Clauses

e>Seal fa
g) h)

55.1, 6.1.1 and 6.2.3 )

Distance ( * ) along horizontal reference line, mm External radiant flux, kW/m' heat

75 225

315

525

675

825

30

20

15

il

j)
8 6

*Measured from the vertical edge board nearer to the external radiant

of ihe calibration heat source.

k)

any gaps between the specimen holder guides and the exposed surface of the specimen by a non-combustible fibrous insularion material. Within 5 s, swing the specimen holder and the specimen into the test position and immediately start the timing mechanism ( that is, the start of the test ). Extinguish the pilot flame 1 min after the start of the test. Terminate the test when the flame front reaches the 825 mm vertical reference line, or after 10 min has elapsed, whichever is the shorter. Swing the specimen holder into its standby position and remove the remains of the specimen construction. Clean any debris from the holder. Repeat the procedures given in (c) to (j) for each of the remaining specimens.
During Test

6.2.4 The fuel-air flowrates to the external radiant heat source, at which the external radiant heat flux distribution in the plane of the exposed surface of the specimen is in accordance with the values given in Table 1, shall be recorded and shall be maintained during the tests. 6.2.5 At these conditions, the temperatures of different points of the radiating surface shall be measured by an optical pyrometer. 7 TEST PROCEDURE
7.1 Procedure

7.2 Observations 7.2.1

Record the time at which the flame front crosses each intersection of a vertical reference line and the horizontal reference line (see 3.6.1). Also record the displacement of the flame front along the horizontal reference line at 1.5 and 10 minutes. 7.2.2 Throughout the test, carefully observe the behaviour of the product and make a special note of the following phenomena: a) Flashing, and b) Transitory flaming.

Following procedure ducting a test: Regulate a> external

shall be adopted

for con-

the fuel - air Aowrates to the radiant heat source to attain the values as determined during the calibration runs (see 6.2 ).

During the test, also record observations of associated phenomena, such as debris falling away from the specimen and whether it is flaming or not; occurrence of intumescence, ,excessive charrmg of the surface ahead of the flame front and/or deformation of the specimen. 7.2.3 During the first one minute of the test, any softening, melting or disintegration of material resulting in the specimen slumping out of the specimen holder, the detachment of the facing from the substrate or any other behaviour which results in the exposed surface not being available for the measurement of flame spread, shall render the test on that specimen invalid. However, should ignition of the exposed face occur during the application of the pilot flame, with a resultant flame front ahead of any such behaviour for the remaining period of application of the pilot flame, or if a flame spread in excess of 250 mm is recorded during the first 1.5 min of the test, then the test on that speci-men shall be deemed valid. 8

b) Allow the radiating

surface to achieve uniform heating of the radiating surface, as indicated by the optical pyrometer. The stable values of the temperatures of the radiating surface shall be the same as those recorded during the calibration runs. Otherwise, the fuel-air Rowrates shall be suitably adjusted.

Cl Ignite the pilot flame. 4 Remove the specimen, mounted

on the specimen holder ( including any backing boards) from the conditioning atmosphere and within 5 min, slide it into the specimen holder guides in its standby position at 90" or more from the test position ( see Fig. 3 ).

IS 12777 : 1989

If one or more invalid test results are obtained, it is permissible for up to a maximum of nine specimens to be tested in order to obtain the required six valid test results. If more than six specimens are necessary to provide a classification for the product ( see 9.1 ), a suffix `R' shall be added to the classification, and the reason for the suffix shall be clearly explained in the test report. In cases, where softening and/or other behaviour, which may affect the flame spread performance of any of test specimens, occurs after extinction of the plot flame, a suffix 9" shall be added to the classification and the reason for the suffix shall be clearly explained in the test report. 8 RECORDING
OF RESULTS 8.1 For each of the specimens

9 CLASSIFICATION 9.1 The results

OF RESULTS

recorded in 8.1 shall be used to obtain a classification for the product according to the criteria specified in Table 2. At least 5 of the 6 test specimens `for which valid test results have been obtained shall have a flame spread which does not exceed l-5 min limit and the limit for the entire test duration, specified for the designated class.
NOTE-The remaining specimen may limit but by not more than the assigned given in Table 2. exceed this tolerances,

10 REPORT 10.1 The test report

shall include the following: address of the testing

tested in accordasce with 7.1, the following shall be recorded: The time at which the flame front crosses the intersection ,of each vertical reference line and the horizontal reference line; The maximum extent of flame spread b) during -the first 1.5 min from the start of the test; C) The maximum extent of flame spread during the entire test, that is, 10 min or less ( see 7.1 ); and 4 The time at which the maximum extent of flame spread occurs.

The a>

name laboratory;

and

b) The name and address of the sponsor; 4 The name and address of the manufacturer 1supplier, if known; d) The date of test; e) A full description of the product ( and face ) tested, including trade name and/ or reference number if available, its construction, nominal thickness, colour, and where appropriate, density;
NOTE - It may of the product. be helpful to provide a sketch

the results reported in accordance with 8.1 include invalid tests, the reason for the testing being invalid shall be reported ( see 7.2.3) and such results shall be clearly indicated.
Table 2

8.2 If

f) The individual test results with 8;

in accordance

g) Observations made during the test and comments on any difficulties encountered during the test ( see 7.2.2 and 7.2.3 );

Flame Spread Classification ( Clause 9.1 )

Classification

Maximum Extent of Flame Spread, mm At 1`5 min Limit for 5 Specimens Limit for 1 Specimen 125 + 25 175 + 25
225 + 25 Exceeding

For the Test Duration Limit for 5 Specimens 125 390
650 the limits for Class 3

Limit for 1 Specimen 125 + `5
390 -I- 45 650 i- 75

Class 1 Class 2
Class 3 Class 4

12.5 175
1 !
225

9

IS12777:1989
h) Details of the form in which the specimens were tested ( material, composite or assembly ), the specimen thickness and,where appropriate, air gap, orientation, substrate, the face or faces subjected to the test, use of short specimens ( 3.3.1 ) and the use of short pieces to make up a specimen ( 3.3.2 ); j) The derived classification according to 9, including any suffix as appropriate; and The statement : `The test results relate only to the behaviour of the test specimens of the product under the particular conditions of test; they are not intended to be the sole criterion for assessing the potential fire hazard of the product in use'.

10

I

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bmau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hdian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No without the prior permission in writing of BIS. implementing the standard, of necessary details, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or edition. following reference: Dot : No. BDC 36 ( 4625 ) part of these publications may be reproduced in any form This does not preclude the free use, in the course of such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 7.5 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 86 62

Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

160036

2 18 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.

Printed at New India Printinti Press. Khuria. India

