**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9228 (1979) : Specification for Mono Seat Chairs for 
Chairlifts Used in Winter Sports [MED 6: Continuous Bulk 
Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC621*e6DW23: 685^9*33 ' IS: 9228- 1979 



5 
o 
o 



o 

Q 
ui 

I 

I 

E 
o 
o 

-O 

3 

<n 

& 

a 
o. 
o 
a: 



< 



H 

E 
o 
O 

« 

§ 

S3 
O 
4) 

CO 



o 

3 

g 

CO 

o 

X 



o 
>» 

§ 
§ 




Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2002) 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

MONO SEAT CHAIRS FOR CHAIRLIFTS USED IN 

WINTER SPORTS 



1. Scope 

,1,1 Covers the requirements for mono seat chairs for passenger chairlifts for winter sports. 

%2 This standard is applicable to chairs used on chairlifts working in anti-clockwise direction, the 
normal direction of movement of chairlift In exceptional cases where local conditions require 
^ovemeitt of the chairlift in the clockwise direction, the provision laid down in this specification may 
also be applied with the only difference that the suspension bar of the chairs seen from the front may 
fee to the left of the chair and therefore the form of the bar itself shall be an inversion of 'S'. 

1.3 This standard is applicable to chairs for installations, having a speed not exceeding 4'25 m/s and 
are suitable for areas experiencing temperatures in the following ranges: 

a) Up to -30°C, and 

b) Below -30*?fc and up to -60°C. 

2. Dimensions — Set? Fig. 1. 

3. Material 

3.1 For areas experiencing temperatures up to — 30°C the suspension bar shall be manufactured from 
seamless steel tubes having a nominal bore of 40 mm or above of Class Heavy conforming to 
IS: 1161-1968 'Steel tubes for structural purposes (second revision)' or equivalent high tensile 
tubes. For areas experiencing temperatures below — 30°C the material shall be as agreed between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 

3.2 The seat of the mono seat chairs shall be manufactured from either suitably treated and seasoned 
wood or fibreglass-reinforced plastic or foam cushions suitably lined or high strength aluminium 
alloy. 

3.3 Safety bars shall preferably be manufactured from metallic material. Other material like wood, 
nylon, etc, may be used provided the requirements laid down in 5.2 are satisfied. 

4. General Requirements 

4.1 When tfie chair is viewed from the front, the suspension bar shall have a shape of 'S\ The 'S' 
shape shall permit the free passage of the suspension bar along the line of the ropeway sloping at 90° 
and in the presence of supporting batteries/rollers/sheaves of standard dimensions when the chair is 
inclined in the transverse direction at 7° with respect to the vertical and at an inclination of 20° 
longitudinally. 

4.2 The ends of the suspension bar shall be welded with caps so that it is weather tight. 

4.3 The suspension bar shall enclose the seating only on the side or on the rear and below the seat. 

4.4 The arms of the chair shall have a smooth surface without any projections even for holding the 
free end of the safety bar of the seat when it is in the locked position. 

4.5 Any gap in the seat except in front and sides shall be not more than 25 mm. 

4.6 Each chair shall be supplied complete with special connecting piece of the suspension bar with 
the clamp shown by the fine continuous line in the figure and shall have bearings to permit free 
swing of 20° longitudinally. Th^ bearings shall be adequately lubricated. There shall be adequate 
clearance between this and stationary part of the ropeway even in the laterally swung position (see 
also IS : 5228-1969 Code of practice for construction of continuous movement monocable ropeways 
with fixed grips intended for transportation of passengers). 



Adopted 31 July 1979 



©January 1980, I SI 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002. 



IS: 9128- 1979 




VERTIC AL PLANE 
PASSING THROUGH 
THE CABLE AXIS 



SPECIAL CONNECTION 
PIECE OF SUSPENSION 
BAR OF THE CLAMP 



SUSPENSION BAR 




SAFETY BAR MAY 
BE VERTICAL OR 
HORIZONTAL 



2900 +50 



TUBE 



STRAIGHT LINE OF 
THE ARM FOR 
SUPPORT OF 
SAFETY BAR 




All dimensions in millimetres. 

Note— The figure illustrates only the dimensions. 

FIG. 1 DIMENSIONS FOR MONO SEAT CHAIR FOR CHAIRLIFTS 

4.7 The material used for welding shall not fail under sub-zero conditions. The low temperature dc 
method of welding shall be employed with low temperature electrodes to prevent brittle fracture at 
sub-zero temperature. 

4.8 To avoid failures, there shall be no notches, undercuts, sharp bends and sudden alterations of 
sections. 

4.9 For design purposes, the mass of passengers with complete sportsgear and winter clothing shall 
be taken as 85 kg/passenger. 

5. Tests Before conducting the tests, the monoseat chairs shall be conditioned as indicated 

below : 

a ) At — 60°C for two hours for areas experiencing a temperature between — 30°C and 
-60°C or 

b) /\t — 30°C for two hours for areas experiencing temperatures up 1o — 30°C. 

5.1 Testing of Suspension Bar, Seat and the Attachment of Seat to the Suspension Bar — The chair 
shall be supported by a horizontal bar passing through the bush of the special connecting piece of the 



IS: 9228- 1979 

suspension bar to the clamp and shall be able to support a test load of 4 kN applied graduaNy and 
centrally with respect to the seat, without any appreciable deformation. The deformation is the 
variation of the distance between the axis of the bush and the axis of the horizontal portion of the 
suspension bar below the chair (distance between XX and YY in Fig. 1 ). 

5.1.1 The residual deformation is not considered appreciable if it does not exceed 2 percent of the 
deformation measured under the test load. The measurements shall be carried out with a suitable 
gauge. 

5.1.2 During the test, the apparent elastic deformation shall be continuous. 

5.2 Testing of Safety Bar 

5.2.1 The safety bar assembly shall be tested in assembled condition with safety bar in closed 
position. The test shall cover all the joints and locking arrangements in the safety bar assembly. The 
test shall consist of applying a force of 15 daN in the direction perpendicular to the plane of rotation 
of safety bar, with safety bar in closed position. During the test no elastic deformation shall be 
noted when the load applied is held for 5 minutes. 

5.2.2 A test similar to 5.2.1 shall be carried out with a load of 30 daN applied on safety bar. There 
shall not be any permanent deformation of any part of the assembly after the test when the test is 
repeated ten times in an hour. 

5.3 Crack Detect/on Test — All components shall be free from cracks and blow-holes. 

6. Marking — Each chair shall be marked with the manufacturer's name or recognized trade-mark, 
the temperature limitations imposed for the chair and the load for which the chair is suitable. 

Note — These markings shall only be marked on the seat and shall not be on any load bearing portion. 

6.1 IS/ Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard covers the requirements for mono seat chairs for chairiifts used in winter sports 
such as skiing and are suitable for use in areas experiencing temperatures ranging either from 0° to 
~30°C or — 30°C to — 60X. 

This standard is one of the series of the Indian Standards to be formulated on aerial 
ropeways. Other standards published so far in the series are given below: 

IS: 5228-1969 Code of practice for construction of continuous movement monocable ropeways 
with fixed grips intended for transportation of passengers 

IS : 5229-1969 Code of practice for construction of continuous movement monocable ropeways with 
automatic grips intended for transportation of passengers 

IS: 5230-1969 Code of practice for construction of continuous to-and-fro movement bicable 
ropeways intended for transportation of passengers 

IS : 7649-1974 Glossary of terms used in connections with aerial ropeways and cableways 

IS : 9047 ( Part I )-1978 Data sheet for aerial ropeways and cableways : Part l Data to be supplied 
by intending purchaser for aerial system for transportation of goods 

In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from UNI 6452- 
1969 "Funicoiari aeree — Seggiola monoposto per seggiovie — Dimension! caratteristiche e prove" 
(Aerial cableways — Monoseat chair for chairiifts — Dimensions, characteristics and tests) issued 
by Ente Nazionale Italiano Di Unificazione, Milano. 



Printed at Delhi Printers, Delhi, India 



