U DC 621.642'17'036

[SSS'I 41

: 665'725 : 006'76
Indian Standard

IS : 8198 (Part

5) -1984

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

STEEL
m 1 I

CODE CYLINDERS
PART

OF PRACTICE FOR FOR COMPRESSED
PETROLEUM GAS ( First Revision)

GASES
( LPG)

j

5 LIQUEFIED

1. Scope - This standard ( Part 5) covers filling, steel cylinders for the storage and transportation 500 ml water capacity.

inspection, of liquefied .`*.

testing and maintenance of portable petroleum gas in cylinders exceeding

2. Terminology 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terminology given in IS : 7241-1981 in gas cylinder technology (first revision )' shall apply. 3. Approved Specifications for Manufacture `Glossary of terms used

3.1 The cylinders used for the storage and transportation of liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) shall conform to one of the specifications approved by the statutory authority. A list of approved speci: fications is given in Appendix A. 4. Filling 4.1 inspection Before Fillingexamination to ensure that : a) The cylinder b) The cylinder c) All statutory with; Before filling any cylinder, the filler shall subject it to a thorough authority;

is manufactured

to a specification

approved

by the statutory

is not due for retesting requirements in

as required under 6; of markings, valve fittings and painting and for visual are complied

respect outlet

d) The valve and its parts including

threads are in good condition;

e) The cylinder does not have excessive dents [see IS : 5845-1984 Code of practice inspection of low pressure gas cylinders in use (first revision ) 1.

4.2 Empty cylinders which have been involved in a fire should not be refilled. They should carefully inspected by a competent person to assess the damage, if any, caused to the cylinders the fire; and also to advise the repairs to cylinders, if required ( see IS : 5845-1984).

be by

4.3 Filling RatioCylinders for liquefied petroleum gas shall not be filled in excess of the filling ratio specified by the statutory authority [see also IS : 3710-1978 Filling ratios for low pressure liquefiable gases ( first revision) ] based on the design of the cylinder and the chemical composition of LPG being filled. The amount of gas charge into the cylinder shall be determined by weighing. The weight shall be checked if after the cylinder has been disconnected from the charging line. 4.4 Leakage -All cylinders shall be carefully examined for leaks after filling. be emptied in approved safe location and inspected for cause of leakage. I 4.4.1 For venting, the cylinder shall be placed in a vertical the procedure laid down in 4.4.2 and 4.4.3. 4.4.2 Area around the cylinder valve opened to vent the cylinder. shall be cordoned position Leaky cylinders shall

in an open

space,

observing

. nut shall be removed and the

off. The security

4.4.3 The operation shall be carried out in an open space away from any building or drains with a minimum IO metres clear distance around the cylinder and where the esca.ping gases shall disperse into the air without creating a hazard or constituting a public nuisance. Care shall always be taken to insure that no sources of ignition, of whatsoever nature, are brought into the cordoned area. Apart from excluding entry of all sources of ignition it shall be ensured that no sparks are created by tools, shoe nails, etc, striking metallic or concreted surfaces.

Adopted I

19 October 1984 INDIAN
MANAK

0

March

1985, ISI INSTlTUTloN
ZAFAR MARG

Gr 3

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS:8198

(Part5)

-1984
without residual gas shall be either purged or evacuated at the filling is not

4.4.4 All cylinders received plant before filling with LPG.

the filler shall ensure that the cylinder 4.4.5 Before a cylinder leaves any filling station, leaking from any part and valve and the cylinder is in order in all respects. 5. Marking 5.1 Marking permanently and Labelling

- Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders shall have the following markings in letter/figure, stamped on them, either at footring or on any non-pressure part of the cylinder: of owner and manufacturer; has been manufactured;

a) d 4 e)

Serial number and identification to which cylinder

b) Specification
Maximum

working

pressure; test; with valve fitted, but excluding

Test pressure, month or quarter and year of last hydrostatic Tare of cylinder, (It shall be the cylinder cap and security nut); litres; and mark. weight

of empty cylinder

f) Water capacity in s-l)Inspector's official

5.2 Colour Identification - Each cylinder shall be painted in accordance with the requirements of IS : 4379-1981 `Identification of the contents of industrial gas cylinders (first revision)' in use, and also, if required, in accordance with the regulations indicated in the Red Tariff for conveyance by rail of explosives and other dangerous goods published by Indian Railway Conference Association. 6. Periodic Inspection and Testing

6.1 Cylinders are subjected to periodic inspection and testing to ensure that they are safe for further use. In the case of LPG, the periodic inspection interval is not to exceed 5 years ( see IS : 8868-1978 Periodical inspection interval of gas cylinders in use) The periodic testing consists of :

a>Visual
b)

Inspection

and internal
Hydrostatic

- To be acceptable examination in accordance

cylinders shall satisfy with IS : 5845-1984.

the

requirements

of external

Test - The test pressure shall be retained for a period of not less than 30 Any reduction in pressure noticed during this retention period or any leakage, visible bulge or deformation shall be treated as a case of failure of the test. In all cases, the inside of the cylinder shall be dried after carrying out hydrostatic test before filling.

seconds.

cl

Weighing - Cylinders shall be weighed and if the tare is less than 95 percent of the original tare marked on the cylinder, the cylinder shall be condemned.

d) Checking of ValvesPrior to the hydrostatic test, the valves shall be removed and the threads examined for distortion and suitability for re-use. Valves or parts of the valves which are not in serviceable condition shall be reconditioned or renewed as necessary. 6.2 Periodic inspection sitate it, as for instance, 7. Repair of Cylinders shall also be carrled out on cylinders whenever special circumstances when the cylinder shows a serious damage or is exposed to fire. and Attachments and inspection of cylinders shall be undertaken by organizations approved by neces-

7.0 General - Repair the statutory authority.

7.0.1 Before commencing any major repairs, the valves shall be removed and the cylinders gasfreed. Gas-freeing shall be carried out preferably by steaming for at least 10 minutes. If steam is not available, the cylinders shall be filled to overflowing with water and allowed to stand for one hour. They shall be emptied, refilled with water and emptied again.

7.0.2 out.

Cylinders

shall

always

be checked to ensure that they are gas-free before hot work is carried

7.1 Dent Removal
7.1 .I Hot dedenting stress-relieved.

shall

not

be permitted.

Subsequent

to cold dedenting

the cylinder

shall be

2

IS : 8198 ( Part 5 ) - 1984 7.1.I .I Hot dedenting may however be permitted if the inspecting authority is satisfied verification of markings on the cylinder or certificates pertaining thereto, that the cylinder originally normalized. Cylinders so dedented shall be again normalized.
7.1.2 Removal of small dents shall be done by hydraulic pressure used should not exceed the test pressure of the cylinder. pressure on a cold cylinder; after was

but the

7.1.3 For large dents which are within the permissible limits specified in IS : 5845-1984, the cylinder shall be partially filled with water and positioned so that the dent is uppermost and in the air space. The cylinder shall be fitted with a pressure gauge to record the pressure inside the cylinder, after connecting the cylinder to an air pressuring system. The area of the dent shall be heated carefully with an oxygen-gas blow pipe and the pressure inside the cylinder shall be slowly raised until the dent disappears. Very light dressing or tapping with a light weight hammer is permissible while the steel is hot. 7.2 Repair of Seams - Cylinders welded or brazed seams provided a) if the original b) the cylinder c) after and heat is heat-treated treatment the may be withdrawn that : after repair; cylinder is subjected to the hydrostatic test and the pneumatic test; from -service to carry out repairs of pinholes in

seams were welded,

the repair is done by welding;

d) adequate records of such repairs are kept. 7.3 When footrings or valve protection rings or handles are removed and re-welded the cylinder shall be subsequently stress-relieved or normalized. 8. Valves and Pressure Regulators to the cylinder,

8.1 Valve Fittings - Valve fittings used on LPG cylinders shall conform to IS : 8737 ( Part 1 )-I979 `Valve fittings for use with liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG )' cylinders for more than 5-litre water capacity: Part 1 Valve fittings for replacement purposes' or IS : 8737 ( Part 2 )-I 978 ' Valve fittings for use with liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) cylinders for more than 5-litre water capacity : Part 2 Valve fittings for newly manufactured LPG cylinders' regarding material, design, construction and testing. The part of the valve in contact with the contents of the cylinder shall be of metal which does not react with the gas and shall be capable of withstanding the test pressure of the cylinder. 8.2 Pressure Regulators - Pressure regulators used on LPG cylinders shall conform ` Low pressure regulator for use with liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG ) mixtures `. 9. Handling, 9.1 Handling
9.1.1

to IS : 9798-1981

Use, Storage
and Use

and Transportation
m

Those responsible for the handling and use of cylinders should understand the characteristics of LPG [ see 4576-l 978 Specifications for liquefied petroleum gas ( LPG >I and it is essential that they be trained in good practices relating to their job. 9.1.2 As empty cylinders are not in fact truly empty but contain LPG vapour, their handling storage shall, in general, be subjected to the same considerations as for full ones. and

9.1.3 Cylinders represent a very heavy capital outlay, and their life depends almost entirely on the care with which they are handled and stored at all times. Cylinders shall, therefore, be well cared for. 9.1.4 Cylinders footrings. shall not be rolled on their sides but shall always be carried or rolled on their

9.1.5 Before cylinders are handed over for transportation, it shall be ensured that the cylinders are not leaking from any part and valve. Also it shall be ensured that the valve outlet is fitted with a safety cap and that the valve is in order in all respects. 9.1.6 cylinder 9.1.7 Cylinders shall not be handled is required for connecting UP. Cylinders shall not be dropped. in any way which shall cause the seal to break before the

9.1.8 Cylinders shall always be used in an upright position, and be so placed that they cannot be knockedlover. Open flames, lights, lighting of fires and smoking shall be prohibited in close proximity of any cylinder containing liquefied petroleum gas, except those while in use for welding, cutting or heating. 3

IS:8198

(Part5)-1984
slings shall not be used

9.1.9 Unless proper means of attaching rope or chain slings are provided, in the handling of cylinders. Magnetic devices shall not be used for lifting. 9.1.lO When cylinders supervision of a competent 9.2 Storage 9.2.1 Full and statutory rules. empty cylinders shall be stored only in places nuts, seal

have to be vented, the operation shall be carried out in the open, under the person, taking the necessary safety precautions.

constructed

in accordance with plugs and valve

9.2.2 Cylinders shall always protection caps, where provided, 9.2.3 9.2.4 Cylinders Cylinders

be stored with in position. ground

security

plugs or transit

shall not be stored below

level or on upper floors. substances or vapours.

shall not be stored near corrosive

9.2.5 Cylinders shall not be stored heated, for example, near boilers. 9.2.6 9.2.7 sheds. Cylinder Empty

in positions

or places where they are liable to become overat floor level and at eaves level.

storage places shall be adequately cylinders which have not been

ventilated

made gas-free shall be kept inside approved storage shall be

9.2.8 Cylinders shall be stored on solid floors; alternatively, the space beneath the flooring adequately ventilated to the open air and not to any other room or compartment. 9.2.9 Cylinder storage of combustible material. becoming blocked.

spaces shall be kept clean at all times in order to prevent the accumulation Particular attention shall be given to ventilating apertures to prevent their direct access to the cylinder storage shall open outwards. persons from having access

9.2.10 All doors or gates giving

9.2.11 Adequate precautions shall be taken' to prevent unauthorized to LPG cylinders kept in the storage shed or storage areas.

9.2.12 Vehicles not specifically designed or adapted for operation in flammable atmospheresshall be forbidden from entering inside storage compartments or from approaching nearer than two metres from cylinder stacks in outdoor storage. 9.2.13 Smoking and the use of naked flames, etc, in storage spaces, whether indoor or outdoor, shall be prohibited. Further a notice to this effect shall be permanently and prominently displayed immediately adjacent to any means of access to the storage space. 9.2.14 If artificial lighting is used in the store or storage space, it shall be electric. Any electric fitting shall be of the flame-proof type and wiring shall be in robust conduit to protect it from damage. No storage shed shall be opened and no handling of LPG cylinders shall be permitted between sunset and sunrise except where approved lighting is exclusively used. 9.2.15 If any accident, fire or explosion occurs involving the cylinder which is attended with loss of life or serious injury to person or property, this shall be immediately reported to the nearest magistrate or to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station and by express telegram to the Chief Controller of Explosives as required under the Gas Cylinders Rules, 1981. 9.2.16 Methods 9.2.16.1 When prevent their rolling
of stacking

LPG cylinders are stacked horizontally they shall be restrained (wedged) apart due to the weight of the stack or due to the removal of any cylinder.

to

9.2.16.2 A gangway approximately 0'6 metre wide enough to permit access and manoeuvring of cylinders shall be left between stacks of single or double rows and between stacks and the walls of indoor storage compartments. 9.2.16.3 Generally, cylinders is recommended that those which 9.3
Transportation

may be stacked vertically (valve upper most) or horizontally incorporate safety relief devices should be piled vertically.

but it

9.3.1 Every vehicle on which sides and back of adequate height

LPG cylinders are transported shall be of strong construction and shall be maintained in good condition. 4

with

IS:8198(Part5)-1984
9.3.2 Every vehicle while by at least one person. LPG cylinders. engaged in the transport of LPG cylinders shall be constantly attended The attendants shall have basic knowledge of fire hazards attached to

to

9.3.3 The speed limit State Transport Authority,

of the vehicle shall not exceed 50 km/h. it shall be observed.

If a lower limit

is imposed by the

9.3.4 No LPG cylinders shall be carried in public service vehicles goods shall be permitted on vehicles oarrying LPG cylinders. 9.3.5 A suitable dry powder or carbon vehicles used for carriage of LPG cylinders. 9.3.6 ignition dioxide

carrying

passengers, and no other

type of fire extinguisher

shall be provided

on the

No person in a vehicle carrying LPG cylinders shall be permitted in the vicinity of the vehicle.

shall smoke, and no fire or other source of

9.3.7 LPG cylinders shall be so transported as not to project sides of ends of the vehicle in which they are transported.

in the horizontal

plane beyond the

There shall be no sharp projection on the inside of the vehicle and adequate measures shall be taken to prevent cylinders falling off the vehicle and being subjected to rough handling, excessive shocks or local stress. 9.3.8 Cylinders transported in the vehicles shall be blocked or braced and be so secured as to prevent movement or falling down. In no case cylinders shall be so loaded into vehicles that they may bounce or may strike each other or other objects. 9.3.9 When cylinders Red Tariff Rules. 9.3.10 No lifting are transported by rail, this shall be done in accordance with the Railway

magnet or hook shall be used in loading

or unloading

of cylinders. its valve protected against

9.3.11 Every cylinder containing LPG when damage in a suitable manner, unless it is securely 9.3.12 During transportation of cylinders

transported, shall have packed in a box or crate.

vehicles

shall be parked in safe areas. lf, by

9.3.13 Wherever possible, cylinders shall be stacked in vertical position during transportation. however, they are stacked horizontally, the maximum height of the stack shall be governed consideration of the weight that a cylinder in the bottom tier is able to withstand. IO.
with

Disposal

of Condemned

Cylinders

10.1 Cylinders including the attachments, such as footrings and handle rings which do not comply the requirements of inspection and testing and which have been rejected and recommended to be destroyed shall be disposed of in accordance with IS : 9200-1979 `Methods of disposal of unserviceable compressed gas cylinders'. 10.2 History sheets
of such cylinders shall be closed and kept on record

for period of one year.

11. General 11.1 The jointing compound used at tant to LPG and which remains plastic use in liquefied petroleum gas appliances a gas-tight seal, jointing compound shall 11.2 In using the code, IS : 4576-1978, India, shall be borne in mind. different in the system shall be of a type which is resis966 Specification for jointing compounds for and installations ). In any joint in which the thread provides be used. lists the various types of LPG generally marketed in joints

( see IS : 3465-l

which

II .3 Safety devices, if used, shall be of approved
safety devices for gas cylinders).

design

( see IS : 5903-1970

Recommendation

for

5

IS:8198

(Part

5)

-1984 APPENDIX
( Clause 3.1 ) LIST OF APPROVED SPECIFICATIONS authority for use in India is given below: 5-litre water capacity for low

A
`i

A-l.

The list of specifications IS : 3196-1983 IS : 7142-1974 BS 401 : 1931

approved

by the statutory

Welded low carbon steel gas cylinders exceeding pressure liquefiable gases ( third revision ) Welded low carbon steel gas cylinders exceeding 5-litre water capacity Steel cylinders Institution. for storage and transport for

low pressure liquefiable ., gases. British

gases not Standards
on

of liquefiable

list is not comprehensive as new specifications are added from time to time. Note -The the subject can be had from the Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur.

Up-to-date

information

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

Liquefied petroleum gases are hazardous if allowed to escape. The low visocity of these gases compared to heavier petroleum fractions greatly aggravates the problem of containing them. To handle them as liquids they should be connfied under pressure or be held at low temperature or both. If the liquid leaks from a cylinder, it will quickly vaporize, mix with air and probably develop a flammable mixture. The hazard here is increased because most liquefied petroleum gases are heavier than air and will spread along the ground where there are many possible sources of ignition. Manufacturers, fillers and users of the gas cylinders covered by this standard should be familiar with the precautions laid down in this standard in order to ensure safe and efficient operating conditions. For general information on LPG and other gases conveyed in cylinders, SP : 9-1978 ' Technical data sheet for gases conveyed in cylinders `, may also be referred. For the purpose of easy reference, the standard Atmospheric gases Hydrogen gas High pressure liquefiable Dissolved Liquefied Liquefied acetylene petroleum chlorine gas gas (LPG) gas refrigerant gas gases gases is being issued in different parts as under:

Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 Part 6 Part 7 Part 8 Part 9

Ammonia gas Common organic Sulphur dioxide

Part 10 Methyl bromide gas Part 11 Methyl chloride gas Part 12 Gases for medical use. Installations' generally refer to the installations at factories and the In LPG trade, `Industrial `Commercial Installations' relate to the larger type of catering establishments, such as hotels, restaurants and canteens. In these applications, the LPG installations generally consist of a large number of cylinders and are handled by relatively unskilled workers. Separate Indian Standards for such installations IS : 6044 (Part I)-1971 ' Code of practice for Part 1 Commercial and industrial installations ' and liquefied petroleum gas cylinder installations: IS : 6044 (Part 2)-1972 ' Code of practice for liquefied petroleum gas cylinder installations: Part 2 Industrial, commercial and domestic bulk storage installations' have been prepared for the guidance of consumers. Manufacture, possession and use of liquefied petroleum gas when contained in cylinders is regulated under the Gas Cylinder Rules, 1981 of the Government of India as amended from time to time. Although this standard has been prepared in consultation and agreement with the statutory authorities under these rules, should anything in the standard conflict with the provisions of Gas Cylinders Rules, the latter shall be adhered to. 6
Printed at Printrade. New Delhi, India

