IRATA ATH IS 14350 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


WAT SEIT ch Tere Career HaT 


(TECH FAUT ) 


Code for Hygienic Conditions for 
Sugar Factories 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.100; 67.180.10 


© BIS 2023 


Ueda Ah SALT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Sey AA HAM, 9 FR Me MHL AM, Ay Reet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2023 Price Group 6 


Sugar Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Sugar Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Consumers do not have the available knowledge or means of determining the hygienic quality of the food they 
purchase. For this, they rely on the hygienic standards of various industries that prepare and handle food materials. 
Unless the factory producing the food is governed by a strict hygienic code in respect of plant layout and 
personnel, the quality of food produced cannot be considered as safe. These factors have been taken into 
consideration in the preparation of this code. 


This standard was originally published in 1996. In this first revision, application of general principles of food 
hygiene as per IS 2491 has been included as a basic requirement and requirements relating to employee hygiene 
and checklist have been updated. One amendment issued to the standard has also been incorporated in the revision. 


In the formulation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 and the rules framed thereunder. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed 
under these, wherever applicable. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14350 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 
SUGAR FACTORIES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the hygienic conditions 
required for establishing and maintaining a sugar 
factory. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 2491 : 2013 Food hygiene — General 
principles — Code of 


practice (third revision) 


IS 3103 : 1975 Code of practice for 
industrial ventilation (first 
revision) 

IS 3646 (Partl) Code of practice for 

: 1992 interior illumination: Part 


1 General requirements 
and recommendations for 
working interiors (first 


revision) 

IS 4251 : 1967 Quality tolerances for 
water for processed food 
industry 


IS 6911 : 2017 Stainless steel plate, sheet 
and strip — Specification 


(second revision) 


3 SITE 


A sugar factory shall preferably be situated in some 
open, clean and healthy surroundings, away from 
garbage dumps; open sewage drains or other places 
likely to breed flies and rodents. It shall be free from 
sources of obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours or 
excessive dust. 


4 BUILDING 


4.1 The structure shall be of permanent nature and 
shall be suitable in size, construction and design to 
facilitate maintenance and hygienic operations for 
processing purposes. It should provide sufficient 
space for housing of equipment and storage of 
materials (raw as well as finished 
products/byproducts) as is necessary for hygienic 
operations. The material of construction shall be of 
brick, plaster, cement, concrete, tile or any other 
equivalent-materials which ensure cleanliness to 
protect contamination. 


Construction of the building shall be such that it 
shall be rodent proof and bird proof. The sugar 
bagging house shall also be fly proof, and rodent 
proof. 


4.2 No portion of building shall be used for domestic 
purposes or other type of food preparations unless 
separated by suitable partitions or locations or other 
effective means so as to avoid contamination of the 
product with undesirable micro-organisms, odour, 
chemicals, filth or other foreign material. 


4.3 Ventilation and Lighting 


The premises shall be adequately lighted and 
ventilated. Ventilation and lighting shall also be in 
accordance with the Factories Act, 1948 
[see 1S 3103 and IS 3646 (Part 1)]. Exhaust fan shall 
be provided wherever necessary. Attention shall be 
given to provide proper ventilation to the equipment 
producing excessive heat, steam, vapors and gases. 


4.4 Floor 


The floor shall be smooth, washable, properly 
sloped to gullies connected to sewers or drains. It 
shall be impervious to water and not affected to 
weak acids, alkalis or steam. Cemented floor shall 
be made for work room (ground floor), store room 
and godowns. 


4.5 Walls 


Internal walls shall have smooth, non-absorbent 
light coloured surface, free from crevices and sharp 
angles, to facilitate their efficient cleaning. The 
junction of the floor with the walls and the junction 


IS 14350 : 2023 


between the two walls shall be rounded to prevent 
accumulation of dust. 


4.6 Repairs 


The building shall be maintained in a proper state of 
repair and cleanliness tall times. Whenever required, 
it may be lime washed, painted, disinfected, 
disinfested and deodorized. 


4.7 Drainage 


4.7.1 Effective drainage shall be provided to drain 
off a large quantity of water used for washing 
machinery, equipment, furniture, floor, etc, 15 cm to 
30 cm half circular drains with glazed pipe at the 
bottom shall be provided. The slope of the floor shall 
be towards the drains. The drain openings shall be 
provided with screen traps to prevent solid matter 
from clogging the drains. The ends of the drains 
leading to the outside of the factory shall be made 
rodent proof by providing screens. The screens shall 
be examined periodically and replaced or cleaned, if 
necessary. The drains shall have water seals and 
shall be cleaned periodically to keep them free from 
any deposits and to prevent habitation of 
cockroaches and rodents in closed areas of drains. 
Ends of the drainage shall lead to the effluent 
treatment plant of the factory. 


4.7.2 Drains carrying high pollution load effluent for 
example juice, syrup, molasses and filter mud, etc, 
shall be segregated from those carrying lower 
pollution loads, for example, injection, cooling and 
condensate water. Oil and grease traps shall be 
provided in mill house and other drains wherever 
necessary to separate them from other organic the 
matter. 


5 RAW MATERIAL HANDLING 


5.1 The raw material to be accepted for processing 
shall not contain any visible decomposition or 
discoloration. 


5.2 The raw material selected for sugar processing 
shall be stored in premises which will protect it 
against contamination and infestation and minimize 
deterioration. 


6 FACTORY AND PROCESSING HYGIENE 


6.1 The sugar factory shall follow the general 
practices of food hygiene as outlined in IS 2491. 


6.2 The floors shall be swept periodically followed 
by sprinkling with water and thereafter rubbing with 
bagasse for drying which shall be sent to the boiler. 


6.3 Waste and rubbish shall be collected in covered 
receptacles and shall not be allowed to scatter on the 


floor of the unit. It should be disposed off in a 
manner which is not detrimental to the hygiene of 
the surroundings after its disposal. 


6.4 To keep check over microbial activity during 
juice extraction, mills shall be thoroughly steamed 
in every shift with live steam of 5 kg/cm? to 7 kg/cm? 
or disinfected by any other suitable method. During 
long stoppages all the juices shall be removed from 
the mills, gutters, imbibition tanks and then they 
shall be washed with hot water followed by 
steaming. Judicious use of disinfectant shall be 
made to keep the growth of micro-organisms under 
check. 


6.5 Leakages in the juice, syrup and molasses pumps 
etc, spillage from tanks and pipelines shall be 
avoided minimized. Leakages depending upon their 
quantum shall be removed from time to time either 
by soaking in bagasse or by lifting through pump 
and sent to the process again. 


6.6 Filter cake shall be discharged directly into the 
trucks or trolleys for its disposal. Its accumulation in 
the factory shall be avoided as it provides a rich 
substrate for the growth of micro-organisms. 


6.7 The factory effluents shall be disposed off from 
the factory in a manner which is not detrimental to 
the hygiene of the factory and its surroundings. The 
factory effluents shall be suitably treated before final 
disposal, such that the treated effluents conform to 
the standard prescribed by the State Pollution 
Control Board. 


6.8 All water disposal lines shall be large enough to 
carry peak loads. All lines shall be water tight and 
the waste disposal shall be effected in such a manner 
as not to cause contamination with potable water 
supplies. 


6.9 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and 
potable water (see IS 4251). The storage tank for 
water shall, unless completely sealed, be kept 
covered with tight fitting lids, examined and cleaned 
regularly. 


6.10 In  centrifugals, uncontaminated water, 
preferably, condensate water, shall be used in order 
to produce sugar almost free from contamination. 


6.11 Suitable fly ash arrestors shall be installed 
before discharging the flue gases in the atmosphere 
and the suspended particulate matter (SPM) of flue 
gases shall conform to the emission standards 
prescribed by the State Pollution Control Board. 


6.12 Perfect sanitary conditions shall be maintained 
during packing and storage of sugar. Sugar godowns 


shall be kept dry and air tight to prevent growth of 
micro-organisms. 


6.13 Proper places shall be provided for storage of 
brooms, brushes, buckets and other cleaning gear. 
Sugar dust catchers/collectors should be provided in 
the drier house. 


6.14 Window glass and light fittings shall be 
maintained clean and dust-free at all times. 


6.15 There shall be no cobwebs in any part of the 
unit, birds, rodents and domestic animals shall not 
be allowed in any part of the unit. 


6.16 No lavatory, sink, cesspool or garbage shall be 
situated or maintained in such a manner that odours 
fumes there from pervade any room where the 
product or raw materials are prepared or stored. 


7 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT HYGIENE 
7.1 Materials for Equipment 


7.1.1 All surfaces corning in contact with the 
products from sugar factory shall be smooth, free 
from pits, crevices and loose scales and shall be non- 
absorbent preferably of stainless steel (see IS 6911). 
Besides surfaces shall be non-toxic and unaffected 
by sugar house products and cleaning chemicals. 


7.1.2 Galvanized sheets shall not be used at places 
where it comes in contact with sugar house products. 
stainless steel may be used. 


7.1.3 Cadmium and lead shall not be used where 
they may come in contact with sugar house products. 


7.1.4 All gasketing and packing materials shall be 
non-porous, non-absorbent and fitted in a manner 
such that stagnation of material between the 
gasketed joints is avoided and proper cleaning is 
possible. 


7.1.5 Wherever sugar house products normally come 
in contact with the equipment surfaces, coatings 
used as a lining to prevent corrosion of the base 
material of the equipment shall be non-toxic, 
unaffected by and inert to the sugar house product in 
contact with it or cleaning chemicals used on it. 
Furthermore, such coatings shall be non-absorbent, 
odourless and tasteless. 


7.2 Installation of Equipment 


7.2.1 All equipment shall be installed in foundation 
of durable, easily cleanable material. 


7.2.2 The placement and design features of the 
equipment in use shall be such that they can be 
cleaned easily. An ample supply of steam and water, 
hose, brushes, cleaning chemicals and equipments 


IS 14350 : 2023 


necessary for the proper cleaning of machineries and 
equipments shall be available. 


7.2.3 Whenever equipment passes through walls or 
floors, it shall be sealed or sufficient clearance shall 
be allowed to permit inspection, cleaning and 
maintenance. 


7.2.4 All electrical connections, such as switch 
boxes, control boxes, conduit cables shall be 
installed in such a way to facilitate proper cleaning, 
or be completely sealed to the equipment or wall. 


7.2.5 The entire processing system shall be cleaned 
periodically. 


8 WATER SUPPLY 


8.1 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and 
potable water (see IS 4251). Running water under 
pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms and 
areas in which food is handled and equipments are 
washed. 


8.2 The equipment shall be so installed and used that 
back siphonage of liquid into the potable water lines 
is precluded. 


8.3 Hot and cold water in ample supply shall be 
provided for plant clean-up needs, where necessary. 


8.4 The storage tanks for water should, unless 
completely sealed, be kept covered with tight fitting 
lids, examined regularly and cleaned out at least 
once every six months. The date of the last cleaning 
and next cleaning shall be prominently displayed on 
the storage tanks. 


8.5 The water shall be periodically examined as 
desired by the Licensing Authority, chemically and 
bacteriologically. A record of such examination 
shall be maintained. 


9 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 


9.1 Every person employed in the sugar factory shall 
be healthy and shall not be suffering from 
tuberculosis or any communicable disease. A 
certificate to this effect shall be furnished by the 
person from an authorized registered medical 
practitioner. 


The employees shall notify the medical officer of the 
factory and the management, cases of fever, 
vomiting, diarrhea, typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts 
and sores and ulcers (however small), discharging 
ears and any other notifiable diseases occurring in 
their own homes and families. 


9.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short and 
clean and wash their hands with soap detergent and 
water before commencing work. No worker shall 


IS 14350 : 2023 


allow his hands or any part of his body or clothing 
to come in contact with the finished product. He/she 
should adopt strict hygienic practices so as to avoid 
adding any microbial contamination to the material. 
No workers shall be allowed to wear ornaments. 


9.3 All employees shall be inoculated and 
vaccinated against the enteric groups of diseases 
once a year. In case of an epidemic all workers shall 
be inoculated. 


9.4 No worker shall be allowed to work without 
proper tight clothing and footwear for bottom 
hygiene. 


9.5 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of 
tobacco in any form or chewing betel leaves shall be 
prohibited within the manufacturing, packing and 
storage area of the unit. Notice to this effect shall be 
prominently displayed and enforced. 


9.6 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences 
shall be provided, maintained and kept clean in 
every factory. The conveniences shall be properly 
lighted. Separate conveniences shall be provided for 
each gender, the conveniences shall always be 
maintained clean and in good repairs. 


9.7 No conveniences shall open directly into any 
work room in the factory. However, these should be 
conveniently situated and accessible to workers at 
all times while they are at the factory. 


9.8 Sufficient number of wash basins with adequate 
provision of nail brushes and soap, latrines and 
urinals in the prescribed manner should be provided. 
The wash basins shall be installed in or alongside the 
sanitary conveniences. 


9.9 Signs shall be displayed in attractive coloured 
posters on walls as reminders to include good 
hygiene and sanitation practice in employees. 


9.10 Workers shall wear mask, gloves, cap and shoes 
to avoid food safety contamination to those who are 
working in bagging area. 


9.11 Proper record shall be maintained for 
needle/knife used in dryer house/bagging house. 


10 CHECK LIST FOR  HYGIENE/ 
SANTTATION AND SAEFTY MEASURES 


10.1 A check list for use by a responsible officer of 
the management is given in Annex A. It shall be 
used at regular intervals, to ensure hygienic 
sanitation and safety measures of the unit. 


11 STORAGE 


11.1 Storage area shall be free from dampness and 
shall be rodent and fly proof. 


11.2 Separate storage space shall be provided for 
storing machinery, equipment, various chemicals 
etc. 


11.3 Insecticides and pesticides must be stored 
separately to prevent pick up of off-notes by the 
product. 


11.4 Damaged product bags to be stored separately 
to prevent contamination. 


IS 14350 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 10.1) 
CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENE AND SANITATION IN SUGAR FACTORIES 


A-1 SITE 


1) Are there any pesticide chemical/petrochemical leather or paper industries nearby? Yes/No 
2) Any cattle sheds and open sewage drains nearby? Yes/No 


3) Are there any stagnant effluents stagnating outside factory premises? Yes/No 


A-2 BUILDING 


1) Is any part of the building-being used for domestic purposes/food preparations without proper partitions? 
Yes/No 


2) Are the floors being maintained properly without any breakages/cracks/holes? Yes/No 
3) Are the roofs/ceiling free of water leakage? Yes/No 

4) Are the doors/windows having proper netting/mesh? Yes/No 

5) Are scheduled repairs, white wash, disinfection being carried out regularly? Yes/No 
6) Are the lights shielded to prevent broken glass contaminating the product? Yes/No 


A- 3 RAW MATERIAL HANDLING 
1) Are the raw material stored in clean and hygienic area? Yes/No 


Are the raw material received, free from visible decomposition or discoloration? Yes/No 


A-4 FACTORY AND PROCESS HYGIENE 


1) Are the floors swept/washed periodically? Yes/No 
2) Is the waste and rubbish kept in covered receptacles and disposed off regularly? Yes/No 


3) Is the leakage/spillage of juice/syrup/massacuite/molasses being bagasse cleaned/collected and sent to the 
process? Yes/No 


4) Is there any mould growth on the equipment? Yes/No 

5) Are the premises kept free from birds, rodents and flies? Yes/No 

6) Are the drains cleaned regularly? Yes/No 

7) Are the filter cake be discharged directly into the truck or trolleys? Yes/No 
8) Is there adequate supply of potable water? Yes/No 

9) Are suitable fly arrestors installed operating? Yes/No 


10) Are proper hygienic conditions maintained in packing and storing area? Yes/No 


IS 14350 : 2023 


11) Is place be provided for keeping brooms, brushes and other cleaning material? Yes/No 
12) Are the window glasses and light fittings cleaned periodically? Yes/No 
13) Are separate area provided for meal consumption away from production? Yes/No 


A-5 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 


1) Are the surfaces coming in contact with product be smooth, free from pits, crevices and loose scales? Yes/No 
2) Is the use of galvanized sheets be avoided where it comes contact with sugar house products? Yes/No 

3) Are the contamination of cadmium and lead be avoided coming in contact with sugar house products? Yes/No 
4) Are the gaskets and packing material non-porous, nonabsorbent type to facilitate cleaning? Yes/No 


5) Are the gaskets and packing material be used in a manner to avoid stagnation of material between the joints? 
Yes/No 


6) Are the inertness of the coatings/ lining to prevent corrosion be ensured? Yes/No 
7) Are the equipments installed on place which can be easily washed/cleaned? Yes/No 
8) Are the equipments designed/ installed to suit cleaning by chemicals, water and steam? Yes/No 


9) Are the equipments passing through wall properly installed to permit inspection, cleaning and maintenance? 
Yes/No 


10)Are the electrical installation installed in a manner to facilitate easy cleaning? Yes/No 


A-6 WATER SUPPLY 


1) Is sufficient potable water available for flushing the equipments? Yes/No 

2) Is hot and cold water supply be provided for cleaning the plant? Yes/No 

3) Are the storage tanks for water properly covered? Yes/No 

4) Are the storage tanks cleaned periodically? Yes/No 

5) Is the water being analyzed for its portability and records of such analysis being maintained? Yes/No 


A-7 STORAGE 


1) Is the storage place free from dampness? Yes/No 

2) Is the storage place rodent and fly proof? Yes/No 

3) Is separate place for keeping chemicals, machine parts, etc, provided? Yes/No 

4) Is storage of pesticides/insecticides isolated to avoid off notes to the products? Yes/No 


5) Is separate room provided for storage of damaged product bags? Yes/No 


IS 14350 : 2023 


ANNEX B 


(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Sugar Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 02 


Organization 
National Sugar Institute, Kanpur 


Army Service Core (ASC), New Delhi 


CONCERT, Chennai 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 


Food Safety Standards 
New Delhi 


Global Cane Sugar Ltd, New Delhi 


Authority of India, 


Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indian Sugar Exim Corporation, New Delhi 


Indian Sugar Mills Association, New Delhi 


MAARC Labs, Pune 
MANAS Industry, Nagpur 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


National Co-Operative Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


National Federation of Co-Operative Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


The Sugar Technologists Association of India, 
New Delhi 
Limited, 


Triveni Engineering & Industries 


Muzaffar Nagar 


Representative(s) 
SHRI NARENDRA MOHAN (Chairperson) 


LT COL B. B. SAHU 


SHRI R. SANTHANAM 
SHRI M. SOMASUNDARAM (Alternate) 


SHRI SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. KAMAT (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR PANWAR 
SHRI RAKESH KUMAR RANJAN (Alternate) 


MS APOORVA SRIVASTAVA 


DRG. S. C. RAO 
SHRI ANIL SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


DR A. D. PATHAK 
DR A. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


DR YOGESHWER SHUKLA 


SHRI RAJIV AGGARWAL 
SHRI RAJEEV KURUP (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. THAKUR 
SHRI DEEP MALIK (Alternate) 


DR VASUDHA KESKAR 
SHRI JEEVAN VASANT JADHAV 


SHRI SURESH CHANDRA 


SHRI K. P. VAISH 
SHRI N. K. SHARDA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAKESH P NAIKNAVARE 
SHRI S. SOMASUNDARAM (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY AWASTHI 
SHRI ANURAG GOYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH SINGH 
SHRI P. K. KHADELWAL (Alternate) 


IS 14350 : 2023 


Organization 


Tamil Nadu Sugar Corporation Limited (TASCO), 
Chennai 


Vasantdada Sugar Institute, Pune 


Walchand Nagar Industries 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI E. MUTHUVELAPPAN 


DR RAJEEV DANI 


SHRI D. R. SARDESHMUKH 
SHRI P. V. KAWADE (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI RAJPAL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 02 (21933). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


