**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14557 (1998) : Automotive Vehicles - Cooling Performance 
- Method of Measurement [TED 4: Automotive Braking Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



REAFFIRMS g'oO'Jb 

IS 14557: 1998 

Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — COOLING 
PERFORMANCE — METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 



ICS 040.01; 43.060.30 



OBIS 1998 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR M ARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1998 Price Group 2 



Automotive Chicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 8 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Automotive \fehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport 
Engineering Division Council. 

This standard is one in the series of Indian Standard being developed for Automotive testing of performance 
evaluation. 

The committee responsible for preparation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed 
or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off 
numerical values ( revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the 
same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 FEBRUARY 2006 

TO 

IS 14557 : 1998 AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — COOLING 

PERFORMANCE — METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 

( Page 1, clause 1, last sentence ) — Substitute 'coolant cooled engine' for 
'water cooled engines'. 

( Page 1, clause 2*1 ) — Substitute 'run-in' for 'run in'. 

( Page 1, clause 2.4 ) — Substitute 'running-in' jfcr 'running in'. 

( Page 1, clause 2.11 ) — Substitute 'as per manufacturer's specification' 
for 'as per release'. 

( Page 1, clause 2,12 ) — Substitute '90 percent of its capacity specified' 
for '90 percent minimum of its capacity'. 

( Page 1, clause 3 ) — Add the following at the end: 

d) Wind air velocity : Less than 3 m/sec' 

( Page 1, clause 4.1 ) — Add the following at the end: 

'Accessories affecting oooling system (like air conditioning, interoooler, EGR 
cooling) should be operated' 

[ Page 2, clause 4*4(b) ] — Substitute 'at radiator inlet' for 'at inlet'. 

( Page 2, clause 4.5 ) — Substitute the following for existing clause: 

'Record the temperatures at radiator inlet, radiator outlet, ambient and oil 
temperature in the stabilized condition.' 

( Page 2, clause 4.7 ) — Substitute 'coolant temperature at radiator inlet' 
for 'coolant temperature' and add the following at the end: 

'Measure the difference between maximum stabilized coolant temperature at 
inlet and outlet of radiator. ' 



(TCD4) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, N«w Delhi, India 



IS 14557 : 1998 

Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — COOLING 
PERFORMANCE — METHOD OF MEASUREMENT 



1 SCOPE 

This Standard outlines the general practice for 
measurement of cooling performance of automotive 
vehicles other than two and three wheelers. This is 
applicable to all road vehicles fitted with water cooled 
engines. 

2 VEHICLE PREPARATION 

2.1 The vehicle shall be run in as per the practice 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer. 

2.2 The vehicle shall conform in all its parts, 
components and systems to the technical specifica- 
tion declared by the manufacturer, especially cooling 
systems. If any other coolant or additives are used 
solely or along with water as a coolant; the water to 
coolant or additives ratio shall be as per the 
recommendations of the vehicle manufacturer. Prior 
to testing the coolant system shall be filled to at least 
90 percent of its capacity specified by the vehicle 
manufacturer. 

2.3 The adjustment of fuel system, ignition system, 
adjustment of brakes, clutch, idling speed and grades, 
quality, quantity of lubricants for various moving parts, 
etc, shall conform to the recommendations specified 
by the manufacturer. 

2.4 The tyres shall be run-in at the same time as the 
vehicle and shall have a tread depth not less than 
90 percent of tread depth of a new tyre and shall have 
operated for at least 500 km, or the distance recom- 
mended for running in of the vehicle, whichever is lower, 
on road prior to test. 

2.5 The tyre pressure shall be adjusted to the value 
recommended by the vehicle manufacturer, when cold 
and shall not exceed the maximum value specified in 
the relevant Indian Standard for that size of tyre. 

2.6 All the fuel enrichening devices other than those 
required for the normal functioning of the vehicle shall 
not be operative during the test. 

2.7 The test vehicle shall be loaded appropriately to 
give adequate traction while towing the loaded 
vehicle/trailed dynamometer to the value recommended 
by the manufacturer as given in 4.4 below to load the 
engine to its maximum power capacity. 



2.8 Thermostat in the cooling system shall be set to 
remain in full open condition during the test. 

2.9 Appropriate instrumentation shall be provided in 
the vehicle to measure temperatures mentioned at 4.4 
below within an accuracy of ± 2°C. 

2.10 The engine rpm measuring equipment shall be 
installed and the accuracy of it shall be within ± 1 
percent. 

2.11 The engine cooling system shall be as per release 
and coolant ratio (water and ethylene glycol) shall 
be as per the recommendations of the vehicle 
manufacturer. 

2.12 The cooling system shall be filled 90 percent 
minimum of its capacity before starting of the test. 

2.13 The exhaust back pressure, air in take 
depression and turbo-boost pressure (in case of turbo 
charged engine) shall be within the limits specified by 
the manufacturer for maximum engine power. 

3 AMBIENT CONDITIONS 

Ambient conditions at test site shall be as given 
below: 

a) Temperature: 303-3 13 K 

b) Atmospheric pressure : 86-106 kPa 

c) Relative humidity : Not more than 75 percent. 

4 TEST PROCEDURE 

4.1 The test shall be conducted on a test track fairly 
flat and smooth, the longitudinal gradient being not 
more than 2 percent. 

4.2 Attach a trailer dynamometer or a loaded vehicle 
or any other suitable loading device to the vehicle so 
that the engine of the vehicle can be loaded to the 
maximum power capacity declared by the manufacturer 
as determined by corresponding engine speed with 
tolerance specified by the manufacturer. Alternatively 
it can be carried out by the chassis dynamometer. 

4.3 Drive the vehicle in lowest gear (the highest 
numerical ratio) at full throttle and adjust the load of 
the towed vehicle such that the engine rpm is main- 
tained within ± 3 percent of the rev/min at which 
engine develops maximum power. 



1 



IS 14557 : 1998 



4.4 In this condition, drive the vehicle continuously. 
The temperature of engine coolant at the inlet to the 
radiator, at the outlet of the radiator and engine oil 
temperature shall be recorded continuously, if 
possible. If continuous recording is not possible, these 
shall be noted at a frequency of not more than one 
minute. Continue to drive the vehicle till any one of 
the following condition is met: 

a) Till the temperature of the coolant stabilizes 
at the inlet to radiator for five minutes, 

b) The temperature of coolant at inlet goes above 
the safe limit recommended by the manufac- 
turer, 

c) The coolant starts boiling, and 

d) The engine oil temperature goes above the safe 



limit recommended by the manufacturer. 

4*5 Record the temperatures at the end of test before 
the vehicle is stopped. Record the total duration and 
the distance covered during the test. 

4.6 Repeat the operations specified at 4.2 to 4.5 for 
engine maximum torque and rpm condition. 

4.7 Measure the difference between maximum 
stabilized coolant temperature and the ambient 
temperature and record it. 

4.8 In case the trial is stopped for any one of the 
reasons specified in 4.4(b), (c) or (d); in both 
maximum power and maximum torque conditions the 
vehicle is deemed to be unsatisfactory for the 
purpose of this standard. 



IS 14557 : 1998 
ANNEX A 

{Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Automotive \fehicles Performance Evaluation and Testing Sectional Committee, TED 8 



Members 

Shri R. R. G. Menon 

Shri R. C. Balakrishnan {Alternate) 
Shri Rajat Nandi 

Shri S. G. Shah {Alternate) 
Shri V. K. Bhatia 

Shri Hira Lal {Alternate) 
Shri P. N. Rangan 

Shri K. E. Takavale {Alternate) 
Shri T. M. Balaraman 

Shri V. M. Manel {Alternate) 
Shri V. M. Mundada 

Shri R. M. Kanitkar {Alternate) 
Shri R. S. Dass 

Shri M. L. Mehta {Alternate) 
Shri S. R. Tapade 

Shri P. C. Barjatia {Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Saha 

Shri Major Balwinder {Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Sharma 
Shri D. B. Jain 

Shri S. K. Gautam {Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Bharij 

Shri R. K. Tripathi {Alternate) 
Shri K. C. Jain 

Shri R. K. Gupta {Alternate) 
Shri P. V. Bhandare 
Shri S.B. Gupta 

Shri Harjeet Sinoh {Alternate) 
Shri U. K. Kini 

Shri M. G. Jhingran {Alternate) 
Dr K. K. Gandhi 

ShriMukesh Saxena {Alternate) 
Shri I. V. Rao 

Shri B. S. Kaustuban {Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Mukherjee 

Shri Z. A. Mujawar {Alternate) 
Shri S. N. Srinivasan 

Shri K. D. Diohe {Alternate) 
Shri V. Mathur 

Shri N. Ranoanathan {Alternate) 
Dr Y. Satyanarayana 

Shri M. L. Gore {Alternate) 



Chairman 

Shri R. Ramakrishnan 

28, 1 Cross Road, Kasturi Bai Nagar, 

Adyar, Chcnnai 600020 



Representing 
Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chcnnai 

Association of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, New Delhi 

Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, New Delhi 

Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Bajaj Tempo Ltd, Pune 

Central Farm Machine Training and Testing Institute, Budni 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance Vehicles, Ministry of Defence, 

Ahmednagar 
Daewoo Motors Ltd, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi 

Department of Industrial Development, Mininstry of Industry, 

New Delhi 
Escorts Ltd, Faridabad 

Kinetic Engineering Ltd, Pune 
Hero Honda Motors Ltd, New Delhi 

Hindustan Motors Ltd, Distt. Hooghly (W.B.) 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 

Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon 

Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nasik 

Premier Automobiles Ltd, Mumbai 

Royal Enfield Motors Ltd, Chennai 

Standing Committee (Tech & Stores) CIRT, Pune 



( Continued on page 4 ) 



IS 14557 : 1998 

( Continued from page 3 ) 

Members 

Shri Lakhinder Singh 

Shri S. R. Agrahari {Alternate) 
Shri A. T. Pathak 

Shri A. V. Krilharni {Alternate) 
Shri R. C. Sethi 

Shri R. Rajaram {Alternate) 
Shri M. K. Mishra 

Shri R. G. Karamore {Alternate) 
Shri A. R. Gulati, 
Director (Transport Engg) 



Representing 
Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Chandigarh 

Tata Engineering & Loco Co Ltd, Punc 

Vehicle Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar 

Vehicle Factory, Ministry of Defence, Jabalpur 

Director General, BIS {Ex-officio Member) 



Member Secretary 

Shri M. V. S. D. Prasada Rao 
Joint Director ( Transport Engg ), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standard! 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian. Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of ( BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. TED 8 ( 4598 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 \ 323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme Vn M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 1 337 86 26,337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

\ 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 / 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

I 235 15 19,235 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 I 832 78 91, 832 78 92 



Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Priatrf tf New Iwfit Priaftt* Prm, Kkurji, India 



