UDC 091'4 : 621'43%3a

IS : 7449 ( Part
( First Reprint NOVEMBER Indian 1982) Standard

I ) - 197d ( Rcrffimaed 1981

m
1I
1. Scope!. Fuel Injection !.I Fuel lnjeclion System Pumps

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

GLOSSARY
PART

OF TERMS

FOR I.C. ENGINES
EQUIPMENT

I FUEL INJECTION

Defines the terms most commonly used in conjunction with fuel injection equipment.

2.1.1 Injection pumpA device which delivers a metered quantity of pressurized n combustion chamber of an engine through an injector at the appropriate time.

fuel

to the

2.1.1.1 Pump wifhouf integral drive -A fuel injection pump whose actuating mechanism does not form an integral part of the injection pump; but of the engine. This type of injection pump is primarily of single cylinder type. 2.1.1.2 Pump wilh integral drive -A fuel injection oump whose actuating mechanism is an integral part of the injection pump itself, that is, the actuating mechanism is enclosed in the same housing together wi:h the other parts of the injection mechanism. . 2.1.2 Distributor pump-A single plunger fuel injection pump in which the plunger reciprocating and rotary motion and distributes the fuel to all the fuel outlets of the pump. has both

2.1.3 Mounting far pumps with integral drive -Based injection pump is grouped into two categories:

on the type of mounting arrangement,

the fuel which is

a) Base mounted pump -A pump which is mounted on the surface of the engine parallel to the pump's camshaft axis, and

b) Flange mounted pump - A pump which-is mounted on the surface of the engine which is at right angles to the pump's camshaft axis. ( A shank mounted pump is a specific case of a flange mounted pump with the pump camshaft at right angles to the engine camshaft. ) 2.1.4 fuel supply (feed ) pump-A pump for drawing the fuel from the fuel tank and supplying it to the fuel injection pump at a positive pressure. 2.1.4.1 Hand priming device -An fuel from thefuel tank and supplying purpose of priming. integral unit of the fuel supply ( feed) pump used for drawing it to the fuel injection pump when the engine is at rest for the

complete assembly consisting of the fuel iniection pump together 2.1.5 Injection pump assembly -A with additional accessories, such as governor. fuel supply pump and other optional devices, when they are assembled to the fuel injection pump to form a complete unit. device for metering and injecting the fuel separately. The 2.1.6 Pressure time injection system -A The fuel metered fuel is forced through the spray holes into the combustion chamber by injector,plug. metered through an orifice depends on the fuel pressure and absolute time. The pump used in this system is termed as pressure time pump.

2.1.7 Pump rotation

a) b)

Clockwise -The injection pump camshaft or drive shaft rotates clockwise from the injection pump drive end.

when

viewec

-The injection pump camshaft or drive shaft rotates counter-clockwise Counter-clockwise when viewed from the injection pump drive end.

2.1.8 Element-The combination of a plunger and its barrel, the two together, form the injecting element of the~fuel injection pump. The element may also perform the additional functions of timing and metering.
Note-The assembly of a pump plunger and barrel is matched with extreme accuracy of fit. forms a unit by itself. Hence the assembl

Adopted 27 September1974

@ February 1975, ISI I I
INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 3

INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, D BAHAOUR

IS : 7449 ( Part

I ) - 1974

2.1.9Helix - A term used to describe the control edge of a spill groove provided on the pump plunger, usually of helical form. The helices may be upper or lower or both and may be the same hand or opposite. They can also be duplicated on both sides of the plungers. 2.1.10 Hand of helix - If by turning the plunger towards left ( viewed from plunger foot towards the control edge ) increased fuel delivery is obtained, the helix is termed left hand. If, the increased fuel delivery is obtained by turning the plunger towards right, the helix is termed right hand. 2.1 .11 Helix lead -The axial advance of the helix edge in one revolution,

2.1.12 Port and helix metering - A system of metering fuel quantity by means of one or more helical cuts in the plunger and one or more ports in the barrel. Axial rotation of the plunger alters the effective portion of the stroke by changing the points at which the helix or helices cover or uncover the port or ports. the amount 2.1.13 Inlet metering - A system of metering fuel quantity by controlling the pumping chamber of the barrel during the filling or suction stroke of the plunger. system of metering fuel quantity 2.1.14 Sleeve metering -A which port opening and/or port closing is controlled. incorporating of fuel entering

a movable sleeve with

2.1 .lS Port closing ( commencement of delivery ) -The point at which the plunger closes the spill port ( provided on the barrel ) such that the entry of the fuel through the suction port stops. 2.1.16Port opening ( end of delivery ) -A term referring to the method of determining the point of end of delivery where the metering of injected quantity is effected by means of port on barrel and helix on the plunger. The point of end of delivery is that when a point of the helix of the plunger uncovers the port of the barrel. 2.1.17 Commencement of injection - The point at which atomized form into the combustion chamber of the engine. the fuel is injected out of the nozzle in an

pre-stroke is that part of the stroke that has been utilized by the plunge1 2.1.16 Pre-stroke -The during its upward ( delivery stroke) movement, from bottom dead centre, till the top face of the plunger covers the inlet ( spill ) port of the barrel. 2.1.19Spill-The fuel returning from the pressure chamber, during the upward stroke of the plunger. chamber of the element to the pump suctior

groove provided in the plunger below the control edge, which leads the spill 2.1.20 Spill groove -A to flow from the element pressure chamber back into the pump *suction chamber. porn provided on the element barrel which allows the fuel, from the pressure 2.1.21 Spill port -The chamber of the element barrel, to return to the pump suction chamber to cause the end of injection. 2.1.22 Spill valve -A valve used to observe commencement and end of delivery stroke 0-f the plunger by allowing the fuel to escape from the pumping chamber. during the delivery

valve assembly installed in an injection pump, interposed between 2.1.23 Delivery valve assembly -A the pumping chamber ( plunger and barrel assemhty ) and outlet, 10 control residual pressure in fuel delivery pipes. This assembly is also known as ' anti-dribble device `. 2.1.24 Retraction ( unloading/relief) volume -The volume of fuel retracted (relieved ) from the fuel detivery pipe by the action of the delivery valve's retraction piston ( relief piston/relief plunger ) in the process of the delivery valve returning to its seat following the end of delivery. holder which retains the delivery 2.1.25Delivery valve holder -A pump. This also forms the outlet of the injection pump, valve assembly within the injection

main casing into and to which are assembled 2.1.26Fuel injection pump housing -The components and other optional devices associated with the fuel injection -pump. 2.1.27 Control rack-The rack or rod by means of which the fuel quantity delivered

all the

is regulated.

collar engagin~g the plunger and 2.1.26 Control pinion (control sleeve or regulating sleeve ) -A having a segment of gear teeth, integral or attached, which mesh with the control rack. With tnis, the linear motion of the control rack is transformed into rotary movement of the plunger to regulate the amount of fuel delivered by the pump. 2.1.29 Rack control /ever-A lever attached to a collar 2 or sleeve engaging the plunger, or attached

IS : 7449( Part I

) -

1974

directly to the plunger, its other end engaging adjustable fittings on the control rod. This transforms the linear motion of-control rod into rotary motion of plunger to regulate the amount of fuel delivered by the pump. ~2.1.30 Full load stop ( maximum speed control) -A device'which limits the travel of the control reck. only,

2.1.31 Excess fuel device - 4nv device providsd for giving en increased fuel setting for starting generally designed to~restore automatically action of the normal full load stop eftet starting. 2.1.32 High pressure assembly. 2.2 Governor 2.2.1 fuel pipe -The pipe connecting the fuel inject@

pump and the nozzle holder

Governors classified by principle

of operation force with

2.2.1.1 Mechanical governor - A mechanical device that utilizes variation of centrifugal speed to regulate the quantity of fuel delivered to the engine by the fuel pump. 2.2.1.2 Hydraulic output for force. 2.2.1.3 Pneumatic 3) governor governor of pressure A-mechanical governor hevrng a hydraulic servo-booster

to increase

governor which works on a difference Vacuum or suction governor -A the suction chamber end the atmospheric chamber.

between

b) Air governor - A governor operated by air displaced purpose end driven by the engine.

by a device provided

for this particular

device for use on engine generator 2.2.1.4 load sensitive governor - An engine speed regulating sets to regulate engine fuel settings as a function of changed loads ( electrical Joed ) anticipating tha resulting changes in engine speed. It may or -may not incorporate a mechanical speed sensing device' . as well. 2.2.2 Governors classified by function regulates

under 2.2.1 which 2.2.2.1 Variable speed governor - Any one of the governors classified the fuel quantity delivered by the injection pump throughout the speed range of the engine.

I 2.2.2.2 Maximum-minimum speed governor - Any one of the governors classified under 2.2.1 which exert control only et rhe upper and Idwer limits of the designed engme speed range; intermediate speeds being controlled by the operator regulating the fuel delivery. -A mechnnical speed-sensitive devize 2.2.2.3 Over speed go;rernw (m3xirnum sposd gwern3r) that, through mechanical or electrrcel action ( operation of a switch ), acts to shut dowel the engine by cutting off fuel or air or both fuel end air supply should the engine speed exceed a preset maximum. 2.2.2.4 Tail shaft governor - A mechanical speed-sensitive device commonly mounted on en engineIc is mechanically connected to the normal driven torque cenverfer to monitor its tail-shatt speed. engine governor such that engine output will be gbverned to maintain a constant tail-shaft speed regqdless of torque load. 2.2.3 Sensitivity of the governor - The difference in speed achieved end the rated speed at the time when the engine is relieved of its load suddenly while the engine is operating under full load and at This is normally expressed rated speed before the governor could exercise control over the engine. es a relation between the average maximum spaeci betwaen full load and no load. This is also a measure for the efficiency of the governor. 2.2.4 ,Zorgue control (adaption ) - A device which adopts the maximum fuel delivered tion pump to the needs of speed end load, at speeds below the engine rated speed. by the injec-

device responsive to engine speed or load or both speed and load to 2.3 injection Timing Device -A control the timed relationship between injection cycle and engine cycle. 2.4 Injector Assembly - The nozzle and nozzle holder assembly injectlon pump is introduced into the combustion chamber. where by the fuel metered by the fuel

2.4.1 Nozzle - The assembly of parts employed to atomize end to introduce tion-chamber in the desired pattern both wtth regard to space and time. 3

the fuel into the combus-

IS : 7449 ( Part I ) - 1974
2.4.2 Nozzle holder-The comprising the nozzle. 2.4.3 Qpen nozzleassembly of all parts of the nozzle holder assembly other than those

A nozzle incorporating

no valve. needle valve,

2.4.4 Closed nozzle-A nozzle incorporating either a poppet valve or a differential loaded with spring, in order to open at some predetermined pressure. 2.4.4.1 Poppet valve An outwardly opening

valve used with certain forms of closed nozzles.

2.4.4.2 Differential needle valve - Refers to that portion of the nozzle needle of a closed nozzle The differential needle valve has two diameters, where the pressure taper and needle seat are formed. the ~pressure of the injected thesmaller being at the valve seat. At this point of the valve ( needle) `fuel acts and lifts the valve ( needle ) off its seat at the predetermined pressure ( spring pressure ) to permit the fuel to be introduced into the combustion chamber. 2.4.4.3 Pint/e nozzle -A closed nozzle with the differential needle valve with a single large orifice (spray hole) at the bottom face of the nozzle body, into which enters a projection from the lower end of the differential ( needle) valve; this projection being so shaped as to influence the nature and direction of the fuel spray. 2.4.4.4 Hole nozzle-A closed nozzle with the differential needle valve with one or more orifices Nozzles with more than one orifice are known (spray holes ) through which the fuel spray emerges out. The orifices are formed on the nozzle ( body ) tip. as multihole nozzles. 2.4.4.5 Pinfaux nozzle - A differential nozzle and hole nozzles designed primarily to improve withoutthe use of heater ( glow ) plugs. incorporating cold starting the characteristics of precombustion of both the pintle chamber engines,

part of the nozzle which serves as a guide for the valve (nozzle needle) and 2.4.5 Nozzle body -The in which the actual spray holes are formed. These two parts, the body and the needle are considered as a unit for replacement purposes. 2.4.6 Nozzle tip separate part. 2.4.7 Nozzle holder nozzle holder. The extreme cap nut-A end of the nozzle body containing the spray hole. It may be a

cap nut or other type

of closure

which

covers the outer end of the

2.4.6 Nozzle retaining nut the other nozzle holder parts. 2.4.9 Pressure spindle ( nozzle needle ).

That part of the nozzle bolt ) -

holder

which

secures

nozzle

or nozzle

tip to

( pressure

A spindle that transmits

the load from the spring to the valve

2.4.10 Pressure adjusting screw or shims -The screw or shims by means of which the spring pressure on the nozzle valve ( needle ) is adjusted to obtain the prescribed opening pressure. 2.4.11 Spring retainer It supports the spring and carries the adjusting distance screw or shims. shaft to the seating

2.4.12 Nozzle holder shaft length -The face of the nozzle holder.

from the top of the cylindrical

2.4.13 Nozzle holder seating face -The face upon which nozzle holder sits to make a gastight seal with the cylinder head. Commonly this face is incorporated on the nut used for retaining the nozzle to the nozzle holder., The 2.4.14 Edge type bar fl/terA contrivance at the fuel entry to the_ nozzle holder assembly. arrangement of a special edge type bar inside this filter, pulverizes the solid particles, by the forces created bv fuel thrusts, to such a small size that they cannot cause damages to nozzle components. This is used, primarily along with hole nozzles. 2.4.15 Diameter ratioof the needle valve seat. The ratio between the guide diameter of the needle and the effective diameter

opening or openings at the end -of the nozzle body or nozzle 2.4.16 Spray ho/e(s) -The which the fuel is sprayed into the combustion chamber. 2.4.17 Spray dispersal angle - The included angle of the cone of fuel leaving in the nozzle body or nozzle tip including pintle type. 4 any single

tip through

spray hole

IS : 7449 ( Part I ) - 1974
2.4.16 Spray angle-The included angle of the cone embracing the axes of the several spray holes of a multihole nozzle. In the case of nozzles for large engines more than one spray angle may be needed ~to embrace all the sprays, for example, an inner and an outer spray angle. 2.4.19 Spray inclination the nozzle holder. 2.4.20 Tip sack -- The hole(s) in a hole nozzle. angle The angle which the axis of a cone of `sprays makes with the axis of

recess inside

the nozzle

body or nozzle

tip acting as a feedtir

to the spray

2.4.21 Differential angle - The difference between the angles of the seat face of the valve needle ) and that of the seat in the body provided to ensure effective seali,lg. 2.4.22 Leak-offFuel which escapes between the nozzle ( needle) valve and its guide. is also used to describe the leakage past the plunger of a fuel pump. ) 2.4.23 Nozzle seating. opening pressure The pressure The maximum needed to lift the nozzle valve during

( nozzle

( This term

( needle ) from period.

its

2.4.24 Peak injection 2.4.25 Pilot injection main delivery of fuel. 2.4.26 Ignition engines.

pressure -A

fuel pressure attained

the injection

small initial

charge of fuel delivered

to the engine cylinder

in advance of the

injection -

A small charge of fuel used to ignite

the main gas charge

in

dual fuel

fuel discharged ( lifting of the needle from its seat ) from a nozzle 2.4.27 Secondary injection -The as a result of reopening of the nozzle valve after the main discharge. 2.4.28 Dribble - Insufficiently the end of a main injection. atomized fuel emerging out of the nozzle at or immediatelyfollowing

2.5 fuel injector -An assembly which receives a metered charge of fuel from another source at a relatively low pressure and then, is actuated by an engine mechanism to inject the charge of fuel to the combustion chamber at high pressure and at the appropriate time. 2.5.1 Unit fuel injector - An assembly which receives fuel under supply pressure and is then actuated by an engine mechanism to meter and inject the charge of fuel to the combustion chamber at high -pressure and at the appropriate time. 2.5.2 Delivery valve - A spring loaded valve which opens at some predetermined fuel flow from the injector plunger and bushing to the spray tip. pressure to permit

