**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12160 (1987) : Technical Drawings - Fundamental 
Tolerancing Principle [PGD 24: Drawings] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



"'^^ 744-13: 621 7531 ( First Reprint JUNE 1 998 > '^ VR^IJJmld ma^) 



Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 1999) 

TECHNICAL DRAWINGS- FUNDAMENTAL 
TOLERANCING PRINCIPLE 



a 

£ 
o 
o 

Xi 

3 

w 

09 

o> 

c 

a 
Q 
o 

(J 
O 



1. Scope — Specifies the principle of the relationship between dimensional (linear and angular) 
tolerances and geometrical tolerances. 

2. Field of Application — The specified principle shall be applied on technical drawings and related 
technical documents to linear dimensions and their tolerances, angular dimensions and their tolerances; 
geometrical tolerances; which define the following four aspects for each feature of the part: 

size; 
form; 

orientation; 
location. 

3« References 

IS :919 ( Part 1 )-1963 Recommendations for limits and fits for engineering: Part 1 General 
engineering ( first revision ) 

IS : 8000 ( Part 1 }-1985/ISO 1101-1983 Geometrical tolerancing on technical drawings; 
Part 1 Tolerances of form, orientation, location and run-out, and appropriate geometrical 
definitions 

IS : 8000 (Part 2)-1976 Geometrical tolerancing on technical drawings: Part 2 Maximum 
material principles 

4. Principle of Independency — Each specified dimensional or geometrical requirement on a 
drawing shall be met independently, unless a particular relationship is specified. 

4.1 Therefore, where no relationship is specified, the geometrical tolerance applies regardless of 
feature size, and the two requirements are treated as being unrelated. 

4.1.1 Consequently, if a particular relationship of size and form, or size and orientation, or size and 
location is required, it shall be specified on the drawing ( see 6 ). 

5. Tolerances 

5.1 Dimensional Tolerances 

5.1.1 Linear tolerances — A linear tolerance controls only the actual local sizes (two point 

measurements ) of a feature, but not its form deviations ( for example, circularity and straightness 

deviations of a cylindrical feature or flatness deviations of two parallel plane surfaces) [see 
IS :919 (Parti )-1963]. 

5.1.1.1 Form deviations shall, however, be controlled by the following: 

— individually indicated form tolerances; 

— general geometrical tolerances; 

— envelope requirement. 

Note — For the purpose of this standard, a single feature consists of a cylindrical surface or two parallel 
plane surfaces- 
There is no control oT the geometrical interrelationship of individual features by the linear 
tolerances. For example, the perpendicularity of the sides of a cube is not controlled and, therefore, 
it requires a perpendicularity tolerance dictated by the design requirement. 

5 A. 2 Angular tolerances — An angular tolerance, specified in angular units, controls only the 
general orientation of lines or line elements of surfaces, but not their form deviations ( see Fig. 1 ). 



Adopted 27 July 1987 



October 1988, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



18 :1216a -1987 

5.1.2.1 The general orientation of the line derived from the actual surface is the orientation of the 
contacting line of ideal geometrical form ( see Fig. 1 ). The maximum distance between the contacting 
line and the actual line shall be least possible value. 



CONTACTING LINE 




CONTACTING LINE 



FIG. 1 



S.1.2.2 Form deviations shall, however, be controlled by the following: 

— individually indicated form tolerances; 

— general geometrical tolerances. 



5.2 Geometrical Tolerances — Geometrical tolerances control the deviation of the feature from its 
theoretically exact form or orientation or location regardless of the feature size. 

5.2.1 The geometrical tolerances will, therefore, apply independently of the actual local sizes of 
individual features (see 4). The geometrical deviations may be at a maximum whether or not the 
cross-sections of the respective features are at maximum material size. 

5.2.2 For instance, a shaft with maximum material size at any cross-section may have a lobed form 
deviation within the circularity tolerance, and may also be bent by the amount of the straightness 
tolerance (see Fig. 2). 



<J>150 h7 



V-0.0^ 7 ( ^p 



"o 


0.06 


0.02 



A DRAWING INDICATION 

MAXIMUM LIMIT OF SIZE 




MAXIM UM CIRCULARITY 
DEVIATION {RESULTING 
FROM A LOBED FORM) 



MAXIMUM 
LIMIT OF SIZE 



MAXIMUM 

STRAIGHTNESS 

DEVIATION 




ANY CROSS-SECTfON 



B INTERPRETATION 
FIG. 2 

2 



IS: 12160 -19B7 

6. Mutual Dependency of Size and Geometry— Mutual dependency of size and geometry may 
be called for by: 

— the envelope requirement ( see 6.1 ); 

— the maximum material principle ( see 6.2 ). 

6,1 Envelope Requirement — For a single feature either a cylindrical surface or a feature established 
by two parallel plane surfaces (feature of size), the envelope requirement may be applied. The 
requirement means that the envelope of perfect form at maximum material size of the feature shall not 
be violated. 

6.1.1 The envelope requirement may be indicated either: 

by the symbol @ placed after the Jinear tolerance (see Fig. 3A), or 
by reference to an appropriate standard which invokes the envelope requirement. 
Example: 

Envelope requirement applied to a cylindrical feature 
a) Drawing indication 



*150 hi 



l-O.Oi) © 



3A 



b) Functional requirements 

— The surface of the cylindrical feature shall not extend beyond the envelope of perfect 
form at maximum material size of ^^150. 

— No actual local size shall be less than ^149*96. 

This means that the actual part shall meet the following requirements: 

— each actual local diameter of the shaft shall remain within the size tolerance of 0'04 and, 
therefore, may vary between ^150 and ^14996 (see Fig. 3B ); 




dt,d2,d3 ACTUAL LOCAL DIAMETERS 
3B 



the entire shaft shall remain within the boundary of the envelope cylinder of perfect form 
and of ^150 ( see Fig. 3C and 3D ). 

3 



IS r12160-1il7 



ENVELO PE OF PERFECT FORM 
AT MAXIMUM MATERIAL SIZE- 




ENVELO PE OF PERFECT FORM 
AT MAXIMUM MATERIAL SIZE 




3D 



6.1.1.1 Hence it follows that the shaft be exactly cylindrical when all actual local diameters are 
at the maximum size of ^150 ( see Fig. 3E ). 



ENVELO PE OF PERFECT FORM 
AT MAXIMUM MATERIAL SIZE 



ACTUA L LOCAL 
DIAMETER 



3E 



8.2 Maximum Material Principle — If, for functional and economic reasons, there is a requirement for 
the mutual dependency of the size and orientation of location of the feature(s), then the maximum 

material principle (m) may be applied [ see IS : 8000 ( Part 2 )-1976 ]. 

7. Application on Drawings 

7.1 Completeness of Drawing — The drawing should specify dimensional and geometrical tolerances 
necessary to check the part completely for its function. 

7.2 Designation — Drawings to which the principle of independency applies shall be identified by 
being marked in or close to the drawing title block as follows: 

Tolerancing IS : 12160 

7.2.1 This indication shall be supplemented by a reference to the appropriate standard general 
geometrical tolerances or to other related documents. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is based on ISO 8015-1985 'Technical drawings — Fundamental tolerancing 
principles', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 

In ISO standard, size of tolerance values are one size lower than basic size whereas in this 
standard both the values are of same size as per the latest principles of ISO in this regard. 



Reprography Unit, BIS. New Delhi, India 



