( Reaffirmed 2004 )

1S : 9001( Part Ill) - 1978

Indian Standard
GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
PART III CHANGE

TESTING

OF TEMPERATURE

Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, LTDC 2
Chairman BRIQ D. SWAROOP Members SHRI H. R. BAPU SEETHARAM SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD ( Alternate Da A. S. BNADURI SHRI B. P. GHOSH ( Alternate ) BRIG N. DAYAL SHRI G. R. GUOSH ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S & T ) Bharat Electronics ) National Ministry Test House, of Defence Calcutta ( DGI ) Organization Ltd, Bangalore Instrumentation Representing Ltd, Kota

Research, Designs & Standards ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow

JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S _S T )-I ( Alternate ) _ Society of Environmental Engineers, Bangalore GENERAL SECRETARY . SHRI T. G. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI GHA~XTA SINGH ( CSIR ), Pilani Kadio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' AssoSHRI J. G. JAIN ciation, Bombay STANDARDIZATION CENTRAL OIWCER ( Alternate ) Posts and `Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRIJOHN FRANCIS Philips India Limited, Bombay SHRI S. P. KULKARNI DR P. K. DUTTA ( Alternate) Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SHRI V. A. MUR ARK SHRI B. K. BANERJEE ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay SHRI D. V. PETKAR National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. V. RAGHURAMAN Directorate General of Observatories (Ministry of SHRI K. RAMAN Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi All India Instrument Manufactures' & Dealers' SHRI P. SANDELL Association, Bombay SHRIFI. C. VERMA ( Alternate ) DRY. V. SOMAYAJULU National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. SURYANARAYANA ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 ) @ CopVrignt 1978
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Cofiyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the raid Act.

IS : 9001( Part III ) - 1978
( ContiwdJ?om pap 1) Members Representing
Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI T. V. A. SUBRAMANIAN SHRI G. C. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI D. SUBRAMANYAN SHRI A. SATHYANARAYANA ( Al&mate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI K. N. TIWARI SHRI P. K. SHUKLA (Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Diiector(Electronic s) ( Secretary)

2

IS I 9001( Part III ) - 1978

Indian Standard
GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
PART III CHANGE

TESTING

OF TEMPERATURE

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part III ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 April 1978, after the draft finalized by the Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard shall be read in conjunction with IS : 9000 ( Part XIV 1978*. )-

0.3 This standard is based on IEC Publication 68-2-33 ( 1971 ) ` Basic environmental testing procedures, Part 2 Tests, Guidance on change of Electrotechnical Comtemperature tests `, issued by the International mission. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part III ) gives guidance to designers and testing personnel on the specification and use of change of temperature tests. 2. OBJECT 2.1 A change of temperature test is intended to determine the effect on the item of a change of temperature or a succession of changes of temperature. It is not intended to show effects which are due only to high or low temperature. For these effects, dry heat test or cold test should be used.
*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic Change of temperature. tRules for rounding olT numerical values ( m&d ). and electrical items: Part XIV

3

IS t 9001( Part

III ) - 1978 by the following: temperature between at which these

The effect of such tests is determined a) Values of high and low conditioning the change is to be effected; b) The conditioning temperatures; c) The rate of change d) The number e) The amount 3. FIELD times for which between

the test item is kept

these temperatures; and TEMPERATURE into or from the item.

of cycles of conditioning; of heat transfer OF CHANGING

CONDITIONS

3.1 In electronic equipment and components, only gradual changes of temParts inside an equipment will undergo slower perature usually occur. changes of temperature than those on an external surface of the equipment when it is not switched on. 3.1.1 Rapid conditions: changes of temperature may be expected under indoor the following environments or immersion in

a) When equipment is transported from warm into cold open air conditions or vice versa; b) When equipment cold water; c) Jn externally d) Under certain is suddenly airborne cooled

by rainfall or

mounted conditions

equipment;

of transportation

and storage.

3.1.2 Components will undergo stresses due to changing temperature when high temperature gradients build up in an equipment after switching on; for example, in the neighbourhood of high wattage resistors, radiation may cause rise of surface temperature in neighbouring components while other portions are still cool. 3.1.3 Artificially cooled components may be subjected erature changes when the cooling system is switched on. 3.1.4 Rapid changes of temperature in components during manufacturing processes of equipment. 3.1.5 interval The number and amplitude between them, are important. of temperature to rapid temp-

may also bc induced changes, and the time

3.1.6 When a transfer time of 2 to 3 minutes is applied, the magnitude of thermal stresses experienced by the item will be less for very small items The thermal stresses, however, will bear a relationship than for large ones. to that which would be experiened by such an item when it was transported within a few minutes from an atmosphere at one extreme of temperature to one at the other extreme.

IS I 9001( Part III )`- 1978 3.1.7 The effects on components and equipment of temperature rise and Dew or frost appearing on components temperature fall may be different. or equipment may cause additional stresses and, where these additional stresses are not desired, humidity should be suitably controlled to minimize these effects. 4. BASIC PHILOSOPHY

4.1 Design of Chaqge of Temperature Tests - The change of temperature tests, as described -in Sections 1, 2 and 3 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )1978*, comprise alternate periods at a high and at a low temperature with The conditionwell defined transitions from one temperature to the other. ing run from room temperature to the first conditioning temperature, then to the second conditioning temperature, and back to room temperature, is called one test cycle. 4.1.1 a) Test parameters are as follows:

Room temperature,

b) High temperature, c) Low temperature, d) Duration of exposure, of temperature

e) Interval between exposure to the two extremes or rate of change of temperature, and f ) Number of test cycles.

4.1.1.1 The high and low temperatures are understood to be ambient temperatures which will be reached by most items with a certain timelag. 4.1.1.2 Only in exceptional cases may they be specified outside the normal storage or operating temperature range of the object under test. 4.1.1.3 The test is accelerated because the number of severe changes of temperature in a given period is greater than that which will occur under field conditions. 4.2 Purpose and Choice af Tests - A change of temperature test is The purpose of a change not intended to simulate field conditions exactly. of temperature test is to stress item in order to determine whether they have been properly designed and manufactured. *Basic environmental testing procedures for elec&nic
Change of temperature. 5 and electrical items: Part XIV

IS : 9001( Part III) - 1978 4.2.1 Change cases: of temperature testing is recommended in the following

a) Evaluation of electrical performance during a change of temperature as described in Section 2 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )-19785. of mechanical performance during a change of b) Evaluation tlegrn;erature as described in Section 2 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )*. c) Evaluation of electrical performance after a specified number of rapid changes of temperature as described in Section 1 or Section 3 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV)-1978*. Evaluation of the suitability of mechanical components, and of d) materials and combinations of materials to withstand rapid changes of temperature as described in Section 1 or Section 3 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )-1978*. e) Evaluation of the suitability of construction of components to withstand artificial stressing, as described in Section 1 or Section 3 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV)-1978*. 4.2.2 The~change of temperature tests specified in IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )1978* is not intended to evaluate the difference in material constants or electrical performance when operating under temperature stability at the two extremes of temperature. 4.3 Choice of Duration of Exposure - The duration of exposure should be related in such a way to the thermal time constant of the items ( or of their critical parts ) that they would reach the approximate ambient It is, therefore, important to know temperature of the space of the bath. the temperature time constant of the item. As the thermal time constant of the outside and inside parts of large items ( equipment ) may differ considerably from each other, it is preferable to take into consideration the thermal time constant of the innermost or most critic~al part. 4.3.1 The time constant depends upon the nature and movement of the surrounding medium [ air in tests described in Sections 1 and 2 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )-1978*, the relevant liquid, such as water in test described in Section 3 of IS : 9000 (Part XIV )-1978*], and it is desirable, therefore, to determine experimentally the time constant in the actual ambient conditions of test. When choosing the duration of the exposure, the following should be considered ( see Fig. 1 ): iftl>5rthend<O*Ol andift1>2*5T
*Basic environmental Change of temperature.

D D
and electrical items: Part XIV

and <57thend<O*Ol
testing procedures for electronic

6

IS : 9boi ( Part 1fr ) - 1938
where tl = duration of the exposure; 7 = temperature time constant of the item; d = difference between the temperatures of the test medium and the item; and D = difference between the hot and cold conditioning temperatures ( IT.4 I - ] TB I

FIG. 1

CURVE OF TEMPERATURE versus EXPOSURE DURATION

4.4 Choice of Duration of Change-Over Time 4.4.1 Choice of Duration of Temjerature Change - If, in the case of twochamber method, in consequence of the large size of the items the changeover cannot be made in 2 to 3 minutes, the change-over time may be increased without an appreciable influence on the test results as follows: t, < 0.05 7 where t, = duration of the change-over time, and 7 = thermal time constant of the item. 4.4.2 Choice of Rate of Change of Temperature -The rates of change of temperature given in test of Section 2 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )-1978* apply to the cases mentioned in 3. However, for large stationary equipments, tests of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )-1978* may be applied to simulate slower temperature changes, for example, those connected with diurnal variations. Such changes are normally considerably slower than l"C/min. In such cases, test of Section 2 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV)-1978* may be applied with lower severities.
*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part XIV Change of temperature. 7

I!$I9QOi( Part IIlt
4.5 Applicability

) - 1978

Limits

of Change of Temperature

Tests

4.5-l Inside an item, the rate of change of temperature depends on the heat conduction of its materials, on the spatial distribution of its heat capacity and on its dimensions. 4.5.1.1 The change of temperature at a point on the surface of an item follows approximately an exponential law. Inside large items, the superposition of such alternate exponential rises and decreases may lead to periodic and approximately sinusoidal changes of temperature with much lower amplitudes than the applied temperature swing, 4.5.2 The mechanism of heat transfer between the test item and the conditioning medium in the chamber or bath should be taken into account. Moving liquid leads to very high rates of change of temperature on the surface of the items and still air to very low rates. 4.5.3 The two-bath method with water as a conditioning medium as described in Section 3 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV)-1978* should be restricted to items which are either sealed or by their nature insensitive to water, as their performance and properties may deteriorate by immersion. In particular cases, such as, with items sensitive to water, other test liquids The characteristics of heat transfer of such liquids which may be required. may differ from those of water, have to be taken into account. 5. REPRODUCIBILITY OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE TESTS

5.1 Influence by the Conditioning Procedure - The reproducibility of change of temperature tests depends on the accuracy with which the test parameters, referred to in 4.1.1, are maintained. 5.1.1 Variations on reproducibility: a) Rate b) Upper in the following test perameters have important medium. effects

of change

of temperature

of the surrounding

and lower temperatures. ( by convection, thermal radiation and

c) Heat transfer mechanisms thermal conduction ). d) Characteristics

of the test medium.

5.1.2 Any special requirements, such as the position and orientation of the item in the chamber or bath, that may affect the reproducibility of the test, should be specified in the relevant specification.
*Basic environmental Change of temperature. testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part XIV

8

IS : 9001 ( Part III ) - 1978 5.2 Influence by Object Under Test - The change of temperature test results are influenced by the differences between test objects with respect to the following parameters:

4 b)

Heat capacity; The amount of heat transfer to, and its distribution over, the item surface; cl Heat conductivity inside the item, which may be non-homogeneous; 4 Thermal expansion of components and materials constituting the item; e) Mechanical properties ( for example, elasticity and tensile strength of components and material constituting the item ); Dimensions and tolerances; and Other properties influencing the temperature the item. distribution within

f> 8)

5.3 This information may be used as a guide for the choice of the number of items and for the understanding of- diflerences in test results. 6. GUIDANCE FOR THE SELECTION OF THE KIND OF TEST

6.1 Specifying a change of temperature test should be a matter of extreme care. Its successful application ~depends on a fundamental knowledge of the items to be tested, their technical properties and performance and the failure mechanism involved under conditions of rapidly changing temperature. 6.2 The severity of the test increases with: a) greater temperature differences, b) faster rates of change of temperature, and c) more rapid heat transfer mechanisms.
required

The least severe test, commensurate with the amount of information on item performance, should be specified.

6.3 The application of change of temperature tests as described in IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )-1978* is preferred as part of a sequence of tests. Some types of damage may not become apparent by the final measurements of a change of temperature tests as described in IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )1978*, but may appear only during subsequent tests [ for example, vibration ( sinusoidal ) or damp heat ( cyclic ) 1.
*Basic environmental Change of temperature. testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part XIV

9

IS t 9001( Part III ) - 1978
6.4 The change of temperature test as described in Section 3 of IS : 9000 ( Part XIV )-1978* should not be used as an alternative to sealing test. 6.5 The conditioning times should, whenever possible, be specified in such a way as to match the daily working time or 24 hours by an integral number of cycles, taking care of recovery and final measurements. If, for certain reasons, such as to avoid a change-over being made during the night, it is necessary to leave the item for a longer time than the prescribed duration tl in one of the exposure atmospheres, it should be left in the cold chamber because ageing effects may occur after a longer exposure to the warm atmosphere. 6.6 When specifying a change of temperature test, the properties of the objects under test which are afl'ected by conditions of changing temperature, and their possible failure mechanism, should be kept in mind. The initial and the final measurements should be specified accordingly. In some cases, it may be sufficient to consider mechanical damage only. Measurements during the changing of temperature should be given primary consideration especially with equipments to be tested.

?&sic environmental testing Change-of temperature.

proceduresfor electronic and electrical items: 10

Part XIV

