( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS :

10515 - 1983

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS DECK CONTAINER/PALLET FOR AIRCRAFT
Air Cargo
Chairman SHRI P. R. CHANDRASEKHAR
Members

OF MAIN LOADER

Handling

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

MCPD

8

Directorate

General

of Civil Aviation,

New Delhi

Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay SHRI P. G. DESHMUKH S~ru C. S. PURUSHOTHAMAN ( Alternate ) Indian Airlines, New Delhi SHRI M. S. BKBOTE SHY S. C. BHATNAGAR( Alternate ) International Airports Authority of India, New SHRI S. JAITLEY Delhi SHm P. R. P. RAO ( AIternate ) Air India, Bombay SHRI S. V. KEMBRE SHm C. MOHANDAS( Alternafe ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SIIRIK. N. S. KRISHNAN Indian Aluminium Company Ltd, Calcutta SHRI G. M. MENON SHRI P. CHAKRAVORTY ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development and SHRI R. N. PADHY Production ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi SHIU B. SAMPATH( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( Aerial Delivery Research SHRl L. S. VElWA and Developmenr Establishment), Agra SHRI AMAR DAYAL ( Alternate ) Associated Commercial & Manufacturing SHIU R. K. VITHLANI Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) SHIU P. S. DAS, Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary ) ( Continued on page 2 ) l Shri P. R. Chandrasekhar standard was finalized. was the Chairman for the meeting in which this

INDIAN

This publication is protected reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

@ Copyright 1983 STANDARDS INSTITUTION under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and

IS:10515 - 1983
(

Continuedfrompage

1)

Air Transport
Convener

Containers

and Pallets

Subcommittee,
Representing

MCPD

8: I

SHRI YASHBIR KUMAR Members SHRI M. S. EKBOTE SHRI K. S. JAYARAM

Indian

Airlines,

New Delhi

Indian Airlines, New Delhi InternDaet;;inal Airports Authority

of India,

New

SHIU P. R. P. RAO ( Alternate ) National Aeronautical Laboratory, Bangalore SHRI G. G. SHAH The Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New SHRI F. C. SHARMA Delhi Ministry of Defence ( Aerial Delivery Research SHRI L. S. VERMA and Development Establishment ), Agra SHRI AMAR DAYAL ( Alternate ) Air India, Bombay SHRI K. N. M. YELAHANKA

2

IS : 10515 - 1983

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS DECK CONTAINER/PALLET FOR AIRCRAFT 0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 March 1983, after the draft finalized by the Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 This standard is based on ISO/DIS 6967 Aircraft -- Wide body main deck container/pallet loader - Functional freighter aircraft requirements to achieve international coordination on the subject.
1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the general requirements for a self-propelled loader capable of raising pallets and containers with basic dimensions and maximum masses as follows: Length Width Height Gross Mass, Max

OF MAIN LOADER

mm 3 175 3 175 2 991 6 058
2. DIMENSIONS 2.1 On an adequate

mm 2 438 2 235 2 438 2 438

mm from 508 5:040

kg 6 804 6 033 5 670 1 340

chassis, the loader shall provide two platforms:

a) A front platform, which is positioned at the applicable aircraft door and which remains at this position during the loading/ unloading operation; and b) A main platform 5 540 mm. for up and down movement between 483 and

2.2 The overall height of the entire unit shall not exceed 3 600 mm The height of the front platform ( top of rollers ) when being driven. shall not exceed 2 413 mm in the fully down position. 3

IS : 10515 - 1983

2.3 The overall dimensions

of the unit shall be kept to a minimum.

2.4 The loader shall support simultaneously, at their maximum gross mass, two 2 438 X 3 175 mm containers/pallets on the main platform and one 2 438 X 3 175 mm container/pallet on the front platform. 2.5 The unit shall have adequate clearance underneath tion of the equipment to the ground when negotiating intersect at 5". 3. PLATFORM,
GUIDE RAILS AND STOPS 3.1 The length of the front platform 2 438 x 3 175 mm pallet lengthwise.

from any partwo ramps that

shall be adequate

to accept one

3.2 The length of the main platform shall be adequate to accept two 2 438 x 3 175 mm pallet one behind the other, lengthwise, on the platform. 3.3 The width of both platforms shall be adequate to accept a pallet with its 3 175 mm dimension across the platforms. 3.4 The surface lateral movement 3.5 The loader load units: of both platforms of load units. shall allow for longitudinal and

shall be designed for powered end and side loading of shall be

4 On the front platform

the longitudinal movement effected by means of a powered system; and

b) On the main platform the longitudinal

and lateral movement shall be effected by means of a. powered system. The main platform powered system shall be `divided into two sections, each of which will accept one 3 175 x 2 438 mm load unit. It shall be possible to control these sections individually or simultaneously.

3.6 The powered system shall be able to drive load units at a speed of Adjustment to a reduced speed shall be approximately 18'3 m/min. possible. 3.7 The front platform shall be adjustable aircraft attitude with an accuracy of: to the following changes in

a) Pitch and roll - half a degree range + 2" (Max), and b) Height - 6'4 mm.
NOTE - It is recommended that the front platform be capable of being attached to the aircraft so as to compensate for changes in aircraft attitude.

4

IS :10515 -1983
3.8 The front platform shall be designed opening aud closing of the aircraft door. not to interfere with the

3.9 Removable guide rails, fixed on the main platform and adjustable on the front platform to the container/pallet widths of 2 438 mm and 3 175 mm shall be provided as follows:

4 Front Platform - Along the whole length of both sides of the
platform to exactly guide load units into the aircraft. be adjustable laterally to align with the appropriate guides. They shall in-aircraft

b) Main Platform - 3 175 mm apart along both sides of the plat-

form. The guide rails shall consist of two sections positioned adjacent to the powered sections of the platform and shall be able to be operated independently. All four sections shall automatically extend when the main platform starts moving upward and remain in this position. When the main platform is being lowered and it reaches the height of 1'52 m from the ground, it shall be possible for the operator to control the retraction of the guide rails. as given below:

3.10 Stops - Stops shall be provided

a) Front Platform - Automatic stops shall be provided at the end adjacent to the main platform. These stops shall raise the moment the main platform starts moving down and shall retract when the upcoming main platform is level with the front platform. Operation of the main platform must be inhibited if the stops are not extended. b) Main Platform - Stops shall be provided at the forward and aft end and at the separation line between the two powered sections. 3.10.1 The stop adjacent to the front platform shall automatically retract as the main platform lines up with the front platform. The stop between the two sections shall be controlled by the operator individually. 3.10.2 The rear stop shall be of the override type ( loading direction ). The rear stop shall automatically retract when a load unit is being transferred IongitudinalIy into the main platform and shall automatically extend as soon as the load unit has passed. 3.10.3 For movement of load units off the main platform end in a longitudinal direction the retraction of the rear stop shall be controlled However, it shall only be possible to retract the rear by the operator. stop when the main platform is stopped at any height between 0'51 and 1'52 m above the ground.

IS : 10515 - 1983 3.10.4 All stops and fixed guide rails shall have a minimum height of 102 mm. Retractable guide rails shall have a height of not less than 51 mm.

4. PLATFORM
4.1 It

OPERATION

AND LOADING

shall be possible to adjust direction on the front platform.

the container/pallet

in a lateral

4.2 Platform elevating systems shall be able to hold both platforms at maximum height with full specified continuous lift capacity with no considerable height decrease for 30 min with and without engine running. 4.3 Both the front and main platform elevating mechanisms shall incorporate safety features to prevent sudden collapse in the event of system failure. , 4.4 Load movement in and out of the aircraft shall be carried out by The unit shall be capable of being positioned one person (operator). The operator shall be able to open and and operated by one person. close the aircraft door from the front platform. 4.5 The time taken for the main platform to reach maximum height from the lowered position and vice versa, that is, one complete cycle, shal1 not exceed one minute. 4.6 The front platform shall be accessible from the ground at all times. 4.7 It shall not be possible to alter the height of either containers/pallets are bridging the platforms. 5. MOBILITY
AND STABILITY

platform

when

5.1 The unit shall be capable of being driven at speeds up to

for at least 3 km. . The unit does not require the capability driven when loaded. 5.2 Power steering shall be provided. 5.3 The unloaded

16 km/h of being

unit shall be able to start moving on a 5" slope, _,,

5.4 The swept radius shall be kept to a minimum to allow the loaderto be easily positioned at the aircraft and to be driven on airport service roads. 5.5 For a final safe positioning at the aircraft jerking speed shall be required. door a slow positive nonto

5.6 Power operated adjus.table stabilizers shall be installed in order provide for the stability required for loading/unloading operations. 6

IS: 10515-1983

5.7The fully loaded unit in the raised position with stabilizers

extended shall be safe in wind velocities up to 129 km/h. In the lowered pos,ition, the loader will remain stable in wind velocities up to 193 km/h. 5.8 It shall not be possible: a) to activate the transfer system and to raise the main platform from the full down position if the stabilizers are not extended, b) to drive the loader when the stabilizers are extended, and c) for stabilizers to collapse in the case of a system failure. 6. CONTROLS 6.1 All controls necessary to move located in the driver position. and position the loader shall be

6.2 In addition, an electrical remote control box of minimum mass and size shall be provided to allow control of both platforms and complete loading/unloading processes from the front platform in an elevated position or from the aircraft door area. 6.3 Ample lighting shall be required for night operations the platforms and close surroundings. 6.4 Normal system warning and indicator to illuminate

lights shall be provided.

