( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 3958 - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING COSMETICS

( First Revision )
Cosmetics
Chairman DR S. S. GOTEOSKAR Members ASSISTANT DIRECTOR Food & Drug Maharashtra, Administration, Bombay Government of Directorate

Sectional

Committee,

YCDC

19

Representing General of Health Services, New Delhi

DR P. D. PILANEAR ( Allernate ) Lakme Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. S. BARVE SHRI S. M. SHANBHAU ( AIternate ) Hindustan Ciba-Geigy Ltd, Bombay SERI V. G. DESHPANDE DR S. S. KARMARKAR ( Alternate ) Consumer Educational and Research Centre, DR A. S. DIVATIA Ahmadabad KUMARI RANI ADVANI ( Alternate ) Johnson & Johnson Ltd, Bombay DR S. N. IYER SERI G. V. BE~ANDARI( Alternate ) Lady Irwin College, New Delhi SHRIYATI T. JACOB Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay DR G. L. MADAN SHRI D. CHHIBBA ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI P. MAxoMDAR SHRI P. K. CHAKRABORTY ( Alternate ) Drugs Control Administration, Government of SHRI R. C. MEIITA Gujarat, Ahmadabad SHRI J. P. GANATRA ( Alternate ) Millet Rochas Pvt Ltd, Madras SHRI A. MINRAZUDDIN KUMARI NASRIN BE~AIU ( Alternate ) Perfumes & Flavours Association of India, Bombay DR S. G. PATNEKAR SHRI SUDHIR JAIN ( Alternate ) Swa$zmya;ehold and Industrial Products Pvt Ltd, SHRI K. S. RAO SIIRI C. R. KRISHNAMOORTEY ( Alternate ) Indian Soap and Toiletries Makers' SHRI A. C. ROY . Bombay Bengal Chemical & Pharmaceutical SHRI P. ROY Calcutta DR A. N. BASU ( Alternate ) Association, Works Ltd,

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1985 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian CopVright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I

IS : 3958 - 1984
( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing

Central Drugs Laboratory, Calcutta DR S. K. ROY DR A. C. Das GUPTA ( Alternate ) Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals & Cosmetics SHRIV.SIT~RAM Export Promotion Council, Bombay SHRI I. SUNDARESH ( Alternate ) Consumer's Guidance Society, Bombay SRRIMATI USHA SUKTITANIEAR SHRIMATI USHA KAMERKAR C Alternate 1 Godrej Soaps Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. S. THAKUR SHRI N. G. IYER ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SARI R. THANJAN New Delhi SRRI S.N. AGARWAL ( Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHJ~I M. S. SAXENA, Director ( P & C ) Secretary SHRIMATIVIJAY MALIK Assistant Director ( P & C ), IS1

IS : 3958 - 1984

Indian Standard
METHODS OF SAMPLING COSMETICS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 October 1984, after the draft finalize:1 by the Cosmetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 0.2 This Indian Standard was originally caption, methods of sampling cosmetics published in 1966 and toilet goods. under the

0.3 Earlier the committee responsible for this standard was designated as Cosmetics and Toilet Goods Sectional Committee, CDC 39, hence the standard covered methods of sampling cosmetics and toilet goods. Subsequently the scope of the committee was restricted to cosmetics only. In this revision, therefore, methods of sampling cosmetics only is prescribed. The intention of formulating this standard is to facilitate the introduction of uniform methods for sampling cosmetics. It is hoped that the standard will bring about a closer understanding among the cosmetics, industry, the purchasing agencies and the testing laboratories. 0.4 In this revision, relevant drawings of equipments commonly used for sampling of products in powder form, thick and thin emulsions and homogeneous liquid forms have been included. Apart frc m this, lot sizes t;;; been rationalized and brought in line with IS : 2500 ( Part 1 )* . Accordingly lot srzes given in Table 2 have been modified. 0.5 This standard is based primarily the indigenous cosmetics industries. on the accumulated experience of

0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. *Inspection by attributes and by count of defects (Jirst revision ) . tRules for rounding off numerieal values ( reuised). 3

IS:3958
1. SCOPE 1.1 This

-1984

draft

standard

prescribes

methods

of sampling

cosmetics. under the under

1.2 It does not inclllde toilet soaps which latest official* definition of cosmetics. 1.2.1 Methods IS : 286-19787. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, of sampling and test

however for

are covered are

soaps

covered

the

following

definitions

shall

apply. 2.1 Acceptable Quality Level ( AQL ) - A designated value of percent defective items that will be accepted most of the times ( approximately 95 times out of 100 ) by operation of the sampling plan. 2.2 Composite Sample -- A sample prepared quantities of material from each of the gross intended to represent fully the lot as a whole. by mixing equal samples in a lot and

2.3 Cosme'tics - Cosmetic means any article intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, or introduced into, or otherwise applied to the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, and includes any article intended for use as a component of cosmetic. 2.4 Gross Sample - A sample prepared by mixing the part or whole of the material from some or all of the units in a package and intended to fully represent the package. from a 2.5 Individual Sample - A sample obtained representing a package and intended for determining characteristics of the material in the package. gross sample the specified it

2.6 Sample - A portion of a material selected in such a way that represents all the characteristics of the material from which it is taken.

2.7 Sampling Procedure - The succession of steps set out in this standard to ensure that the sample possess the essential characteristics of the bulk. 2.8 Test Sample - A smaller sample prepared in a specified manner It has the essential characteristics of by subdivision of the gross sample. the gross sample. *In accordance with a recent amendment to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1982 vide Government Extra Ordinary Notification, Part II Sect 1 No-66 dated 13 November 1982. TMethods of sampling and test for soaps ( second revision ). 4

IS : 3958 - 1984 3. CLASSIFICATION 3.1 For purposes
cosmetics of this standard, three main groups, namely, solids, semi-solids further subdivided as indicated in Table 1.
TABLE Mam GROW (1) Solids Powders 1 CLASSIFICATION SUB-CROUP (2)

shall be classified under and liquids. They shall be

OF COSMETICS TYPICAL EXAMPLES (3) Skin powders, face powders, Kum Kum powders, tooth powders and Surma Compressed make-ups, hair dyes, lipsticks and salves, and solid dentifrices Depilatories, face creams, hair creams and dressings &$2l, liquid make-ups, shaving creams and tooth pastes After-shave lotions, eye lotions, hair oils and tonics, liquid brilliantines, nail polishes and varnishes, shampoos and perfumes Face and hand lotions, hair darkeners and dressings and Bindi

Sticks or cakes

Semi-solids

,r 1 1 1

Thick emulsions Pastes ( solid/ liquid dispersions ) Homogeneous liquids

Liquids

i Thin emulsions

4. GENERAL

REQUIREMENTS
preparing, directions

OF SAMPLING
samples, the

4.1 In drawing,
precautions and

storing and handling shall be observed. in a protected

following
to damp

4.1.1
air, dust

Samples shall be taken or Soot.

place

not exposed

4.1.2 The sampling

instrument

shall be clean being samples

and dry. sampled, shall be the sampling protected from

4.1.3 The samples, the material instrument and the containers for adventitious contamination.

4.1.4 The samples shall be placed in clean and dry glass containers. The sample containers shall be of a size such that they are almost completely filled by the sample. 5

IS : 3958 - 1984 4.1.5 Each container shall be sealed air-tight after filling and marked with full details of sampling, batch or code number, name of manufacturer, and other important particulars of the consignment. 4.1.6 The saml)les shall be stored in such a. manner that the temperature of the material does not vary unduly from the normal temperature and they are protected from light. 4.1.7 Sampling shall be done by a person agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, and in the presence of the purchaser or his representative and the supplier or his representative. 5. SAMPLING DURING MANUFACTURE

5.0 General - The sampling procedure at the point of manufacture shall consist essentially in drawing samples of the finished product from the top, middle and bottom portions of the process vessel immediately prior to packing. 5.1 Batch - The material in a single mass obtained from the same raw materials and process of manufacture prior to packing shall be For instance, the material in a process vessel regarded as one batch. just before packing may be taken as constituting a batch. 5.2 Scale 0E Sampling - In case of solid units such as sticks and In cakes, at least three units shall be selected at random ( see 6.2.1 ). case of non-solids, at least three samples shall be drawn using appropriate sampling instruments ( see 5.3 ), preferably taking the same number of samples from the top, middle and bottom portions of the batch. 5.3 Sampling Instruments - Instruments of the types below may be used for drawing samples of different cosmetics. described

5.3.1 For Powders - For drawing samples of powders, a sampling tube, commonly known as a ' thief' shall be used ( see Fig. 1 ). This tubes with matching usually consists of two closely fitting, concentric slots that are closed by rotating the tubes with respect to each other. The ` thief' with the slots closed, is inserted to the desired depth in a The slots are then opened, and the material flows given process vessel. through the open slots to fill the tube. The slots are then closed and the ` thief' is withdrawn. 5.3.2 For Thick Emulsion's Pastes and Gels - For drawing samples of a samphng instrument similar to that these emulsions, products, described under 5.3.1 may be used. However, the top end of the sampling tube should be connected to a suction device. 6

IS : 3958 - 1984 53.3 For Homogeneous Liquids and Thin Emulsions -- For drawing samples of these products, a simple device ( see Fig. 2 i may be used consisting of a small bottle and a two-hole stopper, one hole being fitted with a short glass tube and the other with a glass tube slightly longer than the depth of the vessel. To the longer tube is attached a stop-cock which is kept closed while the bottle is lowered to the desired depth in a given process vessel. The stop-cock is then opened and, as the air escapes through the longer tube, the product enters the bottle and fills it. An alternative sampling device ( see Fig. 3 ) consists of a tube fitted with a stopper at the lower end which can be closed by means of an attached rod that extends above the upper end of the ,tube. With the stopper disengaged, the tube is lowered slowly into the vessel so that the liquid enters it with minimum disturbance. When the bottom of the vessel has been reached, the lower end of the tube is closed with the stopper and the tube is removed. 5.4 Preparation of Samples - The material of all the samples drawn from the batch according to 5.2 shall be disintegrated, if necessary, and mixed thoroughiy to give the composite sample at the point of manufacture. The material so chosen shall be in a quantity about 3 times the material required for carrying out a complete series of tests for all the requirements of the specification.

3
ENLARGED SECTION AA

I

--

--

__

All dimensions in millimetres.
1A Single Compartment

FIG. 1 CLOSED-END SAMPLING TUBE ( SPEAR ), UNDIVIDED -

Contd

IS: 3958 - 1984
CLOSED

OPEN

SECTION AA

OPEN

BOTTOM VIEW CLOSED

IB

Multi Compartment

FIG. 1 CLOSED-END SAMPLING TUBE ( SPEAR ), UNDIVIDED -

Contd

8

IS : 3958 - 1984

Omm SECTION XX

ID

HANDLE

SECTION XX AFTER ROTATION OF INNER TUBE BY Id

LOCKING ARRANGEMENT

INNER

TUBE

CONE

COM~`LETELY

7C FIG. 1

Single Compartment

CLOSED-END SAMPLING TUBE ( SPEAR ), UNDIVIDED

IS I 3958 - 1984 5.5 The composite sample obtained in, 5.4 shall be examined for all the The material in the batch shall be requirements of the specification. passed on for packing, if the composite sample satisfies all the requirements; otherwise not. 6. SAMPLING OF PACKAGES

- The sampling procedure for packages shall consist 6.0 General essentially in selecting and drawin, u a sufficient number of unit packs. 6.1 Lot - In a single consignment, all the packages containing cosmetics of the same type and form, representing the same batch of manufacture, shall constitute a lot. If the consignment consists of packages containing cosmetics of different types or forms or batches of manufacture, then the packages containing products of the same type, form and batch of manufacture shall be grouped together; each group shall constitute a separate lot. 6.2 Scale of Sampling -For ascertaining the conformity of a lot to the requirements prescribed in the specifications for individual cosmetics and toilet goods, tests shall be carried out on each lot separately. The number ( n ) of packages to be selected for drawing the samples shall depend on the size ( N) of the lot in accordance with Table 2.
TABLE 2 SCALE OF SAMPLING FOR PACKAGES

No.osPAc~AoEs INTHE LOT (Jv) (1)

NO.OFPA~KAGESTO BESELECTED (n) (2)

Upto 4 to 51 to 151 to 301 to

3 50 150 300 500

Each container 3 4 5 6 7

501 and above

6.2.1 The packages shall be selected at random ( see IS : 4905-1968* ) and to ensure randomness of selection, random number tables shall be used. In case such tables are not available, the following procedure may be adopted: ` Starting from any package, count all the packages in one order as 1,2,3 . . . . . . . . . up to r and so on, where r is the integral part of Every rth package thus counted shall be withdrawn to give a N/n. sample for purposes of test `.
*Methods of random sampling.

10

IS : 3958 - 1984
PINCH COCK

1I !' I I I ' ' ' ' '

0 6 GLASS

TUBE-j `f

I

3m max. LONG PIPE\;

I 1
f I I ' I

1

0 6 GLASS TUBING `5'

---IGLASS 100 0,

BOTTLE 200 HIGH

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 2

DIPPERBOTTLE

11

iS : 3958 - 1984
LEVER POSITION)

HAN0 (CLOSED

LEVER POSITION

t-9
TYPE

38----i
A
FIG. 3

k-9

38-----i

TYPE
BOTTOM-VALVED SAMPLING TUBE

B

12

IS : 3958 - 1984 6.3 Gross Sample 6.3.1 For Powders - From each of the packages selected as in 6.2, draw at random one or more containers. The material in the containers so chosen from the package shall be about three times the quantity required for carrying out a complete series of tests for all the requirements of the specification. It shall be disintegrated, if necessary, and mixed thoroughly to give a gross sample.
6.3.2 For Sticks and Cakes - From each of the packages selected as in 6.2, draw at random one or more sticks or cakes. The material so chosen from each package shall be about three times the quantity required for carrying out a complete series of tests for all the requirements of the specification. It shall be disintegrated in a suitable chopper and, after discarding the first and last chippings, the material shall be mixed thoroughly to give a gross sample. 6.3.3 For Thick Emulsions, Pastes and Gels - From each of the packages selected as in 6.2, draw at random a suitable number of containers and with the help of a suitable sampling implement, withdraw the material A simple device for withdrawing for the preparation of a gross sample. semi-solid products from jars consists of a glass tube about 1 cm in The piston is pulled out and the diameter and fitted with a piston. tube pressed in the semi-solid product; the tube is then withdrawn and the sample ejected out of it with the help of the piston. The material so drawn from each package shall be about three times the quantity required for carrying out a complete series of tests for all the It shall be mixed thoroughly to give requirements of the specification. a gross sample.
NOTE - In the case of emulsions and pastes, great care is necessary to ensure that there is no breakdown of the product.

6.3.4 For Homogeneous Liquids and Thin Emulsions - From each of the packages selected as in 6.2, draw at random a suitable number of containers, shake them thoroughly to ensure homogeneity of the contents The material so and draw samples with the aid of a suitble instrument. drawn from each package shall be about three times the quantity required for carrying out a complete series of tests for all the It shall be mixed thoroughly to give requirements of the specification. a gross sample.
NOTE - In the case of liquid preparations containing alcohol or other volatile ingredients, great care is necessary to ensure that there is no loss on evaporation with resultmg change in product make-up.

13

IS:3958 6.4 Test

-1984 Samples and Referee Samples

6.4.1 Composite Sample - Segregate carefully the gross samples obtained from a lot according to 6.2 and 6.3. From each of the gross samples drawn from the same lot, take a small but equal portion of material. Mix all these small portions thoroughly into a single composite mass, which should be of a size sufficient to carry out triplicate testing for all the This composite mass representing characteristics specified under 6.5.2. the lot shall be divided into three equal parts, each forming a composite sample; one for the purchaser, another for the supplier and the third as the referee sample to be used in case of dispute between the purchaser and the supplier. portion of material in each 6.4.2 Individual Samples - The remaining gross sample shall be divided into three equal parts, each forming an individual samp!e. One individual sample from each gross sample in the lot shall be taken to constitute a set of individual samples. One set of individual samples shall be for the purchaser, another for the supplier and the third as the referee sample to be used in case of dispute between the purchaser and the supplier. 6.4.3 All the composite and individual samples shall be transferred to These containers shall then be sealed air-tight with separate containers. stoppers, and labelled with full particulars of identification. 6.4.4 sample samples shall be 6.5

Referee Samples -

The referee samples shall consist of a composite All the containers of referee and a set of individual samples. shall bear the seals of both the purchaser and the supplier, and kept at a place agreed to between the two parties. of Tests as shall

Number

6.5.1 Tests for the determination of important characteristics, specified in relevant Indian Standards for the individual materials, be conducted separately on each of the individual samples. 6.5.2 Tests for the determination of the other prescribed shall be conducted on the composite sample. 6.6 Criteria for Conformity

characteristics

6.6.1 For Individual Samples - For each of the has been determined on the individual samples, R of test results shall be calculated as follows: Mean Range (2 ) =

characteristics which the mean 3 and range

Sum of test results Number of test results and

( R ) = Difference between the maximum minimum value of the test results. 14

IS : 3958 - 1984
6.6.1.1 Jf the specification limit for the characteristics is given as a minimum, then the value of the expression ( i - KR ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results ( see 6.6.1.4 ). If the value so obtained is greater than or equal to the minimum limit, the lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirement for that characteristic. 6.6.1.2 If the specification limit for the characteristic is given a maximum, then the value of the expression ( E + KR ) shall calculated from the relevant test results ( see 6.6.1.4 ). If the value obtained is less than or equal to the maximum limit, the lot shall declared as conforming to the requirement for that characteristic. as be so be

6.6.1.3 If the characteristic has two-sided specification limit, then the values of the expression ( f f KR ) shall be calculated from the relevant test results ( see 6.6.1.4 ). If the values so obtained lie between the two specification limits, the lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirement for that characteristic. 6.6.1.4 The value of the factor I% referred to in 6.6.1.1 to 6.6.1.3 shall be chosen in accordance with Table 3 depending upon the acceptable quality level.
TABLE 3 VALUES OF K FOR DIFFERENT QUALITY LEVELS ACCEPTABLE

ACCEPTABLEQUALITY LEVEL (1) Up to 1 percent her 1 percent 2 percent 4 percent and up to

VALUE

OFK

(2) 0.6 0.5 0.4

Over 2 percent and up to

6.6.2 For Composite Sample - For declaring the conformity of the lot to the requirements for all the remaining characteristics determined on the composite sample, the test result for each of the characteristics shall satisfy the relevant requirement specified in the Indian Standard on the subject.

15

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEMlOF
UNIT

UNITS

( SI UNITS )

%-i?dBOt

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg
S

A K cd mol

Units
UNIT SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
QUANTITY

radian steradian

rad sr

UNIT

SYMBOL 1 J"

DEFINITION

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal W Wb T HZ S V Pa

N = 1 kg.m/s* J = 1 N.m

1

1 W = 1 J/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/ms S = 1 A/V V=IW/A 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l)

1 Pa = 1 N/ma

