( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS: 4708-1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR URINE GLASS, CONICAL
Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances CPDC 12 Sectional Committee,
Chairman
to Chief Inspectorate of Materials [Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) ] Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services ( Ministry of Defence ) Scientific and Surgical Inst,rument Menufacturers & Traders Association, Bombay Ministry of Health, Family Planning & Urban Development Directorate General of Technical Development (Ministry of Industrial Development & Company Affairs ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi

Da S. R. LELE

Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Bombay

Representing

SHRXJ. K. WAD ( Alternate Dr S. R. Lele ) SECRI B. M. BANERJEE COL A. K. BASU SHRI N. C. DALAL SHRI K. GA~YQAYYA SERI V. KRISHNA~~OORTHY SHRI PREM PRAKASH

Members

SERI SATVIR GUPTA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of MAJ SOHAN SINC+H Defence ) SHRI K. L. TALWAR Chief Insuectorete of General Stores f Ministrv of Defence ( DC1 ) 1, Kanpur L * ISCOMED Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. N. VIO SHRI R. N. VIM ( Alternate ) SHRI A. B. RAO, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) Director ( Consr Prod ) SHRI VIJAI Assistant Director ( Consr Prod ), IS1

Secretary

Glass Instruments
COL A. K. BASU

and Appliances

Subcommittee,

CPDC 12 : 2

Convener

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical Services ( Ministry of Defence ) Borosil Glass Works Ltd, Bombay

Da S. R. LELE SHRI J. K. WAD ( Alternate SHRI K. M. MANDAL

Members

Chief Inspectorate of Materials [Ministry of Defence ( DC1 ) ] DR S. C. NEOUY Scientific India Glass Co Ltd, Celcutt,a SHRI N. K. ROY Utkal Equipment & Chemicals Ltd, Cuttack SHRI H. K. PAND ( Alternatr ?) Chief Inmeotorete of General Stores r Ministrv of SHRI K. L. TALWAR Defer&e ( DC1 ) 1, Kanpur "

)

INDIAN
MANAK

BHAVAN,

ST-ANDARDS

9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

SHAH 1

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR

MARG

IS:4708-1968

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR URINE GLASS, CONICAL

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 July 1968, after the draft finalized by the Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products Division Council. 0.2 Preparation of standards for surgical instruments, medical equipment and apparatus, including medical glass instruments has been taken up at the instance of the Advisory Committee for Development of Surgical Instruments, Equipment and Appliances, Government of India. 0.3 Great need has been felt for the standardization of glass apparatus This standard covering the and instruments used in pathological work. essential requirements of urine glass is expected to help in providing uniform equipment to all laboratories. 0.4 In the `preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IND/SL/MED/5842(a) `Glass, urine, conical, 300 ml', issued by the Ministry of Defence, Government of India. 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on pathological glass apparatus. Other specifications published so far in the series are: IS IS IS IS IS IS IS IS IS IS IS Tubes, glass, for pathological work Tubes, sedimentation : 3742-1966 Pipettes, dilution, for haemocytometers : 4067-1967 Tube, swab (west type ), for throat : 4068-1967 Ureometer, doremus' type : 4069-1967 Urinometer : 4087-1967 Pipette for haemoglobinometers and blood pipettes for biochemical work : 4363-1967 Drip counter : 4364-1967 Pipettes, serological : 4444-1967 Bottles, bacteriological : 4445-1967 Filter and filter chamber for blood transfusion 2

: 3740-1966 : 3741-1966

IS:4708
0.6 This standard contains clauses 7.1 and 8.1 which between the purchaser and the supplier.

-1968

call for agreement

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This specification used in pathological
2. MATERIAL lays down the requirements work. for urine glass, conical,

2.1 The urine glass shall be made from clear, neutral glass ( for definiThe glass shall pass the alkalinity test tion see IS : 1382-19611_ ). prescribed in IS : 2303-19631 for Type 1 quality of glass.
3. SHAPE

AND DIMENSIONS
and dimensions shall be as given in Fig. 1.

3.1 The shape
4. CAPACITY

4.1 The brimful
5. WORKMANSHIP

capacity

of the urine FINISH

glass shall be 300 to 350 ml.

AND

5.1 The urine glass shall be free from bubbles and, as far as possible, free from striae, stones and other visible defects ( see IS : 1382-1961f ). 5.2 The contour of the base shall be slightly concave to ensure that the glass shall not rock when placed on a horizontal flat surface. The glass The glass shall not topple shall be symmetrical about the vertical axis. over when placed on a plane surface inclined at an angle of 10" to the The external edges at the base shall be smooth and unihorizontal. formly rounded. 5.3 The rim of the glass shall be smooth and uniformly to ensure absence of sharp edges. The spout shall be shaped to ensure drip-proof pouring. A rough surface
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). tGlossary of terms relating to glass industry. $Method of grading glass for alkalinity.

rounded properly shall be

3

IS : 4708 -

1968
identification

provided on the outer wall, near the top for providing numbers during actual usage.

60 DIA

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 1 URINE GLASS, CONICAL

6. MARKING

6.1 The urine glass shall be marked initials or trade-mark and its capacity. 4

with the manufacturer's

name,

*
Mark.

IS :4708 - 1968

6.1.1 The urine glass may also be marked with the IS1 Certification

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

7. PACKING 7.1 Each urine glass shall be wrapped in thin paper and suitably cushioned with straw in a carton, or it may be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 8. SAMPLING

8.1Sampling and acceptance criteria shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier, preferably as given in IS : 4426-1967*.

*Methods of sampling laboratory

glaeswars and medical glass instruments.

5

INDIAN

STANOARDS

INSTITUTION

The lndlan Standards lnstltutlon ( ISI ), which started functlonlng in 1947. is the national standards organization for India. Its principal object is to prepare standards on national and international basis and promote their general adoption. The overall control of ISI, which IS run and financed jojntly as s non-profit making body by the Government and private enterprise, IS exercised by the General Council, composed of representatives of Central and State Governments; leading trade, scientific and technological organizations; and subscribing members. The Union Minister of Industry is the ex-officio President of ISI. The present technlcal activity of ISI IS carried out through 8 Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Products; Chemical; Civil Consumer Products; Electrotechnical; Mechanical Engineering; Engineering; Structural and Metals: and Textile. All technical work relating to the formulation and revision of standards is done by committees appointed by and under the direction of their respective Division Councils. These committees consist of experts drawn from manufacturing units, technical institutions, purchase organizations and other concerned bodies. To make available benefits of lndlan Standards to the common man. ISI has introduced its Certification Marks Scheme under the Indian Standards lnstltutlon ( Certlficotlon Marks ) Act, 1952, as amended by the Amendment Act, 1961. According to this Act, quality goods conforming'to Indian Standards can carry the ISI Certification Mark. This Mark Is a third-party guarantee of quality of marked goods. Llcences to use the ISI Certification Markare granted to manufacturers using reliable methods of quality control subject to overall inspection by ISI. In the internatlonal field, ISI represents India on the lnternatlonaj Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) and the lnternatjonal Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). IS0 and IEC respectively link 54 and 40 countries, and function through I I8 and 58 technical committees; ISI participates in 83 technical committees of IS0 and all the technical committees of IEC. The committees and subcommittees of IEC and IS0 for which ISI holds the secretariat deal with: Electric Fans, Lac, Mica, Pictorial Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measure= ments in Open Channels, Procedures for Inter-conversion of Values, Spices and Condiments, and Stimulant Foods.

